fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 6
Issue #10
October 2016

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

MIDDLE EAST

SPECIAL ESSAY

3
4
6

Turkey Launches ‘Operation Euphrates Shield’ in Syria
Israel Activates Iron Dome against Rockets from Syria
Iran: Khamenei Calls for Developing New Offensive
Weaponry
7 New Radar System Defends Iranian Airspace
8 Iran Purchases AK-103s from Russia
9 Shia Symbolism: Iran-Backed Militias Resurgent in Syria
10 Mini-UAV Proliferation in Syria
11 Saudi Arabia and China in the Arabian Sea
12 Israel and NATO Upgrade Ties

Choosing Alliances,
Creating Fissures:
Understanding How
the Emergence of ISIS
in Africa
Affects the
Relationships
Between
Boko Haram, AlShebab, and Al-Qaeda

AFRICA

13 Split in Boko Haram Leads to Intra-Group Fighting?
14 The Ethno-Military Dimensions of Current Ethiopian Instability
15 AU Considers Pros and Cons of AU-led Intervention Force in Mali

LATIN AMERICA
16
17
17
18
19
20
21
22

Colombian Ex-President Does Not Like the Peace Agreement
Major Public Speech by FARC Chief
Venezuela’s Socialist Civil-Military Consolidation
Alleged Brazilian Assassins Hired to Murder Paraguayan
President
Tri-National Force Created to Fight Mara Salvatrucha in the
Northern Triangle
Illegal Immigration Problems Continue to Plague Colombia
Coyotes: The Migratory Bridge between the Community and the
Border
Are Transparent and Competitive Elections Possible in Nicaragua?

Page 54

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

23 Prayut Chan-o-Cha Stirs the Pot in Appointing “Outsider” as Army Chief
24 Duterte Gives Indonesia Access to Territorial Waters to Destroy Terrorists
24 Thailand’s Struggling Economy: Can the Military-Run Country Turn Itself
Around?
25 Indonesia Appoints a New Intel Chief
26 Indonesia Advances Naval Preparedness in Armada Exercise

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN
27
28
29
30

A Japanese View on Limited War and Escalation
China’s New ‘4+2’ Service Branch Structure
Japan Justifies Military Expenditures for South China Sea Defense
China Assesses Terrorist Attack on its Embassy in Kyrgyzstan

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

31 Assessing the National Unity Government in Afghanistan
32 Uzbekistan after Karimov
33 Upgrades to Georgia’s Air Defense System

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

34 Details of Russia’s Ballistic Missile Defense
Countermeasures
36 Kavkaz-2016 Exercise Emphasizes National
Mobilization Capabilities
38 Russia Integrates Military Capabilities into Civil
Communications Infrastructure
40 Russian Efforts to Further Network-Centric C4ISR
Integration
42 The Nature of ‘Future War’

44 The Russian Airborne’s Next Generation of
Combat Vehicles and Beyond
46 Banking on Defense
47 Morale Support for Kavkaz 2016
48 Private Russian Soldiers in Syria
50 Bears at the Bering Strait
51 Large UAV Debut over Arctic Delayed
51 Plumbing the Cold, Briny Depths
52 The General Staff on Kavkaz-2016
53 Eastern Military District Command Staff Exercise
Examined

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, and Deliver
the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil
ON THE COVER: “Africa Shattered”
Source: FMSO

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 6 | Issue 10

October | 2016

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Jason Warner

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

Indo-Pacific Asia

Cindy Hurst
Jacob Zenn

China, Korea, Japan

Michael Auslin
Tim Thomas
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Tim Thomas

				
Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editors

Ray Finch
Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Keith French

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Turkey Launches ‘Operation Euphrates Shield’ in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: On 24 August, Turkey
launched its largest military operation into Syria to date,
sending tanks, planes and ground forces into the Syrian
city of Jarabulus. The accompanying passages from the
Turkish press discuss Turkey’s operational
goals for this operation, as stated by the
President and experts. They all note that
the operation’s goals were twofold: To
clear the Islamic State (ISIS) from its
last remaining frontier with Turkey and
to ensure that the Syrian Kurdish forces
(Democratic Union Party-PYD) forces
do not fill the vacuum. As the passages
point out, Turkey considers the PYD as
an extension of the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) which has escalated its terror
attacks inside Turkey since July 2015.
As the first accompanying passage
notes, Turkish President Erdoğan said
about the operation on 6 September: “We
need to demonstrate our presence in the
region. If not, terrorist groups such as
[ISIS], the PKK and its Syrian offshoot
[PYD]... will fill the vacuum.” The second
passage, by Burhanettin Duran, the
general coordinator for a pro-government think-tank in
Ankara, says Turkey’s aim is to develop a comprehensive
approach not to just fight ISIS, but also to block PKK and
PYD aspirations in Iraq and Syria. He points out that the
Turkish government views the creation of a PYD-controlled
statelet in northern Syria as an equally serious threat to
Turkey’s national security as the PKK gaining control over
northern Iraq. (The PKK uses its bases in northern Iraq to
launch attacks on Turkey.) The third passage by a pundit
also echoes this view.
Because Turkey considers the Syrian Kurdish group PYD
as an extension of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party
(PKK), they fear that any gains by the PYD in Syria also
have the effect of emboldening the PKK inside Turkey.
For this reason, Turkish officials view the Syrian crisis as
a “domestic issue”. In 2011, when the crisis erupted, thenPrime Minister (now President) Erdoğan said: “We do not
view the Syria issue as an external issue or an external
problem. Because the Syria issue is our domestic issue.
We have an 850 km border with Syria, along with familial,
historical and cultural ties. Therefore what happens in Syria
can never allow us to be idle observers to it.” Operation
Euphrates Shield is a reflection of this view. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)
1

Izbul, Can. “Erdoğan: “Suriye İç Meselemiz, Gereğini Yapmak
Durumundayız (Erdoğan: “Syria is our Domestic Issue, We
have to do whatever is Necessary”). Amerika’nin Sesi (Voice of
America), 7 August 2011. http://www.amerikaninsesi.com/a/
erdogan-suriye-ic-meselemiz-geregini-yapmak-durumundayiz-127078293/898713.html

“Erdoğan said ... We need to demonstrate our presence
in the region. If not, terrorist groups such as [IS], the PKK
and its Syrian offshoot ... will fill the vacuum.”

The situation as of 19 September.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turkish_military_intervention_in_the_Syrian_Civil_War#/
media/File:Turkish_Offensive_in_Northern_Syria.png

Source: Semih Idiz, “Turkey demands role in Mosul battle, but coalition
unconvinced,” Al Monitor.com, 15 September 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/originals/2016/09/turkey-iraq-syria-isis-raqqa-mosul.
html#ixzz4KTTJ21kd
“Erdoğan told reporters ... “We need to demonstrate our presence in the
region. If not, terrorist groups such as [IS], the PKK and its Syrian offshoot the
YPG will fill the vacuum,” he said.
Source: Burhanettin Duran, “Why is Turkey eager to liberate Raqqa and
Mosul?” Daily Sabah, 12 September 2016, http://www.dailysabah.com/
columns/duran-burhanettin/2016/09/12/why-is-turkey-eager-to-liberate-raqqaand-mosul
“Turkey’s aim is to develop a comprehensive approach not to just fight IS,
but also to block PKK and PYD aspirations in Iraq and Syria.... According to
the government, the creation of a PYD-controlled statelet in northern Syria is
an equally serious threat to national security as the PKK gaining control over
northern Iraq....”
Source: Aslı Aydıntaşbaş, “Cerablus gerçekleri (Jarabulus realities),”
Cumhuriyet, 26 August 2016, http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/koseyazisi/590945/
Cerablus_gercekleri.html
“So, that does Turkey want? Ankara wants to control Jarabulus to prevent
a continuous Kurdish presence in its southern border. It does not have any
absolute desire to fight ISIS; but it does have an absolute desire to prevent any
Kurdish structure in Syria. And it sees that taking Jarabulus is the only way to
achieve this.”
OE Watch | October 2016

3

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Israel Activates Iron Dome against Rockets from Syria
OE Watch Commentary: In mid-September, after a period
of quiet for months, an escalation of spillover incidents from
Syria into Israel took place. Several Syrian mortar shells hit
the Israeli Golan Heights, prompting Israeli Air Force strikes
on Syrian military targets. In response, for the first time, and
in a significant escalation, two anti-aircraft surface-to-air
missiles were fired from Syria at the Israeli Air Force. This
led Israel to station an “Iron Dome” anti-missile battery in the
Golan Heights for the first time since 2014. On 17 September,
this battery successfully shot down two artillery shells fired
at the Golan Heights—the first time an Iron Dome battery
successfully intercepted a rocket from Syria. The accompanying
passages from the Israeli press discuss this development, and
how Israel’s position may be shifting as a result.
The first passage by Ben Caspit, a senior analyst for Israeli
newspapers, discusses how Israel’s position may be changing
given the escalation. He points out that until now, Israel’s
position has been to retaliate against mortal shells or stray
artillery fire from Syria’s civil war (that landed in Israeli
territory) by tit-for-tat artillery fire and occasional retaliatory
air strikes against Syrian troops or positions loyal to President
Assad. He notes that this was part of a formula developed by
Israel, that held the Syrian government responsible for fire
(whether intentional or inadvertent) that ended up in Israeli
territory. However, he points out that Israel has concluded
that an automatic response targeting the Syrian army may not
necessarily be the right response anymore. He quotes a senior
Israeli military official as saying that “It is not impossible that
the next time this happens, the various rebel groups will be the
ones to take a hit from us.... We are completely aware of the fact
that it is not just mortars and bombs fired by Assad’s army that
are landing in Israeli territory. On quite a few occasions, it is
rebel fire. As such, the immunity granted to the rebels until now
is over. From this point on, whoever is responsible for the fire
will suffer the brunt of the response.”
The second passage also notes Israel’s general policy of
targeting the Syrian army in response to anything that came
across the border into Israel. The author quotes a statement by
the Israeli Defense Forces which also points out the shift. The
statement says, “The IDF sees the regime as responsible for
what happens in its territory, with that being said [the army]
will not hesitate to act against any opposition forces in Syria.”
The first passage also notes that these developments are a
result of Russian involvement in Syria, which have boosted
Assad’s self-confidence. The passage quotes an Israeli military
official as saying that “Assad is back in the game, even in the
Golan Heights. This means that we must do everything we can
to ensure that the game doesn’t reach us.”
It appears that as Syrian President Bashar Assad turns his
attention to the Syrian Golan Heights and attempts to retake
control of it from the various rebel groups there, Israel may see
more and more such incidents. End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya).

“[Israeli military official said]... Russian involvement
boosted Assad’s self-confidence, and he is back in the
game, even in the Golan Heights. This means that we
must do everything we can to ensure that the game
doesn’t reach us. That’s exactly what we’re doing.”
Source: Ben Caspit, “How will Israel respond to Assad’s warning?,”
Al Monitor, 19 September 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2016/09/israel-shifts-tactics-vis-a-vis-syria.html
“Until now, whenever a mortar shell or stray artillery fire from Syria’s
civil war landed in Israeli territory in the Golan Heights, Israel made a
point of attacking a Syrian position or mortar belonging to the Syrian
troops loyal to President Bashar al-Assad. It was part of a formula
developed by Israel over the past few years, ever since the Syrian civil
war started lapping against the border fence in the Golan Heights. So
far, the strategy has proved itself effective; the Israeli Golan Heights
have remained relatively quiet, apart from a rather random and even
rare dribble of mortar fire that landed here and there, in unpopulated
areas.
...
Over the past two weeks, however, the situation has changed. The
number of mortar shells landing in the Israeli Golan Heights has
increased considerably. Meanwhile, Israel has concluded that an
automatic response targeting the Syrian army has worn thin and is not
necessarily the right response. “It is not impossible that the next time
this happens, the various rebel groups will be the ones to take a hit
from us,” a senior Israeli military source told Al-Monitor on condition
of anonymity. “This game must end. We are completely aware of the
fact that it is not just mortars and bombs fired by Assad’s army that are
landing in Israeli territory. On quite a few occasions, it is rebel fire. As
such, the immunity granted to the rebels until now is over. From this
point on, whoever is responsible for the fire will suffer the brunt of the
response.”
...
Israeli air force jets and drones, which took part in a sortie targeting
one of Assad’s military installations Sept. 13, were surprised when
the Syrian anti-aircraft system fired two anti-aircraft surface-to-air
missiles at them.
...
These frequent trickles of mortar fire have forced Israel to station an
“Iron Dome” anti-missile battery in the Golan Heights for the first time
in a very long time. This battery has already succeeded by shooting
down two artillery shells fired at the Golan Heights on Sept. 17.
...
A military source told Al-Monitor.... Russian involvement boosted
Assad’s self-confidence, and he is back in the game, even in the Golan
Heights. This means that we must do everything we can to ensure that
the game doesn’t reach us. That’s exactly what we’re doing. So far,
we’ve been successful for the past five years. We will not let anyone ruin
that statistic.”

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2016

4

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: Israel Activates Iron Dome
against Rockets from Syria
Source: Judah Ari Gross, “No, Syrian rebels aren’t tricking the IDF into
providing aerial support,” Times of Israel, 15 September 2016, http://
www.timesofisrael.com/no-syrian-rebels-arent-tricking-the-idf-intoproviding-aerial-support/
“According to Israeli logic in recent months, it doesn’t really matter
which group fired the specific projectile: The Syrian government is
ultimately responsible for whatever comes across the border, and so the
Syrian army will be targeted....
In a statement about the Tuesday night bombing run, the IDF also
clarified its position on the issue.
“The IDF sees the regime as responsible for what happens in its
territory, with that being said [the army] will not hesitate to act against
any opposition forces in Syria,” the army said in a statement.”

Iron Dome missile at ILA Berlin Air Show 2012.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ILA_
Berlin_2012_PD_037.JPG

The Iron Dome anti-missile system.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron_Dome

OE Watch | October 2016

5

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Khamenei Calls for Developing
New Offensive Weaponry
OE Watch Commentary: Under terms
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and the corollary UN Security Council
Resolution 2231, Iran is not
supposed to spend unfrozen
assets and repatriated
cash on offensive military
platforms for at least eight
years, with offensive loosely
defined by the UN Register
of Conventional Arms.
Alas, Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei seems to have
no desire to abide by such
restrictions. According to
the excerpted article from
a news portal close to the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps, the Supreme Leader
specifically demanded
that Iran not only develop
new defensive military
capabilities but offensive
capabilities as well. This
theme was repeated on
September 2 during Friday
prayer sermons, suggesting
that Khamenei does not want
his statements interpreted as pandering to a
single event but rather a declaration of strategy.
Accordingly, Khamenei may be signaling that
he has no intention to wait for legal restrictions
to be lifted before the Islamic Republic begins
importing weaponry such as armor, new missile
systems, and aircraft technically prohibited by
Iran’s agreements. Iranian diplomats may seek
to augment their offensive capabilities with any
or all of three strategies: First, they may seek
to shield themselves at the United Nations with
a Russian veto over any renewed sanctions.
Second, they may argue that the JCPOA is null
and void because the United States has not
fully abided by what Tehran interprets as the
requirement to lift non-nuclear sanctions and to
bolster the Iranian economy. Lastly, they may
simply seek to bolster their indigenous weapons
program, reverse engineering whatever they
acquire abroad or setting local production in a
more authorized manner. Whichever strategies
they choose, it appears that Iranian military
acquisitions have only just begun. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Khamenei said enhancing defensive and offensive capabilities…
was the inalienable and undeniable right of the country.”

Students in Iran sign up to defend the Shrine of Zainab in Damascus, Syria.
Source: Namnak.com, http://goo.gl/z1uBzw

Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei Calls on Iran to Augment Offensive Weaponry.
Source: Leader.ir, http://leader.ir/media/album/original/49784_636.jpg

Source: “Tavan Defah’i va Tahajemi ra Afzayesh Dahid ta Zurguyan Ahsas Tahdid
Konand ,” (“Increase Offensive and Defensive Capabilities Until the Bullies Feel
Threatened”), Tasnim News, 31 August 2016, goo.gl/tiZtG9
The Imam Khomeini Hosseiniyah on Wednesday hosted an exhibition of defense industry
achievements of the Iranian Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics, and his
Excellency Ayatollah Khamenei, supreme commander, for more than two hours visited
the showcase of advanced technologies, indigenous, and knowledge-based technologies
developed by students, researchers, and local experts which will help augment the
military capabilities of the armed forces.
In this exhibition, achievements in the field of designing and manufacturing a variety
of advanced systems and equipment pertaining to missile, radar, marine, optic, armor,
drone and communications were put on display…
Radar systems used for “watching, tracking, hunting and electro-optical fire control”
were in another booth. In this section, Ministry of Defense officials presented a report on
the radar section of domestically-manufactured Bavar 373 defense system, which is more
advanced than its foreign-made prototypes.
After that, Ayatollah Khamenei, during a meeting with officials, researchers and experts
of the Ministry of Defense, said enhancing the “defensive and offensive” capabilities
of the country was the inalienable and undeniable right of the country… There are no
limitations on the development of our defensive and military capabilities. Advancing in
these domains is our duty.”
OE Watch | October 2016

6

MIDDLE EAST

Top

New Radar System Defends Iranian Airspace
OE Watch Commentary: With
regard to operational
requirements, the
Iranian military sees
their future needs as
the ability to conduct
urban warfare and
close quarters fighting
on land. While Iran
embraces an asymmetric
strategy both on land
and at sea, defense of its
airspace has always been
a weak spot. During the
Iran-Iraq War, almost
every major Iranian city
with the exception of
Mashhad was within
range and hit by Iraqi
missiles. More recently,
Iranian officials have
grown concerned by
unauthorized over
flights, especially from
foreign-operated drones.
In the excerpted
article, which was published in many
different Iranian news and defense-specific
websites, Abdollah Reshadi, commander
of Iranian air defense in its northeastern
region (along the Turkmen and Afghanistan
borders), declared that Iran has upgraded its
radar systems since the end of sanctions and
that it can respond in “less than a minute”
to incursions. He specifically spoke of the
recent tightening of Iranian control in “the
skies over the country’s southern territorial
waters.” In particular, Iranian officials
credit the Nazir radar system. General
Farzad Esmayeeli, commander of Khatam
ol-Anbia Air Defense Base, said that with
the Nazir, “no radar-evading flying object
can enter the Islamic Iran’s skies without
permission.” That may be an exaggeration,
but Iranian efforts to upgrade air defense
and develop an indigenous ability to respond
to drones suggest that it hopes to eliminate
one of its chief vulnerabilities. The Supreme
Leader seemingly leading the charge on
this indicates that he retains a firm grip on
broader military strategy. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“Enemy activities can be detected promptly, in less than a minute…”

The Nazir Radar System
Source: Fars News Agency, https://goo.gl/Zd4N7X

Source: “Fa’liyat-e Doshman beh Movaqe’ Shenansi Mishevad” (“The Activities of Our
Enemies are Detected on Time”) Cherif.ir, 2 September 2016. https://goo.gl/RbtRZE
The commander of the Khatam al-Anbiya Defense Base in the northeast area said, defense
does not only include the headquarters, and all the forces of the army, Revolutionary Guards,
and Basij, but also takes the form of an integrated defense network. According to the Mehr
News Agency, Brigadier General Abdollah Reshadi, in a speech prior to the Friday Prayer
sermon this week in the shrine of Imam Reza in Mashhad, said, in the time of the imposed
[Iran-Iraq] war, there were 1,000 regions for special pictures, and these were under the
control of radar systems. He added, these systems were maintained by technical forces and
at that time, we were faced with sanctions, all of the systems were up-to-date for that time
whereas on the other side, Iraq had updated all of the systems to use for the attack against
Iran….
Reshadi added, defense was present in several operations, for example, in Valfajr 8
[Operation Dawn 8 during which Iranian forces recaptured Faw], different types of enemy
aircraft and helicopters were destroyed, and established an answer for Iran for aerial tactics,
and four enemy aircraft were destroyed daily, and the enemies came to fear and chose to
flee…
He added, “An integrated defense network not only includes the headquarters, but also the
army, revolutionary guards, and Basij, and all of the groups should be represented in an
integrated network defense, and Reshadi said that enemy activities can be detected promptly,
in less than a minute, and can be firmly dealt with… [This is why] we were able to witness the
arrest of the American Marines, and why enemy aircraft have no choice but to apologize.
He added, the defense of our country is under control 24 hours a day, and the Supreme
Leader insists on a front-line defense against the enemy until the enemy is no longer able to
encroach on Iranian territory.
OE Watch | October 2016

7

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran Purchases AK-103s from Russia
OE Watch Commentary:
The implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA)
and the signing of
UN Security Council
Resolution 2231 lifted
or revised many
existing sanctions
on Iran. The Iranian
military has used
its cash influx to
restock its military,
purchasing new
missile systems and
tanks from Russia
and potentially
purchasing combat
aircraft—technically
illicit under the
terms of Resolution
2231—from Russia
and China. Now,
according to the
excerpted article from
an official Iranian
defense portal, the
Iranian military
is purchasing new
assault rifles from
Russia. The article describes the AK103, and explains why it is the right
choice for the Iranian military. The fact
that an Iranian defense website must
justify purchase of a Russian weapon
rather than an American weapon might
suggest that many rank-and-file soldiers
would prefer M-16s over Russian
models. The Iranian insistence that a
larger caliber bullet is an advantage is
questionable, given the additional weight
that Iranian soldiers would have to carry,
especially since the article suggests that
Iran’s main focus for the future will be
in urban warfare and the type of closequarters fighting that has occurred in
both Iraq and Syria. The fact that Iran
sees the future of its military needs to be
the ability to conduct the type of urban
warfare conducted in Syria is especially
significant, because it suggests that even
if the Syria war concludes, Iran’s aims
in Yemen and elsewhere might be to
replicate such proxy wars of attrition.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The AK-103…will be the right weapon for our armed forces.”

Iran has purchased AK-103s from Russia
Source: Defapress.ir, http://www.defapress.ir/IDNA_media/image/2016/08/154443_orig.jpg

Source: “Moshkhasat AK-103: Aslahah Polermeri” (“Profile: AK-103, Plastic Gun”), Defa Press,
7 August 2016, http://www.defapress.ir/Fa/News/94695
According to news recently released to our media, Iran bought a number of guns from Russia
such as the AK-103, so that they might be placed at the disposal of our armed forces. From this
brief report, here is what is known about the weapons, and we will also examine a comparison to
two Western weapons….
The AK-103 is from the AK-100 series, and in this model, the Russians have reverted to the
famous 7.62mm caliber, and the guns have benefited from it. The basic design of this weapon is
based on the AK-74M and its body is made from polymers and plastic components.
The AK-103 weights about 3.6 kilograms (7.9 lbs) and has a length of 943 millimeters (37.1
inches), and fires at a rate of 600 round per minute with a bullet muzzle velocity of 715 meters/
second (1600 miles per hour) and an effective range of around 500 meters (1640 feet). This
weapon is also involved in the export market, and it has been exported to India, Libya, and Saudi
Arabia…
Therefore, with respect to the material, it can be said that the AK-103 in terms of accuracy and
compared with American weapons, ranks lower than the M-16, but due to the use of 7.62mm
rounds and its more effective range, will be the right weapon for our armed forces.
On the one hand, given that there is an AK-47 production line in Iran, and that the arms
industry can easily produce these weapons, and on the other hand, because parts can be
interchangeable between AK-47 and AK-103 and taking into account the future of urban warfare
as close combat and given the fighting in Syria and Iraq, it will be better to use weapons such as
the AK-103 and the 7.62 mm bullets.
OE Watch | October 2016

8

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Shia Symbolism: Iran-Backed Militias Resurgent in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: In an August 2016 interview,
retired Iranian Revolutionary Guard (IRGC) commander
Mohammed Ali al-Faliki discussed the creation of a new
IRGC-backed force called the “Free Shia Army” (also known
as “Shia Liberation Army”). According to the accompanying
passages from the interview, the new formation will include
Shia fighters from various nationalities who will fight wherever
Shia sites are in danger. Al-Faliki seemed especially bullish
on Afghans, whom he called “the main reason Damascus did
not fall into opposition hands.” The Afghans fighting for the
loyalist camp in Syria (“the Fatimid Brigade”) are mostly
refugees in Iran whom the IRGC has recruited with material
incentives such as land, jobs, and educational opportunities for
family members. As the excerpt notes, they are deployed “in
the name of defending Shia holy sites in Syria.”
Defending religious sites from Sunni jihadists has become
the rallying cry for Iranian-backed militias in Syria and
beyond. Although Iranian leadership has used symbolic
monuments to mobilize Shia groups since the 1979 revolution,
the current phenomenon in Syria also has roots in the decade
preceding the 2011 protests in Syria, when Iranian money
helped fuel a boom in Syria’s religious tourism industry. Shia
sites were revamped and expanded as tour groups from India,
Pakistan, and Iran descended on Damascus and other parts of
the country.
One of the sites restored with Iranian patronage during this
period was a shrine honoring Sukayna (Sakina), a daughter
of the Prophet Muhammad’s revered grandson Hussayn. The
Sukayna Shrine is located in the rebel-friendly, Sunni-majority
Damascus suburb of Darayya. By late August 2016, Darayya
had been left in ruins after years of tight government siege
and air campaign; which forced the remaining Sunni rebels to
negotiate safe passage out for themselves and their families.
Shortly after the Sunni population withdrew, the leader of
a loyalist Shia militia was photographed praying near the
partially destroyed Sukayna Shrine. As noted in the second
accompanying article, social media chatter from “Syrian,
Iraqi and Lebanese fighters” highlighted the importance of
protecting the shrine.
In early September, the prominent Saudi daily al-Sharq
al-Awsat reported that 300 Shia families from Southern Iraq
would be relocated to various parts of Damascus and its
periphery, including Darayya. The accompanying excerpted
article claimed that the Iraqi militia Harakat Hizbullah alNujaba (HHN) would be in charge of the population transfer.
HHN, which is a second-generation splinter group from Iraq’s
Mahdi Army, refuted the claim the following day. HHN is
among the most successful militias in the contemporary
Syria-Iraq battlefield. Its leader makes no secret of receiving
training, weapons and guidance from Iran. Its cadres permeate
Iraq’s intelligence and police forces, while also controlling
important trade and industry in the country’s south. End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… in the name of
defending Shia holy
sites in Syria…”

HHN logo
Source: http://alnujaba.
com/about-us.html

Source:
‫قيادي بالحرس الثوري يكشف عن قوة شيعية عابرة للحدود‬
“IRGC Commander Unveils Cross-Border Shia Force,” Arabi21. 19
August 2016. http://goo.gl/N1wGM9
According to Faliki: “The Afghan Shia under the command of [Qassim]
Sulaimani were the main reason Damascus did not fall into opposition
hands… In 2014 a group of 50 retired IRGC generals who participated
in the Iran-Iraq war was sent to Syria. I was one of them… We have paid
a great price to support Shia in Yemen and Bahrain”… The IRGC has
recruited tens of thousands of Afghan fighters residing in Iran, in exchange
for material incentives including giving their families land, employment in
IRGC enterprises, and study grants in Iranian universities for the fighters’
family members. Most of the Afghan Shia, who have been recruited and
sent as part of the “Fatimid Brigade,” live in the city of Mashhad, which
has become an Afghan recruitment center. Afghan Shia clerics linked
to the IRGC and Basij play the main role in recruitment, in the name of
defending Shia holy sites in Syria.
Source:
‫مقاتلون طائفيون يوجّهون أنظارهم إلى “مقام سكينة” في داريا‬
“Sectarian Fighters Set their Sights on the Sukayna Shrine in Darayya.”
Enab Baladi, 26 August 2016. http://www.enabbaladi.net/archives/99907
As soon as there were intimations of an agreement to empty Darayya of
its civilians and fighters, the Twitter hashtag [#Sayyida_Sukayna] began
trending among Syria, Iraqi and Lebanese fighters… some accounts
spoke of meetings between the IRGC and Lebanese Hizbullah leaders
to rehabilitate Darayya and possibly welcome Iranian and Lebanese to
“expand the shrine”…
Source:
‫النجباء تنقل عوائل من الجنوب العراقي إلى سوريا ألغراض التغيير الديموغرافي‬
“Al-Nujaba Changes Demographics by Transferring Families from
Southern Iraq to Syria.” Al-Sharq al-Awsat, 6 September 2016. https://goo.
gl/WOiYhd (translation via: http://syrianobserver.com/EN/News/31603/
Iraqi_Shiite_Militias_Seeking_Demographic_Change_Syria/)
The militias of the Iraqi Harakat al-Nujaba Movement have begun to
relocate Shiite families from southern Iraq to areas of Syria, including
Daraya and Moadamiya… At least 300 Iraqi families were being
transported there with the aim of creating demographic change, in
coordination with regime officials in Syria. The source added that the
al-Nujaba Movement — headed by Akram al-Kaabi, and which is close to
Iran and has direct links to the Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei —
was the one in charge of organizing the plan. Each family will be given a
salary of about $2,000 and a house to live in.
OE Watch | October 2016

9

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Mini-UAV Proliferation in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Cheap mini
drones have become increasingly visible in the
Syrian conflict. These video-capable, rotarywing commercial drones provide exceptional
propaganda footage; along with improved
reconnaissance, command and control capabilities
for small units. A propaganda video from a recent
Sunni rebel attack on a loyalist checkpoint in
Quneitra Province, for instance, uses aerial footage
to clearly show the retreat of loyalist forces. The
checkpoint was located on a hilltop and the retreat
of loyalist forces would not be observable without
the aerial view enabled by the mini drones.
According to the first accompanying article,
“most forces in Syria” have UAV surveillance
capabilities. The article claims that Syria has
“agents and sales centers” for DJI, maker of
the popular Phantom quadcopter (for more
information on the DJI Phantom, see: “DJIPhantom COTS UAV,” Red Diamond Threats
Newsletter, August 2016). The mini-drone market
is growing rapidly, and the entry of companies
such as China’s Xiaomi will increase supply while
lowering prices. The proportion of Syrian combat
footage posted online which includes overhead
shots has grown steadily throughout 2016.

“…The idea
of arming a
surveillance drone
came after I saw a
social media post
about food being
delivered by drone
in the West…”

Jund al-Aqsa projectile dropped from Quadcopter
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Op_hRfPhsFs

Source:
‫طائرات بدون طيار تباع بشمال سوريا عبر وكالء حصريين‬
“Unmanned Aircraft Sold in Northern Syria via Exclusive Agents,” Arabi21. 16 July
2016. http://goo.gl/WZhhQw
Syrian activists played down the importance of a recent report published by the
Pentagon regarding ISIS UAVs used for video and surveillance. They noted that most
forces in Syria already have such capabilities… “they are a commercial product that
can be easily obtained, and pointing this out is hardly an important discovery deserving
such media attention”… “Did you know that there are agents and sales centers in Syria
for DJI Phantoms?”… the Chinese companies sells small cargos of no more than 50
planes to merchants who then transfer them to Syria in their own way, despite the many
obstacles placed on buying these types of aircraft…

Mini-UAVs are not used exclusively for
surveillance. In August, Lebanese Hizbullah
fighters in Aleppo Province posted footage of a
rotary wing mini-drone dropping Chinese MZD-2
submunitions on adversary positions. A few days
later, the transnational Sunni jihadist group Jund
al-Aqsa uploaded video of a similar attack on
loyalist forces in Hama. The damage in both cases
appeared to be minimal.

Source:
‫طائرة من غير طيار معدلة للقصف الجوي من تطوير حزب هللا اللبناني‬
“Hizbullah Develops Modified Attack UAV,” Main Battle Tanks Blog. 10 August 2016.
http://anwaralsharrad-mbt.blogspot.com/2016/08/blog-post_10.html

The third accompanying excerpt discusses
an interview with Abu al-Baraa, a Syrian army
defector who developed Jund al-Aqsa’s armed
quadcopter. Abu al-Baraa is a tinkerer - he was
also behind an earlier attempt at improvising
rechargeable batteries for use with SA-7
MANPADS captured from the Syrian military. He
claims to have come up with the idea of arming
a quadcopter after seeing “a social media post
about food being delivered by drone in the West.”
He initially worked alone, doing online research
and developing prototypes. He pitched the idea to
several rebel groups and was taken up by Jund alAqsa, which apparently had enough DJI Phantom
3s to sacrifice some for testing. Abu al-Baraa
claims his design is now being further refined and
will be adopted by several other rebel groups. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫” الفصائل تقصف نظام األسد بطائرات استطالع‬..‫”سجيل‬
“‘Sajil’… Rebels Strike Assad Regime with a Drone,” Arabi21. 4 September 2016.
http://goo.gl/tCh1lK

Social media websites posted a video showing a drone belonging to Lebanon’s
Hizbullah which had been modified to launch a limited attack against Syrian opposition
positions in Aleppo, using submunitions small in both size and impact. The video clearly
shows an aircraft launching two Chinese-made MZD-2 submunitions which were mostly
likely extracted from Chinese-made 122-mm rockets…

Abu al-Baraa said: “The idea of arming a surveillance drone came after I saw a social
media post about food being delivered by drone in the West. I began a long study and
intensive research on the Internet on the weight these drones can bear and decided on
one that could carry 500 grams. I studied the drones that were in the possession of Jund
al-Aqsa and their ability to maneuver with the excess weight, finally determining the
weight they could bear. There was a challenge with the distance the drone would have
to travel, so I designed a circuit board to cover this distance. After great exertion and
effort I obtained successful results, leading to the first test under the name “Sajil-1”
… He explained that the Sajil-3 is almost ready and will correct all previous errors.
The initial development was on his own, but is now a joint effort that includes plans to
develop drones in the hands of opposition factions. Abu al-Bara chose Jund al-Aqsa
rather than another group to test his design because they were the only ones that asked
him to do so. Other factions were concerned that their drones would be lost if the trials
failed and the drone exploded.
OE Watch | October 2016

10

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Saudi Arabia and China in the Arabian Sea
OE Watch Commentary: In last August, a highlevel Saudi delegation led by the kingdom’s de facto
ruler Mohammed bin Salman visited China. The
two countries signed over a dozen trade agreements
and Memoranda of Understanding during the
inaugural meeting of what they termed the “SaudiChinese Joint Committee.” None of the reported
agreements involved weapons purchases or defense
cooperation, but the following day the Saudi
newspaper al-Watan (citing the Chinese Englishlanguage Global Times as its source) claimed that
Saudi Arabia had agreed to purchase an unspecified
number of Chinese-made Pterodactyl drones,
as noted in the first accompanying passage. The
Pterodactyl, or Wing Loong, is a medium-altitude,
long-endurance attack UAV, a Chinese version of
the MQ-1 Predator. This is the second report of
Saudi Arabia agreeing to purchase an unspecified
number of Pterodactyls; the first was in April 2014.
Bin Salman’s visit comes amidst Saudi calls
for deeper cooperation with China. The second
accompanying article argues that the two countries
are “coming from similar starting points” by
having comparable economic development plans
in place (China’s “One Road, One Belt” plan
and Saudi Arabia’s “Vision 2030”). One of the
goals in Saudi Arabia’s “Vision 2030” plan is to
establish a government-controlled domestic arms
manufacturing industry that can meet 50% of Saudi
Arabia’s total arms expenditures by 2030. As the
third excerpt notes, this is a potential growth sector
for Saudi-Chinese defense cooperation.
Earlier in 2016, China and Saudi Arabia were
reported to be on the verge of independently
establishing military bases in Djibouti. As the
Chinese base proceeds apace, the Saudi base
remains little more than an expression of interest.
The fickleness of ties between the rulers of Djibouti
and Gulf States notwithstanding, this expression of
interest should be taken seriously.
A key theme in Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 is
self-sufficiency. Strategically, this entails greater
capacity to independently project power in the
region. According to the fourth accompanying
article, also from al-Watan, the planned Saudi
base in Djibouti is motivated by the absence of
a “hegemonic power in the Arabian Sea” and
driven by a broader strategic vision to counter the
perceived Iranian threat. Saudi Arabia will not
suddenly turn toward China to achieve its regional
strategic designs, but a gradual Saudi pivot toward
the east is plausible. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

“…There
is no
hegemonic
power in the
Arabian Sea
…”
Saudi Arabia
Vision 2030 logo
Source: http://
vision2030.gov.
sa/en

Source:
‫المملكة تشتري عددا من طائرات الزاحف المجنح‬
“Saudi Arabia Buys Several Pterodactyls.” Al-Watan, 31 August 2016. http://alwatan.
com.sa/Politics/News_Detail.aspx?ArticleID=275907&CategoryID=1
Saudi Arabia has signed a contract with China to buy an unspecified number of planes
known as Pterodactyls or Wing Loongs. They are medium-altitude long-endurance
UAVs, according to a report in the Global Times.
Source:
‫ انطالقة جديدة‬:‫السعودية والصين‬
“Saudi Arabia and China: A New Start.” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 30 August 2016. https://
goo.gl/MlrcVY
Saudi Arabia and China are coming from similar starting points, as each has a grand
project: Saudi Arabia has “Vision 2030,” which calls for the restructuring of many
social and economic pillars; China has a plan to revive the ancient Silk Road, which
linked to the Middle East. Both countries are opening up to the world in a new and
planned way, with the aim of improving the situation of the international community in
general and of the two countries in particular.
Source:
‫ من وجهة نظر صينية‬2030 ‫رؤية‬
“Vision 2030 from a Chinese Perspective.” al-Jazirah (Saudi Arabia), 26 August 2016.
http://www.al-jazirah.com/2016/20160826/wz1.htm
Chinese officials have on various occasions expressed China’s desire to coordinate its
“One Road, One Belt” plan with the kingdom’s Vision 2030 plan… Vision 2030 calls for
establishing a 100%-government owned holding company for military industry and for
50% of military spending to be done locally by 2030. This is a grand goal that requires
precise planning by leaders, strong will, and fixed steps. Saudi Arabia may benefit from
China, which has had successful experiences and critical studies on this issue.
Source:
‫لبنان أم جيبوتي‬
“Either Lebanon or Djibouti.” al-Watan, 28 July 2016. http://www.alwatan.com.sa/
Articles/Detail.aspx?ArticleID=31359
…a political and military position that will serve for the next … Were this military
base to become a reality it would be our first base abroad…. Having a military base in
Djibouti would not serve military goals in the Red Sea or Yemen… but would be very
useful as a naval launching point in the western Indian Ocean… There is no hegemonic
power in the Arabian Sea… it may be time to reconsider our strategic priorities. The
idea of opening a base in Djibouti may be a starting point for expansion in the right
direction.
OE Watch | October 2016

11

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Israel and NATO Upgrade Ties
OE Watch Commentary: On 16 September, Israel opened a
permanent mission at NATO’s headquarters in Brussels. This
significant upgrade of ties follows a May 2016 decision by NATO
to invite Israel to open a permanent office and assign an official
Israeli representative. The accompanying passages from Middle
Eastern sources discuss the background of this development.
Although Israel had numerous channels to NATO before, none
of them were operating directly out of alliance headquarters in
Brussels. The permanent and daily access to NATO headquarters
will provide greater opportunities for cooperation and provide
more access to exercises, events and programs.
As the passages discuss, Israel and NATO had been in talks on
improving relations for years, but the opening of the mission had
been vetoed by Turkey. During a period when Turkey’s relations
with Israel were at a critical low, (from 2010-2016) Turkey had
been adamantly opposed to any further NATO cooperation
with Israel. In February 2012, then-Turkish Foreign Minister
Ahmet Davutoğlu said that Turkey would never allow Israel to
use any NATO facility.1 Turkish sources was also claimed that
Turkey blocked Israel’s participation in NATO’s 2012 summit.2
However, following a long period of Israeli and Turkish efforts
to normalize relations, it appears that Turkey dropped this
position. The first passage notes that the invitation was “a result
of pressure by other NATO members on Turkey.... to drop its veto
on closer alliance ties with its former ally.”
The second passage, from the Turkish mainstream Hürriyet
newspaper points out the May 2016 NATO decision was made
after Turkey lifted its veto. The passage notes that a high-level
Israeli official claimed that Turkey dropped its veto in an effort to
normalize its relations with Israel. The two countries did in fact
sign a reconciliation deal the next month, in June 2016. The third
passage quotes Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu as saying how
grateful he is to NATO for the invitation; and his comments that
Israel stands ready to help NATO in its fight against terrorism
and is prepared to share its intelligence and experience in this
effort.
As the final passage from the Times of Israel notes, Israel
is not a member of the 28-nation alliance, but has enjoyed
military cooperation with NATO in a number of fields and is
currently a partner of the Mediterranean Dialogue, a NATO
outreach program with seven friendly nations bordering on the
Mediterranean; which also includes Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia,
Jordan, Mauritania and Morocco. The passage notes that Israel’s
representative to NATO will be Leshno-Yaar, who is also Israel’s
current ambassador to the European Union. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)
1
2

“Davutoglu says will never let Israel use NATO facility in Turkey,” World
Bulletin, 17 February 2012. http://www.worldbulletin.net/haber/85965/
davutoglu-says-will-never-let-israel-use-nato-facility-in-turkey
“Türkiye’den İsrail’e Chicago Vetosu (Turkey Vetoes Israel’s Presence at
Chicago Meeting),” Stargazete.com, April 23, 2012. http://www.stargazete.com/dunya/turkiyeden-israile-chicago-vetosu/haber-550053

“... the NATO decision was taken after
Turkey lifted its veto.”
Source: “Israel opens NATO office as ambassador presents credentials,”
i24news.tv, 16 September 2016. http://www.i24news.tv/en/news/israel/
diplomacy-defense/125551-160916-israel-opens-nato-office-asambassador-presents-credentials
“Israel and NATO had been in talks on improving relations for years,
however, the opening of the mission had been stymied by Turkey, a key
regional ally of Israel until 2010 when Israeli commandos stormed a
Turkish aid ship bound for Gaza, leaving 10 activists dead. Israel and
Turkey have since normalized relations and signed a reconciliation deal
in June.”
Source: “İsrail, NATO karargahında temsilcilik açacak (Israel will open a
representative [office] at the NATO headquarters),” Hurriyet.com, 4 May
2016. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/israil-nato-karargahinda-temsilcilikacacak-40099143
“An official speaking to the Haaretz newspaper in Jerusalem said
that the NATO decision was taken after Turkey lifted its veto. A highlevel Israeli official claimed that this was a sign of Turkey’s efforts to
normalize relations with Israel.”
Source: “Netanyahu: Israel Will Help NATO States With ‘Collective
Struggle’ Against Terror,” The Algemeiner, 15 June 2016. http://www.
algemeiner.com/2016/06/15/netanyahu-israel-will-help-nato-states-withcollective-struggle-against-terror/#
“Netanyahu told the ambassadors [of NATO member states], “I look
forward to this opportunity to discuss our common interests, based on
our common values. I want to thank NATO for inviting Israel to open an
office in your headquarters in Brussels... Israel has much to contribute to
NATO. I believe NATO has much to contribute to Israel...
We stand ready to help NATO in this collective struggle [terrorism]. We
are prepared to share our intelligence and our experience to help in this
common effort.”
Source: “Israel’s first ambassador to NATO presents his credentials,”
Times of Israel, 16 September 2016. http://www.timesofisrael.com/
israels-first-ambassador-to-nato-presents-his-credentials/
“Israel is not a member of the 28-nation... NATO, but has enjoyed
military cooperation with the body in a number of fields and is currently
a partner of the Mediterranean Dialogue...
...
Leshno-Yaar is also Israel’s ambassador to the European Union,
responsible for relations between the Jewish state and the 28-member
bloc.
...
In June, an Israeli expert told AFP that the invitation was a result of
pressure by other NATO members on Turkey, which joined in 1952, to
drop its veto on closer alliance ties with its former ally.”
OE Watch | October 2016

12

AFRICA

Top

Split in Boko Haram Leads to Intra-Group Fighting?
OE Watch Commentary: In August, ISIS
announced that it was replacing Boko Haram’s
long-time leader, Abubakar Shekau, with Abu
Musab al-Barnawi, the son of the founder of
Boko Haram, Muhammed Yusuf. Quickly,
Shekau rejected the claim that he had been
ousted, insisting that he
remained as the group’s true
leader, even as al-Barnawi’s
leadership gained credence
amongst some of the group’s
members. In short, Boko
Haram has now seemingly
split into two camps: those
loyal to the “old guard”
(Shekau) and those loyal to
the new guard (al-Barnawi).
As per the accompanying
article from a reporter who
has canvassed many towns
in Boko Haram-affected
northern Nigeria, the two
factions are in the midst of
an internal power struggle.
The author calls this “an
emerging ideological split
and brutal supremacy battle”
between members of the
factions, with civilians
frequently caught in the crosshairs. According to
locals, each rival faction controls a specific area:
Shekau loyalists are mostly entrenched in central
and southern Borno state and the Sambisa Forest,
its historical area of operation; while al-Barnawi’s
factions retain more control over the transnational
Lake Chad area, at the nexus of the borders of
Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, and Chad. Members of
the rival factions actively trailing and killing each
other. Meanwhile, the entire situation is rendered
more chaotic as a result of the presence of a variety
of other actors, including the arrival of foreign
mercenaries, other foreign fighters, and the shifting
allegiances and associations of civilians in the area
to either of the two factions.
For its part, the Nigerian army has had mixed
reactions to the intra-group split. On one hand, it
has expressed that it is glad to hear of the fracturing
of the group, assuming that it signals a weakening
of Boko Haram. To that end, it is unapologetically
pursuing members of both factions. However, as
relayed in the article, others from the Nigerian
military doubt the importance of the division,
claiming it may be a public relations ploy. End OE
Watch Commentary (Warner)

“There is serious disarray now, and most of the Boko Haram
fighters are apparently confused. Those loyal to Shekau are
being trailed by the other faction and vice versa. It is now
killing, killing and killing.”

Boko Haram is now experiencing internal fighting, with some members loyal to longtime leader
Abubakar Shekau (depicted at left) actively targeting Boko Haram affiliates loyal to the newly installed
leader, Abu Musab al-Barnawi (depicted at right).
Source: http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/news/news/shekau-vs-barnawi-the-battle-for-boko-haram-ssoul/162159.html

Source: Idris, Hamza. “Shekau Vs. Barnawi: The Battle for Boko Haram’s Soul.”
Daily Trust (Abuja, Nigeria). 11 September 2016. http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/
news/news/shekau-vs-barnawi-the-battle-for-boko-haram-s-soul/162159.html
“Boko Haram assailants stormed Tumur, a sleepy community along the Nigerian
border with Niger Republic and slit the throats of 10 people…in the emerging
ideological split and brutal supremacy battle between the hardhearted leader of the
Boko Haram, Abubakar Shekau, and the new point-man of the Islamic State in West
Africa-backed faction of the group, Abu Musab Al-Barnawi…
There is serious disarray now, and most of the Boko Haram fighters are apparently
confused. Those loyal to Shekau are being trailed by the other faction and vice
versa. It is now killing, killing and killing,” [a local] said…
Findings by our reporter reveal that while the ISIS-backed Al-Barnawi has an
upper hand in northern part of Borno State, which shares borders with Niger, Chad
and Cameroon along the shores of the Lake Chad, Shekau is still dominant in the
central and southern parts of the state, where the large swathes of the Sambisa
forest are located….
“While only security officials can confirm if Al-Barnawi has started receiving
support from ISIS or not, what we know is that they have black mercenaries from
neighboring countries who barely speak our local dialect,” he added….”

OE Watch | October 2016

13

AFRICA

Top

The Ethno-Military Dimensions of
Current Ethiopian Instability
OE Watch Commentary: Since
November 2015, riots from the Oromo
ethnic group in Ethiopia have led to what is
arguably the country’s most unstable period
since the end of the socialist Derg regime
in 1991. According to the excerpted article,
the riots have become deadlier over the past
year, killing over 400. The article also notes
that the riots are partially rooted in citizens’
perceptions of the Ethiopian military being
dominated by ethnic Tigrays, which make up
only 4% of the total Ethiopian population.
The current widespread protests in
Ethiopia began in November 2015 when
the central government in Addis Ababa
announced that it was expanding the
capital territory southward, into land held
by ethnic Oromos. Protests against the
central government, a rarity, ensued. The
crackdown on protestors was swift, brutal,
and according to nearly all international
observers, disproportionate. Protests against
the central government have spread to
include members of other ethnic minorities,
including the Amharas, and others. The
Ethiopian government sees the protests
as particularly dangerous, because the
country’s economic growth has come
from holding together, often through
repressive means, an otherwise ethnically
heterogeneous country. Ethiopia is among
the fastest growing countries in the world, at
8% annually.
The article from a former Ethiopian
government official points out that another
central part of the riots is the question of
the ethnic makeup of the military. In short,
ethnic Tigrays played an important role
in overthrowing the Marxist regime of
Mengistu Haile Mariam in 1991, as members
of the insurgent Tigray People’s Liberation
Front (TPLF). Given their success in helping
to topple him, ethnic Tigrays from the TPLF
have had an outstripped role in government,
at one point. According to the article, 37
new generals were appointed in 2012,
and “almost all of them were Tigrayan”
despite the fact that only 4% of the country
is actually Tigray. The irony is that it is
the Ethiopian military and police that are
working to put down the current protests.
End OE Watch Commentary (Warner)

“[The new government in 2012] appointed some 37 generals,
almost all of them Tigreans,”

Protests by ethnic Oromo citizens have put Ethiopia in the most insecure position it has been in since 1991. One
enduring component of the protests is the perceived domination of the Ethiopian government - and especially
the military - by members of the ethnic Tigray minority.
Source: http://africanarguments.org/2016/09/16/behind-the-ethiopia-protests-a-view-from-inside-the-government/

Source: Saado, Juneydi. “Behind the Ethiopian Protests: A View from Inside the
Government.” AfricanArguments (Global). 16 September 2016. http://africanarguments.
org/2016/09/16/behind-the-ethiopia-protests-a-view-from-inside-the-government/
“….Meles died in the summer of 2012 after 21 years in power. As he was the main actor
blocking reform due to fears of losing personal power, many believed his departure could
lead to a fresh start….
However, the reaction from the TPLF leadership was extremely negative…. They
appointed a non-Tigrean – Hailemariam Desalegn – to be Meles’ replacement, but this
gesture was totally disingenuous as they simultaneously took swift measures to cripple the
new PM’s power.
To begin with, they appointed some 37 generals, almost all of them Tigreans, before the
new prime minister took office in violation of the constitution which gives such power to the
prime minister and president.
They reduced the prime minister’s control over ministries by increasing the number of
deputy prime ministers from one to three, with each ministry having to report to these
deputies rather than the PM himself.
The Chief of Staff of the armed forces, the chiefs of intelligence, and foreign affairs
remained in the hand of the TPLF. Several senior advisors were appointed to Hailemariam,
almost all of them Tigreans. And while most of the hardline TPLF members who were
pushed out in 2001 began to work covertly with the system again, those in government
opposed to the increasing one-party monopoly were either demoted or, as in my case,
purged.”
OE Watch | October 2016

14

AFRICA

Top

AU Considers Pros and Cons of AU-led
Intervention Force in Mali
OE Watch Commentary: The African Union’s (AU)
Peace and Security Council is considering deploying its own
counter-terrorism force in Mali, to fight alongside the extant
UN operation, the Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, MINUSMA. The meetings of the AU Peace
and Security Council remain closed; but the snippet offered
in the accompanying report by the pan-African Institute of
Security Studies, provides a rare revelatory insight as to what is
going on behind the scenes.
In January 2012, the National Movement for the Liberation
of Azawad (MNLA), a separatist group fighting for Tuareg
autonomy in the north of Mali, took control over the region;
several months later in March, the national government of
Amadou Touré was overthrown in an army mutiny due to its
response to the MNLA rebellion. Chaos ensued in the northern
stretches of the country, with the MNLA allying and then
fighting with sundry Islamist groups, including Ansar Dine,
and an al-Qaeda offshoot, the Movement for Oneness and Jihad
in West Africa (MUJWA). In January 2013, the Islamist groups
were expelled from the north by the French and African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). Today,
terrorist attacks still occur, despite the ceasefire signed in the
Noukchott process of 2015, and the continued presence of the
UN’s MINUSMA mission.
In short, the AU is contemplating whether to send its own
mission to Mali due to the recognition of the limitations
of the MINUSMA mission: because it is a UN-mandated
peacekeeping mission, it is prohibited from firing unless fired
upon. As a result, it can only play defense, and not actively
work to root out lingering terrorist presence. Though the
AU’s Peace and Security Council has sent a team to Mali to
investigate what such a mission would resemble, as of this
writing, the exploratory process as not yet ended. Indeed,
numerous issues – including how to operate in Mali’s hot, dry
climate, and the lack of resources, among others - would be
important hurdles to overcome prior to deployment. End OE
Watch Commentary (Warner)

“We believe that an [African Union] intervention brigade
is one way of [strengthening the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, or MINUSMA],
particularly seeing that MINUSMA’s classical
peacekeeping mandate does not seem to allow it to engage
in offensive anti-terrorist operations.”
Source: Institute for Security Studies. 2016. “Peace and Security Council
Report #84.” Institute for Security Studies (Addis Ababa, Ethiopia).
https://www.issafrica.org/publications/peace-and-security-council-report/
peace-and-security-council-report-84.
“An AU-led regional intervention force for Mali is not a new idea…
Speaking to the PSC Report last year, the former president of Burundi,
Pierre Buyoya, the High Representative of the AU for Mali and the Sahel
(MISAHEL), said: ‘We believe that an intervention brigade is one way of
doing so [strengthening the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, or MINUSMA], particularly seeing that MINUSMA’s
classical peacekeeping mandate does not seem to allow it to engage in
offensive anti-terrorist operations…”
….Some sources at the AU Peace and Security Department say that the
envisaged regional force demands careful planning, because the mission
will be set up in the difficult working environment of northern Mali.
Notably, the extremely hot, dry climate and the thick dust in the region
present difficulties for the mission…The Malian government’s limited
presence in the north also presents challenges for such a regional force,
which will have to set up its headquarters in unfamiliar terrain.
Moreover, the AU’s counter-terrorist efforts face criticism for the slow
pace of operationalizing worthwhile frameworks. This is largely due
to the poor commitment and coordination of states in the region, as
well as uncertainty around the funding of robust and multi-stakeholder
operations. MINUSMA already faces resource and capacity constraints
that inhibit it from meeting its peacekeeping mandate. Over the years
terrorists in the Sahel have benefitted from these weaknesses in the AU’s
counter-terrorism strategy.”

Members of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in Mali. The African Union is considering sending
its own peace enforcement contingent to Mali,
citing insufficiencies in the MINUSMA’s traditional
peacekeeping mandate, which prevents it from
pursuing offensive anti-terrorist activities.
Source: http://minusma.unmissions.org/en/personnel

OE Watch | October 2016

15

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Colombian Ex-President Does Not Like
the Peace Agreement
“…The Havana Agreement erases the line between victim and murderer…”
OE Watch Commentary: Former Colombian
presidents have lined up for and against the agreement
that the FARC has made with the administration of
Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos. While the
most outspoken among those ex-presidents opposed
to the agreement is probably Álvaro Uribe Vélez
[who served from 2002 until 2010], Andrés Pastrana
[1998-2002] has been especially critical about the
accords during the run-up to the plebiscite that is
to take place on October 2. While polls show the
accord likely to be approved, many influential voices
are expressing their dismay. The accompanying
portion of an interview with Andrés Pastrana offers
us a good summary of some of the most intensely felt
objections. Former President Pastrana is not known
to find himself on the same side of issues with former
President Uribe, or the latter with the leadership of
Human Rights Watch. In their warnings about the
accords, however, they seem to be in agreement. End
OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Ramón Pérez-Maura, interview, “Andrés Pastrana: ‘Las FARC se
acaban como guerrilla, pero siguen como cártel’” (Andres Pastrana: “The
FARC will cease to be a guerrilla, but will continue as a cartel”), ABC, 12
September 2016, http://www.abc.es/internacional/abci-andres-pastrana-farcacaban-como-guerrilla-pero-siguen-como-cartel-201609110220_noticia.html
“Andrés Pastrana Arango was negotiating with the FARC for three years when
they were commanded by Manuel Marulanda Vélez, ‘Tirofijo’. He went absolutely
alone to the Caguan, without his security knowing, in order to seek the path to
peace. It wasn’t possible. … His intrepid determination to achieve peace then
makes it incomprehensible for some why he is now campaigning for the ‘No’ in
the plebiscite …
[From interview:]
Q. How do you explain a country divided in the face of a prospect for peace
after so many years of conflict?
A. The President has determined to sell the idea that for the sake of the Havana
accords the end justifies the means. …
Q. In this [that the FARC will continue to traffic in drugs] you have been very
critical, maybe because the matter touches a very personal chord…

A. Clearly, because all this is the consequence of the death of Plan Colombia
by demand of the FARC. The plan was conceived together with President
Bill Clinton as a social and military offensive against drug trafficking and eventually against the guerrilla. It was so successful that with
some renovated Armed Forces and Police the FARC was made to sit down at
the table again and to reduce coca cultivation from 180,000 hectares during my
administration to 40,000 during the Uribe administration. But, by demand of the
FARC, Santos lowered his arms and gave up Plan Colombia’s head. Today it reaches
200,000 hectares and the business of the FARC cartel doubles in size every two
years….
Q. Let’s talk about the transitional justice, which is especially questioned. ‘Truth
Commission’ — seems normal that in whatever process of this type there needs to
be such a commission. Then why your criticisms?
A. The Havana Agreement erases the line between victim and murderer. The
[legal] concept of the [culpable killer] is lost. Taking off from there, from the
history that they hope to re-write according to their whim, from the simulation of
justice staged in a pseudo-tribunal, everything remains under suspicion.
Q. We are talking about three million hectares that are going to be turned over to
the FARC, and in this moment there are in this country some six million hectares,
more-or-less, and the FARC has at this moment under its control about a million.
Therefore, the majority of the productive land of the country would fall under its
control. In what position does this leave the rest of the country and how is it going
to be managed?
A. That is what I call a question-determination [a question that answers itself].
Ernesto Samper [another former president [1994-1998], whose presidency was
purchased by the Cali Cartel, will manage at least half of the productive lands of
the country at his whim. He is Santo’s right hand man, is very close to the FARC
and to Nicolás Maduro. The accord leaves private property in question and the
Tribunal complete liberty to interpret property to its taste.

Former Colombian president Andrés Pastrana Arango.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Andres_
Pastrana_Arango_%282001%29.jpg

OE Watch | October 2016

16

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Major Public Speech by FARC Chief
OE Watch Commentary: The
current leader of the FARC gave an
open air speech to a large gathering
of FARC adherents and press in
southeastern Colombia, with a large
percentage of the FARC leadership
present. The meeting was not only
uncontested by the government,
but condoned by it even to the
extent that the president released a
number of FARC prisoners so they
could attend the meeting. Styled as
the Tenth National Conference, it
becomes one and perhaps the last in
a line of major planning meetings of
the FARC conducted over a period
of five decades. The portions of the
speech extracted for this OE Watch
piece do not give it full justice.
Regional analysts will want to
pour over it. The tone of the FARC
leader’s presentation was clearly
one of satisfaction if not vitriol.
Singled out for special praise was
Hugo Chavez, part of a repeated
highlighting of the importance of
the bolivarian alliance. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…our adversaries are seen obligated to recognize our complete
right to political franchise…”
Source: Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri, “Discurso del jefe de las FARC del 17 de septiembre de 2016,
en la apertura de la ‘conferencia guerrillera’ (17 September 2016 speech by the FARC chief at the
opening of the ‘guerilla conference’),” Youtube, 17 September 2016, https://youtu.be/F7p6j0TCQ7g?
list=PL4BUlQBKuHekhIT-4TtpQrqj778akweCi
“Comrades, we discover ourselves meeting here, after fifty-two years of continuous political and
military confrontation with the Colombian State, with the purpose of celebrating our Tenth National
Conference, the premier level of democratic event contemplated by our Statutes. …
Contrary to what our contradictors and gratuitous criticizers might preach, we in the FARC-EP find
ourselves far from being an organization of exclusively military nature, …
We have obtained the siting at a conversation table with them, and to move forward a Final Accord
of the Termination of the Conflict, with which it is left definitively clear that in this war there do
not exist winners or losers, at the same time our adversaries are [nevertheless] seen obligated to
recognize our complete right to political franchise, with the broadest guarantees. …
Peace insists that the power of the media is no longer used as another instrument of the war. …
Our deepest aspiration is to arrive with our message to many more [people], until we achieve that
the torrent for great transformations turns out to be uncontainable. …
We have to pay special homage to the memory and the abnegation of that titan of the peoples of Our
America, Eternal President Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías, without whose support and initial impetus
none of what has been achieved would have been possible. …
I declare officially installed the Tenth National Conference of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, Army of the People. Find in your hands Colombia’s destiny.”

Venezuela’s Socialist Civil-Military Consolidation
OE Watch Commentary: According to a
few well-informed analysts, the Venezuelan
military has been transforming toward a force
oriented as much internally as externally, and
to have a leading role in economic planning
and management. That evolution has taken
a more decided step in the face of the food
supply problems that the country is currently
enduring. The military has been charged
with the management of the regime’s Plan
Provision, which is aimed at delivering
basic foodstuffs and hygiene supplies to
the population at large. The portmanteau
agroalimentario [agriculture-food] is used to
describe the broad purview of the militaryled management system. The notion ties
agriculture and diet as a mission, and thus
gives vast authority to the military hierarchy
to make decisions about crops, foodstuff
transportation and food product choices, as
well as food distribution and pricing. The
article does not suggest the military will be
efficient, but only that it will be in charge.
End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Sofía Nederr, “Adoctrinan a militares para que cumplan tareas en la Misión
Abastecimiento” (They are indoctrinating military officers to fulfill Mission Provision tasks),
El-Nacional.com, 18 September 2016, http://www.el-nacional.com/politica/Adoctrinanmilitares-cumplan-Mision-Abastecimiento_0_923307757.html
“Analyst José Alberto Olivar points out that the governmental inefficiency is being
transferred to the armed institution. …
On 5 September, Padrino López [Minister of Defense] reminded his subordinates of the path
they must follow: ‘The visión of the new FANB [National Bolivarian Armed Forces] is to be
profoundly socialist and at the service of the people. During a review of units at Guasdualito
he pointed out that the military organization combated paramilitarism, but must also struggle
against the economic warfare [perpetrated by the United States]. …
Employment of military officers in national developmental functions forms an important
juncture of the military doctrine hoisted by comandante Hugo Chávez. José Alberto Olivar,
specialist in civil-military relations, pointed out that training for the new doctrine has
developed over the last ten years. …
León Heredia [nfi] assures that Venezuelan generals are a group of managers and that
participation in the food provisioning program is as salient a mission as the rest of the
chores with which the men in arms are entrusted ….
A preeminence of military officers over civilians exists in the institutions of the State. …
According to what has been revealed by the High Command, the optimization of the
deployment of the Armed Forces in agricultural zones and commercialization networks will
allow for the achievement of dietary stability. …”
OE Watch | October 2016

17

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Alleged Brazilian Assassins Hired to
Murder Paraguayan President
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 September 2016, a red alert
was initiated in Paraguay after multiple sources uncovered a
possible assassination attempt against the country’s president,
Horacio Cartes. The alert was issued after authorities gathered
information indicating that a prominent drug trafficker known
as Jarvis Pavao Chimenes allegedly paid Brazilian hitmen $5
million to carry out the assassination in retaliation for recent
drug seizures and his transfer to another prison, where he could
no longer run his business. The first accompanying excerpt from
a Paraguayan newspaper discusses this development.
Narco related assassinations of political figures are not
uncommon in Latin America but individuals most commonly
targeted are governors, mayors, congressman, and senators; not
presidents, which makes this case unique if it turns out to be
true. For this reason, Pavao Chimenes took a bold step if he
did indeed order this assassination as it could generate grave
repercussions for him and his organization. The second excerpt,
which claims that “the extent to which drug trafficking has
permeated certain areas in Paraguay points to high-level political
involvement in the country; possibly even at the presidential
level,” raises the question of what type of deal he may have
struck with high-ranking government officials to plan such a
vicious attack. Alternatively, this could simply be a case of a
crazy drug trafficker who felt power and money could exact the
perfect revenge without regard to the possible repercussions. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The extent to which drug trafficking has permeated
certain areas in Paraguay points to high-level political
involvement in the country; possibly even at the
presidential level.”
Source: “Organismos de seguridad activan alerta roja ante información
de atentado contra Cartes (Security Organizations Issue Red Alert
Following News of Assassination Attempt Against Cartes).” Ultima
Hora, 2 September 2016. http://www.ultimahora.com/organismosseguridad-activan-alerta-roja-informacion-atentado-contracartes-n1020811.html
“Interior Minister Francisco De Vargas confirmed that intelligence
reports corroborated information regarding a planned assassination
attempt against President Horacio Cartes….
…Human intelligence reports from inside the prison further indicated
that the hit was ordered by Jarvis Pavao Chimenes in retaliation for
recent large-scale drug seizures totaling an estimated $85 million
and his transfer from the Tacumbu Prison to the Specialized National
Police Association. Supposedly Pavao Chimenes is angry because he is
no longer able to run his business while incarcerated.”
Source: “Paraguay: escenario de una guerra del narcotráfico en
total impunidad (Paraguay: Breeding Ground for a Narco War with
Complete Impunity).” Actualidad RT, 17 July 2016. https://actualidad.
rt.com/actualidad/213408-paraguay-escenario-guerra-narcotrafico-total
“The extent to which drug trafficking has permeated certain areas
in Paraguay points to high-level political involvement in the country;
possibly even at the presidential level.”

China’s cyber policy has become
partly visible to foreign nations
through observation, tracking, and
inference. The policy appears to
have three vectors. These three
aspects—peace activist, espionage
activist, and attack planner—
dominate China’s cyber policy. Some
are always hidden from view while
others are demonstrated daily.
Three Faces of the Cyber Dragon is
divided into sections that coincide
with these vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf
OE Watch | October 2016

18

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Tri-National Force Created to Fight Mara Salvatrucha
in the Northern Triangle
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 July 2016, President Juan Orlando
Hernandez of Honduras personally visited President Jimmy Morales
of Guatemala and simultaneously sent a delegation to El Salvador
to propose the creation of a tri-national anti-gang force. Initial
agreements were quickly made, and in late August, Honduras took
the lead and deployed forces dedicated to dismantling key operational
centers utilized by the estimated 25,000 active Mara Salvatrucha
members in areas throughout the country. It is expected that
Guatemala and El Salvador will form an active part of the tri-national
force by early October.
Gang presence and associated violence is nothing new in the
Northern Triangle (the region formed by Guatemala, Honduras, and
El Salvador), but in the past 20 years the power base of the Mara
Salvatrucha gang (factions known as the MS-13 and 18th Street Gang)
has grown to the point that it now threatens the national security of
these countries. As indicated in the first excerpt, in 2015 alone, murder
rates and extortion in the Northern Triangle soared. Upticks in this
type of activity are said to be directly related to the nearly 70,000
gang members operating in this region. As the first excerpt indicates,
by creating a tri-national force, these countries hope to improve
internal and shared border security as well as intelligence sharing. The
creation of this new force is viewed as a positive step in improving
regional security. However, as the second excerpt notes, police and
prosecutorial bodies also need to join forces in
order to create additional joint strategies
in fighting transnational crime. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: Triangulo norte acuerda crear fuerza para combater las
maras (Northern Triangle Creates Agreement to Combat Las
Maras). La Prensa, 6 August 2016. http://www.laprensa.hn/
honduras/987213-410/tri%C3%A1ngulo-norte-acuerda-crearfuerza-para-combatir-las-maras
“In 2015, El Salvador had the highest murder rate in Central
America with 6,640 reported homicides. Guatemala ranked
second with 5,677 and Honduras ranked third with 5,148. Many of
these murders were carried out by gangs. Furthermore, extortion
activity conducted by the Mara Salvatrucha in the Northern
Triangle served as a principal income generator. Those most
commonly targeted include public transport companies and small
businesses….
…“The tri-national force seeks to stem the flow of gang members
in the region as president Hernandez of Honduras reported that
many [gang members] cross borders to commit criminal acts. In
addition, it is believed that the creation of a tri-national force will
facilitate the flow of intelligence sharing to carry out arrests. To
start, this force with have its command headquarters along the
shared border between Honduras/El Salvador, but there are hopes
to extend its presence across the entire border region.”
Source: “Inicia acciones trinacional contra 70000 mareros
(Actions Taken to Fight Against 70,000 Mara Salvatrucha Gang
Members).” La Prensa, 29 August 2016. http://www.laprensa.hn/
honduras/994910-410/inicia-acción-trinacional-contra-70000mareros
“If a real strategy is implemented in terms of security among
the three countries, it will certainly yield good results and will
lower the levels of insecurity in the region. But for this to have a
broader effect, police and prosecutorial bodies should also join
forces because transnational crime can only be fought with joint
strategies between countries.”

Honduran military troops conducing patrols in rural
Honduras.
Source: http://www.laprensa.hn/honduras/987213-410/
tri%C3%A1ngulo-norte-acuerda-crear-fuerza-paracombatir-las-maras

OE Watch | October 2016

19

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Illegal Immigration Problems Continue to Plague Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: In recent months,
Colombian authorities have been fighting an
uphill battle against illegal immigration into
the country that seems to have no end in sight.
Thousands from Venezuela attempt to enter
the country daily, hoping to acquire basic
necessities such as food and water, and if they
are lucky, a day of work. Cuban and Haitian
migrants from Ecuador flock into Colombia in
hopes of continuing their journey north. The
accompanying passages from Colombian news
sources discuss the Colombian perspective on
this problem and focus on three noteworthy
issues.
First, as noted by El Espectador in the first
excerpt, immigration into Colombia is partially
self-perpetuating in the sense that select
government institutions are directly linked
with illegal immigration in certain parts of
the country. Cases highlighted in Medellin—
Colombia’s second largest city— demonstrate
how public registrars issued Colombian
passports and IDs to illegal immigrants, to
facilitate their movement from Colombia into
Panama.
Second, thousands of Cuban nationals
who entered the country illegally are
currently stranded in Turbo, Colombia
further exacerbating an already problematic
immigration situation. As cited in the second
excerpt, the Cuban nationals want the
Colombian government to put them on flights to
Mexico, but Mexico is no longer receiving these
flights. Colombia is also opposed to sending
Cuban nationals on these flights, because the
government feels that in doing so, they could
be aiding human trafficking organizations by
providing transportation to these individuals.
Finally, as discussed in the third excerpt,
the Colombian government feels that it will
be hit by an additional wave of Venezuelan
immigration; given that select border
checkpoints along the Colombia/Venezuela
border which had been closed for a year, have
been re-opened. These discussions suggest
that Colombia realizes that it is facing an
immigration crisis. Proposed solutions include
creating a national committee that will focus
solely on human trafficking/illegal immigration
in addition to working with neighboring
countries and the United States to create shared
plans to fight this issue collaboratively. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... the Mexican government informed Colombia that they will longer
be receiving flights filled with Cuban nationals into the country.”
Turbo, Colombia.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Turbouraba1.jpg

Source: “Registrador de municipio en Antioquia lideraba red de tráfico de migrantes
(Municipal Registrar Acted as Leader of Human Trafficking Ring in Antioquia).”
El Espectador, 29 September 2015. http://www.elespectador.com/noticias/judicial/
registrador-de-municipio-antioquia-lideraba-red-de-traf-articulo-589438
“Colombian authorities recently dismantled an illegal human trafficking network that
was aided by employees of the National Migration Service, the National Registry, and
the Directorate of Criminal Investigation. This group allegedly issued false Colombian
passports and identification cards for $800. With these documents, illegal immigrants
were able to enter into Colombia from Ecuador and then [go] on to Panama from Uraba
(northern Colombia).”
Source: “Migrantes en Colombia: un flujo que no se detiene (Illegal Immigration
in Colombia: An Unstoppable Wave).” El Espectador, 31 July 2016. http://www.
elespectador.com/noticias/elmundo/migrantes-colombia-un-flujo-no-se-detienearticulo-646524
“We have a group of approximately 1,300 Cuban nationals in Turbo, Colombia. They
entered into the country illegally and are asking that we send them to Mexico on a flight
so that they can enter into the United States. What is our problem with this request?
First, the Mexican government informed Colombia that they will longer be receiving
flights filled with Cuban nationals into the country. Second, we as a nation have clear
legislation against human trafficking and by putting these individuals on flights, we are
actually acting as enablers to human trafficking organizations. Finally, even if they did
send flights with stranded illegal immigrants, we don’t even know who they are where they
are from. Many have fake documentation and we cannot differentiate Cubans from other
nationalities.”
Source: “Frontera estara abiera desde este sabado de forma gradual (Gradual Re-Opening
of Colombia/Venezuela Border on Saturday. El Heraldo, 12 August 2016. http://www.
elheraldo.co/nacional/frontera-estara-abierta-desde-este-sabado-de-forma-gradual-277872
“Official sources have reported that approximately 20,000 Venezuelan citizens crossed
the border into Colombia during the first five hours following the re-opening of select
shared crossing points which were closed for almost a year. The highest crossing rates
were reported along the Simón Bolivar International Bridge where tens of thousands
of people continue to wait to enter Colombia. In an attempt to control migratory flow,
border crossing points will only be open from 5 AM until 8 PM and Venezuelans entering
into Colombia will be required to use an entrance/exit pass.”
OE Watch | October 2016

20

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Coyotes: The Migratory Bridge between the
Community and the Border
OE Watch Commentary: Human migration, legal
or illegal, is a simple fact of life and has gone on
since the beginning of time. In some cases, moving
from point A to point B is legal and simple, and does
not require any outside help. In other cases, travel
may span thousands of miles and include multiple
international border crossings, which is when human
smugglers commonly known as “coyotes” come in
to play. From a law-enforcement perspective, coyotes
may be classified as pariahs, greedy, self-serving,
and even criminal. However, individuals and families
who have benefited from the services of a coyote may
describe them in a much different manner.
A study conducted by sociologist Ricardo Puerta
of Honduras concluded that any positive or negative
migratory experiences may actually be directly
correlated to the type of coyote chosen by clientele.
Puerta claimed that even in the criminal world
of human trafficking, there are varying levels of
service-related integrity. Puerta highlighted this
information in an article released by Honduran new
source El Heraldo where he discussed four different
types of coyotes: the community coyote, the chain
coyote, the five-star coyote, and the border coyote.
The accompanying excerpts from the article discuss
the characteristics of these distinct coyote types.
These excerpts do not attempt to convince anyone
that coyotes are good or bad, but instead, provide
information as to how different coyotes run their
human trafficking businesses. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“The five-star coyote... picks up customers directly from
their homes and charges them anywhere between $7,500 and
$10,000 per person.”
Source: “El coyote, puente migratorio entre la comunidad y la frontera
(Coyotes: The Migratory Bridge between the Community and the
Border).” El Heraldo, 4 August 2016. http://www.elheraldo.hn/minisitios/
hondurenosenelmundo/986477-471/el-coyote-puente-migratorio-entre-lacomunidad-y-la-frontera
“The community coyote: this individual operates in their own community.
Everyone knows who they are as they work directly with schools and churches.
Community coyotes are also generally trusted by the local populace as they are
directly responsible for taking their clientele across the border without the help of
any intermediaries. When compared to other types of coyotes, the community coyote
has most popular image with customers as they live in the same communities that
they work in.
…The chain coyote: this type of coyote does not work alone. Along any given route,
clients may be handed off to other coyotes multiple times. Normal travel times for
individuals traveling with this type of coyote are approximately 15 days. Rape,
kidnapping, blackmail, and extortion are very common with chain coyotes.
…The five-star coyote: this individual picks up customers directly from their
homes and charges them anywhere between $7,500 and $10,000 per person. These
individuals tend to work with women and children and are usually referred by past
customers for future jobs.
…The border coyote: this individual is usually American or at least appears to be.
They are generally light-skinned and drive a nice car. Their clients may be brought
to the border by a five-star coyote. At that point, the border coyote is known to pick
up the women and children and claim them as their own family members. Since the
border coyote generally only transports clients short distances (from one side of the
border directly to the other), their fees tend to be lower than those of other coyotes
($1000).”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is about a
broader set of conflicts than just ‘insurgency.’ In
its 144 sections, Geoff Demarest raises new and
overlooked concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up debate and
critical thinking. As Geoff Demarest puts it: “I hope
that some of the ideas in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf

OE Watch | October 2016

21

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Are Transparent and Competitive Elections
Possible in Nicaragua?
OE Watch Commentary: Nicaraguan presidential elections
will be held this November, but some news channels are
reporting that it will be impossible for the process to be
transparent and competitive. As the first excerpt discusses,
according to the vice-presidential candidate of the opposition
Independent Liberal Party (PLI), this is because Daniel Ortega,
Nicaragua’s standing president, is doing everything in his power
to undermine the opposition. For example, as the passage notes,
in June 2016, a controversial Supreme Court ruling annulled
the candidacy of Luis Callejas (then-PLI party leader and
presidential hopeful), and mandated that Pedro Reyes—an ally of
Ortega—be the candidate and PLI party leader. While the PLI
can still run in the elections, the overall consensus of the party is
that it would be pointless, as their views will not be represented.
The party suffered another blow in early August after Reyes
removed 28 PLI congressmen after they voiced disagreement
with his appointment as party leader.
The questionable transparency and competitiveness of the
process are not the only problems. Two years ago, Nicaraguan
lawmakers approved constitutional changes allowing Ortega
to be re-elected indefinitely. Some claim that with this move,
Ortega is looking to hold onto his presidency for life. If reelected in November, he will serve his third consecutive
presidential term (he was also president of Nicaragua from 19791990). More ironic still is that his chosen running mate for the
November elections is his wife, Rosario Murillo. As indicated in
the second excerpt, Murillo has always had an important voice
within the government, but her selection as the vice-presidential
candidate is both surprising and significant because not even
the world’s most recognized political power couples have ever
run a presidential election on the same ticket. With virtual PLI
exclusion, constitutional changes allowing Ortega indefinite reelection, and Murillo as the vice-president candidate, opponents
feel Ortega is taking all possible steps to ensure that he wins the
elections without opposition and that he or his family continue
as absolute leaders in Nicaragua. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“She [Rosario Murillo] has been the
power behind the throne.”
Source: “¿Por qué es tan cuestionado el camino de Daniel Ortega hacia
una nueva reelección en Nicaragua? (Controversy Surrounding the
Re-Election of Daniel Ortega en Nicaragua).” BBC Mundo, 29 August
2016. http://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-america-latina-37113096
“Violeta Granera, an independent vice-president candidate of
the PLI, said: “Right now, we don’t have the conditions for free,
transparent and competitive elections. We are not withdrawing from
the elections, Mr. Ortega is doing everything he can to expel the
Coalition. Ortega, like President Maduro in Venezuela, wants to
isolate Nicaragua.”…
…“Luis Callejas of the Coalition for National Democracy (CND)
announced his withdrawal from the elections this Wednesday. The
Constitutional section of the Court ruled that the legal representation
of the Independent Liberal Party (PLI) belongs to Pedro Reyes, with
whom the CND doesn’t feel represented. An opposition representative
Eduardo Montealegre claimed Reyes’ PLI doesn’t represent the “real
opposition” and claimed it was rather a “cooperation party” with the
government of Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega. He ruled out any
alliance with Reyes or any other political party, and announced they
would start a “civic fight.”
Source: “Nicaragua: Rosario Murillo, la poderosa y extravagante mujer
de Daniel Ortega que se convirtió en su compañera de lista para la
reelección (Nicaragua: Rosario Murillo, the Powerful and Extravagant
Sentimental Companion of Daniel Ortega as a Potential Presidential
Running Mate).” BBC Mundo, 3 August 2016. http://www.bbc.com/
mundo/noticias-america-latina-36969850
“No important political action in the country happens without her
being involved. She is the visible face of the regime, but she’s much
more than that and she’s more than an adviser. She’s been the power
behind the throne.”

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers
by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since
the state became independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security
cooperation with Russia, the United States and other partners, but there have also been internally
driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past several
years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which
is part of a plan to have contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end 2016.
While the result has yet to be announced, an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed
Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the impact this
could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20-%20Transition%20in%20the%20Armed%20Forces%20of%20Kazakhstan%20-%20From%20Conscripts%20to%20Contract%20Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | October 2016

22

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Prayut Chan-o-Cha Stirs the Pot in Appointing
“Outsider” as Army Chief
OE Watch Commentary: Over
time, three different military
factions have developed in
Thailand. They are the Eastern
Tigers (also known as Burapha
Phayak), which currently have
a stranglehold over the country
(both Thailand’s Prime Minister,
General Prayut Chan-o-Cha
and his Deputy Prime Minister,
General Prawit Wongsuwon
belong to this military faction); the
Special Forces (also known as Red
Beret); and the Divine Lineage.
In May 2014, General Prayut
assumed control of the country
after staging a military coup. He
then created a military-dominated
national legislature and was
subsequently appointed, nondemocratically, as prime minister.
Prayut has now appointed a
new army chief who is from a
different faction – the Special
Forces - causing concern that the
appointment could create a shift in
power and maybe even prompt a
counter coup.
Prayut’s appointment of
General Chalermchai Sitthisat
to army chief, according to the
first accompanying article, has
some observers seeing the prime
minister’s move as a calculated
risk. The piece notes that Prayut
may be loosening the longstanding grip that the Eastern
Tigers- and therefore his own
power base- had maintained
in the past, in order to appease
the different factions in case
he has to legitimately run for
prime minister in free elections,
which are planned for the end
of next year. The second article
reviewed, quotes a domestic figure
in Thailand who argues that the
move could prompt a counter
coup, as it will weaken the power
of the Eastern Tigers. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“…observers feel Gen
Prayut’s involvement in Gen
Chalermchai’s nomination
was intended to “seize back
power” from Gen Prawit
who has been in charge of
military affairs since the
coup.”

Prayut Chan-o-Cha
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:General_Prayut_Chan-o-cha_%28cropped%29.jpg

Source: Wassana Nanuam, “PM Shores Up Support of Military,” Bangkok Post Online, 11 September
2016. http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/general/1083088/prayut-shores-up-support-of-military
Some observers also believe Gen Prayut [Chan-o-Cha] approved the appointment of Gen
Chalermchai Sitthisat to shore up backing from the main army ranks should he move into contention
for the post of prime minister despite no standing for election.
As the latest military reshuffle neared, many observers were waiting to see if there would be any
clash between Gen Prayut and Gen Prawit [Wongsuwon, the deputy prime minister] who wanted the
Burapha Phayak (Tigers of the East) stranglehold on army chief to continue.
In the royally endorsed reshuffle published in Royal Gazette on Friday, however, assistant army chief
Gen Chalermchai was named to replace Gen Teerachai Nakwanich, who retires at the end of this
month, putting an end to weeks of speculation.
Gen Chalermchai is known to enjoy the support of Privy Council president Prem Tinsulanonda and
privy councilor and former prime minister Gen Surayud Chulanont, who is also a red beret… political
observers believe Gen Prayut was concerned to secure the blessing of Gen Prem and Gen Surayud,
who still command wide respect in the army, in case he became premier as an “outsider”.
Other observers feel Gen Prayut’s involvement in Gen Chalermchai’s nomination was intended to
“seize back power” from Gen Prawit who has been in charge of military affairs since the coup.
Source: Chiang Mai and Max Constant, “Thai Junta Move Could Prompt Counter Coup, Says
Analyst,” Anadolu Agency, 14 September 2016. http://aa.com.tr/en/analysis-news/thai-junta-movecould-prompt-counter-coup-says-analyst/646100
[Prem] Tinsulanonda, who was has been a king’s favorite since his days as army chief at the end of
the 1970s, has been one of the most influential players in the country for almost four decades — often
behind the scenes. He is highly respected within military circles and his choices have often prevailed
during military reshuffles.
The analysts said they consider the move by Chan-ocha to appoint Sitthisat a clear blow to the
political ambitions of Wongsuwan.
“In that way, Prayuth Chan-ocha weakens Prawit Wongsuwan. He keeps Prawit down,” said
Chambers.
Last month, a military-sponsored draft constitution was approved at a referendum. The constitution
opens the way for a non-elected “outsider”, including a military officer, to become prime minister after
the country holds elections that are planned for the end of next year.
The fact that the army commander is now not from Chan-ocha’s faction, and that the commander of
the first army — the key military unit involved in coups — belongs to the Divine Lineage group and is
known for being “adventurous” makes this hypothesis [possibility of a coup] credible…
OE Watch | October 2016

23

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Duterte Gives Indonesia Access to Territorial
Waters to Destroy Terrorists
OE Watch Commentary: Philippine
President Rodrigo Duterte strongly advocates
against crime and has granted Indonesia access
to Philippine waters to thwart terrorist activities
in the troubled Mindanao area. According to
the excerpted article, Duterte was recently in
Jakarta, Indonesia where he met with Indonesian
President Joko Widodo. The visit followed
an attack on Duterte’s hometown of central
Davao City, on the southern Philippine island
of Mindanao, in early September, in which the
Abu Sayyaf group reportedly detonated a bomb,
killing 14 and wounding some 70 people.
As a result of continued terror and hijacking
threats in the region, Duterte has given
Indonesia free access for its forces to enter
Philippine territorial waters to “simply bomb
off terrorists spotted there.” Nick-named “The
Punisher,” Duterte was inaugurated in June
and has been taking drastic measures to try to
rid the country of its ongoing terror threat and
crime. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“(If) the chase began in Indonesia, ... (and if it) continues in
international waters and if they are really fast enough also (to
get) inside... Philippines waters they [Indonesian authorities] can
go ahead and blast them [terrorists] off. That’s the agreement,”
Source: Ted Tuvera and Joyce Ann L. Rocamora, “Duterte Tells Indon Forces Chasing
ASGs: ‘Blow ‘em up,’” The Daily Tribune, 9 September 2016. http://www.tribune.net.
ph/headlines/duterte-tells-indon-forces-chasing-asgs-blow-em-up
“Indonesian maritime forces will be allowed to sail along Philippine waters as a
cooperative measure to thwart terrorist movements in the Mindanao area, President
[Rodrigo] Duterte who was in Jakarta for a state visit yesterday said.
… Duterte said that he will allow forces of other states to “simply bomb off terrorists
spotted there.”
“(If) the chase began in Indonesia, here, (and if it) continues in the international
waters and if they are really fast enough also (to get) inside now the Philippines waters
they can go ahead and blast them off. That’s the agreement,” Duterte said.
The perennial threats of piracy and even the prominent abduction of seven Indonesian
nationals by Abu Sayyaf Group mid-2016 have prompted the two countries (Indonesia
and Philippines) to launch coordinated patrols to respond to any similar emergencies.”

Thailand’s Struggling Economy: Can the Military-Run Country
Turn Itself Around?
OE Watch Commentary: Since the 2014 military
coup in Thailand, the economy has been struggling,
but now the country’s top economic advisor Dr.
Kobsak Pootrakool has a plan to turn things around.
The accompanying passage discusses the threepronged overhaul that Dr. Pootrakool envisions
for the country: a build-up of infrastructure, a
restructuring of the country’s industrial base, and
sweeping reform of the agricultural sector.
While the article discusses each one of the three
proposals, the most significant central platform of
the overhaul is the creation of a so-called Eastern
Economic Corridor. The article describes a zone
that will be connected by high-speed rail networks
and highways, and will include the modernization
of deep-sea ports, and include a ferry network to
establish the country as a regional hub for trade.
Despite its current economic struggles, Thailand
is reportedly South-east Asia’s second-largest
economy after Indonesia. The stakes are high for
the country to turn its economy around; as its
current military-run government continues to strive
for domestic and international acceptance. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The proposed infrastructure build-up carries an
initial price tag of US$8.5 billion...”

Source: Leslie Lopez, “Thai Military Plans Three-Pronged Economic Overhaul,”
Straits Times, 9 September 2016. http://www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/thaimilitary-plans-three-pronged-economic-overhaul
“Dr. Kobsak, who is chief lieutenant to the military’s economic point man, Deputy
Prime Minister Somkid Jatusripitak, said that the overhaul is three-pronged:
an infrastructure build-up to boost connectivity, a restructuring of Thailand’s
industrial base to move it away from equipment manufacturing operations to higher
value-added industries, and a sweeping reform of the vast agricultural sector.
The central platform of the overhaul involves the creation of a so-called Eastern
Economic Corridor, covering the already established industrial provinces of Chon
Buri, Rayong and Chachoengsao.
This zone will be connected by high-speed rail networks and highways, and will
involve the modernizing of deep-sea ports in the area to establish Thailand as
a regional hub for trade. A ferry network that will link Chon Buri province with
Phetchaburi in the south is also in the pipeline to improve connectivity in the Gulf
of Thailand.
The proposed infrastructure build-up carries an initial price tag of US$8.5
billion... through government-led spending, but this is expected to jump to US$40
billion over the next decade with the zone earmarked to attract new industries such
as airplane maintenance and petrochemical processing facilities. The aim is for it
to become the logistics hub to serve the neighboring economies of Cambodia and
Vietnam.”
OE Watch | October 2016

24

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Indonesia Appoints a New Intel Chief
OE Watch Commentary: At
parliament recently, Indonesia
appointed a new intelligence chief,
General Budi Gunawan. After only
two hours of questioning, closed to
the public, the House Commission
announced that Budi was “fit and
suitable” for the position.
Interestingly, Budi previously had
served as the country’s National
police deputy chief commander
to which he was appointed
after accusations of corruption
for allegedly accepting bribes.
However, all charges were dropped.
Budi is well connected politically.
According to the first article, he
was the personal aide of Megawati
Sukarnoputri when she was
president in 2001. He was also
current President Joko Widodo’s
only nominee for the position.
According to the second
article, Budi laid out his concerns
over various international and
domestic threats, asserting that the
intelligence agency should improve
its early detection system to prevent
and tackle any threats to the
country’s national security. Along
with radicalism and terrorism, Budi
outlined several international and
domestic threats, to include proxy
and cyber wars. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“External threats that endanger national security are getting more
complex, asymmetrical and have no certain patterns. BIN (Badan Intelijen
Negara – Indonesian State Intelligence Agency) should improve its
performance to make a better early detection system to prevent and tackle
any threats that can endanger our national security.”
Source: Edo Karensa, “Parliament Approves Budi Gunawan as New Intelligence Chief,” Jakarta
Globe Online, 7 September 2016. http://jakartaglobe.beritasatu.com/news/parliament-approves-budigunawan-new-intelligence-chief.
“In his prepared speech to the commission — before the question and answer session which was
closed to the public — Budi had addressed various domestic and international threats against
national security, including proxy and cyber wars.
The top spook-elect outlined programs to stifle radical, terror and communist groups in the country
and promised more measures would be taken to protect Indonesian citizens from attacks and
kidnappings by armed groups overseas.
The intelligence agency will focus on early detection to prevent sectarian conflicts, border disputes
and political and physical conflicts during local elections in 2017 and 2018, Budi said”.
Budi was the personal adjutant of former president and current chairwoman of the Indonesian
Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P) Megawati Sukarnoputri when she was president in 2001.
Source: Marguerite Afra Sapiie, “Budi Gunawan Vows to Improve Spy Agency,” The Jakarta Post
Online, 6 September 2016. http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/09/07/budi-gunawan-vows-toimprove-spy-agency.html
“External threats that endanger national security are getting more complex, asymmetrical and
have no certain patterns. BIN (Badan Intelijen Negara. This is Indonesia’s State Intelligence Agency)
should improve its performance to make a better early detection system to prevent and tackle any
threats that can endanger our national security,” Budi told lawmakers on Wednesday.
Several external threats include the political tension concerning the South China Sea, drug
trafficking, cyber war, conflicts at border areas, terrorist financing and also the rapid spread of
radical ideologies that have endangered the country’s well-being, he added.”

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further,
he has taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian
territory that was taken, from his perspective, illegally.
This book describes Putin and the military’s use of
various strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s
new equipment and reform initiatives, and Putin’s
geopolitical quest for influence in the Arctic and
Ukraine. Included in the discussion are some of the
unintended consequences of his actions (negative
world opinion, sanctions, NATO responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | October 2016

25

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Indonesia Advances Naval Preparedness
in Armada Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2005, Indonesia’s Armada Jaya
exercises have attracted attention in Southeast Asia. At that time,
Indonesia and Malaysia were experiencing tensions over maritime
territory disputed between the two countries. Now, ahead of the next
Armada Jaya exercises in September 2016, Indonesia’s maritime
concerns have changed since the previous decade. Now Indonesia is
more active in defending its claims in the South China Sea (or what it
calls the Natuna Sea) disputes, collaborating with the Philippines on
counter-piracy, and eliminating illegal fishing vessels in its waters.
According to the adjacent Indonesian-language article in Sindonews.
com, Indonesian president Joko Widodo oversaw the Armada Jaya
exercises, which were scheduled for the first three weeks of September.
The exercises involved naval warships and aircrafts and the testing
of surface-to-air missiles from speedboats. The article also states that
7,000 personnel would take part in the exercise. This is an increase
from the 5,000 personnel that took part in the exercise 2005 and the
4,000 personnel that took part in 2011.
As the article indicates, the size of the exercise this year is
unprecedented. This reflects Indonesia’s increasing focus on its
archipelagic waters, especially as incidents with Chinese fisherman
continue to rise as well as threats from sub-state actors. Nonetheless,
Indonesia’s maritime defense strategy remains primarily defensive; the
country does not seek to project its assets outside Indonesian waters.
In the future, Indonesia can be expected to further strengthen this
defensive posture, but it will likely also increase cooperation with
neighboring Southeast Asian countries and possibly also extend
its naval capabilities to external sea lines and economic zones as
the country’s maritime trading interests grow. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“The Armada Jaya XXXIV / 2016 exercise
is the highlight of the Naval exercises in
order to improve the professionalism of navy
soldiers.”
Source: “TNI AL Akan Uji Coba Rudal C-705 di Latihan Armada
Jaya XXXIV/2016 [National Armed Forces Will Test Missile
Exercise C-705 at Armada Jaya XXXIV / 2016], Sindonews.com,
31 August 2016. http://nasional.sindonews.com/read/1135434/14/
tni-al-akan-uji-coba-rudal-c-705-di-latihan-armada-jayaxxxiv-2016-1472610999
The Head of Information Department of the Navy said the exercise
is scheduled to be reviewed by President Joko Widodo (Jokowi) as
it is implemented in the Java Sea from early September to the third
week of the same month.
The Armada Jaya XXXIV / 2016 exercise is the highlight of the
Naval exercises in order to improve the professionalism of navy
soldiers, and is also a follow-up test of multilevel training and
carried out by elements of the Integrated Fleet Weapon System
(SSAT).
Warships, aircraft, marines and strategic weapons of the Navy, in
the form of surface-to-surface missiles from fast boats will also be
used in this exercise.
Likewise, Surface and Underwater Torpedo (SUT) as well as KRI
various caliber cannons and heavy weapons marines will be used.
About 7,000 personnel and 39 warships (KRI) of various types are
involved in this exercise.”

As seen below, the Indonesian navy has upgraded its capabilities, including targeting illegal fishing
vessels and also to protect interests in the South China Sea.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/day-in-photos-march-14-2016/3235278.html

OE Watch | October 2016

26

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

A Japanese View on Limited War and Escalation
OE Watch Commentary: As an island
nation, Japan’s strategic thinking is driven
by its vulnerability to being cut off from
either the Asiatic mainland or the global
commons. Throughout modern Japanese
history (since the 1790s), the fear of
invasion from either northern (Sakhalin and
the Kuril Islands chain) or southwestern
(Ryukyu Islands chain) archipelagic
approaches have structured its defensive
posture.
As the accompanying passage from a
Japanese source demonstrates, Russia’s
annexation of Crimea and invasion of
eastern Ukraine; as well as China’s salamislicing strategy in the South China Sea, has
brought the specter of limited war more
fully into Japan’s security consciousness.
Japanese planners have a two-fold concern:
1) the success of the Russian model of using
unofficial forces, and 2) the perceived lack
of response to both Russian and Chinese
paramilitary operations.
Japanese thinkers worry that superpowers
are restricted in their response to operations
that employ limited ends and means,
due to the balance of forces favoring
the aggressor and the quick securing of
strategic objectives. From this perspective,
when an aggressor chooses limited war
as a military strategy, escalation control
rests with the aggressor, not the defender.
This is true at both the conventional and
even theater nuclear level. The response
in Japanese defense circles has been to
focus on increasing the military’s ability
to strike back flexibly and quickly to an
attempt to seize Japanese islands, and to
combine asymmetric means, including antiship missiles, with high-end conventional
capabilities, such as 5th-generation fighters.
End OE Watch Commentary (Auslin)

“This strategic thinking reflects the recognition of a new era: success
or failure of a foreign policy is decided in a “gray zone” in-between
wartime and peacetime, in hybrid conditions combining conventional
and non-conventional combat.”
Source: Yoshiki Kawamura, “限定戦争とエスカレーション (Limited War and
Escalation),” Briefing Memo, National Institute for Defense Studies News, April 2016,
http://www.nids.go.jp/publication/briefing/pdf/2016/201604.pdf
“The concept of “limited war” developed in the US early in the Cold War. In the
framework of the Cold War between East and West, its main focus was to avoid total war
by managing regional conflict through controlling escalation and limiting military ends
and means. Later, the nuclear balance of terror established between the United States
and the Soviet Union made the use of nuclear weapons no longer an option. This led the
limited war argument to move to center stage, discussing the possibility of controlling
conflict escalation by thinking about how to use conventional military strength effectively
for intervention in the Third World. This argument for limited war, which had moved from
the basic concept of preventing direct confrontation between major powers to focusing on
asymmetric battle between great powers and small nations (non-nuclear powers), has been
drawing attention again in recent years, due to current international crises (Ukraine and
the South China Sea). The new focus of limited war is again drawing attention as a form
of crisis management between nuclear regional powers, or as regards to the actual use of
force.
In Asia, the assumption is that there would be an early [US] attack on missiles [the 2nd
Chinese Artillery], radars, and the control centers which are deployed on the Chinese
mainland, so as to disable China’s ability to impose an anti-access/area-denial strategy
against an Air-Sea Battle strategy. However, there is concern that such a crisis may
rapidly escalate, due to the increasing likelihood that China would launch a pre-emptive
attack before being disabled by the US military.
In this way, we must be seriously concerned about “vertical” escalation, including the
risk of a nuclear response quickly emerging among nuclear-capable regional powers. On
the other hand, in a “salami slicing” strategy like that being practiced in Ukraine and
the South China Sea, the side intending to change the status quo attempts to achieve its
goals by presenting a fait accompli while avoiding an outbreak of traditional war between
states…This strategic thinking reflects the recognition of a new era: success or failure of
a foreign policy is decided in a “gray zone” in-between wartime and peacetime, in hybrid
conditions combining conventional and non-conventional combat.
In contrast to the Cold War, when the strategy of limited war was invented due to a
strategic demand to limit the ends and means of military use so as to avoid escalation to
nuclear war, we are now witnessing an era in which utilizing limited military ends and
means makes it easy to achieve political goals.”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | October 2016

27

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

China’s New ‘4+2’ Service Branch Structure
OE Watch Commentary: Xi
Jinping, China’s President and
Chairman of the Central Military
Commission, recently inspected
the headquarters of the People’s
Liberation Army’s (PLA) Strategic
Support Force and the PLA’s Joint
Logistics Support Forces. His visits
indicated the final step in the creation
of the so-called ‘4+2’ service branch
structure. This means that the four
major military service branches, the
PLA Ground Force, the PLA Navy,
the PLA Air Force, and the PLA
Rocket Force are now supplemented
with two specialized forces, the
PLA Strategic Support Force and
the PLA Joint Logistics Support
Force. The accompanying passage
from a Chinese source discusses
this structure. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“By now, the PLA’s new ‘4+2’

structure of military forces has
come into being, consisting
of the four major military
service branches, namely the
PLA Ground Force, the PLA
Navy, the PLA Air Force, and
the PLA Rocket Force, plus
the two specialized forces
set up separately, namely the
PLA Strategic Support Force
and the PLA Joint Logistics
Support Force.”

Source: Ma Haoliang, “北京观察：解放军“4+2”新架构 (The PLA’s New ‘4+2’
Structure),” Ta Kung Pao Online, 17 September 2016. http://news.takungpao.com/mainland/
focus/2016-09/3370431.html
“By now, the PLA’s new ‘4+2’ structure of military forces has come into being, consisting of the
four major military service branches, namely the PLA Ground Force, the PLA Navy, the PLA
Air Force, and the PLA Rocket Force, plus the two specialized forces set up separately, namely
the PLA Strategic Support Force and the PLA Joint Logistics Support Force. In the current
round of the military reform, the PLA Rocket Force was created on the basis of the former
Second Artillery Corps, and its status was raised from a service sub-branch to a service branch
on an equal footing with the PLA Ground Force, the PLA Navy, and the PLA Air Force. The
PLA Rocket Force has been equipped with its own military uniform, a departure from the past
practice of adopting the uniform of the PLA Ground Force, whereas the PLA Strategic Support
Force and the PLA Joint Logistics Support Force are not called a military service branch but are
instead just referred to generally as a ‘ force.’
In terms of functional positioning, the PLA Strategic Support Force and the PLA Joint Logistics
Support Force shoulder the important mission of providing support and logistical support to
the four major military service branches. The PLA Strategic Support Force has functionally
integrated the various kinds of support forces with a strong strategic, foundational, and support
nature. The PLA Joint Logistics Support Force is a main player in carrying out joint logistical
support and strategic and battle support. Unlike the major military service branches, these two
forces do not have a clearly defined independent combat space.
Second, in terms of personnel strength, the four major service branches are singly unified. In
other words, the PLA Ground Force consists of all officers and men of the ground force and the
PLA Navy consists of all officers and men of the navy, but the members of the PLA Strategic
Support Force and the PLA Joint Logistics Support Force come from all major military service
branches such as the ground force, the navy, the air force, and so on.
In terms of team formation, these two forces have mainly inherited some of the military forces
under the former major headquarters and military regions. The PLA Strategic Support Force has
integrated the electronic confrontation team and the technical reconnaissance force under the
former PLA General Staff as well as the military aerospace force and others under the former
PLA General Armament Department. In addition to providing support for the four major military
service branches, the PLA Strategic Support Force has some of its own new combat forces. The
PLA Joint Logistics Support Force has integrated the rear bases under the former PLA General
Logistics Department as well as the relevant resources under the seven former military regions.
Similarly, within the “4+2” force structure, the PLA Strategic Support Force is at the military
region level as are the four major military service
branches, but the PLA Joint Logistics Support Force is
established at the army level.”

Tim Thomas’s Recasting the Red Star describes
Russia’s culture of military thought through its
modernization effort. Adding to his robust library
of work on the subject, Tim Thomas illuminates
Russia’s Defense Ministry reform efforts, the Russian
national security strategy take on the operational
environment, and a relevant review of the Russian
military doctrine.
OE Watch | October 2016

28

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Japan Justifies Military Expenditures for
South China Sea Defense
OE Watch Commentary: In
anticipation of increased tensions with
China over disputed islands, Japan’s
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe requested
a budget proposal to increase the
country’s defense spending. If approved,
Japan would significantly upgrade its
missile defense capabilities, purchase
new submarines and post more troops
in islands close to the maritime border
with China, thus bolstering its defenses
against China. A Japanese-language
article on searchina.net, which covers
China-related economic and political
news, on 1 September, however, seeks
to downplay, or at least rationalize,
these potential new expenditures in
light of criticisms of Japan abandoning
its pacifist constitution, especially from
Chinese media.

“While it is true that there is an increase in the defense budget, the
background is that there is a growing sense of vigilance in this military
buildup about the unilateral moves of China.”

The article points out that the budget
increase would only be 2% over last
year and that defense spending has
increased by an average of less than 1%
since 2001. Thus, Chinese concerns are
overstated. Moreover, the article points
out that vigilance is needed on Japan’s
part considering China’s unilateral
actions in Japan’s coastal waters as well
as in the South China Sea.
The article brings out some of the key
contradictions in Japan’s post-World
War II defense posture. While seeking
to preserve its pacifist constitution,
relying solely on defensive capabilities
risks allowing China to engage in
aggressive actions that undermine the
interests of Japan, the US and other
Southeast Asian allies. In this sense, the
country’s pacifism can hamstring Japan
and, should there be a major threat of
conflict, it could ultimately force Japan
to abandon the pacifist constitution
altogether. Thus, although the article
does not make this point, Japan’s
budget increases are at the same time
also helping the country to deter China
and maintain the pacifist constitution
for the longer-term. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

Japan’s increased defense budget is aimed at defending islands such as the Senkakus, as seen in the adjacent
image, but there are also concerns about whether the country is adhering to its pacifist constitution.
Source: http://www.rferl.org/content/china-japan-dispute-islands/24708082.html

Source: 警戒せよ！ 防衛費を増加させる日本は「積極的に軍事力を拡大」している
＝中国メディア [“Japan by increasing the defense budget is ‘aggressively expanding its
military power’”]: Chinese Media, searchina.net, 1 September 2016.
“Japan by increasing the defense budget is “aggressively expanding its military power’”
“In the budget request of the fiscal year 2017, the Ministry of Defense’s 168.5 billion yen is
a record high. In China there is a growing concern for Japan’s increased defense spending.
Recently Chinese media reported that Japan continues to expand the defense budget.
However, since the defense budget of 2001 there has been a year-by-year 0.8% increase
in defense spending that has continued to increase every year. This includes the budget for
ballistic missile defense (BMD), for Japan-US joint development and local capacity-building of
missile surface-to-air guided missiles, the deployment of security forces to the Nansei Islands,
and the acquisition of F-35 fighter aircraft.
But the Chinese have intruded into territorial and coastal waters in the South China Sea in
recent years. While it is true that there is an increase in the defense budget, the background is
that there is a growing sense of vigilance in this military buildup about the unilateral moves of
China.”
OE Watch | October 2016

29

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

China Assesses Terrorist Attack on its
Embassy in Kyrgyzstan

“The current situation in Central Asia is at a critical

OE Watch Commentary: On 30 August, a
suicide bomber struck the Chinese embassy in
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, injuring three Kyrgyz
security officers. The attacker has since been
identified as a Chinese Uighur who was deployed
from Syria by the al-Qaeda affiliate Jabhat alNusra (Jabhat al-Nusra has since rebranded as
Jaysh Fath al-Sham). This was the first major
attack on Chinese interests in Central Asia in
recent years and the first suicide attack in Central
Asia in nearly a decade.
One day after the attack, on 31 August military.
china.com posted a Chinese-language article
analyzing the attack in the context of other
regional trends. The article accurately blamed
the attack on a Syria-based Jabhat al-Nusra allied
militant group commonly known as the East
Turkistan Islamic Movement (but which calls
itself Turkistan Islamic Party). It also suggests the
attack on the embassy may have been a response
to China’s killing a group of alleged Uighur
militants, who were caught illegally crossing the
border from China to Kyrgyzstan in 2014.
The article also traces the history of militancy
and ethnic conflict in Kyrgyzstan and emphasizes
the country’s constant instability. It concludes
that the outflow of extremism from Afghanistan
(and now Syria) into Central Asia, Kyrgyzstan’s
economic decline, and the “geopolitical
hodgepodge” and “powder keg” of the Fergana
Valley, could lead to a situation akin to the
Chechen wars in Kyrgyzstan that would radiate
to the Chinese border. The hospitalization—
and eventual death—of Uzbekistani president
Islam Karimov, also in August 2016, may only
exacerbate insecurity, as he had always attempted
to tone down tensions in the region.
The article thus recommends China strengthen
its anti-terrorism cooperation with Kyrgyzstan
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Moreover, it recommends China look at the
attack in Bishkek with the lens of al-Qaeda’s
early attacks on US interests in East Africa in
the late 1990s. Thus, if the attack in Bishkek is
seen in China as a sign of more attacks to come,
China will likely ramp up its anti-terrorism
posture in Central Asia and possibly also other
vulnerable regions where there are significant
Chinese interests, such as Africa. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

moment. On the Kyrgyzstan side, there was just a terrorist
attack; on the Uzbek side, the political strongman, 80-yearold president Karimov, was recently hospitalized due to a
cerebral hemorrhage.”

Chinese president Xi Jinping visited Central Asian leaders at the SCO Summit in Bishkek in 2013,
as seen in the adjacent image, and since then there have been further discussions on antiterrorism cooperation between China and Kyrgyzstan.
Source: http://www.rfa.org/english/commentaries/east-asia-beat/xinjiang-09212013201817.html

Source: 中亚已无可回避地成了中国海外反恐的主战场 [Central Asia is inevitable
becoming China’s main battlefield of terrorism overseas] military.china.com, 31
August 2016. http://military.china.com/critical3/27/20160831/23436438_all.html
“In Kyrgyzstan danger will continue. In June 2010, in southern Kyrgyzstan largescale ethnic conflict took place. In January 2014, Chinese and Kyrgyzstani border
troops killed more than a dozen criminals. Then there was the suicide attack on the
Chinese Embassy on August 30, 2016, where the driver died on the spot and three
employees were injured. Fortunately, the Chinese diplomats were unharmed. These
personnel have been identified “East Turkistan” elements.
After the war in Afghanistan, many international terrorists have gone into hiding
[in Central Asia] by taking advantage of local complex ethnic relationships and the
countries’ relatively weak defense capabilities. In Central Asia, the Fergana Valley
has the most rampant terrorist activities. Staggered in middle of the map, Central
Asia’s powder keg is the Fergana basin. Inter-ethnic conflicts have occurred there,
and Fergana has become the geopolitical hodgepodge.
The “East Turkistan” elements in Fergana are very active, and can establish a
presence in Afghanistan for terrorist training and strengthening ties with Central
Asia and other international terrorist organizations. Andijan could become a second
Chechnya and if extremists gain a foothold in Andijan, it will become a base for
terrorists.
The China embassy attack shows once again that the three forces have been
activated, and will likely target Chinese overseas targets. “East Turkistan” elements
in Kyrgyzstan are close to Xinjiang, with cultural proximity, and the unstable situation
in Central Asia and the complexity of the ethnic conflicts allows the terrorists to be
able to find survival on its soil.
The current situation in Central Asia is at a critical moment. On the Kyrgyzstan side,
there was just a terrorist attack; on the Uzbek side, the political strongman, 80-yearold president Karimov, was recently hospitalized due to a cerebral hemorrhage.”
OE Watch | October 2016

30

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Assessing the National Unity Government in Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: The formation
of Afghanistan’s national unity government
two years ago may have ended the dispute
over the 2014 presidential election, but as
the accompanying excerpted articles show,
there are a number of issues that remain.
The first article from Tolo News, dated 3
September, reports on frustration at the
government, particularly over corruption
and lack of security. The article mentions
that opposition groups stated that they will
offer an alternative to the national unity
government, but it is not clear if they are
referencing the October 2016 parliamentary
elections or other political activities. There
are also questions about how the elections
will take place in the midst of fighting in a
number of districts across the country.
The articles from Khaama Press and
Tolo News provide insight into one of the
issues that the national unity government
has been criticized for. They report on the
negotiations for a peace agreement between
the Afghan government and Hezb-eIslami, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The
articles note that these negotiations have
been going on for two years but a peace
agreement, expected to be signed on 10
September, has been delayed. It is worth
noting in the second article from Tolo
News that the agreement does not include
the Taliban. According to the article, the
High Peace Council will start negotiations
with the Taliban following the signing of
the agreement with Hekmatyar. The peace
agreement could alleviate some frustration
against the national unity government,
but the articles show that there are other
issues that remain. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“As the National Unity
Government approaches its
second anniversary, some
opposition groups have said
that if government does not
fulfill its promises to the people,
they will offer an alternative
instead of NUG.”

President Ashraf Ghani
(left) and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah
(right) form the core of the
national unity government
in Afghanistan, created in
2014 following the disputed
presidential election.
Source: https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Ashraf_Ghani_shakes_
hands_with_Abdullah_
Abdullah.jpg

Source: Majidi, Tariq. “NUG Slammed For Not Implementing Commitments,” Tolo News,
3 September 2016. http://www.tolonews.com/en/two-years-of-nug/27076-nug-slammed-fornot-implementing-commitments

NUG Slammed For Not Implementing Commitments
“…political analysts insist that the national unity government (NUG) has not implemented
the accord which they signed when the formed the government. They also accuse the NUG
leaders of having created many commissions and councils over the past two-years to hide
their negligence… The NUG leaders vowed at their inauguration ceremony that they would
stamp out corruption and that they had serious plans to maintain security.
… Mohammad Amin Farhang, a political analyst said: “There is a proverb that says if you
do not want to get results from work, then form a commission. The NUG also created the
anti-corruption high council and still its functions are not known. They promised to bring
peace, but you hear the head of the peace council also resigned…As the NUG approaches its
second anniversary, some opposition groups have said that if government does not fulfill its
promises to the people, they will offer an alternative instead of NUG.”
Source: “Peace deal with Hekmatyar’s party likely to be signed today,” Khaama Press, 10
September 2016. http://www.khaama.com/peace-deal-with-hekmatyars-party-likely-to-besigned-today-01862

Peace deal with Hekmatyar’s party likely to be signed today
“A peace deal between Hezb-e-Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and the Afghan
government is expected to be signed later today, sources close to Hekmatyar have said. The
sources further added that the draft peace agreement between Hezb-e-Islami and the Afghan
government has been amended during the negotiations…A spokesman for the High Peace
Council of Afghanistan Mohammad Amin Muzafari earlier said they expect to conclude the
peace deal with Hezb-e-Islami…
This comes (after) reports emerged earlier suggesting that the party has issued new
impossible-to-meet demands to sign a peace agreement with the Afghan government…
According to the reports, the new demands included cancellation of pacts with the United
States, a timetable for the withdrawal of foreign troops and that it be signed by a new
government.”
Source: Shahid, Anisa. “Peace Agreement To Be Signed with Hezb-e-Islami,” Tolo News, 19
September 2016. http://www.tolonews.com/en/afghanistan/27342-peace-agreement-to-besigned-with-hezb-e-islami
“The High Peace Council (HPC) said on Monday that a peace agreement with Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar’s Hezb-e-Islami party will be signed this week…Peace talks with Hekmatyar
started two years ago, but talks with Taliban started during Hamid Karzai’s presidency. The
HPC was established six years ago under Karzai, however, it is said that this council has not
had made any important achievement in the way of peace talks with Taliban…the HPC said it
will start peace talks with Taliban upon the completion of the peace agreement with Hezb-eIslami.”
OE Watch | October 2016

31

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Uzbekistan after Karimov
OE Watch Commentary: The death of President
Islam Karimov caused concern in Uzbekistan and
across Central Asia about how a succession of power
would play out and what, if any, changes would
take place with a new president. The accompanying
excerpted articles report on how Prime Minister
Shavkat Mirziyoyev became the interim president
and what this could mean for Uzbekistan.
The article from Podrobno discusses that
Uzbekistan’s Parliament did not follow the formal
way of choosing the next president. According to
Uzbekistan’s law on succession, the President of the
Senate, Nigmatulla Yuldashev, should have taken
over interim duties until elections could be held.
The article notes that the appointment of Mirziyoyev
instead of Yuldashev did not come as a surprise to
many. It also points out that Yuldashev conceded
the position to Mirziyoyev, at least publically. While
the succession did not follow the law, the transition
did not result in violence, which had been one of the
main concerns immediately following Karimov’s
death. Attention is now on what Mirziyoyev will do
as president. As the political expert in the article
notes, he will likely continue many of the things set
up by Karimov, including his foreign policy.
The second article, from Review is the text of
Mirziyoyev’s speech to Uzbekistan’s Parliament on
8 September, which confirms assessments that he
will not make major policy changes. Mirziyoyev
mentions in his speech that good relations with
Russia will continue to be a priority and that
Uzbekistan will not be involved in any politicalmilitary blocs. Most media sources in Russia and
Central Asia do not believe that the new president
will change course and rejoin the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, which Uzbekistan
withdrew from in 2012. Instead, the new president
will most likely continue to pursue bilateral
relations, particularly when it comes to security.
If there is one area worth watching for any
changes, however small, it could come in defense
acquisition. In the past few years under Karimov,
Uzbekistan’s Armed Forces acquired transport
aircraft, armored vehicles, and reportedly new
air defense systems from countries other than
Russia. Whether Mirziyoyev follows along with
acquisitions from other partners remains to be seen,
especially since a number of weapons systems and
equipment in Uzbekistan’s inventory continue to
age. Ultimately, the transition from Karimov to
Mirziyoyev appears to have taken place with no
significant issues. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

Former President of Uzbekistan Islam Karimov meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin in
Moscow in April 2016. While Uzbekistan suspended its membership in the Collective Security Treaty
Organization in 2012, bilateral ties with Russian remained an important of the country’s foreign
policy.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2016-04-25_Vladimir_Putin_with_President_of_
Uzbekistan_Islam_Karimov,_01.jpg

Source: Tikhonov, Maks. “Эксперт: Мирзиеев воплощает в себе статус-кво в
стране (Expert: Mirziyoyev embodies the status-quo in the country),” Podrobno, 9
September 2016. http://podrobno.uz/cat/politic/ekspert-mirzieev-voploshchaet-vsebe-status-kvo-v-strane/

Expert: Mirziyoyev embodies the status-quo in the country
“The appointment of Prime Minister Shavkat Mirziyoyev as interim president of
Uzbekistan was a little surprise, as many had expected Parliament will follow the
formal way of choosing President of the Senate, Nigmatulla Yuldsahev…as noted by
the expert, (Mirziyoyev) appears as a guarantee of the continuation of the course
set by Karimov…according to (expert) Sattarova, the country’s foreign policy will
not change and bilateral relations will continue to be given priority…Security
issues will grow bilateral relations between Tashkent and Moscow…Mirziyoyev
was approved as interim president at a special joint session of the Oliy Majlis on 8
September…”
Source: “Шавкат Мирзиёев: Идеи и программы Первого Президента
Узбекистана станут для нас руководством к достижению поставленных целей
(Shavkat Mirziyoyev: The ideas and programs of the First President of Uzbekistan
stand as a guide for us to achieve them),” Review, 9 September 2016.
http://review.uz/index.php/novosti-main/item/9623-shavkat-mirzijoev-idei-iprogrammy-pervogo-prezidenta-uzbekistana-stanut-dlya-nas-rukovodstvom-kdostizheniyu-postavlennykh-tselej
“Speech by Prime Minister of Uzbekistan, Shavkat Miromonovich Mirziyoyev at a
joint session of the Legislative Chamber and Senate of the Oliy Majlis:
…On (Karimov’s) initiative, the Foreign Policy Concept of the Republic
of Uzbekistan was developed and implemented, the cornerstone of which is
peacefulness, non-interference in the internal affairs of other states and addressing
emerging conflicts only through peaceful means…
…in order to further strengthen the position and prestige of Uzbekistan in
the international arena, we will continue to actively pursue the Foreign Policy
Concept. This position, as before, is the non-alignment to any military-political
blocs, preventing the deployment of military bases and facilities of other states on
the territory of Uzbekistan, as well as the deployment of our troops abroad…The
priority direction of Uzbekistan’s foreign policy is the development of relations with
the CIS states, and all-around strengthening of friendly relations with the Russian
Federation…The national interests of Uzbekistan include active participation and
cooperation with the UN, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the CIS, and
other international organizations…”
OE Watch | October 2016

32

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Upgrades to Georgia’s Air Defense System
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian-Georgian
War in August 2008 exposed several vulnerabilities
in the Georgian Armed Forces, including air defense
capabilities. The excerpted accompanying article
discusses an update to a deal that Georgia made
with France to upgrade these
capabilities; and a recent visit to
Georgia by the French Defense
Minister.

“Late last year Georgia entered into a loan agreement with
the French bank Société Générale for financing acquisition of
air defense system from France.”

The deal was initially signed in
June 2015, but only a few details
of it have been revealed since
then. There were reports when the
deal was signed that it included
the Grand Master 200 radar
system and Crotale missiles, both
produced by Thales; however, the
accompanying article notes that
a portion of the money is for a
purchase from missile developer
MBDA France. The article also
notes that Georgian Defense
Minister Levan Izoria reiterated
support for the deal, which was
signed under his predecessor,
former Georgian Defense
Minister Tina Khidasheli who
resigned from her position on 1
August 2016.
In 2009 a Russian think
The Israeli “SPYDER” surface-to-air missile system can be mounted on various models of trucks and is
tank, the Centre for Analysis
one of the most advanced air defense systems currently in Georgia’s inventory.
of Strategies and Technologies
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SPYDER.jpg
published “The Tanks of August,”
Source: “French Defense Minister Visits Georgia,” Civil Georgia, 10 September 2016.
a collection of articles which examined the August
http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=29428
2008 war. One of the articles noted that the Russian
Air Force experienced unexpected losses during the
French Defense Minister Visits Georgia
war, but only two downed aircraft could be attributed
“French Defense Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, who is visiting Georgia on
to Georgian air defense forces. Russian Ground
September 10-12, met his Georgian counterpart, Levan Izoria, on Saturday… France
Forces had mistakenly shot down the others.
took the lead in helping the country to have its efficient air defense capabilities. He
The Georgian Armed Forces acquired the Israeli
also said that a French air force officer has been assigned to Georgia to oversee the
“SPYDER” air defense system at some point in the
process. Late last year Georgia entered into a loan agreement with the French bank
past several years (reportedly even before the 2008
Société Générale for financing acquisition of air defense system from France…
war), but its inventory is largely made up of Russian
EUR 52.65 million from the total loan amount is designed for purchasing unspecified
systems. The only Russian-made air defense system
equipment and services from ThalesRaytheonSystems, which produces groundin Georgia’s inventory that received significant
based surveillance radars and air defense command and control systems, and EUR
upgrades is the 9K33 Osa (Wasp). It may not be
24.98 million is intended for acquisitions from missile manufacturer MBDA France…
known for some time if Georgia is purchasing radar,
Georgian Defense Minister Izoria said it was reiterated at the meeting with his
command and control or surface-to-air systems with
French counterpart that the contract on air defense systems remains in force and
will be fully implemented. On September 12 Le Drian will travel to Sachkhere in the
this agreement, but it appears that it is applying
Imereti region to participate in a 10-year anniversary of Mountain Training Schools,
lessons learned from the 2008 war with Russia. End
which was launched with the French assistance…”
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
OE Watch | October 2016

33

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Details of Russia’s Ballistic Missile Defense Countermeasures
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation has generally
been highly critical of the US’s role in the global world order
and has often challenged the US through various multilateral
and unilateral means. The Russian Federation believes that her
most important means of resisting this perceived US hegemony is
through the strategic deterrence that her nuclear weapons provide.
Even in the worst of economic times, Russia has been able to rely
on her strategic nuclear forces for nuclear parity with the US and
for strategic deterrence. However, for Russia, the combination
of the US’s development of two very different programs in the
2000s changed this status quo of parity for the first time. As the
accompanying passages discuss, Russia believes that the antiballistic-missile defense and Prompt Global Strike programs are
designed to degrade Russia’s strategic deterrence capabilities. The
accompanying articles discuss technologies that Russia is developing
to defeat these programs; including hypersonic glide vehicles,
hypersonic missiles, and new intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Regarding Anti-Ballistic Missile Defense (ABM), Russia has
generally not expressed much concern about current US missile
defense assets positioned away from it borders, as it has touted
its missile technologies in the Topol, Yars, Bulava, and Iskander
missiles that they claim have the capability to avoid anti-ballistic
missile defense technologies. As both excerpts point out, in terms
of strategic deterrence, what concerns Russia is the future, and
evading the next generation of US anti-ballistic technologies.
Russia’s current concern about the ABM is its belief that the MK41 launch system used in the Aegis-Ashore ground-based missile
defense complexes being stationed in Poland and Romania are
also intended for offensive purposes since they are capable of
employing Tomahawk cruise missiles. Although Russians believe
that the SM-3 kinetic energy missiles present no threat, the ability
to rapidly repurpose the MK-41 launchers to fire Tomahawk cruise
missiles that can target Russian ICBM sites presents a great threat.
Some in the Russian security establishment have argued that if the
emplacement of the MK-11 launchers near Russia’s border does not
breach the letter of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty, it certainly breaches the spirit.
Regarding the Prompt Global Strike (PGS) program, Russia
believes that it was developed as a way of neutralizing Russian
military capabilities by eliminating Russia’s strategic deterrent
forces by only using conventional weapons. By some Russian
estimates, up to 80% of Russia’s nuclear arsenal could be destroyed
without the use of any US nuclear weapons, by a PGS attack. There
has been much Russian chest thumping about the ability of Russian
ballistic missiles to avoid the current capabilities of any US antiballistic-missile system, but apparently Russia sees the possibility of
Russian strategic nuclear assets being destroyed in or on their launch
platforms as a much more grave threat. The ability of the US to
perform precision guidance operations is understood and respected.
Russia has been particularly interested in the US’s development of
hypersonic missile and hypersonic missile launch platforms, and
how these assets could be integrated into PGS. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“The Sarmat missile, whose development began
in 2009, has been touted as Russia’s response to
US projects including the Prompt Global Strike
initiative, and as well the effort to deploy missile
defense near Russia’s borders. If nothing else,
Moscow hopes that the new missile and its payload
will deter US efforts to gain strategic superiority
over Moscow, or, in the worst case scenario, to
launch a surprise attack on Russia.”

Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Hypersonic Killers of American
Missile Defense: Tsirkon and Item 4202 Will Come Into the Army
by 2020,” Svobodnaya Pressa Online, 21 August 2016, <svpressa.
ru/war21/article/154848/>, accessed 15 September 2016.
In an interview with the Rambler portal, Tactical Missile Weapons
Corporation (KTRV) General Director Boris Obnosov expressed
confidence that by 2020 Russia will have developed hypersonic
missiles with a speed of Mach 6-7. He believes such missiles will
substantially weaken capabilities of the probable enemy’s missile
defense forces (PRO) “It is clear that at such speeds, with missiles
having the capability of flying in the atmosphere at a speed 7-12
times that of sound, all systems of defense against them will be
rather weakened.”
Obnosov asserts that several dozen specialized scientific research
institutes and industrial enterprises are taking part in the project
for creating hypersonic missiles, and KTRV is one of the leaders in
this subject area not only in Russia, but also in the world. Much
has been said of late about hypersonic missiles. They already are
being planned for use even in particular strike complexes, both
ground as well as naval, although both we and the United States
began creating them considerably earlier…
After a period of hard times, however, developments were renewed
and now it can be said with confidence that Russia has created a
minimum of two hypersonic missiles which are going through the
test phase. This is the Tsirkon antiship cruise missile of the 3K22 complex, lead developer of which is the Scientific Production
Association of Machine Building (NPO) in suburban Moscow’s
Reutov. Like Raduga, it also belongs to KTRV. An export version of
the missile designated BrahMos is being created in parallel for the
Indian Navy….
The work to create Tsirkon is proceeding so swiftly that it is
proposed to complete state tests next year and launch series
production in 2018. In this connection the forecast by the KTRV
general director regarding 2020 will appear rather cautious….
…But Project 4202 seemingly is capable of surpassing the speed
level set by Boris Obnosov. This missile also is being created
in the NPO. More accurately, this is not an
(continued)
OE Watch | October 2016

34

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Details of Russia’s Ballistic Missile Defense
Countermeasures Source: “Sarmat ICBM: 8 Megatons at Hypersonic Speeds, Arriving 2 Years Ahead of Schedule,”
“independent” missile, but
an intercontinental ballistic
missile warhead which, after
separation from the launch
vehicle, behaves specifically
as a hypersonic cruise missile,
maneuvering freely both in yaw
and pitch. According to various
estimates, the missile’s speed can
range from Mach 7 to Mach 12.
Therefore experts assert that not
only are state-of-the-art missile
defense weapons absolutely
impotent against it, but also
those which the United States
has not yet begun to develop.
Prototype tests are being
carried out using obsolete
RS-18B Stiletto silo-based
ICBMs, which serve to boost
the hypersonic missiles. After
Item 4202 is made operational
it will be placed both on new
RS-28 Sarmat ICBMs as well
as on advanced developments.
It is expected that this will
occur in the period from 2020
through 2025. Production of 20
hypersonic warheads is planned
in the first batch. They will make
upkeep of the American missile
defense system senseless. Three
hypersonic nuclear warheads
will be mounted on each Sarmat.

Sputnik Online, 7 September 2016, <https://sputniknews.com/military/20160907/1045062797/sarmatahead-of-schedule-analysis.html>, accessed 15 September 2016.
On Monday, a defense industry official told Russian media that the mass production of the RS-28
Sarmat intercontinental ballistic missile, a new multi-warhead, super-heavy missile designed to defeat
anti-missile systems, would begin in 2018, two years ahead of schedule. Defense analyst Vladimir
Tuchkov explains what made this possible.
The Sarmat, being developed by the Makeyev Rocket Design Bureau in the city of Miass, just east of
the Ural Mountains, will replace the RS-36, a family of ICBMs and space launch vehicles that entered
service in the 1970s and 1980s.
Featuring a large payload capacity, the heavy missile is expected to carry up to 10 heavy warheads,
or 16 lighter ones, or a combination of warheads and countermeasures meant at overwhelming enemy
missile defenses.
Most concerning to foreign defense observers is the prospect of the Sarmat being armed with
Project 4202, a hypersonic glider which, after separating from its ICBM launch vehicle, will be able
to accelerate to speeds between Mach 7 and Mach 12, acting like a hypersonic cruise missile, and
capable of maneuvering to overcome any existing or prospective missile defense to reach its target.
The Sarmat missile, whose development began in 2009, has been touted as Russia’s response to US
projects including the Prompt Global Strike initiative, and as well the effort to deploy missile defense
near Russia’s borders. If nothing else, Moscow hopes that the new missile and its payload will deter US
efforts to gain strategic superiority over Moscow, or, in the worst case scenario, to launch a surprise
attack on Russia.
Russia’s Strategic Missile Forces initially expected the arrival of the first parties of the new missile
by 2020, in accordance with the state’s defense program to the year 2020. But on Monday, a source
within the Russian military industrial complex told Russian media that “the first Sarmats will be
introduced to the Strategic Missile Forces no later than 2019, and most likely – in 2018.”
Commenting on the news, Vladimir Tuchkov, military analyst and contributor to the independent
online newspaper Svobodnaya Pressa, emphasized that the quickened pace of development was made
possible by the modernization of the industrial base at the Krasnoyarsk Machine-Building Plant, where
the production of the Sarmat missile is set to take place. Thankfully, Tuchkov added, the modernization
of the enterprise’s production capabilities came at a very timely moment, in view of the deterioration
of relations between Russia and the NATO bloc, led by the United States. “The new missile will be a
powerful deterrent, significantly outperforming all existing carriers of nuclear weapons,” the analyst
noted…
Source: http://russia-insider.com/sites/insider/files/Sarmat.jpg

OE Watch | October 2016

35

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Kavkaz-2016 Exercise Emphasizes National Mobilization
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: Much
of the analysis of Russia’s recent
Kavkaz 2016 has focused upon the
impact of the exercise on Ukraine,
but the Kavkaz 2016 exercise has
also revealed Russian efforts to
increase it national mobilization
capabilities. As the accompanying
articles from Nezavisimaya Gazeta
and Gazeta.ru discuss, the Kavkaz
2016 exercises have involved
transitioning the civilian economy
to a wartime footing and practicing
wartime command and control
relationships. These preparations
may seem odd in the era of “indirect
and asymmetric methods,” but talk of
war is rampant in the Russian media.
This discussion does not involve the
“hybrid war” that the West often
mentions, but large scale maneuver
warfare that was seen in the Second
World War, or as was expected
during the Cold War.
The second excerpt mentions of
the possibility of the Ministry for
Affairs of Civil Defense, Emergency
Situations, and Elimination of Natural
Disasters (MChs) being incorporated
into the Ministry of Defense
(MoD). The MoD started drifting
into MChs’s lane several years ago
when it established a disaster relief
regiment. If MChs is subsumed by
the Ministry of Defense, this reform
could be seen as a better way of
streamlining command and control
and readying the government for a
war footing. The Russian Federation
has already formed a National Guard
to centralize command and control
of several of the major, internally
focused, militarized security services.
The result of the MChs reform, if
implemented, is that the myriad of
militarized intelligence and security
services that Russia inherited from
the Soviet Union, will now be placed
in three “umbrella” organizations, the
Ministry of Defense (MoD), National
Guard, and Federal Security Service
(FSB). End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

100th Separate Logistical Support Regiment. Source: https://vk.com/page-60767131_49082397

Source: Oleg Odnokolenko, “The Ministry of Defense Rehearses the Transformation of the
Country into an Integrated Military Encampment: Three Military Districts, Two Fleets, and
the National Economy Are Involved in the Snap Inspection Measures,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta
Online, 26 August 2016, <http://www.ng.ru/armies/2016-08-26/2_minoborony.html>, accessed 15
September 2016.
“Based upon the decision of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief, Southern, Western, and Central
military districts, the Aerospace Forces, the Airborne Troops, and also the Black Sea and Northern
fleets were placed on alert and brought up to full combat readiness on Thursday…
During the course of the combat readiness inspection of the troops, who stand on guard of the
western borders, they also plan “to rehearse” variants of the transfer of industry to a wartime
footing. It is precisely that conclusion that follows from Sergey Shoygu’s order to military leaders
to master jointly with the federal and local executive authorities the issues of “coordination and
the practical fulfillment of the mobilization tasks by industry enterprises”…
Of course, it is unlikely that they will permit Sergey Shoygu to transfer the macaroni plants to the
production of cartridges for the period of the inspection – although that variant is stipulated in
wartime. But it is already obvious that the national economy will be involved in the measure…
Ground Troops Commander-in-Chief Colonel-General Oleg Salyukov also received a mission
with a subtext. He was tasked not only “to provide the overall leadership for the preparation of the
units and formations for the operations at the exercises,” but also to test the command and control
of Southern Military District and the territorial defense troops under “wartime conditions”…

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2016

36

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Kavkaz-2016 Exercise Emphasizes National
Mobilization Capabilities
“The banks must also carry out mobilizational measures; after all, even in the years of the Great Patriotic
War the USSR Sberbank paid wages regularly to all servicemen who were fighting on the front. This is a
system that must always work.”
— Aleksey Leonkov, a military expert for the
journal “Arsenal Otechestva”

Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “The Ministry of Defense Accomplished
Missions, Which Are Characteristic of the MChS at Exercises in
Southern Military District,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 19 August
2016, <http://www.ng.ru/politics/2016-08-19/2_uchenia.html>, accessed
30 August 2016.

Source: Yekaterina Zgirovskaya and Yelena Malysheva:
“Wartime Central Bank. Ministries and Central Bank
Become Involved in Surprise Inspection of Russian Army,”
Gazeta.ru Online, 29 August 2016, <https://www.gazeta.ru/
army/2016/08/29/10165451>, accessed 15 September 2016.

“The troop logistics support and combat support exercises that began
in Southern Military District last week end tomorrow. Nezavisimaya
Gazeta has already written that these are planned preparatory
maneuvers for the Kavkaz-2016 Strategic Command-Staff Exercises
that began earlier than the planned time period due to the Ukrainian
saboteurs’ attempt to penetrate into the Crimea. However, not only this
turned out to be their main distinctive characteristic.

“The Bank of Russia, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Industry and Trade, and other federal executive bodies have
been brought into the surprise inspection of the Russian Army
announced by the president. Gazeta.ru sought to clarify how
the Central Bank will be inspected for readiness to work “in
wartime conditions.”

…We have ascertained that they [logistics support and combat support
exercises] rehearsed the coordination of the logistics support troops
system’s totally new structures during the course of the exercises. Of
them, some are designated not only for defense but also for operations
in situations, which the RF Ministry for Affairs of Civil Defense,
Emergency Situations, and Elimination of Natural Disasters (MChS)
accomplishes. A number of experts are inclined toward the opinion that
this was not done by chance. And it is possible that the reorganization
of the MChS into structure, which will be subordinate to the military
department, is drawing near. The exercise scenario points to that
conclusion. The RF Ministry of Defense reports that the recently
created RF Ministry of Defense 100th Separate Support Regiment was
airlifted from the Moscow Region to Krymsk Airfield. According to the
exercise scenario, the elimination of the aftermath of an emergency
situation (flooding) and rendering assistance to the population in
accommodations was its mission…

“It is also planned to inspect the readiness of a number of
enterprises in the defense industry complex in southern Russia
for the performance of the assigned mobilization tasks for the
delivery and maintenance of arms and military and specialized
equipment in the interests of the groups of troops (forces) that
are being created,” the Defense Ministry announced….

Nevertheless, precisely a regiment, which accomplishes similar
functions, has been created in the Ministry of Defense structure by
the decision of Sergey Shoygu, who headed the MChS for more than
10 years. RF Deputy Defense Minister General of the Army Dmitriy
Bulgakov stated that “100th Regiment – this is an unusual regiment
in the Armed Forces. It was formed based upon the defense minister’s
decision and is designated to accomplish varied missions, including
for the evacuation of the population, searching through debris, for
work in areas of flooding or fire, and to augment troop groupings”.
Military Expert Lieutenant-General Yuriy Netkachev directs attention
that the Ministry of Defense troops very often come to the assistance
of the population in the elimination of natural disasters…he thinks. It
duplicates the MChS functions to some extent. “I will not be surprised
if the country’s leadership will decide to reform the MChS into a
structure, which will be a component of the Ministry of Defense.
Then the duplicating functions will drop off by themselves. And the
reorganization of the MChS bureaucracy will yield significant savings,”
the expert is confident…”

…Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu instructed Deputy
[Defense] Minister for Finance Tatyana Shevtsova to organize
an inspection of the system of financial support for command
and control organs and troops in the southwestern strategic
salient on the transition from peacetime to wartime.

…According to the Russian president’s Press Secretary
Dmitriy Peskov the mobilizational events in subunits of a
number of Russian ministries are “routine activity and normal
practice.”
..According to Leonkov, in the course of the inspection
mobilizational measures such as the evacuation of organs of
power to a bunker are also being rehearsed. “The banks must
also carry out mobilizational measures; after all, even in the
years of the Great Patriotic War the USSR Sberbank paid
wages regularly to all servicemen who were fighting on the
front. This is a system that must always work.
“They can carry out measures to protect corporate networks,
the performance of transactions, and so forth. The nature
of warfare is completely different nowadays and one of its
components is the jamming of any transfer of information in
the enemy’s territory. And if communication with the regions
was severed and the financial system was rendered lifeless
because of the breakdown of communication, which it would
be impossible to restore, everything would grind to a halt, it
would be sabotage. Nowadays it is possible to impact this at a
distance. It is essential to test this communication,” the expert
explained to Gazeta.ru…”
OE Watch | October 2016

37

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia Integrates Military Capabilities into Civil
Communications Infrastructure
OE Watch Commentary: The
Russian Federation is reportedly
engaging in two different lines of
effort to enhance military capabilities
by integrating them with civil
communications infrastructure. The
accompanying articles from Russian
sources discuss these initiatives.
The first accompanying article from
Izvestiya discusses a plan to mount
electronic warfare systems (Pole-21)
on cell phone towers. The systems are
meant to help protect fixed sites and
strategic infrastructure by scrambling
the signals emitted by GPS, GLONASS,
Galileo, or Beidou that are often used
for precision targeting. Precision guided
weapons may also be equipped with
other, less accurate, guidance systems.
But as the accompanying graphic
demonstrates, increasing the circular
error probability of a given cruise missile
by even a few meters can significantly
degrade its effectiveness against
hardened targets such as missile silos.
Although the article implies these
systems will be left “on” to continually
emit a jamming signal, it is more
likely that these systems would only
be turned “on” when hostilities are
expected, as this jamming would cause
significant problems for civil aviation,
communications, and many other
services that are precision navigation and
timing dependent.
The second article from Izvestiya
discusses the possibility of using
Russia’s existing GSM cellular towers
as a detection system for unmanned
aerial vehicles, cruise missiles and light
aircraft. These initiatives coincide
with other efforts to prepare Russia for
large-scale conventional warfare, such as
massive “snap” exercises, reformation of
the reserve system, exercising wartime
command and control relationships,
and testing the nationalization of the
industrial base in the event of a transition
to a wartime footing. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“Already right now more than 250,000 mobile communications base
stations are operating throughout the country and this network is
constantly being expanded…The average density of their deployment
totals 11 units per square kilometer. This permits us to form a roundthe-clock, jam-resistant, multichannel airborne target detection field
based upon the signal that is reflected from them with the capability
of the transmission of the data to PVO [air defense] and PRO [missile
defense] air defense missile complexes.”
— General Director of the
Roselektronika Joint-Stock
Company, Igor Kozlov

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Vladimir Zykov, “The Ministry of Defense Will Jam GPS from
Cellphone Communications Towers: A New Radio Jamming System Will Defend Strategic
Facilities from Enemy Cruise Missiles,” Izvestiya Online, 25 August 2016, <http://izvestia.ru/
news/628766#ixzz4IHrzF0Xl>, accessed 15 September 2016.
The Russian Ministry of Defense has accepted into the inventory the Pole-21 radio suppression
system, which defends Russian strategic facilities from enemy cruise missiles, guided bombs,
and unmanned aerial vehicles, which use the GPS, GLONASS, Galileo, or Beidou satellite
systems for navigation and guidance to the target. The latest jammer, which was developed
by Scientific and Technical Center of Electronic Warfare is the R-340RP radio jammer that
is integrated with the transmission and reception antennas that are installed on cellular
communications towers, which are merged into a single network, which covers entire regions
like a dome that is impenetrable for satellite navigation signals.
“At the present time, the tests of the item have been completed and the system has been
accepted into the inventory,” a Russian Ministry of Defense spokesman, who is familiar
with the situation, told Izvestiya…“The transmission of an elementary signal from a satellite
lies at the foundation of all satellite navigation systems. Therefore, the slightest deviation
from the designated frequency even for milliseconds will result in a loss of accuracy. “The
transmission of a signal occurs in an adequately narrow band, which is also called the
‘reference frequency,’” Independent Military Expert Anton Lavrov, one of the authors of the
book “Brother Armed”, said. “State-of-the-art jammers are directed precisely at blocking the
reference frequency, which it doesn’t pose any great difficulty to jam, while taking into account
its narrowness and the availability of an adequately powerful noise jammer.”
We must point out that all four satellite navigation systems, the signals of which the Pole-21
must combat, use closely spaced frequencies, which end up in the interval from 1176.45 to
1575.42 MHz. The fact that even a transmitter with an output of a total of 20 watts in order
to jam the radio signals in this range in a radius of 80 kilometers attests to the latest Russian
system’s capabilities to create an impenetrable jamming dome….
…At the same time, the system has one shortcoming. As is indicated in its description, “The fact
that this complex creates jamming both for the enemy, who is using the GPS radio navigation
system, and also for domestic consumers of this GPS radio navigation system and also for its
Russian GLONASS equivalent”…

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2016

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russia Integrates Military Capabilities
into Civil Communications Infrastructure
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, Vladimir Zykov, and Aleksey Ramm, “They Will Connect GSM Networks to the Missile Defense System: The
Latest Rubezh Development Will Detect Flying Objects Based Upon a Change of a Cellular Network’s Electromagnetic Field,” Izvestiya
Online, 1 September 2016, <http://izvestia.ru/news/629906#ixzz4IxmjX5qi>, accessed 15 September 2016.
The Russian Ministry of Defense has accepted into the inventory the Pole-21 radio suppression system, which defends Russian strategic
facilities from enemy cruise missiles, guided bombs, and unmanned aerial vehicles, which use the GPS, GLONASS, Galileo, or Beidou
satellite systems for navigation and guidance to the target. The latest jammer, which was developed by Scientific and Technical Center of
Electronic Warfare is the R-340RP radio jammer that is integrated with the transmission and reception antennas that are installed on cellular
communications towers, which are merged into a single network, which covers entire regions like a dome that is impenetrable for satellite
navigation signals.
“At the present time, the tests of the item have been completed and the system has been accepted into the inventory,” a Russian Ministry of
Defense spokesman, who is familiar with the situation, told Izvestiya…“The transmission of an elementary signal from a satellite lies at the
foundation of all satellite navigation systems. Therefore, the slightest deviation from the designated frequency even for milliseconds will result
in a loss of accuracy. “The transmission of a signal occurs in an adequately narrow band, which is also called the ‘reference frequency,’”
Independent Military Expert Anton Lavrov, one of the authors of the book “Brother Armed”, said. “State-of-the-art jammers are directed
precisely at blocking the reference frequency, which it doesn’t pose any great difficulty to jam, while taking into account its narrowness and
the availability of an adequately powerful noise jammer.”
We must point out that all four satellite navigation systems, the signals of which the Pole-21 must combat, use closely spaced frequencies,
which end up in the interval from 1176.45 to 1575.42 MHz. The fact that even a transmitter with an output of a total of 20 watts in order to jam
the radio signals in this range in a radius of 80 kilometers attests to the latest Russian system’s capabilities to create an impenetrable jamming
dome….
…At the same time, the system has one shortcoming. As is indicated in its description, “The fact that this complex creates jamming both for
the enemy, who is using the GPS radio navigation system, and also for domestic consumers of this GPS radio navigation system and also for
its Russian GLONASS equivalent”…

Source: http://vpk-news.ru/articles/27617

Source: http://mtdata.ru/u1/
photo7FB8/20604295228-0/original.jpg

OE Watch | October 2016

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Efforts to Further Network-Centric C4ISR Integration
OE Watch Commentary: Network-centric
warfare can roughly be described as the
integration of networking techniques into
warfighting systems. In
particular, it is the widescale use of networked
electronic reconnaissance
and targeting systems
(satellites, unmanned aerial
vehicles, etc.) linked with
mobile formations. This
type of warfare is meant
to be quickly deployable
throughout the entire theater
of military operations to
deliver decisive strikes on
the enemy’s flanks and rear,
as swiftly and efficiently as
possible. The accompanying
passages from Russian
sources discuss Russia’s
efforts to advance their
network-centric warfare
capabilities.

“The speed of data processing will ensure high-quality real-time
control over military units during war and in peacetime.”

The Soviet Union, and
later the Russian Federation,
had long desired the ability
to field a modern networkcentric C2 system, but
had lacked the technical means to do so. This situation
has changed rapidly in the last few years as Russia has
become home to a thriving information technology
sector with military industries that are quite adept
at developing and fielding new technologies. Russia
has established a national command center that will
reportedly be connected to subordinate command
centers at the operational strategic command (military
district) and Army Group levels. At the tactical level,
the Armed Forces are overcoming C2 problems and
implementing network-centric warfare through a variety
of new technologies. These include new tactical radios,
a tactical digital mobile subscriber system (roughly a
military digital cell phone and data system), and tactical
laptops and tablets. The accompanying article from
Izvestiya discusses how this integration is progressing
in regard to individual vehicles at the tactical level,
while the articles from RIA Novosti and Sputnik discuss
how communications essential for network-centric
warfare will be maintained through a combination of
High Frequency radio transmissions, a Russian military
“internet,” along with other, more traditional means
such as conventional satellite communications. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

R-168 Radio.
Source: Image Courtesy: Vitaly Kuzmin

Source: Aleksey Ramm, “The VDV Will Be Able To Command and Control the
‘Armata’ Online: The Coordination of the Airborne and Ground Troops Will Be
Improved Significantly Thanks to the Integration of Armored Vehicles into the
‘Andromeda-D’ Automated Command and Control System,” Izvestiya Online,
<http://izvestia.ru/news/628366>, accessed 15 September 2015.
“The advanced Russian combat vehicles of the Armata, Kurganets, and
Bumerang families will be compatible with the Airborne Troops Andromeda-D
automated command and control system. Thanks to that decision, airborne
troops commanders will be able to not only issue orders to the crews of the
latest tanks, armored infantry vehicles, and armored transport vehicles in realtime, but will also receive all of the information about the technical and tactical
state of the armored vehicles, beginning with the speed and direction of travel
and ending with the availability of fuel and lubricants and the remainder of
rounds and projectiles…
Communications are carried out via radio, radio-relay, and space lines of
communication and one can work with the computer not only at the command
or surveillance post but also while moving, right up to the front line…The
computers have special software with electronic maps so that each user would
be able to input online changes to the location of enemy troops, weapons,
and equipment. In the majority of cases, our troops are automatically entered
into the program based upon the GPS/GLONASS positioning of the connected
computers.”

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2016

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian Efforts to Further
Network-Centric C4ISR Integration
Source: “United Instrument-Manufacturing Corporation to
Complete Tests of Latest “Elusive” Radio Set in 2017,” RIA
Novosti Online, 18 August 2016, <https://ria.ru/defense_
safety/20160818/1474656550.html>, accessed 15 September 2016.

Source: “Russia’s Armed Forces to Boast Their Very Own HackProof Internet,” Sputnik Online, 10 September 2016, <https://
sputniknews.com/russia/20160910/1045174832/russia-army-internet.
html>, accessed 15 September 2016.

“In 2017, United Instrument-Manufacturing Corporation (OPK)
will complete testing of the latest communication device, which
will prove “elusive” to signals intelligence and electronic warfare
equipment, the corporation’s press service reported on Thursday.

“The creation of an Internet-like telecommunications system for the
Russia Armed Forces capable of executing over 30 million operations
a second took center stage during a roundtable of defense industry
experts held as part of the Army-2016 expo. The ambitious project
will require fiber-optic and coaxial communication lines as well
as wireless technology. The speed of data processing will ensure
high-quality real-time control over military units during war and in
peacetime. The participants of the roundtable discussed the creation
of a ramified high-speed communications system for the Armed
Forces that would not be hacked, ensure multiple backups of data
traffic, commutation and information delivery…”

In the future, the new radio transceiver will serve as a backup for
satellite communication equipment, supporting data transmission
at comparable speeds over long distances.
“United Instrument-Manufacturing Corporation has created
a technology that will offer a threefold improvement in data
protection and will allow for transmitting data over hundreds of
kilometers, even in hard-to-reach areas. This unique development
in Russian radioelectronics is undergoing tests as part of a
ground-based communication complex that is currently being
tested… The plan is to complete testing of the new device in 2017,”
the report states.
The press service specified that a new technology ensures
the requisite level of communication reliability – a broadband
waveform that employs software radio frequency tuning. This
allows the device to overcome jamming and allows it to “elude”
signals intelligence and electronic warfare equipment.”

Platoon/squad
leader tablet PC.
Source: Image
Courtesy: Vitaly
Kuzmin

Source: Graphic Courtesy:
bastion-opk.ru/

OE Watch | October 2016

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Nature of ‘Future War’
OE Watch Commentary: Russian Major
General Vladimir Slipchenko used the phrase
“sixth generation warfare” to describe the 1991
Desert Storm and its aftermath. Sixth generation
warfare follows “fifth generation warfare,”
which focused on the role of nuclear weapons.
“Sixth generation warfare” is characterized by
the increasing use of precision guided munitions
(PGMs) and the growing importance of the
informational aspects of war (information/
psychological operations, C4ISR, Electronic
warfare, cyber warfare, etc.). Russian security
professionals sometimes also refer to this as
“new generation warfare” or “future war”.
The accompanying article from Moskovskiy
Komsomolets discusses one Russian analyst’s
view of this type of warfare. Most Russian
security professionals believe that aerospace (air
and space) is now a theater of military action
(TVD), pointing to the 2015 consolidation
of the Aerospace Forces and Air Force into
an Aerospace Defense Troops. In line with
Major General Slipchenko’s view, the author
discusses how precision guided munitions
and the informational aspects of war will be
decisive and require a rethinking of the way
conventional operations are conducted. The
author frequently discusses the importance of
space based capabilities, specifically how they
are key requirements for US operations by citing
various US doctrine and manuals regarding
space operations.
Although the author discusses many
current views shared by the Russian security
establishment, there are some points where there
are significant differences in Russian opinion.
Many in the Russian security establishment
would likely take issue with the author’s “air and
space centric” view of warfare, that discounts the
role of the Russian Ground Forces. The author
also discounts the role of nuclear weapons; while
many Russian security experts would argue
that Russian nuclear weapons, and the strategic
deterrence that they provide, are essential for
achieving political and strategic goals. Aside
from these points, the view of future warfare that
the author proposes is in line with mainstream
Russian views on the topic, especially the
informational aspects. This is evident in the
accompanying article from Interfax, which
discusses the establishment of information
warfare centers for the Kavkaz-2016 exercises.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Makmut Gareev, Jacob Kipp (former FMSO Director) and Vladimir Slipchenko discussing Future War.

Source: Oleg Bozhov, “How They Will Wage War in the Future: Tanks Rumble
Through the Sky,” Moskovskiy Komsomolets Online, 9 August 2016, <http://www.
mk.ru/politics/2016/08/09/kak-stanut-vesti-voynu-vbudushhem.html>, accessed 14
September 2016.
By general acknowledgment, the main feature of wars of the future is that they
shift from the ground into the aerospace environment. Doctor of Military Sciences
Vladimir Slipchenko, author of a number of books on sixth-generation wars, always
asserted that war of the future will change many customary ideas in areas of strategy,
operational art, and tactics…
So what will wars of the 21st century be like?
There will not be a clearly marked axis of main attack. The attack will begin to
be delivered simultaneously from all axes of a theater of military operations. The
offensive and defense of combined-arms subunits, units, formations, and major
formations and the tank battles — all this is disappearing into the past before our eyes.
In case a defending side in such a war attempts to employ tanks, armored personnel
carriers, and artillery, then enemy precision guided munitions (PGM) immediately will
turn them into range targets, which will be destroyed from a distance without entering
into contact, direct contact, with them. This is why a theoretical substantiation of
sixth-generation wars no longer presumes the involvement of large groupings of
ground troops… terms as “ front,” “rear,” and “ forward edge” simply will become
extinct, since combat operations will be conducted mainly in aerospace over the
territory of an entire country or several countries…
In such a war it already will be difficult to identify the difference between strategy and
operational art, since in the final account command and control of troops, forces, and
assets will be reduced basically to three commands: “detect,” “decide,” “destroy.”
… Wars of the future do not presume occupation at all. Victory can be won chiefly by
destroying enemy economic potential. In such a war it is enough to use strategic attack
forces and PGM to inflict a crushing defeat on enemy means of retaliatory attack,
destroy the most important and key military installations, and destroy

(continued)

OE Watch | October 2016

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Nature of ‘Future War’
his economy, power supply system, and lines of communication; and in addition,
demoralize the population using information warfare techniques, after which the enemy
state’s political system will fall to pieces on its own…
…Russia’s political leadership and the Russian Defense Ministry are taking these
US plans into account in developing their own Armed Forces…Taking this experience
into account, the conclusion can be drawn already today that the following factors are
becoming the chief features of armed warfare of the future:
•

the aerospace operation is the main means of achieving objectives of modern war;

•

exclusion of man from the immediate zone of confrontation;

•

availability of nuclear weapons has no decisive influence on achieving political and
strategic missions of modern war;

•

in modern war a military operation is conducted on an enormous territory with no
clearly defined front line under conditions of fluidity of ongoing operations as well
as a significant dispersion of forces and assets;

•

engaging targets at enormous distances requires state-of-the-art PGM of varying
range, including created on new physical principles, as well as their means of
delivery — airborne, sea-based, and in the future also space-based. That is why
capabilities of those arms and branches of troops which have such platforms come
to the fore: Air Force, Navy, Aerospace Defense Troops, as well as Electronic
Warfare Troops;

•

ensuring coordination of troop operations, operational leadership, as well as
reconnaissance under conditions of war are within the power only of space assets,
which are capable of providing surveillance of enemy facilities to the full depth of
his operational alignment.

And most important: to wage such a war a state must have a highly developed science
and economy capable of creating PGM, state-of-the-art communications systems,
and means of command and control — that entire combat and intellectual potential
required for victory in a new-generation war.

Source: “Information Warfare Group Formed
During the Kavkaz 2016 Exercises,” Interfax, 14
September 2016.
The first information warfare practice took
place during the Caucasus 2016 strategic
command-and-staff exercises, Russian Armed
Forces General Staff Chief Gen. of the Army
Valery Gerasimov said.
“The first information warfare practice took
place during the Kavkaz 2016 strategic drills.
We set up an information warfare group during
those exercises. The mission accomplished by
this group is as essential as the tasks of the
gunfire planning group. This is how important
this work is. This is how we appreciate it,”
Gerasimov told a press briefing at the Russian
Defense Ministry on Wednesday.
The Main Operative Department of the General
Staff, its divisions - information warfare centers
in military districts, information warfare forces,
radio-electronic warfare forces, and units from
the state secret protection service - participated
in the fulfillment of that mission, he said.
“In principle, operations of information
warfare forces are equivalent to operations
of gunfire means and forces. They may even
prevail at a certain stage. All these issues were
practiced during Caucasus 2016 exercises,”
Gerasimov said.

Keeping NBC Relevant

Flame Weapons in the Russian Armed Forces
By Charles Bartles
The Russian Nuclear, Biological, And Chemical (NBC) Defense Troops are tasked with identifying NBC threats in the environment, performing decontamination of troops and equipment, and most interestingly, employing aerosols and flame weapons to engage the enemy. In
most militaries, flame weapons have traditionally belonged to the NBC Troops. The popularity of such weapons has waned significantly throughout the world, but not so in the Russian
Armed Forces. While the utility of NBC Troops in today’s asymmetric warfare is questioned
in other armies, Russian NBC Troops firm grasp of flame weapons keeps them relevant, engaged, and makes them an important asset in the Russian maneuver commander’s toolbox.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Flame_2015.pdf
OE Watch | October 2016

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Russian Airborne’s Next Generation of Combat
Vehicles and Beyond
“A more state-of-the-art digital weapon control system
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying article
from Izvestiya discusses, Russia is concluding testing on
the “Sprut-SDM-1”— the newest iteration of the Sprut
self-propelled antitank gun (Sprut-SD). This modernized
version will be operated by the Russian Airborne (VDV)
and Naval Infantry. The Sprut-SD is based on the BMD4 chassis, amphibious, can be parachute dropped by
Il-76 and An-124 transport airplanes, and is equipped
with a smoothbore 2A75 125 millimeter gun (which is a
modified 2A46 gun) which are installed on all Russian
tanks. The field testing of the Sprut-SDM-1 began after
only 36 of the Sprut-SDs entered service. This practice
appears to be common in the Russian Armed Forces.
Russia sees no need to completely upgrade the entire
force with new models of equipment, instead preferring to
phase in incremental improvements on new or refurbished
equipment that will coexist with earlier models. The
article from Vzglyad discusses the Zauralets-D project,
a self-propelled artillery gun/mortar that was being
considered for the VDV. This project is now being
abandoned in favor of the Lotos self-propelled artillery
gun/mortar. The article from Interfax discusses that
design work is now beginning on the BMD-5 (airborne
fighting vehicle), as a replacement for the BMD-4M.
If Russia fields the BMD-5 in the next few years, the
Russian VDV will be simultaneously operating various
versions of BMD-2s, BMD-3s, BMD-4s, and BMD5s. This practice could be challenging, as parts would
needed to be maintained for each of these systems,
yet Russian logisticians have few reservations about
the practice. This fact is due to the Russian system
of modernization. Unlike many Western countries,
there is no bidding process for new combat vehicles. In
Western countries, due to the bidding process, when
new vehicles are introduced, each usually comes with
unique components which must be added to the national
supply system. In the Russian system, all Russian BMPs
and BMDs are manufactured by KurganMashZavod
(Kurgan Machine Company), and since Russia pursues
an evolutionary, as opposed to revolutionary, system of
modernization, a majority of major subsystems (engines,
transmissions, hydraulics, suspension systems, etc.) and
parts may be used on subsequent models. An added
benefit of this process is that the critical defense industry
plants and design bureaus can always be kept “warm,” by
continually designing and manufacturing new products.
These practices allow lower production costs and permit
smaller production runs that are economically feasible.
Although these articles discuss only Russian VDV
combat vehicles, these production practices are found
throughout the Russian defense industry. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

with a combined gunner’s sight with a night vision thermalimaging channel and automatic target tracker was installed
during the modernization to the 2S25M 125-millimeter selfpropelled antitank gun for the Sprut-SDM1...”— Tractor Plants
Concern
Spokesman

Source: Image
Courtesy: Vitaly
Kuzmin

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “The ‘Flying Tank’ Will Get a Guided Missile:
The Sprut-SDM1 Self-Propelled Artillery Mount will be Able To Use
the New Complex To Destroy Tanks, Helicopters, and Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles,” Izvestiya Online, 23 August 2016, <http://izvestia.ru/
news/628367#ixzz4IHTFKGv0>, accessed 31 August 2016.
“The Ministry of Defense is concluding the plant tests of the latest
modification of the Sprut-SDM1 self-propelled, airmobile, 125-millimeter
antitank gun for the Airborne Troops. A military department spokesman told
Izvestiya that one of the new vehicle’s primary differences is the weapons
control complex (KUV) with the latest missile, which is capable of destroying
at a distance of up to 6,000 meters even a tank with reactive armor in the form
of containers with explosives, which are suspended above the conventional
armor.
The latest item has been totally integrated with the digital fire control system
(SUO), thanks to which the Sprut SDM1’s firing accuracy has not only been
increased but it has also become possible to fire at low-flying and low-speed
targets, for example enemy helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles.
The new self-propelled gun has received a modernized missile, which is
fired through the gun tube and was developed based upon the Invar-M round
[NATO designation AT-11 Sniper]. The high-end shaped-charge round is
located in the missile’s nose and ensures the penetration of reactive armor,
including reactive armor that is made in the embedded version. The main
shaped-charge round directly destroys the target. A variant of the missile with
a high-explosive thermobaric impact warhead has been developed for the
destruction of fortified engineering structures.
“A more state-of-the-art digital weapon control system with a combined
gunner’s sight with a night vision thermal-imaging channel and automatic
target tracker was installed during the modernization to the 2S25M
125-millimeter self-propelled antitank gun for the Sprut-SDM1,” a Tractor
Plants Concern Corporate Management Company spokesman told Izvestiya.
“The state-of-the-art sensors provide fire corrections due to wind, the
vehicle’s own rate of movement, and so forth. Furthermore, the capability has
appeared for the commander to conduct fire from an additional machinegun
mount, including at the upper stories of buildings, domination heights in the
mountains, and helicopters”….

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2016

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Russian Airborne’s Next
Generation of Combat Vehicles and Beyond
Source: “Decision Adopted on Creation of SelfPropelled Guns for Airborne Troops under Lotos Project,”
Vzglyad Online, 16 August 2016, <http://www.vz.ru/
news/2016/8/16/827048.html>, accessed 15 September 2016.
“The development of self-propelled guns for Russian Airborne
Troops (VDV) is being conducted under the Lotos project,
which is a development and replacement of the Zauralets-D
project, Dmitriy Semizorov, general director of the Central
Research Institute of Precision Engineering (TSNIItochmash),
stated.
“We achieved serious scientific and technical groundwork
in the Zauralets which has now been transferred to the Lotos
work,” Semizorov said in a TASS interview. He also noted that
the military has set the task of commencing serial production
of the new self-propelled gun in 2020… In October last year,
the developer reported that the Zauralets self-propelled gun,
designed to equip the VDV, had passed preliminary testing.
In December 2014, Semizorov announced the beginning of
the development of a new artillery gun for the VDV. Semizorov
noted that in 2016 it is planned to supply the troops with a
small batch, with large shipments scheduled from 2017 through
2024…It should also be recalled that in May this year the
developer promised to hand over 144 BMD-4M’s to the VDV in
2016…”.

Sprut-SD
Source: Image Courtesy: Vitaly Kuzmin

Source: “Russian industrialists developing prospective airborne assault
vehicle BMD-5,” Interfax, 11 September 2016.
“The industry has started working on the technical profile of
a prospective airborne assault vehicle, the so-called BMD-5, a
representative from Volgograd Tractor Plant said at a roundtable held at
the Army-2016 international military-technical forum on Friday.
“The analysis of armored vehicle developments in NATO and East
Asian countries shows that there is a design trend for front-drive tracked
vehicles with a crew placed in the armored part of a vehicle’s body. In
view of this, we are proposing an outline of a prospective BMD with
the 100+30 (a 30-millimeter cannon and a 100-millimeter launcher)
armament compartment being designed for the BMP-3 ‘Dragun’“ the
plant’s representative said….”

Source: Image Courtesy: Vitaly Kuzmin

OE Watch | October 2016

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Banking on Defense
OE Watch Commentary: In early 2013, the
Chief of Russia’s General Staff (V. Gerasimov)
published an article which described how he
perceived the current and future nature of war.
As opposed to Clausewitz, who regarded war
as an extension of politics, Gerasimov took a
more holistic approach, arguing that all sorts of
nonmilitary measures could be used to weaken
one’s opponent. To spark widespread protest
in the target population, Gerasimov suggested
that war would first be fought on the economic,
information, diplomatic and political fronts before
the actual employment of armed force. (For
additional background on Gerasimov’s article,
see Charles Bartles, “Getting Gerasimov Right,”
Military Review, Jan/Feb 2016).
Since Russia’s armed involvement against
Ukraine, there have been growing concerns
among Kremlin officials that the West will
further employ these non-military means to
foment protest and a possible “color revolution”
to unseat the current leadership. As the brief
excerpt points out, one area of special concern
is the economic realm, where although Western
sanctions have been in place for over two years,
there are fears that more drastic measures
might yet be adopted. The article describes a
mobilization exercise conducted at the end of
August “to evaluate the readiness for work in
“wartime” conditions of structural subunits of the
Ministry of Communications and Mass Media,
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Industry
and Trade, the Federal Agency for State Reserves,
and the Bank of Russia.” One of the primary
objectives of the exercise was to establish
procedures to ensure that the country’s financial
system would continue to operate in the event that
“communication with the regions was severed.”
Over the past two years, much of the Kremlin
rhetoric (and that of the Kremlin-sponsored
media) has stressed defense awareness and the
necessity of mobilizing for potential conflict.
Some analysts have posited that this increased
military readiness to defend against an external
threat has merely been a tool to strengthen the
legitimacy of the current Kremlin leadership.
This article from the pro-Kremlin source, Gazeta.
ru appears to suggest, however, that some within
the Kremlin firmly subscribe to the vision of
future war described by General Gerasimov and
are taking active measures to defend against an
attack against Russia’s economic system. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…if communication with the regions was severed and the
financial system was rendered lifeless because of the breakdown
of communication, which it would be impossible to restore,
everything would grind to a halt, it would be sabotage.”

President Putin meeting the head of the Bank of Russia, Elvira Nabiullina.
Source: www.en.kremlin.ru

Source: Yekaterina Zgirovskaya and Yelena Malysheva, “ЦБ военного времени.
Министерства и ЦБ привлекли к внезапной проверке армии России,”
[Wartime Central Bank. Ministries and Central Bank Become Involved in Surprise
Inspection by Russian Army] Gazeta.ru, 29 August 2016. http://www.gazeta.ru/
army/2016/08/29/10165451.shtml
The Bank of Russia, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Industry and Trade,
and other federal executive bodies have been brought into a surprise inspection by
the Russian Army announced by the president. Gazeta.ru sought to clarify how the
Central Bank will be inspected for readiness to work “in wartime conditions.”
Surprise inspections by the Russian Army have been taking place in the country
for three years now, and territorial executive bodies and a number of ministries and
departments are also becoming involved. Within the framework of an inspection being
conducted 25 through 31 August, the military are to evaluate the readiness for work in
“wartime” conditions of structural subunits of the Ministry of Communications and
Mass Media, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Federal
Agency for State Reserves, and the Bank of Russia.….
…The Finance Ministry explained to Gazeta.ru that this federal body “is carrying
out specific measures within the framework of the inspection of the troops’ combat
readiness.” “Questions of coordination of actions with other departments are being
rehearsed and the viability of support systems and readiness to respond promptly to
a sudden change in the situation are being inspected. The inspection is taking place
in normal mode. We are planning to complete it on schedule and with a positive
outcome,” the Russian Finance Ministry Press Service said.
...“They can carry out measures to protect corporate networks, the performance of
transactions, and so forth. The nature of warfare is completely different nowadays
and one of its components is the jamming of any transfer of information in the enemy’s
territory. And if communication with the regions was severed and the financial system
was rendered lifeless because of the breakdown of communication, which it would
be impossible to restore, everything would grind to a halt, it would be sabotage.
Nowadays it is possible to impact this at a distance. It is essential to test this
communication,” the expert explained to Gazeta.ru….
OE Watch | October 2016

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Morale Support for Kavkaz 2016
OE Watch Commentary: The
Russian military conducted its largest
training exercise of the year in early
September, when more than 120,000
soldiers and civilians participated in the
Kavkaz 2016 strategic command and
staff exercise. The first excerpt from
the Russian news agency TASS quotes
the chief of the Russian General Staff,
Valery Gerasimov as saying that “it was
a hard test for commanders of all ranks.
It put to test all staffs and military
control agencies and their ability to
coordinate operations by combined
forces in theaters of combat operations.”

Source: “More than 120,000 people take part in Caucasus-2016 drills,” TASS, 9 September 2016.
http://tass.com/defense/898820

The second excerpt, from the
military newspaper of the Southern
Military District, describes a few of
the morale-boosting tools used by the
military to help soldiers handle the
stress and to deal with the mental and
physical strains of this exercise. The
article points out how a “morale and
psychological field support center was
deployed” at the training area, where
personnel provided “intensive and
specific informational/propaganda,
military-social, psychological, cultural/
recreational, and spiritual work with
service personnel.” Besides “conducting
social and civic training exercises,”
service members also had the
opportunity “to read items from fresh
special editions of the Defense Ministry
newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda,” and a
number of other military newspapers.
Soldiers had access to movies and TV
as well as to a facility “where songs and
dances were performed by army and
navy ensembles.” The article further
describes the measures taken to provide
religious support for both Orthodox and
Muslim personnel.

This year, methods for working with personnel have been checked out in a real combat training
situation in connection with the preparation and staging of the Kavkaz-2016 strategic command
and staff exercise.

With impressive displays of strategic
maneuver, coordination and firepower,
the Kavkaz 2016 exercise demonstrated
that the Russian military continues to
strengthen its overall combat readiness.
Furthermore, it appears that Russian
defense officials understand that
key components underpinning this
readiness are adequate resources to
support the “morale and psychological
support” for soldiers in the field. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Opuk Training Area, Crimea. More than 120,000 people, both military personnel and civilians,
have taken part in The Caucasus-2016 exercise, but no more than 12,500 were engaged
simultaneously, the Chief of Russia’s General Staff, Valery Gerasimov, told the media on
Friday….
…Gerasimov described the drills as the “culminating point of intensive military training.”… “It
was a hard test for commanders of all ranks. It put to test all staffs and military control agencies
and their ability to coordinate operations by combined forces in theaters of combat operations,”
Gerasimov said….
Source: Mikhail Malygin, “Уроки боевой работы в поле,” [The Lessons of Combat Work in
the Field] Voyennyy Vestnik Yuga Rossii, 2 September 2016.

In August a special exercise to provide morale and psychological support for the grouping
of troops (forces) in the Southwestern Strategic Sector was staged simultaneously at several
Southern Military District training grounds… In particular, a morale and psychological field
support center was deployed on unfamiliar terrain within a very short space of time at the Opuk
training ground (in the Republic of Crimea)….
…[Malygin] Gennadiy Anatolyevich, what distinguishes a modern morale and psychological
field support center when its activity is being organized directly as part of the troops’ combat
procedures?
[Ochkin] Primarily the compact size of the facility and its mobility — that is to say, its agility,
flexibility, and capability for action and interaction between the morale and psychological
field support center’s structures. All the necessary conditions were created in the tent camp
for intensive and specific informational/propaganda, military-social, psychological, cultural/
recreational, and spiritual work with service personnel. Its main focus is on mobilizing the
personnel to successfully perform their combat tasks….
…The development in service personnel of the group psychological qualities needed for the
successful conduct of combat operations, the raising of the fatigue threshold, the enhancement
of work capability and level of sustainability of professional and combat skills, and the
mobilization of the personnel to successfully resolve their tasks was their main objective in the
exercises….
...The information facility conducted social and civic training exercises with service personnel.
Here service personnel also had an opportunity to read items from fresh special editions of
the Defense Ministry newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda, the Southern Federal District newspaper
Voyennyy Vestnik Yuga Rossii…
…The cultural/recreational facility at the training ground also worked at full stretch. It was
based on a mobile field club incorporating a frame-structure movie theater accommodating
up to 150 people. Russian TV news channels were relayed through video projection equipment
with the aid of satellite dishes….Another facility that operated non-stop was the field concert
platform, where songs and dances were performed by army and navy ensembles….
…[Malygin] What distinguished army and navy priests’ religious activity at the training
ground?
[Ochkin] We deployed two work facilities — for Orthodox service personnel and Muslim
service personnel — to carry out spiritual/morale and individual work with personnel and
conduct religious services at the training ground….
OE Watch | October 2016

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Private Russian Soldiers in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian military marked its
one-year anniversary of conducting combat operations in Syria
last month, and while the conflict continues to rage, the Kremlin
leadership has repeatedly praised its military for their efforts.
As the first brief excerpt from a recent speech by President
Putin points out, the “actions of the Russian military in Syria
deserve the highest assessment as they are meant to defend
Russia’s national interests and help anti-terror efforts to protect
civilians.” A question arises, however, as to which military forces
President Putin was referring to. According to a detailed article
published last month by the Russian business daily RBK, the
Russian government is increasingly relying upon private military
companies (PMCs) to conduct sensitive ground operations in
Syria. (For additional background, see “Russian Ground Forces in
Syria?” OE Watch, Dec 2015).
This article begins by examining previous attempts to establish
and legalize PMCs within Russia, noting that the key questions
regarding oversight and funding have yet to be resolved.
Another concern revolves around the dangers in authorizing
organizations with the potential to “undermine the security of a
state.” Regardless of the lack of legislation, the concerns over the
loyalty of these companies, and the criminal statutes prohibiting
mercenary activity, the article affirms that “private military
companies do exist in Russia.”
The article focuses on the Russian PMC known as “Vagner”
and its close relationship with the “Main Intelligence Directorate
(GRU) Special Operations Forces.” It points out that personnel
employed by Vagner are co-located with a GRU unit and appear
to share the same training facilities. Funding for this PMC
remains murky, and the authors suggest that wealthy business
owners contribute to the company in exchange for lucrative
military contracts. Quoting a Defense Ministry official, the
article points out that the monthly salary of a Russian contract
employee with Vagner operating in Syria would range between
150,000-250,000 rubles per month ($2,300-$3,900). The authors
speculate that there are likely between 1,000-1,600 Russians
employed with PMCs currently working in Syria.
The article also touches upon compensation for those employees
who are wounded or killed in action. Precise evidence has been
difficult to uncover as employees sign non-disclosure statements
which could potentially forfeit their benefit if surviving relatives
reveal this information. While “a Defense Ministry officer insists
that only 27 “private soldiers have been killed in the Near East,”
a “former officer of the private military company speaks of a
minimum of 100 deaths.” Transporting these employees and their
supplies also remains non-transparent, and the article describes
a mixture of official and unofficial logistic means and routes into
Syria. The article concludes that PMCs will not be disbanded
anytime soon, quoting a comment by President Putin from 2012
that Russian PMCs are “indeed an instrument for the realization
of national interests without the state’s direct participation.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Top

“This private military company is indeed an
instrument for the realization of national interests
without the state’s direct participation,”

Vladimir Putin with the President of the Syrian Arab Republic, Bashar Assad.
Source: en.kremlin.ru

Source: “Putin praises actions of Russian military in Syria,” TASS, 20
February 2016. http://tass.ru/en/politics/858227
“The actions of the Russian military in Syria deserve the highest
assessment as they are meant to defend Russia’s national interests and
help participants in anti-terror efforts to protect civilians,” Russian
President Vladimir Putin said on Saturday.
“The combat skills of our military are being improved now in the
military operation in Syria. Fighting in this Middle East country,
our servicemen and officers are defending Russia’s interests,
extinguishing terrorists who call our motherland their enemy and who
don’t hide their expansion plans, including into the territory of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),” the president said at a
reception in the Kremlin dedicated to the Fatherland Defender’s Day
marked in Russia on February 23….
Source: Ilya Rozhdestvenskiy, Anton Bayev, Polina Rusyayeva,
Yelizaveta Surnacheva, “Призраки войны: Как в Сирии появилась
российская частная армия,” [Phantoms of War: How A Private
Russian Army Appeared in Syria] RBK Online, 25 August 2016.
http://www.rbc.ru/magazine/2016/09/57bac4309a79476d978e850d
“All over the world, private military companies are an enormous
business: “Private soldiers” not infrequently replace armed forces. In
Russia, they are outside the law. But the prototype of Russian private
military companies — “the Vagner group” — has been road-tested in
Syria, and the authorities are once again thinking about legalizing it….
The military unit at Krasnodarskiy Kray’s Molkino farmstead is a
secure facility. It is here that the 10th separate brigade of the Defense
Ministry Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) Special Operations
Forces is stationed, Gazeta.Ru has written. The first checkpoint on
the path to the base lies a few dozen meters from the Don Federal
Highway…. Behind this checkpoint is the camp of a private military
company, one of the officers of the troop unit claims….
…This structure does not have an official name, the
name of its leader and its earnings are not disclosed,
OE Watch | October 2016

(continued)
48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Private Russian Soldiers in Syria
and the very existence of the company, which is possibly the largest in the market, is not advertised: Formally, the activity of private military
companies is illegal in our country….
The last attempt to legalize private military companies in Russia was undertaken in March 2016…The government opposed the adoption of
the law, noting in a comment that the draft law contradicted Article 13, Part Five of the Constitution: “The creation and activity of public
associations whose aims or actions are aimed at <…> undermining the security of a state and creating armed formations is prohibited.”…
Despite the absence of a law, private military companies do exist in Russia. …
…In order to make their work abroad easier, Russian private military companies register subsidiary structures in offshore companies.
…Russian troops did not participate in a full-scale ground operation in Syria, but in March 2016, General Aleksandr Dvornikov, commander
of the Russian force grouping in the country, stated that individual tasks were being performed by fighters on the ground. “I will not conceal
the fact that units of our special operations forces are also operating on Syrian territory,” he said in an interview with Rossiyskaya Gazeta. In
his words, the military were performing additional reconnaissance of facilities for the purpose of airstrikes, guiding airplanes to their targets
in remote regions, and performing “other special tasks.”
…the Internal Troops veteran, who had seen both Chechen campaigns, was in Syria as the officer of a private military company known as
“the Vagner group.”…It is the GRU that secretly oversees the “Vagner group,” a Defense Ministry officer and an FSB [Russian Federal
Security Service] staffer confirmed to RBK, the latter adding that this detachment came into being after “the situation in the world became
more tense.”
The “Vagner group” appeared in the Near East not long before Russia began to officially deploy its bases there in the fall of 2015, the
Defense Ministry officer says and a source familiar with the course of the operation confirms. All told, almost 2,500 persons took up position
near Latakia and Aleppo; the operation was led by officers not only of the GRU, but also of the FSB, he adds.
…There was no shortage of applicants: In 2016, there were between 1,000 and 1,600 officers of private military companies in Syria at one
time, depending on the tenseness of the situation, a source familiar with the course of the operation says….
...For private investors, the funding of private military companies is a way of proving their loyalty, an interlocutor in the Defense Ministry
explains, for example, for closer cooperation with the military department. …
…It is very difficult to calculate the costs of maintaining a private military company with a numerical strength of several thousand men. The
Vagner group does not pay for the lease of buildings or its plot of land…Asked whether the restaurateur’s companies are linked to the funding
of the “Vagner group,” a high-ranking federal functionary merely smiled and replied: “You must understand that Prigozhin offers very tasty
meals.”…
…Whereas contracts to service the base pass through electronic platforms, expenditure on the pay of the private military company’s fighters
is almost impossible to trace: The salary is issued mainly in cash, fighters from the “Vagner group” claim….
…The pay of a private military company officer in Syria rarely exceeded R250,000-R300,000 per month, a Defense Ministry officer clarifies
in conversation with RBK. He agrees with the minimum threshold of R80,000, but estimates the average pay for a rank-and-file soldier at
R150,000 plus combat payments and compensation payments….
…It is the private military company that bears the main losses on the Russian side in Syria, RBK’s interlocutors familiar with the details of
the operation say. Their information on the number of deaths differs. A Defense Ministry officer insists that only 27 “private soldiers” have
been killed in the Near East, while one former officer of the private military company speaks of a minimum of 100 deaths….
…RBK contacted the family of one of the slain soldiers of the private military company, but his relatives refused to talk. …An officer from the
“Vagner group” claims that nondisclosure of the terms of working in the private military company are a condition of the family’s receiving
compensation.
…Fighters make their way to Syria under their own steam; there is no centralized departure, one mercenary explains. But freight for the
“Vagner group” is delivered by sea, on the ships of the “Syrian express.” …The format of the “express” can be notionally divided into
three parts: naval vessels, ships that had earlier performed civilian voyages and later became part of the Navy, and chartered bulk carriers
belonging to various kinds of companies all over the world…
…A big role in the liberation of regions of the historical part of Palmyra was played by the private military company’s fighters, a former
officer of the group says….
It is not entirely correct to describe the “Vagner group” as a private military company, another representative of this market believes. “The
detachment does not set itself the task of earning money, it is not a business,” he clarifies. In the case of the “Vagner group”, the interests of
the state, which required forces to perform delicate tasks in Syria, coincided with the desire of a group of former servicemen to earn money
while performing missions in the interests of the country, RBK’s interlocutor close to the FSB leadership explains.
“The advantage from private military companies is the possibility of using them abroad, when the use of regular armed forces is not very
appropriate,” Aleksandr Khramchikhin, deputy director of the Institute for Political and Military Analysis, believes. He effectively repeats a
remark by Vladimir Putin. “This private military company is indeed an instrument for the realization of national interests without the state’s
direct participation,” Putin, who at that time occupied the post of head of government, said in the spring of 2012….
…At the same time, he is confident that private military companies will not be disbanded — the unit has proven its effectiveness.
OE Watch | October 2016

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Bears at the Bering Strait
OE Watch Commentary: The Russians
are planning a coastal defense division on
the inhospitable Chukotka Peninsula at the
Russian end of the Bering Strait. Details
are sketchy except that the troops will have
All Terrain Vehicles (ATVs) and the veteran
MTLB (Russian transport vehicle for combat)
for coastal patrolling. The real questions are
about TO&E artillery, helicopters, missiles
and air defense systems. The division will
belong to the Eastern Military District. The
accompanying passages discuss Russia’s plans
for this future military force.
The peninsula is the geographical point
where the Arctic Ocean meets the Pacific
Ocean. The Bering Strait region is a very
rugged combination of terrain and weather.
Flying over it, sailing through it or traversing
its ground are all challenging and weather
dependent. The US experience in the Aleutian
Island Campaign in that region in World
War II proved a slow, bitter slog to force out
a smaller Japanese force. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Several motorized rifle
artic battalions mounted
on four- and six-wheeled
quadricycles will be part
of the coastal defense
division, which will deploy
in Chukotka in 2018.”

“Speaking at a Defense Ministry meeting, Russian Defense Minister
Sergei Shoigu confirmed that “there are plans to form a coastal
defense division in 2018 on the Chukotka operational direction.”
Source: “Symmetrical Response: Russia will get Division of Troops 85 km
off US Border,” Sputnik Online, 28 August 2016. http://sputniknews.com/
military/20160828/1044714139/russian-coastal-defense-division-chukotka-analysis.html
Defense Analyst Sergei Ishchenko of the independent online newspaper Svobodnaya
Pressa pointed out that no other details have been provided on this future military force.
“However, it’s obvious that this is not just ordinary news, not least because what we’re
talking about is the creation of a serious military force just a stone’s throw away from the
United States: only the Bering Strait will separate the Russian coastal defense division
from Alaska. At its narrowest point, that’s only 86 km away.”
Today, the Russian military “does not actually have a single coastal defense division.
Therefore, there is no model on how it may look, and how it will be staffed. The only
similar force is based in Crimea – consisting of the 126th Separate Coastal Defense
Brigade of the Black Sea Fleet (formerly the 36th Separate Brigade of the Ukrainian
Navy, which changed sides almost in its entirety to Russia in 2014). But a brigade-sized
force is far from being a division. Its combat capabilities are much more modest.”…
Source: Aleksey Ramm, “Российская арктическая пехота пойдет в бой на
квадроциклах Читайте далее (The Russian Arctic Infantry Will Go into Battle on
Quadricycles),” Izvestia Online, 26 August 2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/628923
Informed sources in the Russian Ministry of Defense told Izvestiya of the decision to
create battalions mounted on quadricycles. The military is deciding how many new
military subunits are needed to guard the coastline of Chukotka, and which all-terrain
vehicles the arctic infantrymen will use to accomplish their missions.
“Testing of several types of quadricycles has been successfully conducted by the soldiers
of the 80th Arctic Brigade. The vehicles earned only positive responses,” a “North”
Operational Command spokesman, who is familiar with the situation, told Izvestiya.
“Of course, at first glance, it would be more logical to mount the motorized riflemen on
snowmobiles. But, first of all, they will operate in the coastal zone, where the snow is not
that deep and there are many rocks. Second, summer, even though short, still occurs in
Chukotka when the snow disappears. Snowmobiles are useless in those conditions….”

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of
the Lone Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of lowlevel guerrilla combat as told by the survivors. They cover
fighting from the cities of Grozny and Argun to the villages
of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and finally the hills, river valleys
and mountains that make up so much of Chechnya. Dodge
Billingsley, the primary author was embedded with Chechen
guerrilla forces after the first war, so he knows the country,
the culture, the key actors and the conflict. Yet, as a Western
outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and objectivity.
Fangs of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is
becoming modern and future war.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf
OE Watch | October 2016

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Large UAV Debut over Arctic Delayed
OE Watch Commentary:
Even in the Russian design
bureau world, sometimes short
development to fielding time
requirements slip. The design
bureau is not making any
statements, but the talk on the
street is against an on-time show
and cost overruns in the Altair
UAV project. The passage from
Russian-language Inkazan discuss
a Russian military expert’s views
on the cost and timeline of the
project; and the capabilities of the
Altair UAV, which are linked to
Russia’s interest in developing the
Arctic.
The Altair UAV is named after
the 12th brightest star in the sky
and part of the Aquila [Eagle]
constellation. Of interest, the
US Predator B, a functioning
large, long-range US UAV with
significant flight endurance,
was also called Altair during its
development. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“The vehicle weighs 5.5 tons, its flight endurance is over two days, and
its range is 10,000 kilometers. It will be able to climb to 12 kilometers.”
Source: ”Серийное производство разработанного в Казани беспилотника для Арктики вряд ли
начнется в 2018 году — эксперт (Mass production in Kazan drone unlikely to start in 2018 - expert),”
Inkazan, 23 August 2016. http://inkazan.ru/2016/08/23/serijnoe-proizvodstvo-razrabotannogo-vkazani-bespilotnika-dlya-arktiki-vryad-li-nachnetsya-v-2018-godu-ekspert/
“A prototype of the unmanned aircraft flew for the first time in August 2016. Tests took place in
Tatarstan. The design bureau stated that they do not comment or give out information on any project.
[Russian military expert] Fedutinov noted that news on this subject indeed is very limited. Like the
majority of other projects being carried out in support of the Russian Defense Ministry, this one is
classified. “I believe the maiden flight took place without any kind of serious incidents, since existing
experience shows it is difficult to conceal information about accidents, and this of course is a positive
sign,” Fedutinov stated.
Fedutinov reminded this publication that Sokol Experimental Design Bureau received the right to do
scientific research to create a large UAV with significant flight endurance in 2011. The development
of UAV systems is difficult and costly. At that time the amount of the contract from the Defense
Ministry was announced as one billion rubles. “The amount issued to the company for the project
presumably in late 2014 certainly was many times more. I believe the final figure will exceed planned
expenditures,” Fedutinov stated.
He further stated that the Altair UAV will be able conduct reconnaissance and data relay with the help
of communications systems. The vehicle weighs 5.5 tons, its flight endurance is over two days, and its
range is 10,000 kilometers. It will be able to climb to 12 kilometers. “It is no accident that the Arctic
is linked with development of this UAV. Russia’s interests in developing the Arctic dictates the need
for a military presence, including the need for aerial surveillance, which unmanned aviation systems
could provide” Fedutinov reasoned.”

Plumbing the Cold, Briny Depths
OE Watch Commentary:
The prime months for Arctic
exploration and training are
August and September and the
Northern Sea Fleet is busy. The
“Vizir” — Russia’s Northern Fleet
hydrographic ship — is charting the
depths, salinity and currents off the
entire Russian Arctic coast. Some
of this work may support Russia’s
claim that the underwater land mass
of Russia stretches to the North Pole.
Other findings may help determine
the limits that icebreakers of various
classes may penetrate during the
long, cold winter. Clearly, findings
will assist surface and subsurface
navigation. So its long days and,
hopefully, calm seas for the Russian
scientists bobbing in the Barents and
points eastward. The accompanying
passage from a Russian news source
discusses the expedition. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Northern Fleet hydrographic ship “Vizir”
has departed on the latest Arctic expedition.”

Source: Dmitri Grigoryev, “Гидрографы Северного флота отправились в Арктику (Northern
Fleet Hydrographers Have Headed Out to the Arctic),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 16 August 2016.
https://rg.ru/2016/08/16/reg-szfo/gidrograficheskoe-sudno-sf-vizir-ushlo-v-arkticheskuiu-ekspediciiu.
html
“The Northern Fleet hydrographic ship “Vizir” has departed on the latest Arctic expedition.
According to the Northern Fleet press office, the ship has left its permanent basing site at Mishukovo
settlement, Murmanskaya Oblast, and set course for the Barents Sea’s northern zone. What lies
ahead for the expedition is geodesic and hydrological research of the Barents, Kara, and Laptev
Seas and, if weather conditions are favorable, the East Siberian Sea.
The Northern Fleet press office reports that the expedition will last almost two months and that
the military hydrographers’ return to base is expected in October. During the expedition, new
geographical discoveries could occur in those Arctic sea water areas that are now free of icebergs.
The Russian Federation’s Ministry of Defense Press Service and Information Directorate reported
earlier that the “Vizir” had returned from its previous Arctic expedition in October last year. At that
time, the military hydrographers visited, for the first time in that Northern Fleet service’s history, a
little-studied Arctic area close to the Severnaya Zemlya Islands.
The previous expedition lasted 41 days and conducted oceanographic research at 30 geographical
locations.
Using modern apparatus, the researchers recorded the sea-floor relief in Arctic areas remote from
the Northern Fleet’s main basing locations, and also took measurements of the Kara and Barents
Seas’ depths over a route covering more than 5,000 kilometers.”
OE Watch | October 2016

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The General Staff on Kavkaz-2016
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s southern sector,
which borders primarily on Georgia and Azerbaijan
and includes the North Caucasus (Chechnya,
Dagestan, etc.), is an area bearing special attention,
according to Russia’s Chief of the General Staff,
General Valeriy Gerasimov and Deputy Defense
Minister, General Dmitriy Bulgakov. This is due not
only to the region’s past history but also as a result of
today’s ongoing confrontations in nearby Afghanistan
and Syria. For this reason Russia recently conducted
an Armed Force’s exercise known as Kavkaz-2016
in the region. The exercise paid special attention to
the state of combat readiness and level of outfitting
of troops in the Southern Military District. It also
examined problems associated with ensuring the
uninterrupted financial support of the district’s troops
in wartime. Phase one of the exercise ran from 5-7
September. It was designed to examine the border
area and learn how to isolate areas of potential use to
illegal elements. Phase two ran from 7-10 September.
It exercised command and control issues associated
with such operations. Kavkaz-2016 devoted special
attention to the development of unconventional
thinking in the operations of formations and subunits.
Operational groups of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs (MVD), the Federal Security Service (FSB),
and the Ministry of Extraordinary Situations (MChS)
also took part in the exercises. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“He [Gerasimov] stated that the Southwestern Axis is of

great importance today for ensuring the national security
of the Russian Federation. ‘This is dictated by the fact that
the belt of international instability is approaching Southern
Russia as a result of the escalation of the situation in the Near
East. This fact is moving us to take steps to preserve stability
in the North Caucasus,’ General of the Army Gerasimov
explained.”

Source: Russian Federation Defense Ministry’s Department of Information and Mass
Communication, “Chief of the Russian Federation’s Armed Forces General Staff Told
Journalists Preliminary Results of the Strategic Command and Staff Exercise Kavkaz-2016,”
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation website, 14 September 2016. http://eng.mil.ru/
en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12096033@egNews

Chief of the General Staff, General of the
Army Valery Gerasimov.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Valery_Gerasimov_%282015-05-12%29.jpg

“Special attention in the exercise was given to the redeployment of formations and military units to operating areas of simulated bandit
forces and terrorists,” General of the Army Gerasimov noted. A grouping of aviation and air defense forces executed missions in support of
the Ground Troops. Problems of delivering strikes against bases and facilities of fighters, sealing off air channels for supply of illegal armed
force elements, and repelling air strikes of the enemy supporting them were worked out. Readiness of the air defense system was checked.
Forces of the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla conducted a naval blockade of the operational area, prevented the withdrawal of bandit
forces by sea, and freed vessels seized by terrorists.
He [Gerasimov] stated that the Southwestern Axis is of great importance today for ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation.
‘This is dictated by the fact that the belt of international instability is approaching Southern Russia as a result of the escalation of the
situation in the Near East. This fact is moving us to take steps to preserve stability in the North Caucasus,’ General of the Army Gerasimov
explained.”
“In fire engagement we succeeded in working problems as part of the establishment of a unified information system, which includes receipt of
intelligence and immediate delivery of pinpoint strikes,” the head of General Staff announced.
He [Bulgakov] emphasized that with the involvement of our science new approaches to the supported process both in the organizational as
well as technical respect were worked out with consideration of Southern MD troops being reequipped with new models of arms and military
equipment and the improvement in operational preparation of its territory and infrastructure.
According to him, on the whole during the snap inspection of combat readiness, the exercises confirmed the readiness of the materialtechnical support system for supporting the mobilization deployment of troops (forces) on the Southwestern Strategic Axis, including the
transport movement of troops arriving from other strategic axes; and the capability of maneuvering supplies in support of the groupings of
troops (forces) being established.
OE Watch | October 2016

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Eastern Military District Command Staff Exercise Examined
OE Watch Commentary:
Russia’s eastern sector recently
conducted a command staff
exercise that involved a notional
enemy (played by a reinforced
motorized rifle company) and a
remotely monitored battlefield.
As the accompanying passage
from a Russian source discusses,
all types of weapons and
equipment were deployed against
a make-believe opposition, to
include Iskander-M operational
missile systems, unmanned
aerial vehicles, reconnaissance
squads, Ka-52 helicopters, BM21 Grad missile launchers, 153
mm Giatsint-S self-propelled
guns, Shmel rocket launchers,
snipers, BMP-2s, and UR-77
mine clearing vehicles. Of
interest is that, like exercise
Kavkaz-2016, the exercise
emphasized the development of
creative thought, a point often
dismissed by Western analysts of
Russia who consider the latter’s
exercises as too conscripted. The
exercise also stressed the ability
of commanders and staffs to
develop nonstandard solutions to
training tasks. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“Departing from routine procedure and seeking nonstandard solutions to
the training tasks that arise is a requirement to which the command and staff
training exercise leadership HQ gave top priority from the outset. But so,
of course, is strict observance of the demands of safety and of conducting
modern warfare competently.”
Source: Olga Kapshtyk, “Нестандартные решения. ПРИВЕТСТВУЮТСЯ (Nonstandard Solutions
[are] Welcomed),” Suvorovskiy Natisk, 2 September 2016. http://debri-dv.com/filedata/files/1718.pdf
“And now the exercise has begun. The missile formation’s personnel perform a mock ballistic missile
launch from an “Iskander-M” operational missile system. It has been executed from a training
complex in the Yevreyskaya Autonomous Oblast. The missile has successfully destroyed a target on the
Amurskaya Oblast range, having flown a distance of around 300 kilometers.
The designated targets’ destruction is clearly visible through binocular lenses. The destroyed targets
include the notional enemy’s command and control post. This enables the motorized rifle formations to
switch to an attack, which is accompanied by an intensive artillery strike.
On the improvised battlefield there is not a single draft serviceman. In action, professionals capable
of deciding the outcome of a battle in a real situation show their worth.
Departing from routine procedure and seeking nonstandard solutions to the training tasks that arise
is a requirement to which the command and staff training exercise leadership HQ gave top priority
from the outset. But so, of course, is strict observance of the demands of safety and of conducting
modern warfare competently.
During the mock offensive operation, intensive artillery bombardment is being used against the
notional enemy troops by BM-21 “Grad” missile launchers, 153-mm “Giatsint-S” self-propelled
guns, and a “Sani” mortar. From the air, a bomb attack by Su-24 bombers is being inflicted on
concentrations of the notional enemy troops. Flamethrower subunits armed with the “Shmel” infantry
rocket launcher, as well as pairs of snipers, have been mobilized in the operation. The preparations
for the combat vehicles’ offensive were made by military engineers who drove lanes through minefields
using UR-77 mine clearing vehicles.”

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading
e-journal highlighting current threats in
the Operational Environment.
It is produced by the Threats Intelligence
Support Activity (US Army TRADOC G-2)
and posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.
aspx?dpID=377.

OE Watch | October 2016

53

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Jason Warner

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Choosing Alliances, Creating Fissures: Understanding How the
Emergence of ISIS in Africa Affects the Relationships Between
Boko Haram, Al-Shebab, and Al-Qaeda
On the African continent, ISIS is the new kid on the block. Having
emerged in its current global form in approximately 20131 with operations centered primarily in Iraq and Syria, ISIS’ entrance into Africa
was more of a secondary goal. Currently, ISIS’ primary stronghold in
Africa is in Libya, especially the city of Sirte, though other locations
throughout the continent have been feeling its presence as well. As of
mid-2016, Somalia has endured at least two successful attacks by ISIS;2
Kenya has been threatened with an ISIS-related anthrax scare;3 and
South Africa was warned by the US in May 2016 that an ISIS attack
around Ramadan of that year could be likely.4
ISIS’ entrance into the African operational environment has also
meant that the group has encountered pre-existing insurgencies, many
of which hold broadly similar, Islamist goals. Among others, extant
African insurgencies operating on the African continent include those
interested in creating Islamic caliphates and ruling territories via
an ultra-conservative and violent interpretation of sharia law. Such
pre-existing groups include Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)
in West Africa, and al-Qaeda in East Africa (AQEA) in the Horn of
Africa, and other local insurgencies have, to some extent, affiliated or
considered affiliating with Al-Qaeda in these regions, including Boko
Haram in West Africa, and al-Shebab in the Horn of Africa. And,
while it might seem logical that such pre-existing Islamist insurgencies
would welcome the entrance of a similarly minded ally in the form of
ISIS, this has not necessarily been borne out in practice.
Indeed, the ways that the two regional al-Qaeda branches and their
“local” insurgent partners of Boko Haram and al-Shebab have interpreted the emergence of ISIS into their areas of operation could not
be more divergent. For its part, in March 2015, Boko Haram officially
pledged allegiance to ISIS and in so doing, effectively renounced any
allegiances to AQIM. (Yet, more recently, in August 2016, the fissures
between the former Boko Haram and ISIS were put on display, as
the latter announced the installation of a new leader of Boko Haram,
causing a split within the groups). Conversely, al-Shebab has had a
radically different relationship with ISIS. Despite overtures from ISIS
that al-Shebab should join it, al-Shebab has been staunchly opposed to
forging a relationship with ISIS and has now begun to severely punish
its members who advance pro-ISIS rhetoric or advocate for the groups’
mergers. In broad terms then, Boko Haram has adopted a decidedly
pro-ISIS outlook (recently called into question), while al-Shebab has
adopted a decidedly anti-ISIS outlook.
What accounts for these divergent outlooks on ISIS, held by the two
most prominent Islamic terrorist groups in Sub-Saharan Africa? Why
has Boko Haram seemingly been pro-ISIS, while al-Shebab is decidedly anti-ISIS? More macroscopically, what are the implications of this
divide for the US and the global community?

Boko Haram
Boko Haram is an Islamist militant group based in northeastern
Nigeria, which has, since approximately 2009 sought to create and
Islamic caliphate in that area of the country under the rule of sharia.
Under the current leadership of Abubakar Shekau, the group has attacked both government forces and Christian and Muslim civilians. As
of mid-September 2016, the group has killed an estimated 25,859.5
Of all insurgent groups in Sub-Saharan Africa, Boko Haram has
been ISIS’ most stalwart ally, at least until recently. On 7 May 2015,

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Boko Haram’s leader, Abubakar Shekau, released a message pledging
allegiance, or bayat, to ISIS. ISIS formally accepted Boko Haram’s
pledge six days later on 13 March 2015. As such, Boko Haram as a
group and the territories it holds were incorporated into ISIS as a
wilayat, or province, named Wilayat Gharb Afriqiyah (West African
Province). Boko Haram’s pledge to ISIS garnered global attention, as
it signaled a merger between the deadliest groups in both the Middle
East and Africa, creating what one observer, perhaps hyperbolically,
described as “a marriage from hell.”6
What factors led to this desire from Boko Haram to ally itself with
ISIS? On the broadest plane, ISIS and Boko Haram may be said to
hold the same goals: the carving out of caliphates in otherwise secular states in which to install sharia law. For Boko Haram, its primary
goal is to reinstall the Sokoto Caliphate that existed between 1804 and
1903; for its part, ISIS has created at least ten global wilayats around
the world, though they vary in the degree of ISIS control. Second,
there is a degree of respect between the groups for what each has
accomplished. Third, some members of Boko Haram’s admiration for
ISIS’ sophisticated use of social media, especially Twitter and YouTube.
To the latter point, some have noted that even before its merger with
ISIS, Boko Haram had increased its video production quality to mimic
those of ISIS, and had even adopted the same music as ISIS in the socalled “opening credits” of its films.7
Since their merger, politics on the ground have given credence to
the notion that the Boko Haram-ISIS alliance is more than just nominal. For one, Nigerian security forces have arrested numerous affiliates
of ISIS within the country. In January 2016, Nigerian military apprehended alleged ISIS recruiter Abdussalam Enesi Yanusa in the city of
Kano. An undergraduate at the Federal University of Technology in
Minna, Yanusa was allegedly trying to recruit Nigerians to join ISIS,
and was planning on traveling to Libya for training.8 Moreover, in
June 2016, Nigerian security forces arrested five people, again in Kano,
who were involved in an ISIS sleeper cell.9 Perhaps unsurprisingly, reports have also circulated suggesting that Nigerians – including former
and current Boko Haram affiliates – are themselves joining ISIS’ ranks
in Libya. Other instances of ISIS’ presence in Nigeria can also be felt.
Troublingly, Nigerian media outlets were abuzz when it was revealed
in May 2016 that ISIS had seemingly created a phone app, called Huroof, to teach children the alphabet through the use of images of guns,
canons, and tanks.
Yet, this “marriage from hell” hit a decidedly rocky patch in August 2016, when ISIS announced via in its newspaper that Abu Musab
al-Barnawi, had been named the new leader of Boko Haram. For his
part, Shekau quickly disavowed this change in leadership, asserting that he remained at the helm. At the heart of ISIS’ attempt at a
wholesale replacement of Shekau was his tactical choices: namely,
his tendency to allow and encourage Boko Haram to launch attacks
against Muslims, including with child suicide bombers, a trend that
ISIS found to be too radical and anathema to its interests. Since the
announcement, the once meaningful alliance between Boko Haram
and ISIS has been called into question, with members of Boko Haram
now claiming allegiances to either Shekau or al-Barnawi. Indeed, some
in Nigeria now fear that the split could in fact simply signify a clearer
division of terrorist labor between the groups, with Shekau’s faction
focusing on anti-Muslim attacks, with al-Barnawi’s faction entrenchOE Watch | October 2016

(continued)

54

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Jason Warner

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Choosing Alliances, Creating Fissures: Understanding
How the Emergence of ISIS in Africa Affects the Relationships
Between Boko Haram, Al-Shebab, and Al-Qaeda
ing itself as the anti-Christian arm of the group. Meanwhile, reports
have been rife of internecine fighting between the factions.
Indeed, even before the announcement that led to the rift between
the two, Boko Haram’s alliance with ISIS was been believed to be likely
less pronounced than had been assumed by the international community. Irrespective of their aforementioned similarities, Boko Haram
and ISIS have never been not entirely intuitive bedfellows. While ISIS
conceives of itself as waging a global jihad – with attacks like those in
Paris in November 2015 and Brussels in March 2016 –Boko Haram’s
areas of violence are generally localized to the Lake Chad Basin region,
and the countries of Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, and Chad. In short,
Boko Haram’s aspirations are far less geopolitical than ISIS’s. To that
end, in May 2016, US officials suggested that the relationship between
Boko Haram and ISIS was indeed not nearly as profound as had been
thought. With the ability to track flows of finances, they asserted that
actual transfers of cash or arms were minor. Instead, officials argued,
Boko Haram had affiliated itself with ISIS for “branding purposes”
though meaningful linkages were few.10
And yet, what of the other major terrorist group in West Africa,
AQIM? It should be noted that indeed, while Boko Haram has long
been assumed to have some connections with AQIM, their relationship has never been truly profound.11 Nevertheless, AQIM is now
engaged in a sort of turf war with Boko Haram and ISIS, fueled primarily by AQIM’s newfound sense of insecurity by being crowded out
of the insurgency landscape in West Africa. Indeed, whereas al-Qaeda
affiliates in other parts of the world – like the al-Nusra Front in Syria,
and al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula – are gaining territory, AQIM’s
territorial holdings have been undermined by ISIS’ presence, especially in Libya12, where ISIS has de facto control of the coastal city of Sirte.
As some have noted, AQIM’s early approach to ISIS’s presence in West
Africa was to allow ISIS to take the spotlight, and arguably expend its
resources in what AQIM expected to be an overzealous burnout. Yet,
this plan has backfired: as one analyst has said, “The price of quiescence from al-Qaida’s perspective is [its new] irrelevance” in West
Africa.13
As a result of this reputational insecurity, capped by Boko Haram’s
2015 alliance with ISIS, AQIM has also stepped up its own attacks
across West Africa in the past year. The primary motor keeping
AQIM’s reputation for carnage alive in West Africa is a new militant
group, called al-Mourabitoun. Formed from a merger between the
former Movement for Oneness and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO)
and the “Masked Men’s Brigade,” al-Mourabitoun officially became a
part of AQIM in December 2015. Since then, it has been unleashing a
wave of terror across West Africa, claiming three of the highest-profile terrorist attacks in that region in the past year. These included the
November 2015 attacks on the Radisson Blu hotel in Mali that killed
22; the January 2016 attacks on the Splendid Hotel in Burkina Faso
that killed 30; and the March 2016 attacks on Grand Bassam Beach in
Côte d’Ivoire that left 21 dead. Notably, al-Mourabitoun has shown the
tendency to target francophone West African countries – Mali, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire – in retribution for France’s leadership in counter-terrorism efforts throughout the Sahara and Sahel. To that end, it is
the case that the uptick in attacks from al-Mourabitoun are intended
to signal the group’s enduring relevance and capacity to carry out
high-profile lethal operations in the face of other formidable groups,
especially ISIS and Boko Haram.14

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Al-Shebab
Al-Shebab, or “the Youth,” is a fundamentalist Islamic group that
operates primarily in southern and central Somalia. Since 2006,
al-Shebab has been working to overthrow various iterations of the
central government in Somalia, based in Mogadishu. Al-Shebab
formed as a breakaway group from the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC),
a group of sharia courts from southern Somalia that attempted to control Mogadishu from June to December 2006. However, when Ethiopia invaded Somalia in 2006, along with a subsequent African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the UIC was defeated, and al-Shebab
came to rise. Since then, al-Shebab’s primary goal has been the ousting
of the current government of Somalia, as well as ridding the country
of the presence of AMISOM. To that end, al-Shebab’s tactics include
suicide and car bombings of Somalian government buildings, and
targeted killings of members of AMISOM, which is comprised primarily of troops from Kenya, Uganda, Burundi, and Ethiopia. Importantly,
al-Shebab has been an affiliate of al-Qaeda since 2012, serving as the
de facto East African branch of the group.
As opposed to Boko Haram, which has shown at least a nominal
commitment to working with ISIS, al-Shebab has been far less eager to
do so. ISIS leaders have been reaching out to al-Shebab leaders since
at least 2015. In so doing, they have asked the latter to abandon its
linkages with al-Qaeda, and instead, form “Wilayat Somalia,” or the
Somali Province of ISIS. In no uncertain terms, al-Shebab’s leader, Ahmad Umar, has rejected these overtures.15 In September 2015, al-Shebab sent out an internal memo to its members officially rejecting ISIS’
calls: this memo stated that not only would al-Shebab remain loyal to
al-Qaeda, any defectors to ISIS would be punished by death.16 And
indeed, al-Shebab has been acting on these threats. Reports continue
to circulate on social media that the al-Shebab police, known as the
Amniyat, are actively arresting ISIS sympathizers from within al-Shebab. Moreover, a senior al-Shebab official from the Middle Juba region
of southern Somalia, known for his pro-ISIS outlooks, was ambushed
and killed by other members of al-Shebab for his defiance.17 Not only
has al-Shebab put a moratorium on its own members leaving to go to
ISIS, it has also seemingly openly taken on ISIS itself, killing members
of the group who have been at the forefront of advocacy efforts to get
al-Shebab to switch allegiances.18
While al-Shebab’s September 2015 declaration stopped a wholesale changing of allegiances from al-Qaeda to ISIS, it was not entirely
successful at mitigating the attractions of ISIS: indeed, a new pro-ISIS
offshoot of al-Shebab, called Jahaba East Africa, is now serving as the
official ISIS representative group in East Africa. Jahaba East Africa
was created in October 2015 by Abdiqadir Mumin, a former senior
al-Shebab leader in the Puntland region of Somalia, along with approximately 20 followers19 from his former unit of 300 soldiers based
in the Galgala Hills.20 In April 2016, Jahaba East Africa pledged bayat
to ISIS, and in so doing, castigated al-Shebab in a public statement for
remaining affiliated with al-Qaeda, writing:
“We in Jahaba East Africa are advising all East Africans to
leave al-Shabaab and their sponsor groups, like Al-Muhajiroun, Al-Hijra and Ansar Islam….Like Al-Shabaab the sponsor groups have not understood the binding obligation of the
OE Watch | October 2016

(continued)

55

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Jason Warner

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Choosing Alliances, Creating Fissures: Understanding
How the Emergence of ISIS in Africa Affects the Relationships
Between Boko Haram, Al-Shebab, and Al-Qaeda
Khalifah (caliphate)….We are telling the mujahedeen in East
Africa that al-Shabaab has now become a psychological and
physical prison.21”
Jahaba East Africa’s members are thought to be more diverse than
al-Shebab’s. While al-Shebab is made up of primarily – though not
exclusively – ethnic Somalis, Jahaba East Africa is composed of Muslims from across east Africa, including ethnicities from Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Somalia, Sudan, and Eritrea. Reports have revealed that
the pro-ISIS and anti-ISIS split within al-Shebab has – as in the case of
Boko Haram – largely been dictated by age: older, established members of al-Shebab want to stay allied with al-Qaeda, while younger
members, especially tech-savvy ones, prefer to switch to ISIS. In no
uncertain terms, the rise of Jahaba East Africa signals ISIS’ clearest
presence in East Africa.
In the same way that ISIS’s entrance into West Africa has created
new fault lines of allegiances in that area, so too has ISIS’ entrance into
East Africa generated new forms alliance amongst insurgent groups
that stand to be exploited. While it is the case that in West Africa, the
powerhouse Islamist insurgency, Boko Haram, has allied with ISIS –
leaving erstwhile pseudo-partner al-Qaeda in the dust – in East Africa,
it is ISIS that has been left high and dry, but for the emergence of the
relatively small Jahaba East Africa. Indeed, al-Shebab’s alliance with
ISIS is hampered not only due to its desire to retain ties with al-Qaeda,
but also, to a certain extent, to the incommensurability of their goals.
Whereas ISIS holds as its goal the creation of caliphates around the
globe, al-Shebab is more parochial in its aims: it seeks instead to oust
the government in Mogadishu, which entails simultaneously chasing
out international peacekeeping forces, especially the AMISOM force,
from its area of operation.

1

For a detailed overview of the emergence of the Islamic State, see: Dews,
Fred. 2014. “Key Dates in the Rise of the Islamic State (ISIS)”. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution. http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/brookings-now/
posts/2014/12/key-dates-in-the-rise-of-the-islamic-state.
2 Meservey, Joshua. 2016. “Anthrax Terror Plot Shows ISIS’ Reach Into East
Africa.” The Daily Signal, May 6. http://dailysignal.com/2016/05/06/anthraxterror-plot-shows-isis-reach-into-east-africa.
3 Ibid.
4 Essa, Azad. 2016. “South Africa Denies ‘Imminent’ ISIL Attack in Ramadan - News from Al Jazeera.” Al-Jazeera, June 6. http://www.aljazeera.
com/news/2016/06/south-africa-denies-imminent-isil-attack-country-160606134943636.html.
5 Council on Foreign Relations.  2016. “Nigeria Security Tracker.” Accessed 18
September. http://www.cfr.org/nigeria/nigeria-security-tracker/p29483.
6 Lister, Tim. 2015. “Boko Haram + ISIS = Marriage from Hell” CNN.com, February 25. http://www.cnn.com/2015/02/25/world/boko-haram-lister-analysis/.
7 Matfess, Hillary. 2015. “How the ISIS-Boko Haram Alliance Will Alter Nigeria’s Future.” Defense One, March 15. http://www.defenseone.com/
threats/2015/03/how-isis-boko-haram-alliance-will-alter-nigerias-future/107484/.
8 Berger, Sarah. 2016. “ISIS In Africa: Alleged Islamic State Recruiter Arrested In
Nigeria.” International Business Times, February 9. http://www.ibtimes.com/
isis-africa-alleged-islamic-state-recruiter-arrested-nigeria-2300144.
9 Ahmad, Muhammad. 2016. “Nigeria’s Secret Police ‘Bust ISIS Sleeper Cells in
Kano’, Arrest 5 Suspects - Premium Times Nigeria.” Premium Times (Abuja),
June 9. http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/205009-nigeriassecret-police-bust-isis-sleeper-cells-kano-arrest-5-suspects.html.
10 No author cited. “U.S. Says No Major Link between ISIS, Boko Haram - Premium Time Nigeria.” 2016. June 9. http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/
top-news/204995-u-s-says-no-major-link-isis-boko-haram.html.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Conclusion
Several lessons should be learned from the foregoing discussion.
First, it is the case that what happens in one part of the continent
seemingly affects groups in other parts. Indeed, upon Boko Haram’s
pledge of bayat to ISIS in March 2015, it urged other Islamist groups in
Sub-Saharan Africa to follow suit.22 Moreover, others have argued that
ISIS’s more advanced internet tactics have led both Boko Haram and
al-Shebab to become sophisticated in their own use of social media, in
effect copying ISIS’ strategies.23 Yet still, other observers suggest that
a “contagion effect” is underway, where Boko Haram’s endorsement is
likely to compel other African insurgent groups – though perhaps not
al-Shebab – to ally with ISIS.24
Second, observers should recognize the fact that the entrance of
ISIS into Africa intuitively presents challenges, but also, might possibly present new opportunities to combat the groups. On one hand, it
is clear that the entrance of new extremist elements into many of the
unstable states in Africa is not a good sign. However, we might also
rightly interpret that the fissures in the contemporary African security
landscape with the entrance of ISIS might be exploited. In West Africa,
the alliance between Boko Haram and AQIM is on the rock, and the
new ruptures between the pro-Shekau and pro-Barnawi factions also
more likely signal a weakening, and not strengthening, of relations.
Meanwhile, in the Horn of Africa, a palpable antagonism between
Al-Shebab and ISIS/Jahaba East Africa is emerging, and an impending
reconciliation looks unlikely. Figuring out how to effectively exploit
the new tensions between Islamist insurgent groups in Africa should
be considered a priority for the future.

11 Cocks, Tim. 2014. “Boko Haram Too Extreme for ‘Al Qaeda in West Africa’
Brand.” Reuters, May 28. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-bokoharam-analysis-idUSKBN0E81D320140528.
12 Temple-Raston, Dina. 2016. “ISIS Competition Fuels Al-Qaida Comeback In
Africa.” NPR.org, March 15. http://www.npr.org/2016/03/15/470567037/
isis-competition-fuels-al-qaida-comeback-in-africa.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 Meservey 2016.
16 Dearden, Lizzie. 2016. “ISIS: New Terrorist Group Jahba East Africa Pledges Allegiance to ‘Islamic State’ in Somalia.” The Independent, April 8. http://www.
independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/isis-new-terrorist-group-jahba-east-africa-pledges-allegiance-to-islamic-state-in-somalia-a6974476.html.
17 Gaffey, Conor. 2015. “ISIS or Al-Qaeda? Somalia’s Al-Shabab Divided Over
Allegiance.” Newsweek, November 25. http://www.newsweek.com/isis-or-alqaeda-somalias-al-shabab-divided-over-allegiance-397772.
18 Meservey 2016.
19 Ibid.
20 Sheikh, Abdi. 2015. “Small Group of Somali Al Shabaab Swear Allegiance to
Islamic State.” Reuters, October 23. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-somalia-idUSKCN0SH1BF20151023.
21 Dearden 2016.
22 Dearden 2016.
23 Fidler, David. 2016. “Disrupt ISIS’ Online Campaign in Africa.” Defense One,
April 20. http://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2016/04/disrupt-isis-online-campaign-africa/127634/.
24 Dearden 2016.

OE Watch | October 2016

56

