fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 6
Issue #12
December 2016

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment
SPECIAL ESSAY:

The Evolution
of
Relations
p. 51

MIDDLE EAST

3 Baghdadi Threatens Turkey, Saudi Arabia and
Libya
4 ISIS Trauma Will Affect Generations
5 The Battle for Raqqa: A Kurdish Perspective
6 Iran to Take Police Training on the Road?
7 Iran: Use of Drones to Secure Mehran Border
8 Will Iraqi Kurds Fall Victim to Iran-Saudi Proxy
War?
9 Iraq’s PMF Leverage Mosul Offensive
10 Mecca and the Yemen-Saudi War’s Expanding
Scope
11 Solar Power Growth in Yemen

AFRICA

12 Russia as Mali’s New Counter-Terrorism Partner
13 The Nigerian Army’s Morale Boost: A Fallen
Soldier Gets Recognition
14 ISIS Stabbing at US Embassy in Kenya Generates
Controversy

LATIN AMERICA

15 Bolivarians Not Losing Everywhere: Nicaragua
15 Former Colombian President Uribe on FARC
Proposal
16 Colombia’s President Tries Again
16 Is Venezuela’s Resistance Falling Apart?

17 Mexican Military Industry to Produce Rockets
and Aircraft
18 More than Half of the Mexican Military Devoted
to War on Drugs
19 Brazilian Air Force Commander Announces
Eventual Personnel Cuts, Larger Investment in
Technology
20 Experts Warn of Guns for Food Trade with
Venezuela

ASIA-PACIFIC

21 China’s Challenges in the Defense Trade Industry
22 Thai Military Bearing Down on Social Media
23 Indonesia Expected to Focus on Nuclear Power
to Achieve Energy Security
24 Resentment Toward the Governor of Jakarta: A
Sign of Problems to Come?
25 DPRK Press Comments on Nukes
26 China Sites Training Deficiencies

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

27 Afghanistan’s Membership in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization
28 A Potential Driving Force Behind Georgia’s
Armed Force Reforms
29 The Investigation of the Bombing at the Chinese
Embassy in Bishkek Continues

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
30
32
34
36
38
39
41
42
44
45
46
47
47
48
49
50

Russia Adds ‘Technicals’ to its Order of Battle
Russian Artillery Brigades to Get UAVs
T-14 Armata Improvements, T-72 Modernization
The Russian Ground Forces Communication
‘Backbone’
Declining Pay and Housing Shortages in the
Russian Military
Crimean Water Problems: “Settlements are
Doomed”
Expanding Kremlin Influence in the Balkans?
Ukrainian Military Manpower Challenges
Russian UAV Defense and Developments
Russia Develops New Anti-Sonar Coating for
Submarines
Return of the Antitank Rifle
Upgrading Arctic Air Defense
Arctic Ground Forces Training Concludes Before
Onset of Polar Night
Russia Training Special Forces Helicopter
Squadrons
Russia’s National Guard to Receive “Unhackable”
Drone
Russia Supplies China with 3-D Electronic Maps
for the Su-35 Fighter

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 6 | Issue 12

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East

The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil
ON THE COVER: Turkish President Erdoğan in front of the Kocatepe Mosque in
Ankara, and Russian President Putin in front of Saint Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow.
Sources: Wikimedia Commons, GoodFreePhotos.com, kremlin.ru

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

Asia-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Steven Galluzzi
Tim Thomas

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Tyler Gartner

FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.

December | 2016

Les Grau
Joseph McConnell
Tim Thomas
				

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Keith French

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Baghdadi Threatens Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Libya
OE Watch Commentary: On 3 November, the
ISIS-affiliated al-Furqan media released a recording
by the group’s leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
The recording, which appears to be recent (due
to references to the recent death of a senior ISIS
leader and the on-going Mosul operation), contains
important messages for Turkey, Saudi Arabia
and Libya. The accompanying passages from
Turkish sources discuss these messages and their
implications.
As the passages discuss, Baghdadi threatens
attacks in Turkey and Saudi Arabia, and encourages
militants who cannot go to Iraq and Syria, to go to
Libya. He is reported to tell his fighters to “unleash
the fire of their hate” on Turkish troops fighting
them in Syria, and to take the battle into Turkey;
and that “Turkey is now within your target range,
and a target of your jihad … invade it and spread
fear where there is safety.” As for Saudi Arabia, he
is reported as telling his followers to launch attacks
targeting security forces, government officials,
members of the ruling al-Saud family and media
outlets, for “standing with the infidel elements in the
war against Sunnis and Islam in Iraq and Syria”.
ISIS has attacked Turkey many times, however
in the past, it would not claim responsibility for its
attacks there. (For more information, see Special
Essay: “Attack on Istanbul Airport: ISIS’s Evolving
Strategy and Implications,” OE Watch, August
2016.) As discussed in the second passage, this
points to a new chapter in ISIS strategy towards
Turkey, where the group will now start claiming
responsibility for attacks. Indeed, the next day, the
group claimed responsibility for an attack in the
southeastern town of Diyarbakir in Turkey, which
killed eight people and injured 100.
ISIS is currently being squeezed in Syria and
Iraq. It is well known that the group resorts to
terrorist attacks outside its own territories when
it feels squeezed, in order to show that it is still
strong. As the Mosul and Raqqa operations against
ISIS strongholds unfold, it is highly likely that the
group will carry the fight once more into one of its
closest targets-Turkey, as the first passage claims.
Baghdadi’s call for fighters to head to Libya is
also an extension of this. The third passage is by
a Turkish military expert, who suggested a year
ago that, as the group gets cornered in its own
territory, it would try to expand and diversify its
fronts globally, by spreading out into Libya (and
other regions like Yemen, the Sinai Peninsula and
Afghanistan). End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“...[I]t is widely accepted that ISIS will want to carry the
fight to other regions and one of these regions will be its
neighbor, Turkey. This will be Turkey’s inevitable destiny.”
Source: Gülener Kirnali, “Bağdadi: ‘Türkiye’yi işgal edin ve güvenli yuvalarına
korku salın’ (Baghdadi: ‘Invade Turkey and spread fear in their safe homes’),”
Medyaskope.tv, 3 November 2016, http://medyascope.tv/2016/11/03/bagdaditurkiyeyi-isgal-edin-guvenli-yuvalarina-korku-salin/
“... [The] Baghdadi recording published by the ISIS-affiliated Al Furqan media
organ, is Baghdadi’s first message since December 2015. It is unclear when the
message was recorded, but references to al Adnani— ISIS’s number two, who was
killed in August— suggests that it is recent. In his message, Baghdadi calls for
attacks on Turkey and Saudi Arabia.
Baghdadi tells his militants that the Turkish soldiers fighting them in Syria are
“equal to dogs” and says, “You can now unleash the fire of your hate towards
Turkish soldiers. Turkey is now within your target range, and a target of your
jihad. Invade it and spread fear where there is safety.”
As for Saudi Arabia, whom Baghdadi says “stands with the infidel elements in
the war against Sunnis and Islam in Iraq and Syria,” he calls on his militants to
target security forces, government officials, the Saud family members and media
organizations. In addition, Baghdadi calls on those militants who cannot go to
Syria and Iraq, to head to Libya and for all ISIS fighters to stick together.”

“One of the strategies that ISIS implements ... is to spread
and diversify its fronts in the Sunni geography. It is trying
to spread into regions like Yemen, Libya, the Sinai Peninsula
and Afghanistan...”
Source: Ruşen Çakır, “Bağdadi’nin Turkiye’ye Tehdidi [Video] (Baghdadi’s Threat
to Turkey [Video]),” Periscope.com, 3 November 2016. http://rusencakir.com/
Periscope/Bagdadinin-Turkiyeye-Tehdidi/1535
“Baghdadi encourages militants who cannot go to Iraq and Syria, to go to Libya.
There are also sections that directly affect Turkey. He points to Turkey as a target,
along with Saudi Arabia.
...
This signals a new era because ISIS will likely start claiming responsibility for
its attacks on Turkey.... If [the group] loses Mosul, and with the upcoming Raqqa
operation, it is widely accepted that ISIS will want to carry the fight to other
regions and one of these regions will be its neighbor, Turkey. This will be Turkey’s
inevitable destiny. Turkey is the number one country what will be affected by ISIS
spreading the war.”
Source: Metin Gürcan, “IŞİD’le yaklaşan savaşı anlama kılavuzu (A guide to
understanding the imminent war with ISIS),” t24.com, 13 November 2015, http://
t24.com.tr/yazarlar/metin-gurcan/isidle-yaklasan-savasi-anlama-kilavuzu,13214
“One of the strategies that ISIS implements in order to not be caged in Syria, is to
spread and diversify its fronts in the Sunni geography. It is trying to spread into
regions like Yemen, Libya, the Sinai Peninsula and Afghanistan, in an effort to be a
big force that would not be defeated by global powers such as the U.S. and Russia.”
OE Watch | December 2016

3

MIDDLE EAST

Top

ISIS Trauma Will Affect Generations
OE Watch Commentary: As the battle
to re-take Mosul from ISIS continues, there
is an inconvenient issue that is not being
discussed. It is the fact that Mosul society
has been under ISIS rule for over two
years, during which time ISIS schools and
training camps have been widespread. As
the accompanying passages discuss, up to
one million children have been indoctrinated
with ISIS propaganda; where the group
trained children on how to make bombs and
how to kill. There is a generation who will
need an army of psychiatrists to undo what
ISIS did, given this “education”, and the
post-traumatic symptoms of living under
ISIS’s brutal rule. The accompanying pieces
discuss the effects of ISIS rule on future
generations; and the potential threat it may
pose for the West.
The first passage, by a Syrian news agency
notes that Iraqi children have suffered
horribly under ISIS rule. It points out that
ISIS prohibited education for girls, and
taught a jihadi curriculum to boys which
emphasized militarism. Similarly, the
second passage notes that up to a million
children have been subject to an “extremist
curriculum that teaches how to make
bombs and cut off heads.” These children
have regularly been forced to watch gory
propaganda videos on killing and making
bombs.
The third passage by a Kurdish news
source notes that doctors claim many who
have fled Mosul will remain “psychologically
scarred for life.” The passage quotes a
psychologist with Doctors Without Borders
who says that, “It is not only the current
generation who will be affected by that
trauma but the coming generation as well.
It’s not affecting that person alone. It goes
genetically to the other generations.”
The final piece discusses a Europol report
which claims that children raised under the
group’s rule are of “particular concern.”
The report notes that ISIS trains minors
to become the next generation of foreign
terrorist fighters, which may pose a future
security threat to European Union member
states. The piece also quotes a researcher
as saying that these children pose an
immediate and long-term threat because
their educational indoctrination breeds
hatred against the West. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“Approximately one million children living under ISIS in Iraq

have been forced to learn from an extremist curriculum that
teaches how to make bombs and cut off heads... Children living
under ISIS’ rule are regularly forced to watch gory propaganda
videos and guides on killing and making bombs...”
Source: “Children of Mosul speak of ISIS atrocities, want to return to school,” Aranews.net,
23 October 2016, http://aranews.net/2016/10/children-mosul-speak-isis-atrocities/
“Iraqi children have suffered horribly under the Islamic State’s (ISIS) theocratic rule...
Wherever ISIS exerted control, it prohibited education for girls and restricted it for boys.
When schools were open, they were forced to teach a jihadi curriculum which emphasized
militarism and their Islamic Tafsir, a limited exegesis.”
Source: Bethan McKernan, “ISIS ‘teaching Mosul’s children how to kill and make bombs in
school’, say Iraqi parents,” Independent.co.uk, 7 November 2016, http://www.independent.
co.uk/news/world/middle-east/isis-children-extremist-propaganda-mosul-offensivelatest-a7402986.html
“Approximately one million children living under ISIS in Iraq have been forced to learn from
an extremist curriculum that teaches how to make bombs and cut off heads...
Children living under ISIS’ rule are regularly forced to watch gory propaganda videos and
guides on killing and making bombs, father of five Hamid said.”
Source: Glenn Field, “Trauma of ISIS war will affect generations, say doctors,” Rudaw.net,
31 October 2016, http://rudaw.net/english/kurdistan/301020163
“Those living at the Dibaga camp in the Kurdistan Region are grateful for having survived
the brutalities that ISIS has committed in Iraq over the last two years. Although the worst
may be over for tens of thousands in the facility, doctors fear that many will remain
psychologically scarred for life.
“There is a shock through generations,” Dr. Abdul Halim, a psychologist from Doctors
Without Borders (MSF, Médecins sans frontières) at Dibaga camp for internally displaced
persons (IDPs), told Rudaw.
“It is not only the current generation who will be affected by that trauma but the coming
generation as well. It’s not affecting that person alone. It goes genetically to the other
generations.”
Source: Lizzie Dearden, “ISIS training children of foreign fighters to become ‘next
generation’ of terrorists,” Independent.co.uk, 29 July 2016, http://www.independent.co.uk/
news/world/middle-east/isis-training-children-of-foreign-fighters-to-become-next-generationof-terrorists-a7162911.html
“In its annual report on terrorism in the European Union, Europol said children raised
under the group’s rule are of “particular concern”. In their propaganda, Isis has often
shown that they train these minors to become the next generation of foreign terrorist
fighters, which may pose a future security threat to member states,” the Europol report said.
“Some returnees will perpetuate the terrorist threat to the European Union via facilitation,
fundraising recruitment and radicalisation activities. They may also serve as role models for
future would-be violent jihadists.”
“They are an immediate threat and will become a much longer-term one,” said [a senior
researcher from the Quilliam Foundation]. “Their educational indoctrination breeds hatred
against the West and calls all other states illegitimate – these children will have no access to
or memory of any other ideas.”
OE Watch | December 2016

4

MIDDLE EAST

Top

The Battle for Raqqa: A Kurdish Perspective
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 November,
Operation ‘Wrath of the Euphrates’ was launched to
liberate the ISIS stronghold of Raqqa in Syria. The
operation was initiated by the Kurdish-led Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF). The excerpted article
from an interview with a Kurdish commander
provides the Kurdish perspective on the battle. The
commander discusses the planned stages of the
operation and has important messages about his
group’s goals.
The Kurdish Commander interviewed is
Sipan Hemo, a commander with the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units (YPG). Hemo notes that
preparations have been going on for two months.
He discusses that in the first phase, Raqqa will be
encircled from the north, east and west. He notes
their plans that, once they reach the Euphrates
River in the first phase, then a second phase will
be planned against the Raqqa town center. He says,
“From the experience gained at Manbij, where the
operation lasted 73 days, we know the liberation of
Raqqa’s center will take time.”
Hemo discusses that the liberation and
administration of Raqqa will be similar to the
process followed in Manbij. He notes the role of
local forces will be more pronounced at Raqqa.
Thus, the policy of assisting in the liberation of
Arab-dominated areas and then handing over control
to a local assembly won’t change. Hemo says, “The
Raqqa Military Council is made up of exclusively
of people from Raqqa. The Kurds have no goal
of remaining in Raqqa... There is no intention of
having Raqqa join the Rojava [Syrian Kurdistan]
Northern Syria Democratic Federation. The people
of Raqqa will decide their future themselves.”
When asked if they expect an offensive move
from Turkey and what the Kurdish reaction would
be if this happened, Hemo says: “We don’t want to
be seen provoking Turkey. We are at war against
[ISIS] in our own country. This is not an anti-Turkey
operation.” This is an important message to Turkey,
whose leaders have repeatedly said (as noted in the
third passage) that they would not tolerate a large
Kurdish role in the attack on Raqqa over fears that
this would expand Kurdish-controlled areas in
Syria. It is also an important message to the locals
of Raqqa.
Raqqa has been under ISIS control since 2014. The
long-term plan for seizing, holding and governing
Raqqa is still unclear. Raqqa is a predominantly
Arab and Sunni city and a Kurdish assault on Raqqa
would be unpopular inside Raqqa. As Hemo notes,
this is not something the Kurds intend either. End
OE Watch Commentary (Kaya).

“In the first phase, Raqqa will be encircled from the north,

east and west... Once we reach the Euphrates River in the
first phase, then a second phase will be planned against the
town center. From the experience gained at Manbij, where
the operation lasted 73 days, we know the liberation of
Raqqa’s center will take time.” — YPG General Commander

Source: Fehim Tastekin, “Kürt perspektifinden Fırat’ın Gazabı (The Wrath of the
Euphrates from a Kurdish perspective),” Al Monitor.com, 8 November 2016, http://
www.al-monitor.com/pulse/tr/originals/2016/11/turkey-syria-euphrates-from-kurdishperspective.html
“What are the conditions for the Kurds to participate in the Raqqa operation? What
kind of an operation is planned? Who will govern Raqqa once the dust settles?
Al-Monitor asked these fundamental questions to the YPG General Commander
Sipan Hemo. According to Hemo, Kurds are cooperating with the coalition in the
Raqqa operation. He said, “Preparations have been going on for two months... In
the first phase, Raqqa will be encircled from the north, east and west. This operation
should not take long. Once we reach the Euphrates River in the first phase, then a
second phase will be planned against the town center. From the experience gained at
Manbij, where the operation lasted 73 days, we know the liberation of Raqqa’s center
will take time.”
Hemo added, “The plan for the liberation and then administration of Raqqa will not
be different from Manbij. Actually, the role of local forces will be more pronounced
at Raqqa. The policy of assisting in the liberation of Arab-dominated areas and then
handing over control to a local assembly won’t change. The Raqqa Military Council is
made up of exclusively of people from Raqqa. The Kurds have no goal of remaining in
Raqqa. The Kurds will not come from Qamishli, Kobani and Hasakah to run Raqqa.
There is no intention of having Raqqa join the Rojava Northern Syria Democratic
Federation. The people of Raqqa will decide their future themselves.”
...
When asked if they expect an offensive move from Turkey and what the Kurdish
reaction would be if this happened, Hemo said: “We don’t want to be seen provoking
Turkey. We are at war against [IS] in our own country. This is not an anti-Turkey
operation.”
Source: “YPG withdraws forces from Manbij and heads for Raqqa,” Rudaw.net, 16
November 2016, http://rudaw.net/english/middleeast/syria/16112016
The Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG) announced on Wednesday that
they have withdrawn their forces from the northern Syrian city of Manbij after
enabling local forces to protect the city, adding that the withdrawn units will join
the US-backed Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) in the operation to retake the ISIS
stronghold of Raqqa.
“We announce the withdrawal of our forces to east of the Euphrates to take part in
the “the Wrath of the Euphrates” to liberate Raqqa.” the YPG General Command said
in a statement.
Source: Amberin Zaman, “US promises Turkey role in Raqqa in surprise Ankara
meeting,” Al Monitor.com, 7 November 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2016/11/us-turkey-appease-kurdish-forces-sdf-raqqa-islamic-state.
html#ixzz4QBSRwpzx
“Turkey continues to voice its opposition to the alliance because of the very close
links between the SDF’s Kurdish component, known as the People’s Protection Units
(YPG), and the Kurdistan Workers Party, the Kurdish rebel group that is fighting for
Kurdish autonomy inside Turkey.”
OE Watch | December 2016

5

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran to Take Police Training on the Road?
OE Watch Commentary: “Export of Revolution”
is the raison d’être of the Islamic Republic of Iran
according to Iran’s constitution and the founding
statutes of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC). Traditionally, it has been
the elite Quds Force which has
been the vanguard of revolutionary
export. The Quds Force has trained
militias and proxies in Lebanon,
Iraq, and possibly in Yemen as
well. The accompanying passage
suggests that there may now be a
new component and strategy to
this mission.
The Law Enforcement Forces
(LEF)—essentially a police
force which also takes on some
paramilitary functions—is an
important but under-discussed
component of Iran’s internal
security. The comments in the
excerpted article by the LEF
commander Gen. Hossein Ashtari
about the readiness of the LEF to
train corollary groups “in countries
where Iran has defense and
security attaches” suggest that Iran
is expanding its efforts to rebuild
other countries in its own image.
Training the police in Lebanon (where the pro-Hezbollah
Michel Aoun’s rise to the presidency confirms growing
Iranian influence), Iraq, or Yemen would help Iran
solidify control and influence in its new ‘near abroad.’
Ashtari’s export of LEF training —if it occurs—
would suggest that the Qods Force and its proxies
like Hezbollah will be the mechanisms by which Iran
expands its influence; while the LEF becomes the
strategy by which Iran establishes proxies to consolidate
that influence.
In recent years, Iranian authorities have also discussed
exporting the paramilitary Basij model to other
countries. Should this come to pass, it would create an
indoctrination and recruitment mechanism in schools,
universities, and workplaces throughout Iranianinfluenced countries including Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon.
In December 2011, Ali Saidi, Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei’s representative to the IRGC, gave religious
justification to the push to expand the Basij beyond
Iran’s borders. “There is a need for 100 million Basijis
in the region before the Imam of the Era can emerge,”
he said. That expansion of the Basij, however, appears to
remain more in the realm of regime rhetoric than reality.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“We have the necessary expertise to…conduct training [in]
the field of police and security.”

Law Enforcement Forces parade in the Western Iranian town of Asadabad.
Source: http://www.dana.ir/File/ImageThumb_0_608_458/431843

Source: “Amadegi Iran Baraye Entighal-e Tejarbiyat-e Mamorit-haye Amniyati
va Polisi beh Sayar Kashvarha (Iran ready to transfer experiences of police and
security missions to other countries),” Tasnim News, 31 October 2016, www.
tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/08/10/1227217/‫یگدامآ‬-‫ناریا‬-‫یارب‬-‫لاقتنا‬‫تایبرجت‬-‫تیرومام‬-‫یاه‬-‫یتینما‬-‫و‬-‫یسیلپ‬-‫هب‬-‫ریاس‬-‫اهروشک‬

Iran Ready to Train Police and Security Abroad
Gen. Hossein Ashtari, commander of the Law Enforcement Forces, on the third
day of the first joint conference of military attaches, defense representatives,
and armed police of the Islamic Republic of Iran, with appreciation for the
stakeholders at the conference, said, “This joint meeting is very good and will
no doubt bring valuable results. Military attachés, representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran are in different countries of the world and thank God that
today our country is in an excellent position of security, and these dear ones are
reflected in the capability and capacity of the country on an international level
as well as in the experience and capacities of the countries in which they are
present….”
Gen. Ahstari reiterated that “We also announced our readiness for all the
countries where we have defense and security attaches to know that we have
the necessary expertise to exchange experiences and conduct training [in] the
field of police and security.” He stated that, on security issues today, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has the best possible conditions, and said, “These privileged
positions have been achieved due to the blood of the martyrs, the policies of the
supreme commander, and the jihadi spirit of our armed forces.”
OE Watch | December 2016

6

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Use of Drones to Secure Mehran Border
OE Watch Commentary:
Iran continues to press
indigenous unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) into action.
In the article excerpted here, a
colonel in a provincial Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC) unit describes how they
have used UAVs to secure Iran’s
Mehran border with Iraq during
a yearly pilgrimage in which
millions of Shi’ite Muslims
travel to the city of Karbala in
Iraq.

“The IRGC used UAVs for the security of Arba’in along the
Mehran border.”

The Arba’in commemorations
are a Shi‘ite holiday marking
the 40th day anniversary
of Ashura, which is a
commemoration of the death
of the Prophet Mohammad’s
grandson Imam Hussein at Karbala in 680 AD.
Pilgrim traffic has increased exponentially since
the fall of Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq. That
local units now have their own UAVs and operate
them routinely for surveillance—including security of
large crowds—suggests that they have become wellintegrated into the Iranian armed forces at a local level.
It suggests that provincial IRGC units have specialized
personnel to maintain and fly UAVs, in addition to the
real time ability to monitor video feeds and identify
threats and/or targets.
At the same time, the need to press UAVs into service
for border surveillance is a reflection that Iran continues
to worry about instability bleeding across its border
from Iraq and the vulnerability of crowds to terrorist
threats. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

An IRGC UAV operating over Iran’s mountainous border region.
Source: Mehr News Agency, https://goo.gl/Q4DeqT

Source: “Istifadeh az Pehpad Towsat Sepah baraye Tamim Amniyat Arba’in dar
Morz-e Meran (The Use of Drones by the IRGC in order to Secure Arba’in along
the Mehran Border),” Mehr News Agency, 3 November 2016, mehrnews.com/
news/3814356/‫مهران‬-‫مرز‬-‫در‬-‫اربعین‬-‫امنیت‬-‫تامین‬-‫برای‬-‫سپاه‬-‫توسط‬-‫پهپاد‬-‫از‬-‫استفاده‬

The Use of Drones by the IRGC to Secure the Border
Col. Abdul Sahab Tahmasbi, in a conversation with the Mehr News Agency, said,
the Ilam Province Amir al-Mu’minin Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
unit has complete readiness to serve the pilgrims along the Mehran border and
has mobilized all of its resources in the area. He said, the Amir al-Mu’minin
IRGC unit of Ilam is ready to serve in different capacities for the security of the
movement of ‘Ashura pilgrims in the Mehran sector of the border’. Tahmasbi
reported about the use of UAVs by the IRGC for the security of Arba’in along the
Mehran border, and said they had prepared accommodation for 10,000 pilgrims
and there had been a massive gathering along the international border at Mehran.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is produced by the Threats Intelligence Support
Activity (US Army TRADOC G-2) and posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377.
OE Watch | December 2016

7

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Will Iraqi Kurds Fall Victim to Iran-Saudi Proxy War?
OE Watch Commentary: In recent years,
the proxy war between Saudi Arabia and
Iran has expanded from Syria to Yemen and
perhaps Bahrain as well. In Syria, Saudi-backed
opposition groups fight the Bashar al-Assad
regime which Iran supports via its Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), Basij
‘volunteers,’ and Lebanese Hezbollah. In Yemen,
Saudi forces are involved in fighting the Houthis,
whom the IRGC has trained and Iran has armed.
In Bahrain, the government has intercepted
alleged IRGC arms shipments to sectarian Shi‘ite
opposition groups.

“The Barzanis must know that they are indebted to Iran.”

Alas, the tension between Iran and Saudi
Arabia may soon expand more forcibly into Iraqi
Kurdistan according to the excerpted article in the
Islamic Student News Agency. In a recent speech
about events in Iran’s neighborhood, General
Yahya Safavi noted that Masoud Barzani, de facto
president of Iraqi Kurdistan Region, has allowed
the Saudi consulate to arm groups intent on
operating against the Iranian regime; adding that
Iran may cut off help to the Barzanis “if they enter
these political games.” This may be a reference
to the ongoing Kurdish insurgency inside Iran or
The Haj Omran border crossing between Iran and Iraqi Kurdistan
Source: Iraq Business News, http://goo.gl/4B9KXW
perhaps the Baluchi insurgency in southeastern
Iran which Iranian authorities have long
believed Saudi Arabia to be behind.
Source: “Ravabati Khubi ba Turkiye Darim Ama dar Mosaeli Siyasi ba Iran Raghabat Mikonad
(We Have Good Relations with Turkey although it competes with Iran on political issues),”
Alternately, Safavi—who commanded
Islamic Student News Agency, 7 November 2016. www.isna.ir/news/95081711682/‫یطباور‬the IRGC for a decade until 2007
‫یبوخ‬-‫اب‬-‫هیکرت‬-‫میراد‬-‫اما‬-‫رد‬-‫لئاسم‬-‫یسایس‬-‫اب‬-‫ناریا‬-‫تباقر‬
and now advises Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei—may simply be seeking to
The senior military advisor to the Supreme Leader said, “The alliance of the Americans has
warn Barzani that Iran considers Iraqi
so far failed to control the situation and the Syrian people have made good on their resistance.”
Kurdistan to be part of its ‘near abroad’
Gen. Safavi, with reference to the final stages of liberation of Aleppo, emphasized, “Presumably,
and that Tehran will not tolerate the
they will move toward Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and Libya after the liberation of Mosul, and there will
presence of competitors in the region.
be tensions between [Masoud] Barzani and the Turks….”
This could herald further insecurity for
Safavi noted, “Regarding the fact that [de facto Kurdish President] Masoud Barzani has allowed
Iraqi Kurdistan, the region, and forces
the Saudi consulate to give arms to anti-revolutionaries, the Barzanis must know that they are
present in the region to which Iranian
indebted to Iran.” He added, “The Iraqi Kurds are Aryans and their roots are Iranian… They
authorities are hostile. End OE Watch
must know that if they enter these political games, it is unclear if Iran will help them anymore.”
Commentary (Rubin)

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the
state became independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation
with Russia, the United States and other partners, but there have also been internally driven efforts that could
have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past several years has been the increase in
the number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have contract
soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end 2016. While the result has yet to be announced,
an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this
effort has been progressing and the impact this could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and
on the Central Asian region.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20-%20Transition%20in%20the%20Armed%20Forces%20of%20Kazakhstan%20-%20From%20Conscripts%20to%20Contract%20Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | December 2016

8

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iraq’s PMF Leverage Mosul Offensive
OE Watch Commentary: The ongoing
Mosul offensive is likely to enhance
the military and political influence of
the Shi’a Popular Mobilization Forces
(PMF) in Iraq. Prevented from entering
the ISIS-held city for fears of sectarian
backlash from its (predominantly Sunni)
residents, the PMF are deployed to
Mosul’s south and west, purportedly to
isolate the city from ISIS-held territory in
Syria. Critics fear that the PMFs in fact
seek to establish a secure land corridor
linking Iran to Syria via Iraq. As the first
accompanying article argues, this Iranian
strategic goal helps explain the PMF’s
eagerness to move toward Tel Afar in late
October, despite an alleged promise to
refrain from doing so.
The PMF’s legal status remains murky
but appears headed toward greater
institutionalization, thanks in part to the
Mosul offensive. Several months ago,
the Iraqi prime minister’s office issued
“Office Order 91.” According to a PMF
official cited in the second excerpt,
this decree turns the PMF into a force
resembling Iran’s Revolutionary Guard,
“a military force that is part of the Iraqi
state, but not part of the Iraqi army.”
Office Order 91 has paved the way for
a parliamentary bill to formally make
the PMF a state entity. The bill was put
forth for discussion concurrently with the
Mosul offensive.
The PMF would certainly benefit from
greater institutionalization, as would their
backers in Iran. According to the third
accompanying excerpt, strengthening
the PMF entails substantial domestic
risks including added financial burdens
on the Iraqi state, growing warlordism
in the political class, and subservience to
Iranian foreign policy as the PMF would
become “the Iranian regime’s parallel
army in Iraq.” The institutionalization of
the PMF would make them the guarantors
of the political system enshrined in Iraq’s
2005 constitution. This system virtually
guarantees Shi’a dominance over the Iraqi
state through a system of ethno-sectarian
quotas. As the article notes, “Iraq’s postMosul battles may well revolve around
the legitimacy of this political order.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Above: Popular Mobilization Forces logo.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/0/03/Popular_Mobilization_Forces_Logo_
Official_1.jpg
Right: Iraqi map with purported Iranian-controlled route
highlighted.
Source: Author, based on http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/
middle_east_and_asia/iraq_cia_2003.jpg

Source:
‫ ألف مقاتل لممر آمن إلى دمشق‬23 ‫سليماني يقود‬
“Suleimani Commands 23,000 Fighters for a Safe Corridor to Damascus,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 31
October 2016. https://www.alaraby.co.uk/politics/2016/10/31/-‫إلى‬-‫آمن‬-‫لممر‬-‫مقاتل‬-‫ألف‬-23-‫يقود‬-‫سليماني‬
‫دمشق‬
Taking Mosul isn’t important to Tehran, quite the opposite in fact, as a delay or failure for the
army and the international coalition in liberating Mosul means they will fully vacate Tel Afar…
The 389-kilometer road is open and paved and it takes around five hours by car to go from the
Iranian border with the city of Kalar in Diyala Province, to the Syria-Iraq border via Tel Afar.
This is a shorter route that the former Anbar road which has been closed for three years…
Source: “What are Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Units doing in Beirut?” Al-Monitor, 18 August
2016. www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/08/lebanon-host-secret-meeting-iraq-pmuswestern-diplomats.html
“We will be a military force that is part of the Iraqi state, but not part of the Iraqi army. This is
due to many reasons that we explained to them, namely the corruption spread within the Iraqi
government institutions, and I think they understood our point of view. We made it clear that
we will be an alternative army subordinated to the state, just like Iran’s [Islamic] Revolutionary
Guard Corps.”
Source:
‫الحشد الشعبي… نحو مؤسسة رسمية في العراق‬
“The PMFs… Toward an Official Iraqi Institution,” Rawabet Center, 11 November 2016. http://
rawabetcenter.com/archives/34891
The draft law being proposed by the National Coalition (Shi’a) gives PMF fighters privileges
like those granted to members of the Iraqi Ministry of Defense. These include relatively high
wages vis-à-vis civilian institutions. The draft requires the government to arm the PMF, secure
all of their logistical needs, and task them with liberating the provinces under ISIS control… the
PMFs will increase Iraq’s economic burden especially given that the Iraqi state has been in a
crushing economic crisis for years. This will be accompanied by a security crisis, as the PMF’s
component units, even if incorporated into Iraqi state institutions, will continue receiving orders
from party leaders rather than the government… The PMF will become the Iranian regime’s
parallel army in Iraq and will be that country’s tool to intervene in Arab affairs and shake its
stability… The dark tunnel Iraq is entering will not end with the end of ISIS, but rather this will
mark the start of new sectarian battles, including related to the PMFs and the confirmation of
sectarian quotas in ruling over Iraq.
OE Watch | December 2016

9

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Mecca and the Yemen-Saudi War’s Expanding Scope
OE Watch Commentary: When Saudi Arabia began
bombing Yemen in March 2015, many of Yemen’s
ballistic missile systems had been removed from their
bases and scattered in caves and underground shelters
in the mountains surrounding the capital Sana’a and in
the northern province of Saada. The Yemeni arsenal
included Scud-type missiles that were subsequently
modified for extended range (800 km) and a heavier
warhead (500 kg). In September 2016, Yemeni forces
loyal to the Sana’a-based government run by deposed
president Ali Abdullah Saleh and the Huthi Movement
unveiled these modified missiles, calling them Burkan-1
(Volcano-1) and threatening to launch them toward the
Saudi city of Jeddah.
As with the other ballistic missiles in possession
of Saleh-Huthi forces, the Burkan-1 does not appear
capable of penetrating Saudi Arabia’s air defense
systems. Nevertheless, even if they are neutralized
on the battlefield, these “indigenously produced” (i.e.
modified) missiles add great value to the Huthi-Saleh
informational campaign, wherein every launch is
described as a direct hit causing major damage. Put on
the defensive, Saudi Arabian authorities are forced to
refute these statements and make the case that every
Yemeni missile targeting Saudi soil has in fact been
successfully intercepted.
In late October, Huthi-Saleh forces claimed a
Burkan-1 launch targeting an airbase near Jeddah.
Saudi authorities countered that the missile’s target was
in fact the holy city of Mecca, around 60 kilometers
east of Jeddah. As the first accompanying article notes,
the Saudis also claimed that the missile had been
launched from a mosque in Saada, where according to a
“high level Yemeni source” young students were being
trained on “how to storm Mecca’s holy sites.”
The Huthis were quick to brush off the accusation,
as the second article shows. Yet for once, the Huthis
were on the defensive about a missile launch. As the
third excerpt notes, Saudi Arabian allies throughout
the Sunni Muslim community were quick to issue
condemnations of the attack, in a show of support
undoubtedly greeted with pleasure in Riyadh. However,
as the fourth accompanying article notes, bringing
Mecca into discussions about the Yemen-Saudi war
carries its own risks for the Saudi regime. The article’s
author, a former Yemeni ambassador opposed to the
Huthis-Saleh alliance, argues that doing so distracts
from the domestic factors fueling the Yemeni conflict.
This makes it harder to defeat the Huthis in Yemen
while at the same time inadvertently bolstering Iran’s
argument that a neutral body, rather than the Saudi
ruling family, should take custody of Islam’s holy sites.
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… you remove the Huthi rebellion from the narrow
context of being a rebellion against the Yemeni people
and place it in the broader context of a rebellion against
the Islamic World …”
Source:
‫ الصاروخ الذي استهدف مكة أطلق من مسجد‬:‫عسيري‬
“Asiri: The Missile Targeting Mecca Was Launched From a Mosque,” Al-Arabiya,
29 October 2016. https://goo.gl/1mBLq0
The adviser in the Saudi Defense Ministry said that the ballistic missile that was
shot down was launched from a mosque in Saada. Coalition aircraft destroyed the
launcher… A high level Yemeni source said that Huthi militia leaders had recently
begun to discuss what they called the “Raid of Mecca” in various military bases.
Teachers in Huthi-controlled cities were starting to teach students of middle and
high school how to storm Mecca’s holy sites, while also encouraging students to
drop their studies and fight jihad in the Huthi ranks, in order to bring the Kaaba
back to Sana’a.
Source:
‫ العدو السعودي بانتظار الهدف القادم‬.. ‫بركان جدة‬
“Jeddah Volcano… The Saudi Enemy Awaits the Next Target,” Al-Masira, 31
October 2016. https://goo.gl/CvcS6F
The Saudi enemy cured its confusion with lies which once uncovered are yet
another proof of the precision of the military and popular committees in terms of
precision in hitting their target (King Abd al-Aziz Airbase). When the Saudi enemy
claims that the missile targeted the holy city of Mecca, most of its allies, as well as
the Arab League and others sought to disseminate this big lie.
Source:
‫تنديد عربي وإسالمي واسع بإطالق الحوثيين صاروخا ً على مكة‬
“Broad Arabic and Islamic Condemnation of Huthis Launching Missile Toward
Mecca,” 28 October 2016. Al-Arabiya, https://goo.gl/uKpXAl
The wave of anger grew in the Islamic World after the Huthi militia targeted
holy sites in the western part of Saudi Arabia with a ballistic missile that was
intercepted by the Arab coalition’s defenses and fell some tens of kilometers
outside of Mecca. On Friday, the Gulf Cooperation Council and several countries
condemned the Huthis missile launch…
Source:
‫الحوثي لم يقصف مكة‬
“The Huthis did not Bomb Mecca,” Al-Tagheer. 30 October 2016. http://www.
al-tagheer.com/art34757.html
When the Huthis’ adversary rushes to show that shooting a missile in the
direction of Mecca equals targeting the holy site, you naively remove the war from
its limited context and place it in a broader context, bringing out the sectarian
and religious elements and characterizing the war as a sectarian religious
conflict which requires Pakistan and Indonesia to support Mecca and gives Iran,
Iraq’s Shia, and Russia the right to support the Shia Huthi… By doing this you
remove the Huthi rebellion from the narrow context of being a rebellion against
the Yemeni people and place it in the broader context of a rebellion against the
Islamic World… you push neutral Islamic countries to adopt a project to make
Mecca a neutral Islamic city, administered by an Islamic organization, as is the
case with the Vatican and Christians, and as sectarian Iran has called for.
OE Watch | December 2016

10

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Solar Power Growth in Yemen
OE Watch Commentary: Solar energy has emerged
as a major growth industry in war-torn Yemen. As the
accompanying articles discuss, solar power in Yemen meets
needs created by the war, rather than being a deliberate plan
for renewable energy. As such, demand for solar panels is
expected to increase in the coming years. The market is driven
by small-scale purchases, and lacks government planning and
oversight. Defective and low-quality panels abound.
The majority of Yemenis live in villages, and rural
electrification is estimated at around 20%. Yemen’s largest
power plant was subjected to repeated sabotage after opening
in 2009. It went out of service in 2015. Since then, the
country’s city-dwellers have relied on smaller grids and private
generators. Solar panels alone cannot meet the energy needs of
city life, but they are filling gaps for urban households while
also making electrification possible in otherwise dark rural
areas.
An affordable solar panel may be of no use beyond providing
basic lighting or charging portable electronic devices. Yet as
the third accompanying article attests, the ability to reliably
charge your phone is a priority for many. Landlines never
reached much of rural Yemen, but cellphones are widespread,
making the promise of solar energy all the more appealing.
The fact that cellphone coverage can be spotty at best in
remote areas may soon be rendered irrelevant by the global
spread of wireless Internet connections.
Portable electronic devices have become basic tools for
modern insurgencies. The ability to indefinitely charge
cellphone or quadcopter batteries from dark hideouts, or to
cheaply run global media centers from off-grid locations, will
doubtless be exploited by future insurgencies. It should come
as no surprise that major growth in the use of solar and other
renewable forms of energy is also occurring in
besieged population centers such as Gaza
and rural Damascus. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫الطاقة الشمسية تنير منازل اليمنيين في الحرب‬
“Solar Power Lights Yemeni Homes During War,” Al-Jazeera, 21 February
2016. https://goo.gl/1TPTYB
According to Saddam al-Ahdal, an official at the Solar Power Expo in
Sana’a, domestic expenditures in the solar power market totaled around
300 million dollars in 2014 and 2015. This is expected to rise to three
billion dollars over the next four years, according to the Saba News
Agency based in Sana’a and controlled by the Huthis.
Source:
‫الطاقة المتجددة في اليمن بين االحتياج والتنظيم‬
“Renewable Energy in Yemen Between Necessity and Regulation,” Yemen
Press, 17 October 2016. http://yemen-press.com/article12700.html
Usage is still on an individual level and electrical production is very
limited. It has not yet reached the level of being a public service with
clear mechanisms and specific power plants for distributing electricity.
Solar power in Yemen meets needs created by the war, rather than
being a deliberate plan based on the utility of renewable energy. The
Yemeni market is open to the import of panels and solar energy systems
haphazardly and without regulation…
Source: “In Electricity-Starved Yemen, it’s Always a Race for Power,” The
National, 12 July 2014. http://www.thenational.ae/opinion/comment/inelectricity-starved-yemen-its-always-a-race-for-power
Securing electricity has become the single greatest concern for locals
and the incredible hunger for electricity in Yemen makes you think that
life revolves around the search for energy and little else…Before leaving
home you have to make sure you have your electronic chargers with you
– checking that you have makes you feel like a warrior who checks his
weapons and ammunition before going to battle.

“… Solar power in Yemen meets needs
created by the war, rather than being a
deliberate plan based on the utility of
renewable energy…”

Rural Yemen
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/22/Yemen_landscape_05.jpg

OE Watch | December 2016

11

AFRICA

Top

Russia as Mali’s New Counter-Terrorism Partner
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s strategy
for its near abroad is to maintain its influence
and limit any US, NATO or Western military
influence.1 In farther theaters such as West
Africa, Russia has not reached out to militaries
in the region since the Cold
War era. However, that is
changing. The excerpted
French-language article from
a Malian news site discusses
a high-level Russian visit
to Mali to support Mali’s
counter-terrorism operations.
Mali is currently fighting a
variety of militants, including
ones aligned with al-Qaeda in
the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM),
and smaller factions loyal to
the Islamic State and Iraq and
Syria (ISIS). The country is
seeking support from Russia
through the provision of arms
and training.
Malian interest in Russia
is partially due to Mali’s
frustration over AQIM’s
continued increase in its
areas of operations in the
country, including targeting
a major international hotel
in Bamako last year, despite
the ouster of AQIM from
positions it occupied in northern Mali in 2013.
Moreover, there is now a recognized ISIS
faction under Abu Walid al-Sahrawi harassing
Malian and Burkinabe border guards along their
mutual border. This is all taking place despite
a high-level of French and US support to the
country, suggesting that Russia may be seen
as an alternative ally that could bring different
results.
From the Russian perspective, a counterterrorism partnership with Mali is consistent
with its effort to portray itself as a reliable
counter-terrorism partner compared to the
West. Given this effort, Russian arms deals
and counter-terrorism trainings will likely
increase in Africa. However, they will not come
close to matching the depth of the longer-term
relationships that countries like the US and
France have built in recent years, anytime soon.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
1

See, for example: http://www.e-ir.info/2013/06/17/assessing-russias-policy-toward-its-near-abroad/

“Russia is ready to help Mali fight against terrorism and to
ensure its economic development ... We are following very
closely all the events happening in Mali and around Mali.”

Russian President Vladimir Putin has met with South African leader Jacob Zuma, while other high-level
Russian officials have discussed arms deals in other countries, such as Mali.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Putin_and_Jacob_Zuma,_BRICS_summit_2015_02.
jpg

Source: “Russia is ready to supply weapons to Mali to fight against terrorism and train
Malian soldiers,” Maliactu.net, 13 October 2016. http://maliactu.net/la-russie-prete-afournir-des-armes-au-mali-et-a-assurer-la-formation-des-militaires-maliens-communiquemalien/
Russia is ready to supply weapons to Mali to fight against terrorism and train Malian
soldiers. The announcement was made by Mikhail Bogdanov, Deputy Foreign Minister
and Special Representative of Russian President Vladimir Putin for the Middle East and
Africa, who are visiting Mali.
During a work session, the Malian and Russian parties have shown their willingness to
strengthen bilateral cooperation.
Taking this opportunity, Mikhail Bogdanov has also reaffirmed “the commitment of
Russia to the unity and territorial integrity of Mali.” “Russia is ready to help Mali fight
against terrorism and to ensure its economic development ... We are following very closely
all the events happening in Mali and around Mali. As a member of the UN Security
Council, Russia thinks that African problems must be solved by Africans,” he said.
Militarily, Mr. Bogdanov said that for many years his country participates in the training
of Malian military and that his visit to Mali will contribute to “the revitalization of the
Malian military training.”
OE Watch | December 2016

12

AFRICA

Top

The Nigerian Army’s Morale Boost:
A Fallen Soldier Gets Recognition “The story of his death and valour has gripped
OE Watch Commentary: In Boko Haram’s seven-year long violent
conflict with Nigeria, the group has used social media, including
Youtube and Twitter, to publicize its leaders and fighters, and extol them
as martyrs. In contrast, there have been few publicized heroes among
Nigerian soldiers. Most fallen soldiers have perished at the hands of Boko
Haram, unnoticed by society or media. However, the excerpted article
demonstrates that this may be changing: The Nigerian army, religious and
political leaders, and the media are praising a fallen soldier as a hero.
The excerpted article for Premium Times discusses the death of
Muhammed Abu-Ali, who was recently killed by Boko Haram in a battle
in Mallam Fatori along Nigeria’s border with Niger. Less than one year
before his death, Abu-Ali had been promoted by the Chief of Army Staff
for his performance in two battles in which the Nigerian army retook
territory from Boko Haram in Baga and Gambarou. These victories served
as a turning point for the army.
Abu-Ali comes from a prestigious family in Kogi State, which may
be why extra attention has been paid to his death. Nonetheless, photos
of his family and him in uniform are being spread on social media,
commemorating his life. This is serving as a long overdue respect for not
only Abu-Ali but other fallen soldiers. In addition, Abu-Ali’s Muslim faith
furthers the narrative that the fight against Boko Haram is not a MuslimChristian one but one of Nigerians together against Boko Haram.
Yet, as the Premium Times article also describes, the optimism about
military efforts coinciding with the praise of Abu-Ali is premature. Only
weeks before Abu-Ali’s death, 83 Nigerian soldiers were killed in an
attack that the Nigerian military seemed to at first cover up. There are
also complaints among soldiers of shortages in supplies. Moreover, there
is concern about complacency in the army about recent successes, while
Boko Haram is regrouping to reclaim the territories that Abu-Ali and other
soldiers took from Boko Haram last year. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

the country, with many on social media directing
their thoughts and prayers to his family.”
Source: “Tributes pour in for slain Nigerian Army
hero,” Premium Times, 6 November 2016. http://www.
premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/214629-tributes-pourslain-nigerian-army-hero.html
Tributes are pouring in for the Nigerian Army commander
who lost his life in a Boko Haram attack. Muhammed Abu-Ali,
a lieutenant colonel, was killed in a sundown ambush by Boko
Haram as he was coordinating reinforcements to repel an
ongoing gunbattle in Mallam Fatori — an insurgent stronghold
on the northernmost tip of Borno State.
The tragedy came barely a year after Mr. Abu-Ali was
promoted from a major to a lieutenant colonel by the Chief
of Army Staff, Tukur Buratai, for the uncommon gallantry
he brought to the battlefield. For several months preceding
the recognition, Mr. Abu-Ali had been involved in audacious
operations that ended in the liberation of several Northeast
settlements previously held by Boko Haram. The story of his
death and valour has gripped the country, with many on social
media directing their thoughts and prayers to his family.
The military maintained that combat operations are gradually
coming to an end and troops are only clearing the sect’s
remnants across the beleaguered region. But with high-profile
attacks —such as the displacement of 83 combatants a fortnight
ago and the latest that just claimed its bravest commander—
occurring at frequent intervals in recent weeks, some analysts
are sounding a note of skepticism.
Nigerian soldiers have succeeded in taking
back territory from Boko Haram in recent
months, but only recently are fallen soldiers
receiving praise publicly.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/nigerianmilitary-some-officers-selling-arms-to-bokoharam/3493038.html

OE Watch | December 2016

13

AFRICA

Top

ISIS Stabbing at US Embassy in
Kenya Generates Controversy
OE Watch Commentary: On 27 October, a man armed
with a knife walked outside the visa section of the US
Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya and attempted to stab a Kenyan
guard. Immediately, the guard shot the armed man to death.
The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) later claimed that
the attacker was a “solder of the Islamic State”, although ISIS
did not provide any evidence of an operational connection to
the attacker. Indeed, initial reports suggested the attacker was
likely operating alone.
As the excerpted article from All Africa discusses, the
killing of the attacker has received criticism from Kenyan
politicians, including a governor in the largely SomaliMuslim populated northeast of the country, where the
attacker is believed to come from. The governor criticized the
guard for using lethal force in a situation where he believed
there were other methods to subdue the attacker. Moreover,
if the attacker remained alive after being subdued, then
investigators could have learned about the attacker’s motives
and connections. The governor may also be subtly pandering
to anti-American rhetoric by hinting that details about the
incident are not being revealed as if it were a conspiracy.
Nonetheless, the attack in Nairobi could indicate a new
trend of ISIS-inspired attacks on US interests in subSaharan African countries where so-called lone wolves
who are inspired by ISIS seek to kill Americans wherever
and whenever they can find them. These types of attacks
are already becoming commonplace in Europe and Russia.
With sub-Saharan Africa being ISIS’s third most active
region (after the Middle East and Europe), such attacks
could also become regularized not only in Kenya but also
in West Africa, which has two recognized ISIS affiliates
(Boko Haram in Nigeria and Abu Walid al-Sahrawi’s alMurabitun, or Greater Sahara, Brigade in the Mali-NigerBurkina Faso border region). In addition, as the article points
out, perceptions of excessive force used by the US or Kenyan
government on militants or suspects can be exploited as a
recruiting tool for groups like al-Shabab. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“What kind of knife was it that it scared
everyone to the point that they ended up
shooting him. It is difficult for us to believe that
indeed that boy was a terrorist.”

The scene after a US embassy guard in Nairobi killed a man who
attempted to stab the guard.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/islamic-state-claimsresponsibililty-attack-outside-embassy-nairobi/3571393.html

Source: “Ahmed Abdullahi Faults Police for Killing U.S. Embassy
Attacker,” All Africa, 31 October 2016. http://allafrica.com/
stories/201611010469.html
Wajir Governor Ahmed Abdullahi has called for investigation over last
week’s shooting of a terror suspect from his county outside US Embassy in
Nairobi. The governor said the man, who allegedly knifed a officer, should
have been disarmed and arrested to help with investigations into terrorism
instead of being shot dead. “Police and the parties concerned should come
clean and show the public what actually happened,” he said during a
fundraiser at Baraza Park in Wajir Town.” What kind of knife was it that it
scared everyone to the point that they ended up shooting him. It is difficult
for us to believe that indeed that boy was a terrorist,” he added.
The Islamic State has since claimed the attack that saw the US embassy
remain closed, saying the attacker was following its instructions. Mr
Abdullahi said unnecessary killings without investigation were driving
more young people to join terror groups, especially the Somalia-based AlShabaab.

River Flotillas in Support of Defensive Ground Operations: The Soviet Experience
Lester W. Grau
In the history of warfare, ground and naval forces frequently have to cooperate. There are usually problems putting these two
forces together since their missions, equipment, training, communications and mutual unfamiliarity get in the way. These
problems are common during transport of ground force equipment and personnel aboard naval vessels, exacerbated during
amphibious landings and assaults and very difficult when operating together along major rivers. This article analyzes the Soviet
history of defensive river flotilla combat during the first period of the Great Patriotic War (World War II against Germany). It
outlines missions, the operational environment, lessons learned, the command and control problems experienced between naval
and ground forces and the challenges of conducting such operations.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/River%20Flotillas%20in%20Support%20of%20
Defensive%20Ground%20Operations%20The%20Soviet%20Experience.pdf
OE Watch | December 2016

14

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Bolivarians Not Losing Everywhere: Nicaragua
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 November,
Nicaraguans experienced an ‘election’ that further
solidified Daniel Ortega’s hold on the chief executive
position. The accompanying Youtube reference features
the official verbal laydown of the statistical results (in
Spanish). Daniel Ortega continues as President, with
his wife Rosario Murillo as Vice President. It must
be noted however, that Ortega’s bolivarian MarxistLeninist party controls all of the country’s institutions
including the election commission and the courts,
which disqualified the only major opposition party. That
move contributed immensely to the smooth functioning
of the electoral process. The second accompanying
reference is from before the elections, in July. The
writer, Mr. Pedro Corzo, had no doubt about what
the result would be even then. As the author implies,
governing in Nicaragua is still a family affair. It should
be noted that this particular family is a member of the
region’s Bolivarian family of anti-American totalitarian
leftists. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“Nepotism in the Sandinista regime is not limited
to the matrimony…”
Source: Videos Mundo, “Resultados ELECCIONES NICARAGUA 2016 Primer
reporte (Results Nicaraguan Elections 2016 First Report),” Videos Mundo,
Youtube, 10 November 2016. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2uppSbPC_Wc
“…overwhelming victory…”
Source: Pedro Corzo, “Nicaragua: Dos por el voto de uno (Nicaragua:
two for one vote),” Periodismo Sin Fronteras, 14 July 2016. http://www.
periodismosinfronteras.org/nicaragua-dos-por-el-voto-de-uno.html
“Nepotism in the Sandinista regime is not limited to the matrimony. A son,
Laureano Ortega is presidential advisor for investments and the principal
proponent of the construction of the debated [cross-Isthmian] canal with
Chinese capital, another offspring, Rafael Ortega, administers the distribution
of petroleum, his wife controls the distributor that manages many gas stations
in the country, another son, Juan Carlos and his sister Camila control various
communications media…”

Former Colombian President Uribe on FARC Proposal
OE Watch Commentary:
Colombia seems to be at a
crossroad. Years of power
negotiations between the
administration of Juan Manuel
Santos and the FARC were finally
laid bare in a 297-page document,
labeled a peace accord, then put
to a public up or down vote. The
down vote prevailed. A prominent
public face and one of the principal
spokespersons opposed to the
proposal was former President and
current Senator Álvaro Uribe Vélez.
Vélez had been relatively silent after
the public rejection of the proposal,
but gave a lengthy interview in
early November to Spanish news
and political celebrity Cayetana
Álvarez de Toledo y Peralta-Ramos,
13TH Marchioness of Casa Fuerte.
In that interview, Ms. Álvarez
posed numerous incisive questions.
The accompanying excerpts
highlight a few of those questions
and President Uribe’s answers. The
attitudes expressed in the course
of the full interview seem likely to
reset the direction of Colombian
policy in the mid- if not near-term.
End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: Cayetana Álvarez de Toledo interview of Álvaro Uribe, “Álvaro Uribe: ‘Llamaron paz a la
democracia sometida’ (Alvaro Uribe: ‘They call submitted democracy, peace’),” El Mundo, Madrid, 6
November 2016. http://www.elmundo.es/internacional/2016/11/06/581db89ce2704e6a658b4689.html
“…Álvarez: How do you eliminate a war? Uribe: In Europe they think that Colombia has passed from
the war of Uribe to the peace of Santos. That is false. During my term in office, Colombia gained
immensely in security. If you wish, in peace. We did not seek the annihilation of guerrilla groups,
but rather their dismantling. The agreement of Santos with the FARC on the other hand, generates
impunity, strengthens the marxist-leninist model and does not combat drug trafficking. They are
calling subjected democracy, peace….
Álvarez: A democratic State can negotiate with a terrorist organization? Uribe: I never denied the
possibility of negotiating. At the time they criticized me: ‘you call them terrorists but you negotiate
with them’. I responded: ‘it is a process of dismantling the terrorist [organization]; one negotiates
under certain immovable conditions that do not cause damage to democracy’. In my government an
atypical submission of terrorism to justice was achieved….
Álvarez: Atypical? Uribe: 35,000 paramilitaries were demobilized and 18,000 guerrillas. The foot
soldiers did not go to jail. The leaders did, for periods of five to eight years. They were not conceded
eligibility to participate in politics and the national agenda was not negotiated with them. It was a
demobilization with judicial benefits in accordance with Colombian law….
Álvarez: “To what do you attribute the absence of public support? [for Uribe’s position opposed to the
proposed accords] Uribe: The International community has committed many errors. It abandoned
the Cuban people, submitted to six decades of dictatorship. For years no one said anything about the
repression of the Venezuelan people. …
Álvarez: And Spain? It should be the voice of Iberoamerica. It has suffered terrorismo badly.
Nevertheless, it accepted the elimination of the FARC from the European Union terrorist organizations
list. It even approved of the idea of King Phillip himself attending at Cartagena [for the signing of the
accords]. Uribe: About Cartagena, you would have to ask those who attended…It is evident that some
people accept for others what they would never accept for themselves. I said to Spain: Why do you
propose that we give to the FARC what you would never give to the ETA? They criticized me harshly
for saying it. But the [logical] effect has come about: ETA has demanded of Spain the same deal that
Santos proposes to bestow on the FARC. A bad example propagates. There are no moral borders.
Condescension to terrorism in one place on the map strengthens terrorism all over the map….”
OE Watch | December 2016

15

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Colombia’s President Tries Again
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 October Colombians held
a plebiscite in which they could vote YES or NO to a 297page accord the administration of Colombian President Juan
Manuel Santos and leaders of the FARC had signed after years
of negotiations. The language of the proposition, the voting
procedure and the vast bulk of propaganda all favored approval.
Nevertheless, the NO vote won. The accord, supposedly, was
dead and was to be re-negotiated completely. Barely a month
later, and after ‘nine days of intense meetings,’ the President
signed a new accord, now 310 pages. Some say the new work
produced cosmetic changes and kept what the NO voters voted
against. Promoters of the pact say it incorporates suggestions
made by the NO people. This time, however, President Santos
saw to it that there would be no plebiscite, but that the legislature
(which his party controls) would decide the agreement’s
fate instead. As the accompanying passages express, many
Colombians are upset. They are quite aware of everything going
on in neighboring Venezuela, to include the recent, derisive
slap-down of the opposition by the socialist regime there. (see
next article, “Is Venezuela’s Resistance Falling Apart?”) A sense
of disempowerment and insult may be taking over Colombian
public perceptions and attitudes, which may in turn create
dangerous volatility. Look for Colombia to erupt if any more
of its public opines that their president has moved arrogantly to
satisfy the FARC and please the Nobel Prize committee at the
expense of the clearly expressed public will. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…nine days of intense meetings in the Cuban capital…”
Source: Eduardo MacKenzie, “¿Un nuevo acuerdo de paz? (A new peace
agreement?),” CONtextoganadero, 15 November 2016. http://www.
contextoganadero.com/columna/un-nuevo-acuerdo-de-paz
“It is not hard to see that this long dry text is the former pact of 297
pages rejected by the electorate in the plebiscite of 2 October, 2016, with
some insignificant additions. The new document conserves the former
structure and includes almost the totality of the themes, points and subpoints that were rejected by the Colombians.”
Source: Radio RCN and EFE, “Gobierno y Farc firmaron nuevo acuerdo
de paz con propuestas de promotores del No (Government and FARC sign
new peace accord with suggestions from promoters of the No),” RCN and
EFE, 13 November 2016. http://www.rcnradio.com/nacional/firman-encuba-nuevo-acuerdo-de-paz-con-propuestas-de-promotores-del-no/
“The new document was signed by the chief negotiators of the
Administration, Humberto de la Calle, and the guerrilla, Iván Márquez
(alias of Luciano Arango), who have headed nine days of intense meetings
in the Cuban capital in order to reach a new consensus with the goal of
‘reaching a stable and durable peace’. Also, the negotiators invite ‘all of
Colombia and the international community, always together in the search
for reconciliation, to accompany and endorse’ the new pact ‘and its
prompt implementation in order to leave in the past the tragedy of war…
peace will wait no longer’.”

Is Venezuela’s Resistance Falling Apart?
OE Watch Commentary: Organized opposition to the
Bolivarian socialist regime of Nicolás Maduro was never
homogenous nor did it enjoy a consolidated leadership. Just at
the point of a massive demonstration in early November that
some thought might be a breaking point, Maduro managed to
persuade a group of putative opposition leaders to enter into a
dialog. The result of that dialog was a near total capitulation
on the part of the opposition representatives. It seemed as if
Maduro had taken all the starch and initiative out of the protest
movement, at least temporarily. The accompanying passages
discuss the population’s frustration with the opposition.
The regime made some insignificant concessions while
reiterating and emphasizing that the socialist revolution would
continue, deepen, and that there would be no elections until
December 2018 as normally scheduled — that there would in no
case be a recall election. Furthermore, the state of emergency
that gave the executive sweeping dictatorial powers was
extended. The results from the dialog also seem to have broken
popular support for the umbrella organization, the MUD, which
had cobbled together a majority in the national legislature. It
may be that more active and committed leaders take the reins
of the resistance movement, but it is yet to be seen if they
will be effective in mounting further demonstrations, or if the
Bolivarians will have successfully, terminally repressed the
movement. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Source: “Maduradas, ¡PICA Y SE EXTIENDE! Las duras palabras de
Fabiola Colmenarez: Es hora de SUPERAR a la MUD ([She] Bites and
Then Lays It Open! The tough words of Fabiola Colmenarez: The time has
come to move beyond the MUD),” Maduradas, 13 November 2016. http://
www.maduradas.com/pica-y-se-extiende-las-duras-palabras-de-fabiolacolmenarez-es-hora-de-superar-a-la-mud/
“The leader of the Voluntad Popular [Popular Will] party, Fabiola
Colmenarez, expressed herself after the announcement of the accords
between the government and opposition, asserting that the time had come
to “move past” the Mesa de la Unidad Democrática [Table of Democratic
Unity, the legislative umbrella organization of opposing parties], which in
her judgement does not represent the feelings of Venezuelans who hope for
a change in the leadership of the country.”
Source: Javier Antonio Vivas Santana, “El diálogo se ha prostituido:
La explosión social será inevitable (The dialog turned prostitute: Social
explosión is inevitable),” Apporea, 13 November 2016. http://www.
aporrea.org/actualidad/a237071.html
“The population is frustrated. No relationship exists between the
dialog that the cupola of Maduro supporters and the self-styled Table
of Democratic Unity (MUD), with the needs of the people. The recent
‘accord’ signed by the leadership bastards who monopolize the political
discourse of the country is not even close to the demands of a people in the
street.”
OE Watch | December 2016

16

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Mexican Military Industry to Produce Rockets and Aircraft
OE Watch Commentary: The Mexican military
industry has been producing its own weapons and
ammunition since 1916 but also imports some
equipment to meet demand. However, according to
Mexican Army General Fausto Lozano Espinosa, this
may change by 2020. The accompanying passages
discuss Mexico’s efforts to cut costs, become more
self-sufficient in military technology, and potentially
even become an exporter of such technology.
As noted in the first piece, Espinosa claims that
the Army and Air Force plan to use the domestically
produced “FX” line to include the FX-05 which is an
assault rifle that is currently used by Mexican Special
Forces. This line was originally produced in 2006 to
replace the Heckler and Koch G3 and G36 in an effort
to modernize Mexico’s military and now represents a
solution to further cut costs and stimulate the national
economy.
In addition to producing their own weapons and
ammunition, Mexico is also looking to domestically
produce rocket launchers and aircraft which represents
a new endeavor. Initially, Mexico plans to build
training aircraft for the Air Force Academy, but within
the next 20 years, hopes to possess the capacity to
build fighter jets. The first prototypes would ideally be
available by the end of 2016. When questioned about
the possible exportation of new military equipment,
General Fausto Lozano Espinosa indicates that he does
not see why Mexico would not explore this option
given that the country is already involved in exporting
weapons and military vehicles. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“...if we purchase this weapon from external suppliers
our total cost would range from 460-960 million Pesos,
but by producing domestically we create our own line of
firearms and stimulate our own economy all while saving
money.”
Source: “La industria militar de México se lanza a construir aviones de
adiestramiento (Mexican Military Industry to Produce Training Aircraft),” La
Jornada, 10 October 2016. http://lajornadasanluis.com.mx/ultimas-publicaciones/laindustria-militar-mexico-se-lanza-construir-aviones-adiestramiento/
“The FX assault rifle, which will be used to replace the G3, costs approximately
10,000 Mexican Pesos to produce. Producing this weapon abroad would cost
30,000-40,000 Pesos. Mexican Army General Fausto Lozano Espinosa further
indicated that the Mexican military has 230,000 soldiers and stated the following
regarding domestic versus foreign production “if we purchase this weapon from
external suppliers our total cost would range from 460-960 million Pesos, but by
producing domestically we create our own line of firearms and stimulate our own
economy all while saving money.”
Source: “Industria militar. De hacer balas a construir aviones. (Military Industry.
From Ammunition to Aircraft Production.),” El Universal, 14 September 2016.
http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/articulo/nacion/seguridad/2016/09/14/industriamilitar-de-hacer-balas-construir-aviones
“When questioned about the possibility of exporting military equipment, Lozano
Espinosa responded: “I believe there is a market and there are no barriers in place
that would impede exportation. The military industry has sectors responsible for
importing and exporting weapons and vehicles. That means it is a legally viable
option and a route we are exploring for the future.”

FX-05 assault rifle..
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/34/FX-05_Cutaway.jpg

OE Watch | December 2016

17

LATIN AMERICA

Top

More than Half of the Mexican Military
Devoted to War on Drugs
OE Watch Commentary: Mexican deployment of
troops to fight organized crime in national territory
is a contentious topic in Mexico and abroad.
Soldiers have been accused of multiple human rights
abuses including excessive use of force, extrajudicial
killings, torture, and disappearances. The
accompanying passages discuss the controversial
use of the armed forces for internal security risks.
The first passages points out that even top
Mexican military commanders argue that the war
on drugs should have never been left to soldiers. It
quotes the National Defense Secretary as saying
that “sending soldiers prepared for war to confront
criminals with no military training has caused
serious problems.” Ironically and despite widespread
arguments regarding this activity in Mexico, there
are more soldiers on the streets than ever. Why?
Mexico initially began using soldiers to fight
the war on drugs during the Felipe Calderon
administration in 2006 for at least two separate
reasons. First, the country saw drug cartels as a
challenge to the authority of state because these
organizations were capable of infiltrating state and
local governments, intimidating officials, and even
creating their own shadow governments in certain
areas of Mexico. Second, Mexican law enforcement
agencies were incapable of fighting organized crime
groups and in 2006, the military was seen as the
best alternative to get the country back under control
while police forces were vetted for corruption and
re-trained. For these reasons, troops became the
front line defense against organized crime during
the Calderon administration, as the second passage
points out.
Moving forward to the Enrique Pena Nieto
administration in 2012, there were grand hopes
that troop involvement in domestic issues would
come to an end with the creation of a national
gendarmerie but this organization is still not ready
to stand on its own. This means that the military is
still conducting police activities and at present, as
the second source notes, more than 50% of Mexico’s
armed forces are fighting the war on drugs. In an
attempt to curb military involvement in what should
be police duties, Mexican senators have proposed an
initiative to regulate deployment of Armed Forces
in country. The third pieces discusses this initiative.
Although it is still a work in progress, it indicates
Mexico’s desire to get troops off the streets and back
to focusing on external security threats. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Mexican troops operating at a random checkpoint.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mexican_
troops_operating_at_a_random_checkpoint_2009.jpg

Source: “General Cienfuegos: El Ejercito debe salir de las calles; fue un error entrar
en esa Guerra (General Cienfueges: It Was a Mistake to Use Military in Drug War.”
Sin Embargo, 16 March 2016. http://www.sinembargo.mx/16-03-2016/1636596
Mexico’s National Defense Secretariat (Sedena), General Salvador Cienfuegos
Zepeda, said it was wrong for the Mexican military to “enter fully into combat
against drug traffickers,” which, he said, left the military with “a problem that is
not ours.” Cienfuegos said that sending “soldiers prepared for war” to confront
criminals with no military training has caused “serious problems,” and admitted
that tactics such as day time raids have left the civilian population at risk. The
general added he believes the army should not be deployed in the streets for the
purpose of combatting crime as they are not prepared for the role.
Source: “Contra narco, 50% de milicia; actuaron más de 133 mil activos entre
2015 y 2016 (Half of Mexican Army Devoted to War on Drugs).” Excelsior, 17
September 2016 http://www.excelsior.com.mx/nacional/2016/09/17/1117381
Accountability Reports released by SEDENA indicate 45,085 soldiers participated
in the fight against drug trafficking during 2007. In 2008, it was reduced to 45,000,
in 2009, it rose to 48,750, and in 2010 it rose to 70,864. Finally, in 2011, the last
year recorded in the report, the number reached 96,261, so from 2006 to 2016, the
participation of soldiers in the fight against organized crime has increased to 77,382
(36.8 percent).
Data from SEDENA indicates the military has 213,477 active members. Of these,
52,194 members (24.44 percent) on average, are permanently positioned and
perform internal security duties. During the period from September 2015 to July
2016, 122,046 soldiers (which represents 57.3% of the force) performed activities
that included actions against drug trafficking.
Source: “PAN propone iniciative para regular uso de fuerzas armadas en el pais
(Mexican Senators Propose Bill to Regulate Depolyment of Armed Forces vs.
Crime).” El Politico, 20 October 2016. http://www.politico.mx/minuta-politica/
item/18163-pan-propone-iniciativa-para-regular-uso-de-fuerzas-armadas-en-el-pais
The proposal aims to regulate the power of the federal executive branch to deploy
armed forces for internal security tasks. It also proposes the construction of a
collegial body that would be responsible for establishing programs, strategies, and
lines of action for the deployment of federal armed forces.
OE Watch | December 2016

18

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Brazilian Air Force Commander Announces Eventual
Personnel Cuts, Larger Investment in Technology
OE Watch Commentary: In late September, the Brazilian
Air Force announced a plan to reduce staffing by 25 percent
over the next 20 years in response to the government’s
severe fiscal crisis. The accompanying passages discuss the
Brazilian Air Force’s plans to streamline and modernize
itself.
In the first passage discusses, Brazilian Air-Lt. Brig.
Nivaldo Luiz Rossato says that the initiative has been
developed over the course of several years with an eye
toward modernization and optimization. Under the current
budget, the Air Force receives the equivalent of 0.41 percent
of Brazil’s gross domestic product and roughly 70 percent of
those resources go toward personnel costs which according
to Rossato, limits the scope for investment.
Initial plans to cut personnel involve replacing retiring
service members with contractors who will be offered eightyear contracts. With money saved from these cuts, Rossato
indicates that the Air Force hopes to revive Brazil’s space
program and expedite production of the KC 390 military
cargo plane; both of which seem realistic. In fact, Brazil is
in a great position to expand its space program for at least
two separate reasons. First, because the National Institute for
Space Research runs a world-class satellite-testing facility
in São José dos Campos which is located 62 miles from São
Paulo. Second, because Brazil’s Alcântara spaceport in the
northeastern state of Maranhão is considered to be one of the
best spots in the world to launch satellites into orbit as it sits
on the equator and takes full advantage of Earth’s spin.
As the second passage notes, Brazil is behind on payments
to Embraer for the KC 390, but hopes that personnel cuts will
free up funds to continue production. These aircraft were
initially due to be ready in 2016 but as of now, this date has
been pushed to 2018 because of current budget constraints.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“If you spend more on technology and focus on
modernization and optimization, you can have
fewer people” and still be able “to ensure the
fulfillment” of the air force’s mission...”
Source: “Força Aérea Brasileira irá reduzir pessoal devido a cortes no
orçamento (Brazil’s Air Force to Downsize amid Budget Woes),” Info
Defensa, 5 August 2016, http://www.infodefensa.com/latam/2016/08/05/
noticia-cortes-orcamentarios-deixam-forca-aerea-brasileira.html
“If you spend more on technology and focus on modernization and
optimization, you can have fewer people” and still be able “to ensure the
fulfillment” of the air force’s mission to monitor the airspace over the giant
South American nation and its territorial waters, according to Brazilian
Air-Lt. Brig. Nivaldo Luiz Rossato.”
Source: “Brazil’s Embraer Delays Cargo Jet, Loses Revenue on Defense
Cuts.” Reuters, 30 July 2015. http://www.reuters.com/article/embraerresults-guidance-idUSL1N10A0R320150730
“Brazilian planemaker Embraer SA said it will delay development of
a military cargo jet and forgo $300 million of revenue this year due to
Brazil’s weaker currency and defense spending cuts, triggering the biggest
drop in its shares in nearly four years. Embraer now plans to deliver
its first KC-390 cargo aircraft to the Brazilian Air Force in the first half
of 2018 rather than the end of 2016, the company said in its quarterly
earnings report.”

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and
President, Vladimir Putin has led an extensive
reorganization and reequipping of his country’s
armed forces. Further, he has taken several
opportunities to reclaim Russian territory that was
taken, from his perspective, illegally. This book
describes Putin and the military’s use of various
strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s new
equipment and reform initiatives, and Putin’s
geopolitical quest for influence in the Arctic and
Ukraine. Included in the discussion are some of the
unintended consequences of his actions (negative
world opinion, sanctions, NATO responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | December 2016

19

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Experts Warn of Guns for Food Trade with Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: Venezuelans and Trinidadians
are bartering on the high seas, selling and/or exchanging
arms and ammunition for food, and basic commodities.
These trades are also being reported to take place at some
of Trinidad and Tobago’s remote coastal ports. This is
significant because it is being fueled by Venezuela’s food
shortage which has no end in sight. Thus, authorities fear that
continued shortages will exacerbate illegal weapon bartering.
As the accompanying passage discusses, these fears appear
to be warranted.
As the piece discusses, police are reporting significant
seizure increases in both illegal weapons and ammunition.
Weapons are most commonly sold to Trinidadians by
soldiers and military commanders who have access to
Venezuela’s ample supply of Chinese AK-47s, Russian
AK-103s and Dragunov sniper rifles. Once in Trinidad
and Tobago, they are used by criminal groups dedicated
to drug trafficking and other criminal activities. In some
cases, weapons are traded for items as basic as a roll of
toilet paper and a few loaves of bread. The piece also notes
comments by firearms weapons specialist Paul-Daniel
Nahous, who compares the current situation in Venezuela
to that of the Soviet Union when it dissolved and former
states such as Ukraine broke away in 1991; in the sense that
many government issued weapons were sold on the black
market by military personnel there too. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“... guns and ammunition smuggled into Trinidad
and Tobago from the South Western peninsula is not a
recent phenomenon, but there is fear that Venezuela’s
grave food shortage could further perpetuate this type
of activity.”
Source: “Experts warn of guns for food trade with Venezuela,” The
Guardian (Trinidad and Tobago), 29 May 2016. http://www.guardian.co.tt/
news/2016-05-29/experts-warn-guns-food-trade-venezuela
“According to security experts, guns and ammunition smuggled into
Trinidad and Tobago from the South Western peninsula is not a recent
phenomenon, but there is fear that Venezuela’s grave food shortage could
further perpetuate this type of activity. Seizure statistics support this
concern as Trinidadian authorities cited a 32% increase in the seizure of
illegal guns and a 153.6% increase in the recovery of illegal ammunition.
From January 1 to September this year, 545 illegal guns and 16,671
rounds of illegal ammunition were seized compared to 450 illegal guns and
6,575 rounds of ammunition for the same period last year.”
“Certified police sniper and firearms weapon specialist Paul-Daniel
Nahous, said what is occurring in Venezuela is similar to what happened
to the former Soviet Union when it dissolved and former states such as
Ukraine broke away in 1991. Some of the former Soviet Union weapons
were sold off legally, but many slipped through the cracks and onto
the black market. Some military commanders sold off entire military
installations and poorly paid soldiers “lost” their weapons selling them
also.”

China’s cyber policy has become
partly visible to foreign nations
through observation, tracking, and
inference. The policy appears to
have three vectors. These three
aspects—peace activist, espionage
activist, and attack planner—
dominate China’s cyber policy. Some
are always hidden from view while
others are demonstrated daily.
Three Faces of the Cyber Dragon is
divided into sections that coincide
with these vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf

OE Watch | December 2016

20

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China’s Challenges in the Defense Trade Industry
OE Watch Commentary: The recent biennial Airshow
China expo in Zhuhai, which kicked off on 1 November,
attracted the attention of the international media. The
primary focus of interest has been on the first public
demonstration of China’s new Stealth J-20 aircraft,
designed by the Aviation Industry Corporation of China.
Despite this attention, China still faces a number of hurdles
in the defense trade industry. The accompanying passage
discusses the challenges that China faces in gaining an
advantage in international weapons sales, due to quality
issues and competition.
The world has been taking note as China continues its
economic growth (albeit that growth has somewhat slowed)
and the rapid modernization of its military. However, as the
passage notes, the global perception of the Chinese defense
industry is less than adequate. Some of the perceptions
are due to malfunctioning systems or defective weapon
designs. Additionally, China lacks extra services, such as
training and the maintenance of equipment and arms. Some
countries also lack political trust in China.
Chinese scholars and analysts are quick to defend the
country’s reputation by pointing out that human factors and
weather play a key role during operations as to whether or
not a target is hit. The article cites a number of examples
demonstrating other countries’ past system failures.
Trade is a key element of China’s growing economic
might. Should China be able to improve the reliability of its
military technologies, it will increase the capabilities and
prestige of its defense economy. The biennial Airshow at
Zhuhai is an ideal way to help in its “marketing” efforts.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“… Chinese manufacturers are still struggling to build
brands in an international market dominated by competitors
from the United States and Russia.”
Source: Minnie Chan, “China Battles Fierce Competition and Quality Issues in
Fight for Weapons Sales,” South China Morning Post, 31 October 2016, http://
www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2039880/china-battlesfierce-competition-and-quality-issues
More than 900 Chinese weapons will be on display, according to the
organizer of the six-day show, which will feature more than 700 exhibitors
from more than 42 countries and regions – with more than 400 exhibitors from
China alone.
… Chinese manufacturers are still struggling to build brands in an
international market dominated by competitors from the United States and
Russia.
At September’s Africa Aerospace and Defence air show in Pretoria, South
Africa, Chinese exhibitors struggled to find buyers even though Beijing tried
hard to secure sales of its L-15 Falcon trainer and JF-17 fighter, Andrei Chang,
the founder of military magazine Kanwa Asian Defence, told the South China
Morning Post.
IHS Jane’s reported that two C-705 missiles failed to hit their targets after
being fired from two of the Indonesian navy’s KCR-40-class missile attack
craft during the large-scale Armada Jaya 2016 exercise in the Java Sea on
September 14.
“When a missile is fired, human factors play the key role during the
intermediate operations to decide whether it will hit its designated target,
including a series of reference data such as what altitude it needs to ascend to
in the first stage and when it needs to turn.”
Zhou said the capabilities of the C-705 missile and the shorter-range C-701
and C-704 models had been proven in recent attacks by Iranian-backed Houthi
rebels in Yemen on United Arab Emirates vessels that were part of a Saudi
Arabian-backed coalition supporting the Yemeni government.
“I do not think that China has built its brand in the field of global weapon
exports ... but in recent years, China has been paying a lot of attention on
research and innovation,” he said.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked concepts
related to modern conflict in a provocative
manner designed to stir up debate and
critical thinking. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf

OE Watch | December 2016

21

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Thai Military Bearing Down on Social Media
OE Watch Commentary: The Thai
military has been clamping down on
social media in the country since the
death of King Bhumibol Adulyadej
on 13 October. The accompanying
passages discuss restrictions to the
freedom of speech and expression
in the country, through increased
monitoring of social media content.
According to the first article, on
1 November, nearly three weeks
after the death of the king, General
Chalermchai Sitthisart, the army
chief, announced the opening of a
newly updated cyber center, under the
command of Major General Ritthee
Intrawuth, to monitor social media for
“Lèse Majesté” (insulting the monarch)
content and to protect itself from
cyber-attacks. Through its transition,
Thailand’s Military Technology Center
was renamed Army Cyber Centre.
Along with maintaining a vigilant eye
for cyber-attacks and cracking down
on “Lèse Majesté” content, the cyber
center is also expected to play a bigger
role in disseminating information
of its own to prevent further
“disinformation” from being spread.
The second article describes
another example of clamping down
on communications. According to
the article, the country’s telecoms
regulator, National Broadcasting and
Telecommunications Commission, is
now encouraging citizens to report
any “inappropriate comments.” An
example of a violation, according to the
article, could be as trivial as someone
simply writing “Yes” in response to
a Facebook post that criticized the
monarchy. In particular, comments
posted to Facebook, YouTube, and
Line, which is a global messenger
application should be reported. The
article argues that the new effort is
likely related to Thailand’s strict “Lèse
Majesté” laws. As the passage notes,
this refers specifically to article 112 of
the Thai Criminal Code, which makes
it illegal for anyone to express negative
views about the country’s royal family.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“People needed to be trained to show more discretion before
forwarding messages on social media… These included messages with
content that may be deemed “Lèse Majesté” in violation of Section
112 of the Criminal Code… Therefore, the Army Cyber Centre would
monitor for the dissemination of “Lèse Majesté” content on the social
media and take action against those responsible…”

Various social media brands.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Socialmedia-pm.png

Source: “Army Tightens Monitoring of Social Media,” Bangkok Post, 1 November 2016, http://
www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1124460/army-tightens-monitoring-of-social-media.
Gen Chalermchai [Sitthisart] said the army attaches importance to boosting security against
cyber-attack. The establishment of the Army Cyber Centre was part of the modernization of the
army and other military commands.
The cyber centre will also play an important role in information dissemination, he added.
Cyber attacks were now a threat to national security, particularly the dissemination of
misinformation through modern technologies that were being continually improved upon.
People needed to be trained to show more discretion before forwarding messages on social
media… These included messages with content that may be deemed “Lèse Majesté” in violation
of Section 112 of the Criminal Code… Therefore, the Army Cyber Centre would monitor for
the dissemination of “Lèse Majesté” content on the social media and take action against those
responsible…
Source: Michael Tegos, “Thailand’s Telecom Regulator Encourages Facebook Users to Spy Each
Another,” Chiangrai Times, 7 November, 2016, http://www.chiangraitimes.com/thailands-telecomregulator-encourages-facebook-users-to-spy-each-another.html
Thailand’s National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC), the country’s
telecoms regulator is …asking for people to “collaborate to suppress inappropriate messages,”
without really defining what these are. It includes instructions on how to report them using each
platform’s tools and then contact the NBTC.
While not explicitly mentioned, it’s likely this is related to Thailand’s strict “lèse majesté” laws.
Specifically, article 112 of the Thai Criminal Code makes it illegal for anyone to express negative
views about the country’s royal family. If you’re wondering how extensive this is, in August a
woman was charged under article 112 for replying “yes” to a Facebook post that criticized the
monarchy.
OE Watch | December 2016

22

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Indonesia Expected to Focus on Nuclear Power to
Achieve Energy Security
OE Watch Commentary: Concerned
about its future energy security, Indonesia
is focusing on nuclear power to supplement
its current energy portfolio. These efforts
include turning to China, Russia, and France
for nuclear development technology. China
has the fastest growing nuclear power
program; Russia leads the world in nuclear
reactor exports; and France gets about threequarters of its power from nuclear power. The
following two excerpted articles offer a good
overview of the country’s energy challenge
and how the government is trying to secure its
future energy security.
According to the articles, Indonesia’s energy
portfolio consists of only five to seven percent
new and renewable energy sources. It must
increase that amount to 23 percent in order to
achieve its stated goal of reducing greenhouse
gas emissions 30 percent by 2025, and nuclear
energy is considered a way to achieve that
goal.
One potential hurdle for Indonesia is its
current government regulations, which
consider nuclear energy to be the country’s
last option for renewable energy because
the country reportedly is believed to already
have some 74,000 tons (probably referring to
reserves). Officials are therefore seeking to
change the law to allow more nuclear powered
reactors to come online in the future. Also
worth noting is that Indonesia is projecting
that it must develop 115-gigawatt power
plants by 2025 in order to meet its power
demands. Currently, however, it can only
fulfill about 52-53 gigawatts. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“Indonesia needs new and renewable energy sources
to meet long-term demands.”

Source: Indriyani Astuti, “Nuklir Energi Terbarukan Untuk Reduksi Gas Rumah Kaca,
(Nuclear Energy to Reduce Greenhouse Gases),” Media Indonesia, 11 October 2016.
http://mediaindonesia.com/news/read/71521/nuklir-energi-terbarukan-untuk-reduksi-gasrumah-kaca/2016-10-11
[Arnold Soetrisnanto, chairman of the Technical and Energy Commission of the National
Research Council] said, “Without making a decision to develop a [thermal nuclear power
plant] PLTN, it will be very difficult for the government to reach its capacity target for
new power plants and the National Energy Policy (KEN), under which it is has been
decided that renewable energy must reach 23 percent in terms of the mix of energy by
2025.” However, a revision of the national energy policy is needed because in Government
Regulation (PP) No. 74 in 2014 on Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM) nuclear energy
is considered as the last option for renewable energy utilization.
Source: Dian Erika, “Djarot Sulistio Wisnubroto, Kepala Badan Tenaga Nuklir Nasional
(Batan): Kalau Besok Diminta Bangun PLTN, Kami Siap (Djarot Sulistio Wisnubroto:
If Tomorrow There is a Request to Develop a Thermal Nuclear Power Plant, We Are
Ready),” Republika, 12 October 2016. http://www.republika.co.id/berita/koran/prokontra/16/10/12/oexfo13-djarot-sulistio-wisnubroto-kepala-badan-tenaga-nuklir-nasionalbatan-kalau-besok-diminta-bangun-pltn-kami-siap
Currently, the number of Indonesian people has reached almost a quarter of a billion.
On the other hand, our mineral energy supply (oil, natural gas and coal) is depleting.
Indonesia needs new and renewable energy sources to meet long-term demands. …
Meanwhile, if we look at it from a demand for power point of view, by 2025, Indonesia
must be able to develop 115-gigawatt power plants. Currently, we can only fulfill about
52-53 gigawatts.
Based on the presidential decree on 22 June 2016, Indonesia must formulate the roadmap
for a nuclear power plant (PLTN). We translate such a decision by calculating the number
of power sources that we have such as oil or gas as well as other resources. Then, we
calculate whether this nuclear energy is included, whether it will be an alternative or a
last option. We also communicate often with other nations; for example, France, Japan,
Russia and China. Every month they even come to Indonesia to offer nuclear development
technology.

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of the Lone
Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of low-level guerrilla
combat as told by the survivors. They cover fighting from the cities
of Grozny and Argun to the villages of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and
finally the hills, river valleys and mountains that make up so much
of Chechnya. Dodge Billingsley, the primary author was embedded
with Chechen guerrilla forces after the first war, so he knows
the country, the culture, the key actors and the conflict. Yet, as a
Western outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and objectivity.
Fangs of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is
becoming modern and future war.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf
OE Watch | December 2016

23

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Resentment Toward the Governor of Jakarta:
A Sign of Problems to Come?
OE Watch Commentary: In 2014, Indonesia
drew some, although limited, attention when
President Joko Widodo appointed Basuki Tjahaja
Purnama, known by his Chinese name Ahok,
as governor of the Indonesian capital, Jakarta.
Not only is Ahok Ethnic Chinese, but he is also
Christian, something that does not bode well
with radical Muslims in Indonesia, which has the
highest population of Muslims in the world.
As the accompanying article discusses, Ahok,
who is known for being outspoken, had said
that the interpretation of a Qur’anic verse by
Muslim theologians was erroneous. The verse
in question was that a Muslim should only elect
a Muslim leader. This prompted a group, the
Islamic Defenders Front (FPI – Front Pembela
Islam), to accuse the governor, who is coming
up for reelection in February 2017, of blasphemy.
Following the accusations, tens of thousands of
Islamists conducted a peaceful protest, which
escalated into violent clashes between the
participants and police/soldiers.
While Ahok is very popular and much
appreciated for being able to effectively manage
the city of 10 million inhabitants, there seems
to be growing discontent among Islamic
fundamentalists, who want to keep him from being
reelected. It is a situation worth watching. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“According to the governor [Basuki
Tjahaja Purnama], an interpretation
that had been made by some Ulemas
(Muslim theologians), who interpreted
a verse in the Qur’an as saying that
a Muslim should only elect a Muslim
leader, was erroneous.”

Jakarta Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c0/
Wakil_Gubernur_DKI_Basuki_TP.jpg

Source: “Une Manifestation d’ Dégénère à Jakarta (A Demonstration Deteriorates in
Jakarta),” Le Point, 4 November 2016, http://www.lepoint.fr/monde/indonesie-unemanifestation-d-islamistes-degenere-a-jakarta-04-11-2016-2080790_24.php
The governor, who is known for being outspoken, is being accused of blasphemy
against Islam after a statement he had made at the end of September. According
to the governor, an interpretation that had been made by some Ulemas (Muslim
theologians), who interpreted a verse in the Qur’an as saying that a Muslim should
only elect a Muslim leader, was erroneous. With the extent of the polemic that was
fueled by Muslim fundamentalists, the governor, who is known [by his Chinese
name] Ahok, made a public apology. However, the anger of certain radical groups,
such as the FPI, a radical Islamic group that has many followers in Indonesia,
the country with the highest population of Muslims in the world, has not subsided.
There has already been an earlier demonstration, on 14 October, against the
governor, who is a candidate for reelection in February.

A Small Box That’s a Big Deal: How Latin American Countries
Are Using CubeSATs and Why it Matters
by Kevin Freese
The Army is the Defense Department’s largest space user and the space domain is an essential part of the current and
future operational environment. A relatively new satellite technology – the CubeSAT – is now making it easier for
countries such as Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay to launch their space programs. By facilitating traditionally
non-spacefaring nations to develop space programs, CubeSATs will give such nations a greater voice in international
space policies and laws. For the United States, this will mean increased necessity to take the interests of other nations
into consideration when operating in space.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/SWJ_A%20Small%20Box%20That’s%20a%20Big%20Deal_%20How%20Latin%20American%20Countries%20Are%20
Using%20CubeSATs%20and%20Why%20it%20Matters.pdf
OE Watch | December 2016

24

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

DPRK Press Comments on Nukes
OE Watch Commentary: The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK) claims that the continued
development of both nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles is the strategic
cornerstone that protects its national
sovereignty from US interests in the
region. As the accompanying passage
from a North Korean newspaper
demonstrates, the DPRK portrays itself
as a socialist beacon of independence
that has blazed against decades of what
it describes as selfish, imperialist US
interests. The passage discusses the
DPRK’s resolve to withstand sanctions
imposed by the US and the international
community.
The piece characterizes the international
community’s continuation of decades of
ineffective sanctions as both hypocritical
and unrealistic, arguing that the value of
possessing nuclear weapons far exceeds
the effects of sanctions; as no nuclear
power has ever suffered acts of military
aggression. Since the failure of the 1994
Agreed Framework to denuclearize, the
DPRK has refused to halt nuclear weapon
development despite several attempts
at negotiations by foreign powers. The
DPRK contends that becoming a nuclear
power will place them on a level political
playing field with other world powers and
ultimately lead to economic prosperity
through peace and stability.
Sixty years of juch’e, the DPRK’s
ideology of economic and political selfreliance, likely accounts for a large part
of their ability to withstand what a DPRK
state reporter characterizes as the most
heinous sanctions in history in terms of
duration and breadth of content. End OE
Watch Commentary (Galluzzi)

“We have set out on the path of nuclear possession to defend the
country’s sovereignty and the people’s right to existence against the
United States’ increasing nuclear threat and blackmail and vicious
blockade.”
Source: Pae, K.-h. “North Korean ‘Commentary’ Call Nuclear Force People’s Power, Future
of National Prosperity,” Rodong Sinmun, 3 October 2016.
In terms of content, intensity, and implementation period, mankind has never seen such
a brutal, ruthless, deep-rooted, and atrocious precedent as the United States’ sanction
maneuvers against our republic.
…
The hostile forces are threatening and blackmailing us by saying that we cannot achieve
economic development without giving up nuclear weapons… This is indeed the height of
hypocrisy.
US imperialism, the ringleader of imperialism, shamelessly lives by sucking other nations’
blood and sweat, and is the villain of the human world with a habit of deceiving, trampling
on, and harming others. Without deceiving others, this hideous thing cannot hide its ugly
appearance or live on, and it is trying to conquer the world with the robber’s theory that all
assets on earth must be monopolized by the United States and everyone must obey it.
…
We definitely have not become a nuclear state to possess nuclear weapons of tyranny to
harm mankind, as did the United States. Neither have we possessed nuclear weapons to enter
the ranks of several powers that control the international political current. We have set out
on the path of nuclear possession to defend the country’s sovereignty and the people’s right
to existence against the United States’ increasing nuclear threat and blackmail and vicious
blockade.
…
Our people’s demand is that not just nuclear tests, but something even greater must be done
for self-defense even if it means that they have to tighten their belts 10 and 100 more times
and spend a huge amount of money and all of the country’s assets.
The rash acts of the people crazily running about who still try to put [North] Korea’s nuclear
[weapons] on the negotiation table and take them as a political bargain or economic deal are
mere crudity of a group of insane modern-day Don Quixotes.
…
During the 70-odd years after the emergence of nuclear weapons in the world, there were
the intense East-West Cold War and numerous small and big wars, but the countries that
possess nuclear weapons — whether they were small or large — never suffered military
aggression.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | December 2016

25

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China Sites Training Deficiencies
“Services should mainly give on-the-spot guidance to the construction of the joint foundation and
the joint specialties in combination with individual training... so as to promote the comprehensive
implementation of the joint training plans and to guarantee training quality and effectiveness.”
OE Watch Commentary: As
China attempts to develop its military
establishment, specific deficiencies
continue to appear. There are reports
that the services still act on their own
and implement independent standards,
procedures and rules as to how they
are organized. This inhibits unified
operations. Further, it has been noted
that there are too few standards for
teaching and training, resulting in
the low quality and effectiveness
of the force. As the accompanying
passage from a Chinese source
shows, this has resulted in calls to
immediately settle these problems
and make improvements that perfect
the mechanisms required to develop
a unified and professional force. The
piece suggests that China understands
the importance of creating forces that
are able to work jointly, and that the
development of a better unified control
mechanism is clearly an important and
required step in the process. End OE
Watch Commentary (Thomas)

Source: Han Guangming, “Take Aim at Missions and Tasks. Push Forward Joint Training,”
Jiefangjun Bao Online, 1 November 2016.
“Focus on solving the issues of how to conduct joint training, how to arrange tests and provide
support for joint training through further improving the guiding regulations and rules. For the
contents of training, in addition to the study of basic theories related to joint operations and
skill training specified by the current outline, it is necessary to add the study of theoretical
subjects related to joint operations command, action, support to joint basic training, so as to lay
a solid foundation for joint training. For joint specialized training, in addition to the contents
specified by the current outline, it is necessary to add coordinated training for the cyber warfare
element, the survey, mapping and navigation element, and the electromagnetic spectrum element.
Commanders at all levels should be enabled to implement the principles for using the new-type
combat forces and to determine the appropriate timing for using these forces and the form of
collaborative actions.
The forces involved should jointly practice command, jointly practice collaboration, jointly
practice action, make sure that they train together in peacetime and fight together in wartime. Set
up conditions similar to battlefield environments. That is, in the selection of timing and location
for a joint exercise, it is necessary to select an area similar to the task area with terrain, weather,
hydrographic, and transport conditions similar to the battlefield environment, so as to enhance
the targeted attribute of joint training and improve the effectiveness of joint training.
Services should mainly give on-the-spot guidance to the construction of the joint foundation and
the joint specialties in combination with individual training. Theater commands should mainly
give circuit guidance to joint command drills and joint exercises with live force in combination
with element-specific drills, command post exercises, and live force exercises, so as to promote
the comprehensive implementation of the joint training plans and to guarantee training quality
and effectiveness.”

Suheil al-Hassan and the Syrian Army’s Tiger Forces
By Lucas Winter

This paper looks at the genesis, evolution and growth of the Syrian Army’s
“Tiger Forces” and their leader Suheil al-Hassan. The paper shows how Hassan
has played an important role since conflict began in 2011. It attributes his
transformation from special forces commander to leader of military campaigns to
an ability to harness the Syrian Army’s full infantry, artillery and airpower better
than any other loyalist field commander. Given the Syrian Army’s manpower
shortages, rampant corruption and rivalry-laden bureaucracy, this is no small
feat. Al-Hassan has become a key symbol in the Syrian loyalist camp, able to
project more combined arms power than anyone else in Syria. His success on the
battlefield comes less from tactical or strategic insights than from his ability to
thrive within the loyalist camp’s opaque and rivalry-laden bureaucracy. For
this he has become a symbol to regime supporters, proof that the war can be
won by working within the system.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Small%20Wars%20Journal%20-%20Suheil%20al-Hassan%20and%20the%20
Syrian%20Army%E2%80%99s%20Tiger%20Forces%20-%202016-07-22.pdf
OE Watch | December 2016

26

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Afghanistan’s Membership in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization “India and Pakistan signed the memorandum of obligations
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying excerpted article reports on the
government of Afghanistan’s interest in joining
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO); amid the on-going process for India
and Pakistan to obtain membership. The piece
includes important points by Afghan Chief
Executive Abdullah Abdullah, about what
Afghanistan’s membership in the SCO could
mean.
First, Abdullah notes that Afghanistan views
the SCO as a good platform for dealing with
security issues and expresses his hopes that
current members support Afghanistan’s joining
the organization. The SCO’s security focus
is on dealing with the threats of terrorism,
separatism, and religious extremism. One
area of security cooperation in the SCO is the
Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure (RATS)
headquartered in Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
RATS is reported to have a shared database
on regional threats, but it is not known for
taking an active role in combating them. SCO
members carry out periodic joint exercises
with military and security forces and Afghan
forces could benefit from this. However,
the organization does not get involved in the
internal issues of a member state or negotiate
a dispute between states. There is also no
collective defense article within the SCO to
jointly deploy forces in response to a conflict
involving a member state.
Abdullah also mentions the Afghan
government’s efforts to negotiate with the
Taliban and getting Pakistan to assist in
peace treaty negotiations. While he does not
express any expectation that the SCO would
get involved in these negotiations, he may
expect that membership would help resolve the
ongoing conflict. The piece article also points
out that the SCO decided to admit India and
Pakistan in 2015 and that it took a year for both
to put together a full membership application.
While both are likely to become members,
this will not take place until sometime in
2017. Given this timeline, even if Afghanistan
received support for SCO membership and
signed the memorandum of obligations within
the next several months, the example of India
and Pakistan shows that it could take up to
two years to achieve membership and any
assistance the organization might provide. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

on 24 June 2016, thereby starting the formal process of
joining the SCO as full members. The acceptance process
will take some months but they are expected to become full
members in 2017.”

The presidents of the member states of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) meet
during a summit in Ufa, Russia in 2015. A major component of the SCO is security, but the
organization does not get involved in the internal issues of a member state.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2015_Summit_of_the_Shanghai_Cooperation_
Organization_04.jpg

Source: Kathy Whitehead, “Abdullah Urges Full Membership For Afghanistan At SCO
Summit,” Tolo News, 3 November 2016. http://www.tolonews.com/en/afghanistan/28146abdullah-urges-full-membership-for-afghanistan-at-sco-summit
“Delivering a speech at the 15th prime minister’s summit of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, Afghan CEO Abdullah Abdullah... requested Afghanistan be made a
full member of the SCO and that its members support the move. He said Afghanistan
attaches great importance to the SCO as a regional platform for addressing international
terrorism, violent extremism, separatism and narcotics through confidence-building and
enhanced economic and security cooperation…The 15th prime minister’s summit was held
Thursday in Bishkek in Kyrgyzstan…Abdullah said…”Our sincere endeavors to engage
the Taliban and nudge Pakistan to assist the peace process have thus far yielded almost
no concrete results…
…The Shanghai Cooperation Organization, or Shanghai Pact, is a Eurasian political,
economic, and military organization which was founded in 2001 in Shanghai by the
leaders of the People’s Republic of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Russian
Federation, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. These countries, except for Uzbekistan had been
members of the Shanghai Five, founded in 1996; after the inclusion of Uzbekistan in 2001,
the members renamed the organization. On July 10, 2015, the SCO decided to admit India
and Pakistan as full members.
India and Pakistan signed the memorandum of obligations on 24 June 2016, thereby
starting the formal process of joining the SCO as full members. The acceptance process
will take some months but they are expected to become full members in 2017. Afghanistan,
Iran, Mongolia and Belarus are the SCO observer-countries, while Turkey, Azerbaijan,
Sri Lanka, Armenia, Cambodia and Nepal are dialogue partners.”
OE Watch | December 2016

27

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

A Potential Driving Force Behind Georgia’s
Armed Force Reforms
OE Watch Commentary: Reforms in
Georgia’s Ministry of Defense (MoD) have
been taking place for several years. A number
of these have been connected to the capabilities
of the Georgian Armed Forces to deal with a
scenario similar to the Georgian-Russian War
in August 2008. The accompanying excerpted
articles report on an important development that
may impact these reforms.
The first accompanying article discusses
the details of the Russian-Abkhazian treaty
to create a combined force. The article notes
that the Russian contingent would be made up
of units already deployed in Abkhazia, which
are estimated to be made up of three to four
thousand personnel. The combined force will
reportedly be under a joint Russian-Abkhazian
command, but in the event of a conflict, the
force would come under control of the Russian
Ministry of Defense.
The second article from Georgia Today
reports on a recent policy change in the
country’s MoD that will cancel the previous
defense minister’s decision to abolish
conscription. Contract soldiers make up the
majority of personnel in Georgia’s Armed
Forces and conscripts are often placed in noncombat positions or are used as a reserve force.
The announcement of maintaining conscription
came just after the treaty ratification, and
follows earlier opposition to the previous
defense minister’s decision to abolish it. The
Russian-Abkhazian joint force could influence
the ongoing reforms in the Georgian MoD. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Georgian Defense Minister
Levan Izoria said Monday that
compulsory military conscription
would be reinstated only months
after his predecessor Tina
Khidasheli abolished the practice
just before she left office in
August.”

Georgian Minister of Defense Levan Izoria.
Source: http://www.rfe.org

Source: “Tbilisi Protests as Abkhaz Troops Get Combined with Russian Forces,” Civil,
3 November 2016. http://civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=29594
“The Georgian Foreign Ministry condemned Russia’s ratification of the treaty
with Georgia’s breakaway region of Abkhazia on establishing a Combined Group of
Forces… Russia’s State Duma ratified the treaty on November 2 with 410 votes; the
breakaway region’s parliament ratified the same treaty in December 2015, a month
after its signing. Russia and breakaway Abkhazia signed the treaty in November 2015,
to define the ways for putting in practice the provisions of the Framework Agreement
on “Alliance and Strategic Partnership,”…The group will be led by the Russian military
base deployed in Abkhazia.
…The creation of the so-called Combined Group of Forces in Abkhazia, against the
backdrop of continued military build-up and constant military drills in the occupied
territories, further aggravates the already difficult security situation on the ground
and significantly threatens the stability of the entire region,” the (Georgian Foreign
Ministry) statement reads…”
Source: Thea Morrison, “Georgia’s Defense Ministry Reinstates Compulsory Military
Service,” Georgia Today, 7 November 2016. http://georgiatoday.ge/news/5093/
Georgia%E2%80%99s-Defense-Ministry-Reinstates-Compulsory-Military-Service
“Georgian Defense Minister Levan Izoria said Monday that compulsory military
conscription would be reinstated only months after his predecessor Tina Khidasheli
abolished the practice just before she left office in August. Izoria said he ordered
compulsory military service to be reinstated because Georgia’s small population can
not provide enough professional contract soldiers to deal with the country’s numerous
security threats…
Izoria’s predecessor, Khidasheli - Georgia’s first female defense minister, abolished
compulsory military conscription on June 27. Her decision, however, never took full
effect as two other ministries retained the right to continue drafting young people into
their service. About 25 per cent of all eligible conscripts typically serves in the Defense
Ministry, while the remainder are placed under the authority of the Interior Ministry…”
OE Watch | December 2016

28

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

The Investigation of the Bombing at the Chinese Embassy
in Bishkek Continues
OE Watch Commentary: The government of
Kyrgyzstan continues to investigate the suicide
bombing that took place at the Chinese Embassy
in Bishkek on 30 August. The accompanying
excerpted articles report on the most recent
developments; particularly a significant problem
that was recently uncovered. Apparently,
members of Kyrgyzstan’s Armed Forces and
Border Guards service had been selling weapons
and explosives out of their armories for two years.
The article from Zanoza reports on this
significant discovery. This is not the first time that
a service member with access to an armory has
been caught selling weapons (Please see, “Small
Arms in Kyrgyzstan” OE Watch, March 2016), but
this is an instance that involved a large number
of personnel. In addition to the 26 officers and
warrant officers dismissed, there were reportedly
over a dozen service members arrested and
charged with stealing and selling weapons.
The Chinese government has reportedly been
in contact with Kyrgyz officials involved in
the investigation, but there has not been much
information on its reaction to the bombing other
than condemning it. The article from China
Radio International also reports on the arrests of
Kyrgyz service members demonstrating that the
case continues to be followed in China. Finally,
the article from Vecherniy Bishkek reports that
an investigation into an assassination attempt
on a senior prosecutor on 29 July in Bishkek
helped uncover the sales of the weapons. The
prosecutor survived the attempt, which had been
carried out with a bomb made with explosives
allegedly bought from the same criminal group
that supplied the suicide bomber in the embassy
attack. The article also mentions that President
Atambayev reprimanded the Chief of the General
Staff, though it did not note any additional
measures taken to cut down on theft from
armories. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: Marat Uraliev, “Со склада ГПС продавали оружие и патроны. 26 офицеров
и прапорщиков уволены (Weapons and ammunition were sold from an armory of the
State Border Guards service. 26 officers and warrant officers have been dismissed),”
Zanoza, 12 October 2016. http://zanoza.kg/doc/345724_so_sklada_gps_prodavali_
oryjie_i_patrony._26_oficerov_i_praporshikov_yvoleny.html
“…a warrant officer of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic
was arrested by the security services. He sold Kalashnikov’s from the armory of one of
the Border Guards units…According to reports, the officers and warrant officers of the
Border Guards and General Staff had been selling weapons marked as unfit for service
since 2014…At the moment it is known that there are 26 rifles, 14 Makarov pistols and
13 thousand rounds of various calibers still unaccounted for…”
Source: “Kyrgyz officers implicated in Chinese embassy bombing,” China Radio
International, 24 October 2016. http://english.cri.cn/12394/2016/10/24/1461s943275.
htm
“…The Russian news agency Interfax, quoting Kyrgyz official sources, said that
according to investigators, officers sold weapons to the criminal gangs which conducted
the terror attacks on the Chinese embassy in Kyrgyzstan and against a Kyrgyz
prosecutor earlier this year…
…According to Russian and Kyrgyz media, police arrested an arms trafficker last
month, who was the driver of chairman of the Kyrgyz State Defense Committee, and
found several AK series rifles and a large amount of ammunition at his home. The
trafficker confessed that one of his suppliers was a border service officer…
The Chinese embassy in Kyrgyzstan was attacked on August 30 by a suicide car
bomber, in which the lone assailant was killed and five others were wounded. The
compound also suffered damage…”
Source: Bermet Malikova, “Прощай, оружие! (A Farewell to Arms!),” Vecherniy
Bishkek, 25 October 2016. http://members.vb.kg/2016/10/25/panorama/2.html
“…Details of those involved in the illegal sale of weapons to members of a criminal
group appeared during the operational and investigative activities in the case of the
assassination of the prosecutor this summer – said the agency…During the investigation
of the terrorist attack at the Chinese Embassy in Bishkek it was revealed that the suicide
bomber acquired explosives from members of the same (criminal) group. Those arrested
testified that the weapons, ammunition, and explosives were sold by members of the
Kyrgyz military…President Almazbek Atambayev reprimanded the Chief of the General
Staff of the Kyrgyz Armed Forces…”

“According to reports, the officers and warrant officers of the
Border Guards and General Staff had been selling weapons
marked as unfit for service since 2014.”

Bishkek Skyline.
Source: https://c1.staticflickr.com/9/8069/8188974166_9fb5e1f952_b.jpg

OE Watch | December 2016

29

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia Adds ‘Technicals’ to its Order of Battle
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
articles from Izvestiya discuss Russia’s use of
light trucks (referred to as ‘technicals’) as fighting
vehicles. Based on its combat experience in Syria,
Russia has found that light trucks are advantageous
in certain environments; particularly where
mobility and maintenance concerns trump the
requirements that conventional combat vehicles
meet. Russia is now creating special “light”
motorized rifle battalions that will be based on the
UAZ-3163 Patriot.
This is not Russia’s first experiment with the
use of ‘technicals’. In 2009, the 56th Air Assault
Brigade was equipped with UAZ ‘Hunter’ light
trucks. The project was abandoned after space
and weight difficulties were encountered with
transporting troops and cargos. As the passages
discuss, the UAZ-3163 Patriot alleviates these
problems due to its capability to accommodate
more troops and cargo. If Russia plans on a
continued presence in Syria, motorized rifle
battalions based on ‘technicals’ are likely to be
part of Russian capability development to support
the effort. Note: the accompanying image is of an
unmodified UAZ. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“One can call an armed pickup the contemporary embodiment
of a technical. These motor vehicles have a number of
advantages as compared to a factory-supplied military vehicle.
They outstrip army transport vehicles by an order of magnitude
based upon speed, expend less fuel, and they are much easier to
service, especially in urban conditions,”
— Military Expert Oleg Zheltonozhko
Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “The Return of ‘Technicals’ to the Russian Army,”
Izvestiya Online, 14 October 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/637713
The Russian Army has begun to actively employ in Syria a unique multi-role off-road
vehicle, which has been adapted for combat raids and patrolling at long distances and
also for engagements under urban conditions. Although these pickups are vulnerable
as compared to armored vehicles, thanks to their speed advantage, they can rapidly
arrive at the needed point and conduct a strike prior to the enemy moving up the main
force.
The army version of the UAZ-3163 Patriot pickup can be equipped with a Kord
heavy machinegun and an AGS-17 automatic grenade launcher. The experts think
that pickups with machineguns – are an ideal weapon for the maneuvering war in the
Middle East.
“The vehicles were airlifted to Syria at the end of the summer. “The Patriots are
(continued)
participating in escorting humanitarian convoys, the patrolling

The UAZ-3163-103 “Patriot” might replace the UAZ-3151 in the Russian army.
Source: https://topwar.ru/81531-uaz-3163-103-patriot-mozhet-zamenit-uaz-3151-v-rossiyskoy-armii.html

OE Watch | December 2016

30

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russia Adds ‘Technicals’ to its Order of Battle
of facilities, and are also acting
as mobile defensive installations,”
a Russian military department
spokesman, who is familiar with the
situation, told Izvestiya. “The vehicles
have undergone a special upgrade for
employment in the complex conditions
of the desert…
Besides the installation of a swiveling
gun turret in the truck beds, the UAZ
has obtained a large number of other
army upgrades – mountings have been
installed between the seats in the cabin
for two assault rifles and entrenching
tools (shovels, pickaxes, and crowbars)
and additional electrical outlets
for connecting night vision devices.
Special repair kits for patching tires
that have been punctured by bullets
have also become part of the Russian
jeeps’ equipment kit…
Military Expert Oleg Zheltonozhko
told Izvestiya that an armed pickup
will not replace an already existing
armored vehicle but can be used by
light mobile teams.
“One can call an armed pickup
the contemporary embodiment of a
technical. These motor vehicles have
a number of advantages as compared
to a factory-supplied military vehicle.
They outstrip army transport vehicles
by an order of magnitude based upon
speed, expend less fuel, and they are
much easier to service, especially in
urban conditions,” Zheltonozhko said.
“In the process, those automobiles
can be equipped with the most varied
weapons – from heavy machineguns
to multiple rocket launcher systems.
Although these pickups are also
vulnerable as compared to factorysupplied military vehicles, they can
rapidly arrive at the needed point in
a very short period of time thanks
to their speed advantage, conduct
a strike and withdraw prior to
receiving a retaliatory strike. In this
they have a significant advantage
over conventional army vehicles, the
deployment of which is carried out
over a much longer period of time”…

“Unique super-light motorized rifle brigades, the soldiers of which will
travel and fight with the enemy in UAZ Patriot jeeps-pickup trucks, will
appear in the Russian Ground Forces. The new military units, which
have been created based upon the experience of the combat operations
in Syria, will conduct high-speed raids at hundreds of kilometers in
contrast to traditional motorized rifle regiments and divisions in armored
transport vehicles and infantry fighting vehicles.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm, “The Ministry of Defense Is Forming Super-Light Brigades,” Izvestiya
Online, 21 October 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/639226
Unique super-light motorized rifle brigades, the soldiers of which will travel and fight with the
enemy in UAZ Patriot jeeps-pickup trucks, will appear in the Russian Ground Forces. The new
military units, which have been created based upon the experience of the combat operations
in Syria, will conduct high-speed raids at hundreds of kilometers in contrast to traditional
motorized rifle regiments and divisions in armored transport vehicles and infantry fighting
vehicles.
Motorized rifle battalions, which are equipped with UAZ Patriot pickup trucks, will become
the new military units’ main strike force. Each jeep transports up to seven personnel with their
personal weapons, and also various equipment, including additional ammunition, food and
supplies of water and fuel. The motorized rifle Patriots will be equipped with 12.7 millimeter
Kord machineguns, AGS-30 30-millimeters grenade launchers, and Kornet or Konkurs antitank
missile complexes. In the mortar battery, the jeeps will transport Podnos 82-millimeter mortars
and a basic load of mortar rounds.
“The formation of the new brigades is already occurring at the present time,” a military
department spokesman, who is familiar with the situation, told Izvestiya. “One military unit
each will appear in Southern and Central military districts in the near future, The new brigades’
organizational-staff structure will be different from the traditional organizational-staff structure.
There will be fewer personnel and vehicles in them but the ‘super-light’ brigades themselves will
be more maneuverable and mobile”.
According to Izvestiya’s information, besides the motorized rifle battalions in pickup trucks,
there will be traditional motorized rifle battalions, which are equipped with BTR-82, in the new
brigades. Artillery subunits, including rocket-propelled artillery, which are equipped with Grad
multiple rocket launcher systems, will also appear in the new military units. Anti-tank battalions,
which are equipped with antitank missile complexes, which are installed on motor vehicles, will
also be in the super-light brigades. The antitank missile personnel will be able to not only halt
and destroy enemy tanks but also knock out firing points and fortifications, and also destroy the
enemy, who has taken up defense in urban buildings.
“Over the course of a day, an ordinary motorized rifle battalion, which is equipped with
armored transport vehicles or armored infantry vehicles, can conduct a march to a distance of
no more than 100 kilometers. But a motorized rifle battalion in UAZ Patriot pickup trucks will be
able to cover a distance of several hundred kilometers per day. In the process, while operating
using small teams, the motorized rifle platoons and companies in pickup trucks will be able
to slip between enemy combat formations and conduct rapid strikes. But those battalions are
effective only under desert, steppe, and semi-arid terrain conditions. Based upon their combat
capabilities, automobile mounted infantry strongly loses to infantry in BMPs and BTRs in forests
and forest-steppe terrain…
OE Watch | December 2016

31

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Artillery Brigades to Get UAVs
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
passages discuss important developments in Russia’s
use and production of UAVs. First, Russia plans
to use the Orlan-10 UAVs as artillery spotters in
artillery brigades, a significant change from how
Russian Ground Forces units usually manage UAVs.
Second, Russia is transitioning from a UAV importer
to an exporter.
For practical reasons, the Russian Ground Forces
requires UAVs that do no not need airfields for
launching and landing. Due to this limitation, these
UAVs are too small to serve as weapons platforms,
but instead perform other enabling functions. These
functions include general reconnaissance, electronic
warfare, communications retransmissions, and
artillery spotting missions. The accompanying
article from Izvestiya discusses Russian plans to
field Orlan-10 UAVs as dedicated artillery spotters
in artillery brigades, a marked change from how
Russian Ground Forces units usually manage
UAVs. In general, Russia has had great success with
integrating UAVs into artillery spotting roles, and
it is of little surprise that dedicated artillery spotter
units will now be fielded. Although not mentioned in
the article, UAV spotters will also likely be found in
Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) Brigades,
as their primary mission is counter battery fire.
As the article discusses, Russia is now adding
UAV companies to all maneuver brigades. These
companies are typically divided into platoons, not
based upon function, but upon the size and range
of the UAVs they operate. For instance, the “miniplatoon” operates the hand launched Granat-1,
while the “short-range platoon” operates the larger
Orlan-10, Granat-4, and Eleron airframes. Generally,
Russian UAVs are designed to carry different
“payloads”. Thus the airframe may perform different
functions on different missions, in order to best
manage the limited number of airframes.
The article from Interfax discusses how Russia’s
domestically produced Orlan-10 airframe will now
be manufactured for export as the Orlan-10E. The
Orlan-10 has been very successful as an artillery
spotter, despite not being digitally integrated into
the Russian C4ISR and artillery control systems.
In practice, coordinates are relayed by the UAV
crews to the artillery fire control centers or forward
observers, which the UAV crews are co-located.
This effective and low cost system that is easy to
integrate will certainly be popular with Russia’s
customer base. Russia has now transitioned from
a UAV importer to UAV exporter. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“Russian artillery brigades and regiments will receive Orlan-10
UAVs, which can locate enemy command posts, communications
stations, gun mounts, and multiple-launch missile systems using
miniature electronic intelligence stations. However, the latest
artillery reconnaissance unmanned system is mainly targeted
against enemy counterbattery radars...”

Source: http://izvestia.ru/news/636937

Source: Aleksey Ramm, “Russian Artillery Troops Will Receive UAVs for Use
Against Radars,” Izvestiya Online, 10 October 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/636937
Orlan-10 UAVs will locate command posts, communications stations, gun mounts,
and multiple-launch missile systems.
Russian artillery brigades and regiments will receive Orlan-10 UAVs, which can
locate enemy command posts, communications stations, gun mounts, and multiplelaunch missile systems using miniature electronic intelligence stations. However, the
latest artillery reconnaissance unmanned system is mainly targeted against enemy
counterbattery radars, which can locate artillery systems with a precision of several
meters.
“The latest set of tests are almost complete,” Izvestiya was told by an informed
source at the Ministry of Defense. “An organization and establishment structure is
currently being drawn up for new artillery reconnaissance subunits, which will be
armed with these artillery reconnaissance unmanned systems. During the first stage,
reconnaissance UAVs will be part of combined-arms armies’ artillery brigades and
will later be included in the reconnaissance equipment of motorized rifle and tank
divisions’ artillery regiments.”
An artillery reconnaissance unmanned system is quite a complicated hi-tech
product, consisting of several UAVs, an analysis and data processing station, and an
automated control system. The core of an artillery reconnaissance unmanned system
is formed by several Orlan-10 UAVs, equipped with suspended electronic intelligence
containers, which can detect the activity of enemy communications equipment and
signals from counterbattery radars.
UAVs transmit collected information to the system’s command post, where a
processing station analyzes the data and an automated control system adjusts the
UAVs’ flying direction in such a way as to determine the position of the radar using
the triangulation method. Having located the target, one of the UAVs “hangs” over
the radar, transmitting its coordinates and video image to help
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

32

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian Artillery Brigades to Get UAVs
artillerymen destroy the target.
“The artillery reconnaissance unmanned system can
pinpoint and detect a wide range of targets,” Izvestiya
was told by an officer familiar with the operation of this
unique system. “These are air defense missile systems’
radars, radars which provide support during enemy aircraft
flights, and even miniature radar stations, which are now
commonly used by reconnaissance and infantry subunits for
surveillance at a distance of several kilometers.”…
“The experience of modern wars and armed conflicts
shows that artillery is still the god of war,” military analyst
Aleksey Leonkov tells Izvestiya. “Even airstrikes cannot
replace massed artillery fire. And the most effective way to
protect your troops from enemy artillery is to destroy that
artillery with the so-called counterbattery fire, when enemy
artillery positions are detected and instantly suppressed.
This is why the United States and NATO have traditionally
been paying close attention to creating counterbattery
radars.”
The expert noted that the use of artillery reconnaissance
unmanned systems will allow Russian artillerymen to
not only win the duel with the enemy and dominate the
battlefield in terms of firepower, but they will also be able to
inflict serious damage on the enemy’s command and control
systems, air defense systems, and other important assets.

Source: “Russia May Turn From UAV Importer Into UAV Exporter,”
Interfax-AVN, 17 October 2016.
Rosoboronexport has begun promoting Russian unmanned equipment on
the foreign market — information about the small-class UAV, Orlan-10E,
was presented at the Russian special equipment exporter’s stand at the
ArmHiTec 2016 exhibition that was held in Yerevan.
“Some people may think that the presence of information about a smallsize UAV at a Rosoboronexport’s exhibition is an insignificant fact.
Nevertheless, this signifies a very important step: Just a few years ago we
were importing such systems, and now we have the chance to turn from a
buyer into a supplier,” Denis Fedutinov, expert in the field of unmanned
systems, “a favorable circumstance here is that this is happening against
the backdrop of the successful application of these systems in the Syrian
campaign.”..
It was reported earlier that systems with Orlan-10 UAVs had successfully
passed the full range of Russian Ministry of Defense tests and are now
being supplied to the Russian Ground and the Airborne Troops. The total
of the flying hours clocked by Orlan family UAVs this year is more than
several tens of thousands of hours…
The control panel provides the possibility to simultaneously control three
devices at a distance of 100 km. The standard mobile configuration of the
Orlan-10E system includes two to four UAVs, a ground control terminal
with integrated training aids, and a remote antenna. There is also a
portable version with two UAVs.

“Some people may think that
the presence of information
about a small-size UAV at a
Rosoboronexport’s exhibition
is an insignificant fact.
Nevertheless, this signifies a very
important step: Just a few years
ago we were importing such
systems, and now we have the
chance to turn from a buyer into
a supplier…”
— Denis Fedutinov,
UAV Systems Expert

Source:http://izvestia.ru/news/636937

OE Watch | December 2016

33

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

T-14 Armata Improvements, T-72 Modernization
OE Watch Commentary:
The accompanying article from
Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer
(Military-Industrial Courier)
features an interview with
Lieutenant General Alexander
Shevchenko, Chief of the Main
Armored Directorate of the
Russian Ministry of Defense.
Lieutenant General Shevchenko
discusses several topics of
interest, including the fielding of
the T-14 Armata, robotization,
and a tank support combat
vehicle (BMPT). Perhaps the
most interesting aspect of the
interview is his discussion of the
T-72 modernization. Shevchenko
explains that approximately 1000
T-72s have been modernized
to the T-72B3 standard, with
plans that another 300 tanks will
also be upgraded. In terms of
capabilities, the T-72B3 has much
more in common with the T-90
than with older T-72s, and it is
almost certain that that many
T-72s can be refurbished for the
price of one T-14 Armata.
The accompanying article from
Izvestia mentions an interesting
aspect about future T-72
modernizations. Much as Russia
has adapted technologies found on
older tanks to be used on the T-14
Armata, technologies developed
for the T-14 Armata will now
be incorporated into future T-72
and T-90 modifications. Russia’s
design emphasis on incremental
development and modularity
significantly eases problems
related to sharing components
across different platforms. In
addition, the T-14 and T-72 are
made by the same manufacturer,
UralVagonZavod. This system
not only facilitates development,
but also presumably lowers
research and development costs.
End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“There are actually more than 1,000 of these tanks in the armed forces...
In the near future the armed forces will be acquiring ... over 300 improved
T-72-B3 tanks modified to meet the field’s requirements.”
— Lieutenant General Alexander Shevchenko, Chief of the
Main Armored Directorate of the Russian Ministry of
Defense.

T-14 Armata.
Source: Sergei Fadelchev, http://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2015/06/12/10/000113C400000CB2-3121195image-a-1_1434101515649.jpg

Source: Oleg Falichev, “Armata-Led Breakthrough,” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 27
September 2016, http://vpk-news.ru/articles/32436
The Kavkaz-2016 strategic command staff training exercise showed that the Russian army is ready
to accomplish the most unexpected missions in diverse theaters of operations. Officers and men
mobilized, morale high. But to what extent does our combat hardware meet the new challenges? What
new models of armaments and specialized equipment (VVST) are in development, are ready to go into
series production? Answers to these and other questions have been provided by Lieutenant General
Alexander Shevchenko, Chief of the Main Armored Directorate of the Russian Federation Ministry of
Defense…
[Falichev] Uralvagonzavod’s general director has said that as of today around 1,000 T-72 tanks have
been modernized to T-72-B3 standard. What now?
[Shevchenko] We began this work four years ago under the armored vehicle armament development
program. There are actually more than 1,000 of these tanks in the armed forces. It should be
mentioned that in terms of the cost-quality ratio we entered the top 10 with this vehicle. It has good
prospects and will continue to evolve. In the near future the armed forces will be acquiring under the
state defense order over 300 improved T-72-B3 tanks modified to meet the field’s requirements. The
upgrade will apply to the power plant, protective systems, and the sighting and aiming system…
[Falichev] A tank support combat vehicle (BMPT) development is based on the T-90, and deliveries
of it to Kazakhstan have begun. It is true that our colleagues are at a loss to explain why it has not
entered service with us here at home. What are the prospects in this respect?
[Shevchenko] This emphasizes yet again the attitude people have toward our equipment. So we
should say to our colleagues that we are already accepting it for service here. This, I believe, will
simultaneously increase its price and raise procurement volumes. At the same time, the General
Staff has yet to have its say on the vehicle in question, and this is beyond the competence of the Main

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

34

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: T-14 Armata Improvements, T-72
Modernization
Armored Directorate. I repeat: The vehicle has been built and is
ready at any moment to go for trials…
[Falichev] Right now our so-called partners are paying a lot
of attention to robotics. The soldier, the officer are as it were
withdrawing from the firing line and increasingly becoming
operators, which reduces losses in a combat environment.
[Shevchenko] In 2017, as has already been mentioned, we are
planning to put an entire range of new vehicles into service. Being
aware that their construction incorporates unique technologies, we
have now initiated a program that will submit recommendations and
developments relating to robotization. The exceptional nature of this
technology lies in the availability of digital equipment, which gives
them unique capabilities and creates a strong foundation for the
robotization of armored equipment. To this end the corresponding
scientific research has been started…The basis for robotization
has been established by the digital technologies incorporated at
the respective design stages of the Armata, the Kurganets, and the
Bumerang. It is a matter of building a system that will independently
take decisions on the battlefield, which is difficult enough. This
requires us to resolve the problems of machine vision and situational
awareness…
The work is intended to run for two years, by which time a robotic
Armata in which a digital device independently performs missions
on the basis of the objective situation may already have been built…I
repeat: In two years’ time a robotic Armata may have made its
appearance, but I wouldn’t kick up a fuss around a robotic tank….

T-72B3M.
Source: Image courtesy: Vitaly Kuzmin

Source: Aleksey Moiseyev “T-72 and T-90 Tanks to Receive
‘Electronic Brain’ From Armata,” Izvestiya Online, 10 October
2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/636502
Russia’s T-72 and T-90 main battle tanks are to receive the latest
electronic components of the Armata tank’s fire-control system:
the automatic target tracker (ASTs) and the computer unit, which
enable enemy combat hardware to be destroyed with the very first
round with almost 100-percent precision even in zero visibility.
The ASTs allows the gunner simply to point the sight at an
enemy tank and press a special button. The automatic tracker
will independently track the enemy vehicle, swinging the turret
to follow its movement and raising and lowering the tank’s gun.
For its part, by analyzing the various parameters, from the
combat vehicle’s speed and direction of movement to the weather
conditions and the status of the gun barrel, the system computes
the optimal firing parameters so as to guarantee target kill with
the very first round.
“Currently the Defense Ministry has scheduled several extensive
modernization options for the T-72 and T-90 tanks. The list of
prospective components planned for installation includes the
automatic target tracker and computer unit of the T-14 Armata’s
fire-control system,” Izvestiya has been informed by a military
department official familiar with the situation. “Following the
completion of trials of the Armata tank and its electronic systems,
work to install the ASTs and the computer unit on older models
of the T-72 and T-90 is scheduled. We plan to be testing the
modernized ‘seventy-twos’ and ‘nineties’ with the new systems
over the course of two to three years.”
As the paper’s contact described it, work to install the latest
components is greatly facilitated by the fact that the Kalina firecontrol system (SUO) — of differing generations, admittedly — is
installed on all three tanks.

Lieutenant General Alexander Shevchenko, Chief of the Main Armored
Directorate of the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense.
Source: http://vpk-news.ru/articles/32436
http://www.automobili.ru/upload/
medialibrary/9ad/9ad05bf3e5da547c094910b1b2e00108.jpg

“The most advanced version of the Kalina is installed on the
Armata. A previous-generation SUO is installed on the T-72B3
and the T-90. Specifically, the T-72B3 is fitted with an ASTs with
limited capabilities compared to the Armata, and even this is
lacking on the T-90,” the Defense Ministry official explains. “But
the underlying thinking and the technical solutions are largely
identical for all the SUOs, and therefore it is not technically that
difficult to transfer the units from the Armata to the T-72 and the
T-90…
OE Watch | December 2016

35

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Russian Ground Forces Communication ‘Backbone’
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpt from an interview with the Russian
Ground Forces Signals Chief, Major General
Aleksandr Viktorovich Galgash, discusses many
aspects of the Russian military’s communications
modernization effort. As Major General Galgash
explains, The Russian Federation has made great
efforts in transitioning away from Soviet era
analog based equipment, to digital equipment
with substantial data transmission, encryption,
and anti-jamming capabilities.
At the tactical level, the Russian Ground
Forces, the Aerospace Defense Forces, and
Navy have been receiving fifth generation
R-168 Akveduk radios for the last few years.
The entire Russian Ministry of Defense, as well
as Russia’s other militarized intelligence and
security structures appear to be transitioning
to the same radios for interoperability reasons.
Russia has also started introducing the sixth
generation R-187 Azart radio series. The
compact, frequency hopping VHF capable, Azart
reportedly implements a Software-Defined Radio
(SDR) technology that replaces some of the
radio’s components (mixers, filters, amplifiers,
modulators/demodulators, detectors, etc.) with
software solutions.
At the operational-strategic level, the
communications backbone for the Ground
Forces will be based on the vehicle mounted
‘Redut-2US’. The Redut-2US is a five vehicle
system that supports videoconferencing, data
retransmission, telephone communications,
automated command and control systems, and is
capable of interfacing with legacy technologies.
Major General Galgash explains Russian
military communications theory, and the premise
that the Russian Ground Forces must use a
networked combination of satellite and terrestrial
radio communications at different wavelengths
and alternating frequencies to maintain secure
and robust communications. The Russian
communications “backbone” provided by the
Redut-2US is not only maintained through
radio communications, but also by wired and
fiber optic networks. This redundancy not only
facilitates greater data flows, it also provides
more secure and less disruptible communications
in an electromagnetically challenged
environment. The fielding of the Redut-2US is
another example of Russian efforts to develop a
cross-platform “network-centric” C4ISR system.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Major General Aleksandr Viktorovich Galgash, Ground Forces Signals Chief.
Source: https://life.ru/t/%D0%B7%D0%B2%D1%83%D0%BA/920740/armieiskiie_
brighady_osnastiat_riedutami_novuiu_sistiemu_sviazi_obkatali_na_uchieniiakh

Source: Igor Korotchenko: “They Will Equip Army Brigades with ‘Redut’” Life
Online, 23 October 2016. https://life.ru/t/звук/920740/armieiskiie_brighady_
osnastiat_riedutami_novuiu_sistiemu_sviazi_obkatali_na_uchieniiakh

About the Development of the Ground Forces Advanced
Communications System
[Korotchenko] Let’s talk a bit about how the development of the Ground Forces
advanced communications system is progressing. And if you can, discuss it in
maximum detail within what you can say on the air.
[Galgash] The Ground Forces conduct ground operations, at the same time the
communications equipment, while taking into account the physics of the process,
use all echelons from space and air to ground. Within the space, air, and ground
echelons, a series of definite experimental design work projects is being conducted,
which will permit us, for example, for the space echelon, to create a single thirdgeneration satellite communications system (right now the second generation is being
used). The projects will also permit us to create an orbital constellation and a ground
grouping, which provide communications at any point. Relay stations on various
flight-lifting devices are being used for the air echelon – this includes unmanned
aerial vehicles, helicopters, aircraft, which use the physics distribution process and
radio wave propagation to increase the communications range and support the
command and control of troop groupings, which are operating on remote axes.
The ground echelon at the operational-strategic echelon – is the foundation of the
communications system’s field component. Redut complexes constitute it – these
are communications devices, which consist of communications equipment, channel
encryption devices, and devices for providing services to officials. Contemporary
requirements for the command and control system and, naturally, for the
communications system, compel us to provide such types of communications as
videoconference communications, telephone communications, data transmission, and
troop automated command and control. And all of these communications devices
are connected in certain individual devices of this complex. The hardware complex
and the command-staff vehicles, which are being developed within Sozvezdiye-2015,
constitute the foundation for the tactical echelon..
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

36

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Russian Ground
Forces Communication ‘Backbone’
On the Modernization of Command and Control Posts in 2016
[Korotchenko] Well, and what kinds of changes will occur in the technical equipment
of the field component of the signals troops and in the development of satellite
communications, well, in particular, what is planned in the near future?
[Galgash] As I have already said, equipping with Redut complexes is planned in the
near future for the operational and strategic echelons for the communication system’s
field component. They have undergone testing in the troops in the last two years and
they did themselves justice: they provide officials with all types of communications. And
the comprehensive equipping of all of the command and control brigades of the military
district army echelon with these complexes is beginning this year. Work is being
conducted at the tactical echelon on the creation of a single command and control
system at the tactical command and control echelon, which is complex based upon
its structure and consists of 13 command and control subsystems: the headquarters
command authorities, artillery, and others, and the types of troops, which are part of a
combined-armed formation…
[Korotchenko] Has shortwave communications not lost its significance with the active
introduction of satellite communications?
[Galgash] Shortwave communications is the foundation of the organization of
communications for the tactical echelon, satellite communications is designated for the
command and control of subunits, which are operating at a distance and on separate
axes outside the area of operations of the formation’s main subunits…

On the Renewal of Communications Equipment
[Korotchenko] Then the next question. Which new communications systems and
equipment are either being introduced or are being planned for introduction into the
troops within the State Armaments Program until 2020 at the present time? What
is their advantage? Specifically how many weapons and military communications
equipment entered the Ground Forces in 2016? And which models merit attention from
your point of view? What is their distinctive feature?
[Galgash]… Special attention is being devoted to outfitting with digital communications
equipment, both radio, radio-relay, tropospheric, and satellite communications
equipment. The Akveduk communications equipment complex and the Azart portable
communications equipment complexes are the primary communications equipment
at the tactical command and control echelon, for radio equipment – R-166 medium
output radios, R-419 radio relay equipment, R-423 tropospheric equipment, and R-441
satellite communications equipment. R-444 state-of-the-art satellite communications
equipment and other communications equipment are being supplied.

Redut-2US.
Source: http://nevskii-bastion.ru/redut-2us/

OE Watch | December 2016

37

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Declining Pay and Housing Shortages in the
“To this day every tenth Russian Army officer needs
Russian Military
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin
leadership continues to wrestle with a struggling
economy. Reduced fossil fuel revenues and
Western economic sanctions, combined with an
aging infrastructure and persistent corruption,
have hindered economic growth and have forced
the government to reduce social expenditures.
While the Kremlin’s patriotic rhetoric remains
as strident as ever, it appears that these economic
challenges are also beginning to affect military
spending, at least with regard to quality of life
issues for military personnel.
Quoting a recent report from the State
Duma Defense Committee, the excerpt from
the centrist newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
points out that due to the devaluation of the
ruble and inflation, “servicemen’s pay and
allowances have depreciated practically by
half over the last five years.” What makes this
report doubly interesting is that it was “signed
by Duma Defense Committee head, Hero of
Russia Colonel General Vladimir Shamanov,
who had commanded the Airborne Troops
prior to the September elections.” Shamanov is
widely regarded as a strong Kremlin loyalist,
and for him to sign such a report suggests that
the economic situation for those in uniform has
reached a troubling level. The report argues that
the government has failed to properly index the
pay to account for inflation for active duty and
retired military personnel.
The economic downturn has also hampered
the government’s ability to provide adequate
housing to military personnel. According to this
State Duma Defense Committee report, as of
“October 2016, 30,000 servicemen are among
those who need permanent housing, and 11,000
of these await the receipt of a housing subsidy.”
Despite President Putin’s directive to “provide
permanent housing to all servicemen by 2015”
the military housing waiting list continues to
grow. The excerpt claims that “every tenth
Russian Army officer needs permanent housing.”
The article concludes by pointing out the
comments of a high-level uniformed official,
who claims that these budget shortfalls “will
negatively impact prestige of the Armed Forces
and their authority in the eyes of society and
in the final account can negatively impact
their combat effectiveness, which cannot be
permitted.” As the Russian economy continues
to sputter, the military’s fight over scarce budget
allocations appears to be intensifying. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

permanent housing.”

Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “В страну возвращаются ‘бездомные полки,’ (‘Homeless
Regiments’ Are Returning to the Country),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 7 November
2016. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2016-11-07/1_6852_army.html
A reduction in military expenditures in the next three years will affect social items
of the defense budget to a considerable extent. The State Duma Defense Committee
expressed concern on this score in its Conclusion No 4/1.1, which noted in particular
that in the last five years “servicemen’s pay and allowances have depreciated
practically by half.” They have not been indexed for a long time, however, nor will they
be in 2017. The Conclusion states: “The Defense Committee believes that a diminished
level of servicemen’s social protection is impermissible” considering the importance of
missions being performed by servicemen and the role of this social category of citizens
in the life of society and the state.”
The Conclusion on the draft bill “On the
Federal Budget for 2017 for the Planning Period
of 2018 and 2019” was signed by Duma Defense
Committee head Hero of Russia Colonel General
Vladimir Shamanov, who had commanded
the Airborne Troops prior to the September
elections…. It becomes clear that the State
Duma Defense Committee disagrees not only
with government refusal to index servicemen’s
pay and allowances, but also with the fact that
President Vladimir Putin’s May (2012) Edict
No 604, which prescribes paying pensions to
retirees two percent above inflation annually,
also “is not being completely fulfilled.” …
Former Airborne Commander, now
…It is apparent from the document signed by
Duma Deputy
Shamanov that serious underfunding also is
and Chair of the Defense Committee,
expected for other social items of the military
Vladimir Shamanov.
Source: Wikimedia Commons
budget. The Duma Defense Committee gives
the reminder that “according to RF Defense
Ministry data, as of the end of October 2016, 30,000 servicemen are among those who
need permanent housing, and 11,000 of these await the receipt of a housing subsidy.…
This, too, is not much: with this money it is possible to provide housing only to 7,000
officer and warrant officer families annually. This means the waiting list for housing
in the Army and Navy will not be exhausted in the next three years. Meanwhile, the
President assigned the task of providing permanent housing to all servicemen already
by 2015.

This did not happen. To this day every tenth Russian Army officer needs permanent
housing. Military deputies direct attention to the fact that “according to RF Defense
Ministry data, as of the end of October there are 100,800 servicemen on file as needing
official housing.”…
…Major General Vladimir Bogatyrev, chairman of the National Association of Armed
Forces Reserve Officer Associations, believes for his part that problems involving
Armed Forces underfunding can be solved, but that this can be done only by the
Supreme Commander. “Our Association sent a letter to the head of state on behalf of
veterans of war and combat operations in which we expressed our concern over the
possible reduction in defense expenditures,” Bogatyrev told NG [Nezavisimaya Gazeta].
“We directed the President’s attention to the fact that this will negatively impact
prestige of the Armed Forces and their authority in the eyes of society and in the final
account can negatively impact their combat effectiveness, which cannot be permitted.”
OE Watch | December 2016

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Crimean Water Problems: “Settlements are Doomed”
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past
decade, Russian military theorists and pundits
have posited that one of the chief drivers of
future conflict will be scarce natural resources.
The current lack of fresh water supply in Crimea
may be a case in point. In the accompanying
excerpt from a Ukrainian weekly, the author
points out that the fresh water supply in Crimea
has dropped toward critical levels, and that if
a solution is not found soon, some settlements
may be “doomed.”
Prior to March 2014, Ukraine provided
the bulk of energy and water to Crimea via
power grids and the North Crimean Canal,
which supplied “85 per cent of Crimea’s fresh
water needs.” These sources have since been
restricted by the government in Kiev, forcing
Russia to ferry supplies into Crimea. Deprived
of a land route into Crimea, the author describes
the challenges the Kremlin has faced in
providing water and energy to the peninsula.
While the construction of a rail/road bridge
from Russia to Crimea over the Kerch Strait
continues, it will likely not be completed for
at least another year. Indeed, the author refers
to “the fairy tale about the bridge,” which will
purportedly solve “a number of problems,”
yet in reality, will not fully address Crimea’s
water and energy shortage. Plans to generate
more energy for Crimea via electric turbines
or gas pipelines (which could be used to run a
desalinization project) have been hampered by
Western sanctions.
The author describes how Russian officials
have attempted in the past to bribe local
Ukrainian authorities to channel water into
Crimea. To date, these efforts have failed, and
the water situation in some parts of Crimea
has fallen to dangerous levels, where “soil
salinization, particularly in north Crimea, [has
begun] to develop.” According to the experts
quoted in the article, should the shortages
continue, people living in these areas will be
forced to relocate, perhaps even off of Crimea.
The author concludes the article by suggesting
that the Kremlin may ultimately back down
and renounce its annexation of Crimea if the
Ukrainian government remains firm in its
resource blockade of Crimea. To date, however,
the current Kremlin rhetoric and other available
evidence do not point toward a such a resolution
of Crimea’s water problems. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Now water costs like gold, and, consequently, it must be
handled in the same manner…”

Map of North Crimean Canal (red).
Source: Wikimedia commons

Source: Valentyna Samar, “Туды и сюды без воды…(There and here, but without
water…),” Zerkalo Nedeli, 29 October 2016. http://gazeta.zn.ua/internal/tudy-i-syudybez-vody-_.html
…Regarding [shortage of fresh] water, electric power and everything linked to the
above, one will have to stay patient. For two or three years to come according to
President Putin….
…From small gas-turbine substations, and to building a bridge over the Kerch Strait.
So far, only the technological, “capital” foundations of the future overpass have been
erected and only on the narrow strip of the Tuzla Island, but, all of a sudden, there is no
money any more… However, the fairy tale about the bridge, as a button for solving a
number of problems, can be fed to the people for a number of years to come…
Any school pupil will tell you that to increase the consumption of electricity one must
increase its generation first…. Which, according to the plan, will be launched only if
Siemens turbines are supplied. However, the EU sanctions have stalled this project
completely.…As we can judge from Putin’s words, by the end of this year Russia will
have to lay across the bed of the Kerch Strait another “bridge” (a [natural] gas one) - a
pipeline going to thermal power plants that are being under construction in Simferopol
and Sevastopol. Which, using nobody knows which turbines (considering Siemens’
assurances that the company is not going to break the EU sanctions), is to step up
domestic production [of energy].
…The other sectors include water desalination technologies, which are now impossible
because the process is energy-intensive. And, after that resorts will be developing,
which depends on energy supplies…. So, the unresolved energy-supply problem is stuck
into another one - the shortage of fresh water. Both before and immediately after the
annexation of Crimea, many pundits were publicly saying that there was no alternative
to [pumping] the water from the Dnieper River through the North Crimea Canal which
supplies Crimea with up to 1bn cu.m. of water a year, enabling irrigation in this highrisk farming area….
The problems remain, and it is increasingly difficult for Vladimir Putin to find words
to convince that these problems will be soon resolved. …The minister of Russian
resources and ecology of the Russian Federation, Sergey Donskoy, said in October
(continued)
that the situation with water supplies in Crimea was “objectively
OE Watch | December 2016

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Crimean Water Problems: “Settlements are
Doomed”
somewhat worse than a year previously”. That water pipelines must be built to enable a flexible redistribution of water resources, that the
local authorities must tighten their control over water consumption. “Now water costs like gold, and, consequently, it must be handled in the
same manner…”
I will remind you that 85 per cent of Crimea’s fresh water needs was satisfied owing to the North Crimea Canal. Moscow could not close this
deficit, which occurred after Kyiv’s refusal to let pump the Dnieper water through this canal to Crimea after the latter was occupied in the
spring of 2014, nor can it close it two and a half years later….
…It has to be said that in the beginning, in 2014, the occupiers tried to solve the problem with running the water along the North
Crimea Canal according to the “understandings” [the criminal world’s rules of ethics]. At that time, according to the deputy head of the
administration of the acting president, Andriy Senchenko, who in the spring of 2014 insisted on not pumping water through the North Crimea
Canal, the travelling messengers from Simferopol offered a bribe of 20m dollars….
…“Since they have stopped watering the soil, capillary salinisation has started ALREADY. It produced a synergy effect, and soil salinisation,
particularly in north Crimea, began to develop fast…. And without the Dnieper water, these settlements are doomed.”…
…Today, many Crimean residents are fighting against Russia. Many regular servicemen who have kept their oath of allegiance to the people
of Ukraine, and many heroic volunteers…. Many of them have relatives in Crimea. Perhaps, that is why none of them wants to retake Crimea
by force. …A different, bloodless way is the way of economic sanctions and resource limitations. Our people will understand it and will cope
with it. The other ones - the recent arrivals - will have to go away.

Source: Ministry of Defense of Ukraine ; http://www.mil.gov.ua

OE Watch | December 2016

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Expanding Kremlin Influence in the Balkans?
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past several years,
senior Kremlin officials have repeatedly expressed
their displeasure at the continued expansion of NATO
and Russia’s decreased influence in Eastern Europe.
This sense of anger and disapproval was reignited
when, earlier this year, NATO officials announced that
Montenegro would soon become the 29th member of
the alliance. While uncovering the facts in the Balkans
has always been a challenge, the two brief excerpts
from Albanian sources suggest that the Kremlin may
be using economic, information, and various forms of
influence to foment “internal destabilization” in and
around Montenegro to prevent the country’s accession
into NATO. This would allow Russia to keep its last bit
of land access to the Adriatic Sea.
The first article insinuates that the (recently
unsuccessful) coup d’etat in Montenegro was orchestrated
by Russia, in order to “turn Montenegro into a satellite of
Russia and Serbia.” The article also questions why most
Albanian media “remained almost totally silent over both
the coup in Montenegro and the dangerous implications
it has beyond its borders.” Pointing to possible RussianAlbanian economic concerns, the author claims that the
“silence in Albania regarding the events in Montenegro
and the failed coup d’état there stinks of sponsorship,”
pointing out that some “Albanian ministers have sent
written requests to the Russian Gazprom requesting
that they set up an operation in Albania.” In addition to
economic incentives, the Kremlin has worked “to create
a friendly Russian climate within the Albanian public
through the daily glorification of Russian military power
and glory, as well as the Russian president.”
The excerpt from the second article describes an
unsettled border issue between Kosovo and Montenegro,
which if not resolved, could also stymie Montenegro’s
accession into NATO. The actual size of the disputed
territory is relatively small (8,200 hectares or 31 square
miles), but pro-Serbian deputies within the Kosovo
Assembly continue to block ratification of the border
agreement with Montenegro. The article points out that
“there is widespread speculation in Kosovo that the
Serbian deputies acted after consulting with Belgrade.
If true, Serbia and Russia have killed two birds with one
stone: both the Kosovo-Montenegro border agreement
and Montenegro’s NATO membership bid have been
delayed.”
While Montenegro’s military contribution to the NATO
alliance will be small, the second article explains that its
accession “would enable the West to close Russia’s last
overland corridor of access to the Adriatic Sea.” Incidents
over the past couple of months appear to indicate that the
Kremlin is willing to employ and expand its significant
influence within the region to prevent Montenegro from
joining NATO and to keep open its land access to the
Adriatic Sea. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Russia is using all means to overturn Montenegro’s
current NATO membership situation and deviate its proAtlantic policy.”

Map of Montenegro-Kosovo border.
Source: Wikimedia commons

Source: Shaban Murati, “Failed Coup d’Etat in Montenegro and Albania,”
Gazeta Shqiptare, 31 October 2016.
Events with international implications which occur in a neighboring country
should automatically draw special attention from Albania’s official offices and
the public. However, this did not happen when a shocking event took place in
Montenegro. A coup d’etat organized to take over the parliament, liquidate the
prime minister, and bring the opposition to power through violence failed on
the parliamentary Election Day on 16 October. This incident, during which,
as Montenegro’s Prosecutor Milivoje Katnic put it, “unprecedented terror and
bloodshed was prevented,” was almost not mentioned at all in Albania and
the Albanian media, which supply the public with all kinds of daily banalities
from Serbia and Greece. They remained almost totally silent over both the
coup d’etat in Montenegro and the dangerous implications it has beyond its
borders….
…It is not in Albania’s vital strategic and geo-political interests to have a
government in power in Montenegro that follows a policy aimed at turning
Montenegro into a satellite of Russia and Serbia, which is the objective of the
current pro-Russian and pro-Serbian opposition in Montenegro….
…Russia is using all means to overturn Montenegro’s current NATO
membership situation and deviate its pro-Atlantic policy. Unable to impose the
electoral victory of the pro-Russian and pro-Serbian forces in Montenegro,
Moscow applied the well-known geo-political method of changing the
country’s strategic orientation and its Atlantic policy by removing the
government from office…. The silence in Albania regarding
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Expanding Kremlin Influence in the Balkans?
the events in Montenegro and the failed
coup d’etat there stinks of sponsorship.
The confirmed implication of Serbian and
Russian citizens shows that the coup d’etat
was a joint Russian-Serbian operation….
…Pro-Russian factors in Albania, in
politics, in the media, in non-profit,
non-governmental associations, and
in academic and religious circles have
unusually strengthened over the last two
years. There is a clear Russian strategy
to create a friendly Russian climate
within the Albanian public through the
daily glorification of Russian military
power and glory, as well as the Russian
president…. Albanian ministers have sent
written requests to the Russian Gazprom
requesting that they set up an operation in
Albania.
…“Montenegro has entered the arena
of the Russian strategy to overthrow the
pro-Atlantic government through internal
destabilization. This is Moscow’s strategy
in the Balkans.”

Source: Blerim Reka, “New Border Conflicts in Balkans Could Foil NATO Strategy,”
Geopolitical Intelligence Services, 14 September 2016. https://www.gisreportsonline.com/
new-border-conflicts-in-the-balkans-could-foil-nato-strategy,defense,1982,report.html
Border disputes in the Western Balkans are stirring again. The newest one has flared up
between Kosovo and Montenegro — two small nations that emerged from the breakup of the
former Yugoslavia. Both are West-leaning, but their inability to handle a border demarcation
issue threatens to derail NATO’s larger strategy for containing Russia’s influence in the
region.
…The new conflict surfaced after a European Union-Balkans summit in Vienna, in August
2015, at which Kosovo and Montenegro signed an agreement on border demarcation.
Montenegro’s Assembly ratified it, but the Assembly of Kosovo has balked, as the opposition
claims that the deal deprives Kosovo of 8,200 hectares of its land.
…At this point, Montenegro is just one step shy of becoming NATO’s 29th member. Its
accession has a particular weight for the alliance because it would enable the West to close
Russia’s last overland corridor of access to the Adriatic Sea. Having accepted Albania and
Croatia in 2009, NATO is now tantalizingly close to being able to complete its southern
security ring by covering the entire Adriatic line from Trieste to Otranto. All that needs to
happen is that the missing link, Montenegro, meets the criteria for acceptance. The snag is
that a candidate state must have no outstanding border issues with neighbors….
…There is widespread speculation in Kosovo that the Serbian deputies acted after consulting
with Belgrade. If true, Serbia and Russia have killed two birds with one stone: both the
Kosovo-Montenegro border agreement and Montenegro’s NATO membership bid have been
delayed.

Ukrainian Military Manpower Challenges
OE Watch Commentary: As winter approaches, the conflict between pro-Russian
separatists and Ukrainian forces in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of the country continues
to smolder. All sides claim they are working toward a peaceful resolution, yet the political
status of these regions remains undetermined and the fighting drags on. The Kremlin
leadership appears intent on exploiting this conflict to weaken the current pro-Western
orientation of the government in Kiev. The ability of the Ukrainian military to maintain a
robust defense will be key in thwarting the Kremlin’s plan. Alongside modern weaponry,
trained and motivated personnel are central components of the Ukrainian defensive operations.
The accompanying excerpts from Russian and Ukrainian sources describe some of the recent
achievements and challenges in the realm of Ukrainian military manpower.
Since May 2014, the Ukrainian military has gone through six waves of mobilization (men,
between the ages of 18-50, were conscripted for a period of up to 18 months) to beef up
military manpower. These mobilized soldiers have now completed their tour of duty, and as
the first excerpt points out, in early November 2016, President Poroshenko announced that
“not a single military person called up under mobilization remains on the frontline.” President
Poroshenko went on to emphasize that now, the “Ukrainian Armed Forces must be fully
staffed with volunteers, contract soldiers who are very well drilled, motivated, trained and
equipped.”
The second excerpt challenges the president’s assertion that all drafted soldiers have been
released and claims that “mobilized soldiers still remain on the frontline.” The article goes on
to point out that “the contract servicemen who have already been recruited are not so good or
so well-motivated. In addition, a serious shortage of personnel is observed in units.” According
to a quoted source, “because they [the military] did not manage to recruit a sufficient number
of people, they simply changed and reduced the establishment. For example,

(continued)

Source: “Ukraine finalizes 6th wave of
demobilization,” Interfax, 2 November
2016.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko
has accepted the report of Defense
Minister Stepan Poltorak and Chief
of the General Staff Viktor Muzhenko
regarding completion of the process of
discharge of military personnel in the
country’s sixth wave of demobilization…
“As the president and the Supreme
Commander-in-Chief, I can report to
the Ukrainian people that from now
onwards, that not a single military
person called up under mobilization
remains on the frontline, in the ATO
[Ukraine’s military operation in
Donbas] area. And the Ukrainian
Armed Forces must be fully staffed
with volunteers, contract soldiers
who are very well drilled, motivated,
trained and equipped,… The Ukrainian
Armed Forces that we have today are
qualitatively new,” Poroshenko said.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Ukrainian Military Manpower Challenges
whereas before, there were 670
persons in the establishment of
a battalion, now there are only
500. Consequently, battalions
and brigades are not at full
strength.” This article also
questions the willingness of
these new contract soldiers to
fight, claiming that “far from all
contract servicemen are wellmotivated.”
The article concludes by
describing the continued
challenges in transforming
Ukraine’s mobilization
military to a professional force,
particularly in light of the semifrozen conflict in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. Should
the conflict escalate and require
additional manpower, the excerpt
points out the Ukrainian military
will be able to draw upon the
“reservists from all six waves of
mobilization,” totaling “100,000
such persons.”
The Ukrainian military
continues its transformation
toward becoming a professional
fighting force. However, as this
conflict drags on, the resolve
and tenacity of the Ukrainian
state and military will be tested.
End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

Source: Artur Hor, “Порошенко уничтожил эту армию: в АТО жалуются на качество
контрактников (Poroshenko Has Destroyed This Army: Volunteers in Antiterrorism Zone Complain
About Quality of Contract Servicemen),” Apostrophe, 2 November 2016. http://apostrophe.ua/article/
politics/government/2016-11-02/poroshenko-unichtojil-etu-armiyu-v-ato-jaluyutsya-na-kachestvokontraktnikov/8118
President Petro Poroshenko stated on 2 November that not a single military person called up under
mobilization remains on the frontline. In his words, the Army should henceforth be provided only by
well-motivated contract servicemen. However, participants in the antiterrorism operation say that the
head of state’s information is inaccurate and that mobilized soldiers still remain on the frontline. And
in the words of volunteers, the contract servicemen who have already been recruited are not so good
or so well-motivated. In addition, a serious shortage of personnel is observed in units….
Immediately under this statement comments appeared from people representing the military who
stated that commanders were reporting inaccurate information to the president and that mobilized
soldiers remain on the frontline after all….
…However, in the words of volunteers, the full replacement of mobilized soldiers with contract
servicemen remains a big problem. Let us note that, according to the information of the Defense
Ministry, 60,000 persons have signed a contract with the Ukrainian Armed Forces since the beginning
of the year, and the total number of military persons who were accepted to serve under contract from
2014 through 2016 was 90,000.
“There are not enough personnel, and the contract-based army is not [as] successful as they are
trying to make out to us,” volunteer Olha Reshetylova says. “Because they did not manage to recruit
a sufficient number of people, they simply changed and reduced the establishment. For example,
whereas before, there were 670 persons in the establishment of a battalion, now there are only 500.
Consequently, battalions and brigades are not at full strength. This is precisely how the command
authority got out of the situation.”
Problems are present not only with regard to the numbers of contract servicemen, but also with their
motivation. Military expert Ihor Romanenko noted that one should not idealize mobilized soldiers. In
his opinion, it is necessary to work more actively on the development of a professional army, and then
the Defense Ministry will receive the possibility of filtering out unmotivated people….
In the expert’s words, if an escalation of the conflict begins in the Donets Basin, reservists from all six
waves of mobilization will come to help. According to the information of the Defense Ministry, there
are 100,000 such persons.

Ukrainian President, Petro Poroshenko.
Source: Wikimedia commons

OE Watch | December 2016

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian UAV Defense and Developments
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian
armed forces continue to develop and
strengthen their unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) technology and defenses.
While perhaps not as advanced as their
Western counterparts, Russian weapon
manufacturers continue to close the UAV
technology gap. The accompanying two
excerpts describe two recent technological
advances within Russian UAV defense and
development.
The first excerpt from the government
news source, Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online,
describes a new Russian weapon which
purportedly can defend against even
swarms of drones by “reliably disabling
their built-in radio-electronic systems,
turning the drone into a useless piece of
inert iron and plastic.” This article also
goes on to claim that “Russia is also
developing a state-of-the-art, custom-built
electronic warfare system, the Shipovnik
AERO, which will have the capability
to hack the built-in computers of enemy
drones, in addition to taking them under
full control.”
The second excerpt, from the proKremlin source Izvestiya Online, claims
that Russia’s new National Guard will soon
be equipped with “tailor-made unmanned
air vehicles that are protected against
hostile takeover by enemy electronic
warfare systems.” According to the article,
if an enemy tries to hack into the ZALA
16E5 system, the UAV “will ignore any
incoming commands from an alien source
and, in the event of loss of contact with the
base, will switch to automatic mode and
return to base under its own steam.” This
UAV will have a range of up to 150 km and
will be equipped with “photographic and
video cameras, night vision instruments,
and a thermal imaging device.”
With regard to Russian weapon
developments, sifting the truth from
disinformation has always been a
challenge. Nevertheless, over the past
several years, the Russian military and
associated manufacturers have made
significant improvement with advanced
weapon systems to include UAV
deployment and defense. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“And such a weapon has already been developed in
Russia; it does not destroy the drones physically or jam
them, but reliably disables their built-in radioelectronic
systems, turning the drone into a useless piece of inert iron
and plastic…”
Source: Dmitriy Grigoryev, “В России создали эффективную систему борьбы со стаями
ударных дронов (Effective System for Combating Swarms of Strike Drones Developed in
Russia),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 29 October 2016. https://rg.ru/2016/10/29/v-rossiisozdali-effektivnuiu-sistemu-borby-so-staiami-udarnyh-dronov.html
An effective weapon against swarms of mini strike drones capable of disabling an
air defense system has been developed in Russia. TASS has been informed of this by a
representative of the United Instrument Manufacturing Corporation (UIMC, which is part of
the Rostekh State Corporation).
“To combat massed raids by robotic systems, a weapon is needed that will act on the drones
on an intrinsically new level. And such a weapon has already been developed in Russia;
it does not destroy the drones physically or jam them, but reliably disables their built-in
radioelectronic systems, turning the drone into a useless piece of inert iron and plastic,” the
agency’s interlocutor said….
…The source clarified that ordinary air defense systems and electronic warfare complexes
are powerless against such “robotic aerial predators,” but the intrinsically new weapon
developed by Russian specialists will simply not allow the swarm of robots to reach its place
of destination….
…As Rossiyskaya Gazeta has already reported, in addition to a weapon against robot
swarms, Russia is also developing a state-of-the-art, custom-built electronic warfare system,
the Shipovnik AERO, which will be able not only to hack the built-in computers of enemy
drones, but also to take the flying vehicles under full control….
Source: “Росгвардия получит невзламываемый беспилотник (Federal Service of National
Guard Troops To Receive Unhackable Drone),” Izvestiya Online, 3 November 2016. http://
izvestia.ru/news/642289
The Federal Service of National Guard Troops (FSVNG) is to receive tailor-made unmanned
air vehicles that are protected against hostile takeover by enemy electronic warfare systems.
The drone, which is manufactured by the company ZALA AERO GROUP (which is part of the
Kalashnikov concern), will ignore any incoming commands from an alien source and, in the
event of loss of contact with the base, will switch to automatic mode and return to base under
its own steam.
The state-of-the-art unmanned air vehicle (UAV) ZALA 16E5 is capable of carrying out
aerial reconnaissance while remaining in the air for up to 16 hours consecutively and
transmitting an image to the operator at a distance of up to 150 km. The flying drone’s builtin equipment includes photographic and video cameras, night vision instruments, and a
thermal imaging device. And images received from them are superimposed on one another,
allowing the operator to monitor a terrain at any time of day or night….
The tailor-made Russian software, which, in Khamitov’s words, is the exclusive design of
ZALA GROUP, renders UAVs invulnerable to enemy electronic warfare systems. The control
signal is encrypted by a special algorithm, and when an attempt is made to replace the
communications channel or jam its built-in system, it will detect the substitution and issue a
command to return the apparatus to its place of launch by the shortest route.
OE Watch | December 2016

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia Develops New Anti-Sonar Coating for Submarines
OE Watch Commentary: The Krylov Science Center and
Okeanpribor (Ocean Instruments) Concern, with the support of
Advanced Research Foundation (FPI) have been developing a
new anti-sonar coating to be applied to Russia’s submarine fleet.
The excerpted article from Izvestia discusses the implications of
this, particularly regarding signals detection and distortion.
According to the piece, the new piezoceramic coating is a
polymer film with zirconium, titanium, and lead oxides, all of
which have signal absorbing characteristics. The article explains
that when the coating is applied to the hull of a submarine,
it uses the piezoceramic’s properties of absorption to detect
signals that come in contact with the submarine’s hull, in effect
turning the hull into a hydro-acoustic antenna for the entire
ship. Using the data gained from the coating, the submarine can
detect signals and distort any signals coming in contact with the
coating.
According to the article, the project is currently in the late
stages of development, which is expected to be completed in
2017. The reliability of the new coating, and the distorting
qualities it has, makes piezoceramics a likely replacement for the
rubber anti-sonar coating in use with the US and Russian navies
today. The article outlines the Russian Navy’s plans to equip
future submarines with the coating, as well as the its plans to
equip current submarines with the coating after the development
is complete. End OE Watch Commentary (Gartner)

“Aleksandr Mozgovoy, an expert in the field of naval
engineering, noted that piezoceramic coatings will
replace passive anti-sonar coverings made from
rubber, which today cover all multirole and nuclear
submarines.”
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin and Aleksey Ramm, “Russian Submarines
will become Invisible to Sonar: The Krylov Science Center and
the ‘Okeanpribor Concern are Creating a Unique Coating based on
Piezoceramics,” Izvestiya Online 30 September 2016
“The use of piezoceramics, or more precisely piezoceramic-based
films, is an advancement in the development of sound-absorbing
technologies, and here Russian developers again substantially
surpass Western developments,” noted Aleksandr Mozgovoy. The
main advantage is the capability of acquiring a long-lasting and
strong covering, within which various sensors and antennas can
be integrated. Not only future ships, but also those already in
the inventory can be covered with the new anti-sonar material.
For example, the Project 667BDRM strategic nuclear-powered
submarine missile cruisers, the missile attack APLs [nuclear-powered
submarines], and the multirole Project 971 submarines. For this it
would be sufficient to replace their hull covering with a new coating
during regular between-deployment repairs, and connect it to the
electronic systems of the submarine itself.”

Delta IV class submarine.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/83/Submarine_Delta_IV_class.jpg

OE Watch | December 2016

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Return of the Antitank Rifle
OE Watch Commentary: During
the Great Patriotic War (the Soviet
War with Germany in World War
II), Soviet infantry would haul the
PTRD-41 or PTRS-41 14.5x114mm
antitank rifles. These were unwieldy
(just under seven feet long),
heavy (38 pounds and 46 pounds
respectively), could engage targets
out to 800 meters and produced
a very hefty recoil against the
gunner’s shoulder. They were not
very effective in penetrating tank
armor and produced an immense
muzzle blast that gave away the
weapon’s location immediately.
Despite their designation as antitank
rifles, they were more accurately
anti-material weapons that were
effective against less-armored
weapons systems and vehicles. The
recoil frustrated all efforts to equip
them with telescopic sights.
As the accompanying article
from Izvestia discusses, Tula is
developing a new, unwieldy, heavy,
hefty-recoil, large-caliber sniper
rifle for the ground forces. It is
designated as the KSV. Up to this
point, the maneuver brigade had a
sniper platoon. The article indicates
that this may be increased to a
sniper company with the addition
of a platoon of these anti-material
weapons. It will fire a 23mm [.91
caliber] round (the same diameter
as the antiaircraft round common in
the ZPU-1 and ZPU 23-4 antiaircraft
systems). It will use design
characteristics of the 23mm round
and the 30mm automatic cannon
found in the turret of the BMP and
helicopter gunships. This indicates
that the bullet is probably a subcaliber, fin-stabilized discardingsabot round with a tungsten
penetrator. Recoil dissipation will
be a major design challenge. Tula
has pulled off some real surprises
in the past. It will interesting to
see how they handle this latest notso-small-arms challenge. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Russian Defense Ministry plans to equip snipers and
motorized rifle and tank brigades with unique large-caliber
sniper rifles capable of disabling enemy tanks with a single
shot using 23-mm bullets, destroying armored vehicles and
armored personnel carriers, and also eliminating the crews
of mortars, anti-tank missiles, and man-portable air defense
systems.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm, “Defense Ministry Orders Sniper ‘Mini-Cannon’: It Can Be Used To
Smash a Tank Gun, Disable a Tank Tread or Shoot Off a Track Link,” Izvestia, http://www.izvestia.
ru, 14 October 2016
The development of the new unique sniper system is being conducted by the Tula Instrument
Design Bureau, which is part of the Precision Systems Holding Company. “The large-caliber
sniper rifle is listed on the development list of possible new Ground Forces small arms systems up
to 2020. The Instrument Design Bureau is now leading the design of the new rifle system. After
the rifle is manufactured and factory and state tests are underway, the government will decide on
its adoption. We plan to complete all work in the next two-three years.”
Technically speaking, this is not about a large-caliber sniper rifle but a small sniper cannon,
since systems with calibers greater than 20-mm are categorized not as small arms but as small
caliber cannon. Aleksei Sorokin, head of the Central Design Research Bureau of Sporting and
Hunting Weapons stated that his enterprise plans to issue the first prototype of the KSV next year.
“We are now at the most complex stage of work. We are developing the ammunition for the new
system,” Sorokin stated. “The ammunition will be based on so-called wrap-around [pereobzhatysub-caliber] cartridges from 30-mm shells used in automatic cannon and 23-mm anti-aircraft
ammunition. A unique bullet design with very high ballistic coefficient has also been developed.
According to our plans, over the next year we will prepare the working design documentation, start
to issue the KSV, and then move on to design tests. It is clear that the product will be fairly big with
length of almost two meters, and heavy, since the 23-mm ammunition has considerable recoil.”
The unique new ammunition for the KSV does not pierce thick tank armor, but can disable a tank
with a single shot.
Military expert Aleksei Leonov stated “The development of sniper rifles whose caliber is close to
20-mm currently occupies an important place in the small arms system in many countries of the
world. Such rifles are heavier than standard sniper rifles of 12.7-mm caliber currently in service.
But in terms of range of fire the 20-mm sniper systems are not inferior to small caliber guns
mounted on armored personnel carriers and infantry fighting vehicles, while surpassing them in
accuracy. The energy of the ammunition in this rifle makes it possible to penetrate the armor of
military vehicles and field fortifications, not to mention personnel. In fact, this rifle dominates over
other sniper systems on the battlefield.”
Currently, the composition of each Russian army infantry brigade includes a motorized rifle
company of snipers, of which it is planned to equip one platoon with sniper ‘mini-cannons.’ The
subunit will act as a mobile reserve headed by the unit commander in the most important area.
Sorokin stated that “the tank has many vulnerable spots. A KSV can destroy a tank gun and it will
be unable to fire. By smashing its viewing devices and sights we will leave it blind. With a broken
tank track or track link, and according to calculations our ammunition can do this, the tank will
lose mobility. Currently, simultaneously with the creation of the KVS, we are conducting detailed
scientific research where we are analyzing the vulnerabilities of tanks and ways to destroy them.”
OE Watch | December 2016

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Upgrading Arctic Air Defense
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has maintained
an anti aircraft gun and air defense missile capability
on the assumption that electronic countermeasures
can neutralize missiles, but bullets will fly unhindered
through an electronic barrage. Often, the gun and
missile systems are paired on tactical air defense
vehicles such as the SA-22 Pantsir and the SA-6
Tunguska. As the accompanying passage discusses,
this dual capability is being stripped from the Arctic
version of the SA-22. The system will lose its two
dual 30mm autocannon for additional missiles. The
autocannon are for short range air defense and Arctic
skies are not always clear or sunlit, as the passage
points out. Further, there are more moving parts in a
gun system that can be affected by severe cold. These
may be factors in the loss of the autocannon capability.
The Arctic Pantsir may also be mounted on the
Vityaz DT-30P tracked, articulated, amphibious, allterrain vehicle. This vehicle platform is becoming
ubiquitous for the Arctic ground forces as it becomes
the carrier of choice for supplies, personnel, medical
evacuation, weapons systems and field kitchens. From
a repair and logistics perspective, it makes a lot of
sense. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Mikhail Kotov, “Arctic-Class Pantsir Will Have No Guns,” Moscow
Life, 9 November 2016. https://life.ru/
The Instrument-Making Design Bureau engaged in the development of the
Pantsir-S1 self-propelled surface-to-air missile/gun systems has been discussing
the configuration of the Arctic-version Pantsir. In the words of the designers, it
will not have its gun armament but a modernized target-detection radar station
will be installed on the system instead, according to the publication Voyennoye.
rf reports.
In addition, the Arctic version of the air defense system will be provided with
an increased missile capacity — 18 missiles will be installed instead of 12. These
are the requirements of the Ministry of Defense, which directed this change.
There are very likely two principal reasons for the absence of the gun
armament. First, dense fogs are a frequent occurrence in the Arctic, and the
target needs to be visible for engaging it with a gun, while radar guides a missile
to its target automatically. Second, the extremely low Arctic temperatures
severely complicate the functioning of gun armaments.
The Pantsir system may be mounted on the Russian-built Vityaz DT-30 PM
all-terrain chassis. It is a tracked vehicle and has been built to travel across
ground with a low load-bearing capacity — swampland, for instance — virgin
snow, roadless terrain, and rugged forested terrain. The Vityaz can operate
within a temperature range of plus 40° to minus 50° C [104° to -58° F].
Previous information disclosed plans to mount the Tor-M2 short-range SAM
system on a Vityaz chassis for use in Arctic and High Northern environments.

Arctic Ground Forces Training Concludes Before Onset of Polar Night
OE Watch Commentary: The weather
in Murmansk this time of year is iffy. It
can rain. It can snow. Daylight dwindles
until December, when it disappears
completely for some 40 days. As the
accompanying passage by the Western
Military District Press Service discusses,
the Northern Fleet’s 200th Motorized
Rifle Brigade and the 61st Naval Infantry
Brigade conducted their final major
joint training exercise for 2016. The
exercise included force-on-force training
and live-fire exercises. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

Source: “A Two-Sided Tactical Exercise of Northern Fleet Ground and Coastal Defense
Troops North of the Arctic Circle Has Ended,” Western Military District Press Service,
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 22 October 2016. http://www.mil.ru.
Over the course of several days, soldiers from a Northern Fleet motorized rifle brigade
and naval infantry brigade practiced combat training missions in accordance with a combat
training course. Individual elements of the exercise involved subunits moving to specified
locations, taking up advantageous positions, and carrying out defensive and offensive
actions.
In the course of the exercise, the Northern Fleet ground and coast guard troops improved
their proficiency in utilizing standard-issue weaponry and military equipment, constructing
field fortifications, and coordinating battlefield interaction. Here the motorized rifle subunits
rehearsed defensive tasks, whereas the naval infantry practiced offensive tasks.

During the practical exercise phase, combat range-firing exercises involved motorized
rifle, tank, and artillery subunits. In the course of the firing exercises T-72B tank crews; field gun crews of the Akatsia, [2S2 152mm selfpropelled howitzers], Gvozdika [2S1 122mm self-propelled howitzers], Nona [2S9 120mm self-propelled gun/mortars], and Msta-S [2s19
152mm self-propelled howitzers]; gun crews of the Shilka quad 23mm self-propelled anti-aircraft guns; gunners of the Strela-10 surface-to-air
missile system; firing crews of the Grad [BM-21 122mm] multiple rocket launchers, teams of the [AT-4 Spigot] Fagot antitank guided missile
system; and subunits of motorized rifle personnel carried out fire missions to suppress and destroy a notional enemy’s combat equipment and
manpower.
Subunit commanders’ ability to control their subordinates under the conditions of rapidly changing combat were assessed in the course of the
exercise.
Around 5,000 service personnel and more than 500 pieces of armored and support vehicles were mobilized during individual phases of the
exercise.
OE Watch | December 2016

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia Training Special Forces Helicopter Squadrons
OE Watch Commentary: Ever since the
first rotary wing assets were introduced
to the battlefield they have become an
indispensible section of any modern military.
The Russian military is now seeking to
train more specialized helicopter squadrons,
which will allow them to
employ their special forces
more efficiently.

“Military expert Anton Lavrov observed that at the present time
the air and space forces of practically all developed countries
have helicopter subunits specialized in work with special units
and subunits.”

The goal of the new
specialized helicopter
squadrons is to transport
special forces soldiers to
the rear of the enemy, to
destroy their fire support
and cut off their evacuation
routes. The pilots of these
new squadrons are being
taught to fly at ultra low
altitudes, as well as attack
by utilizing the element of
surprise to their advantage.
These specialized pilots
would increase the
likelihood that the troops
they transport survive, as
well as accomplish their
mission.
As the accompanying
excerpt points out, the
special forces’ helicopter
The Mi-8AMTSh helicopter in flight.
subunits are being
Source: http://pinstake.com/russian-military-helicopter
formed from regimental
and brigade Mi-8AMTSh and Mi-8MTV-5 transport and assault
Source: Aleksey Ramm,“Российский спецназ получит вертолетные
helicopter squadrons. The newly trained pilots will also be integral
эскадрильи (Russian Special Forces Will Be Getting Helicopter
in the deployment of armored vehicles such as the Gusar and Tigr.
Squadrons),” Izvestiya Online, 5 October 2016. http://izvestia.ru/
news/635900
These armored vehicles will be deployed with the use of the Mi-26
ultra-heavy transport helicopters, nicknamed “flying cows” due to
their immense size. Their size presents a challenge for pilots trying
The special forces’ helicopter subunits are being formed from
to fly undetected into the enemy rear, but the Mi-8AMTSh and Miregimental and brigade Mi-8AMTSh and Mi-8MTV-5 transport and
8MTV-5, the helicopters that will be transporting the special forces
assault helicopter squadrons. As distinct from conventional line
soldiers, cannot fit the vehicles in their fuselage.
pilots, the special forces’ helicopter pilots will acquire more in-depth
flying skills under adverse weather conditions and also at night under
Perhaps one of the reasons the Russian military is focusing on
terrain-following conditions, when the crew of the rotary-wing vehicle
creating new squadrons of specially trained helicopter aviators is
descends to maximum low altitude, hiding from enemy observation.
due to the historical success of such units. Two instances of special
The special forces’ pilots will also master several special tactical
forces pilots being coupled with special forces soldiers are the war
maneuvers making it possible to confuse the enemy and successfully
with Georgia in August of 2008; and the operation in Crimea in the
land special forces in the enemy rear…. Military expert Anton Lavrov
spring of 2014. In both of these instances, the 344th Center provided
observed that at the present time the air and space forces of practically
the pilots for the operations. These pilots will form the groundwork
all developed countries have helicopter subunits specialized in work
and provide combat training for the pilots of the new specialized
with special units and subunits.
squadrons. End OE Watch Commentary (McConnell)

OE Watch | December 2016

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia’s National Guard to Receive “Unhackable” Drone
“The tailor-made Russian software... renders UAVs invulnerable to enemy
electronic warfare systems.”
OE Watch Commentary: In April
2016 Russian President Vladimir Putin
authorized the development of a National
Guard (NG). Over the ensuing months
he has not only developed regulations for
the NG and provided a manning strength
of 340,000 service men and women, but
he has also outfitted the NG with various
types of weaponry, both new and old.
As the accompanying passage discusses,
the latest new addition appears to
be the so-called unhackable drone,
designated as the ZALA 16E5. These
drones are reportedly protected against
hostile takeover by enemy electronic
warfare systems. The drone is designed
by the ZALA AERO GROUP which,
according to company spokesman Nikita
Khamitov, will be delivered at the start
of 2017. End OE Watch Commentary
(Thomas)

Source: “Federal Service of National Guard Troops to Receive Unhackable Drone. Latest
Flying Drone Will Identify Attempt to Substitute its Control Signal and Return to Launch
Position,” Izvestiya Online, 3 November 2016.
“The Federal Service of National Guard Troops is to receive tailor-made unmanned air
vehicles that are protected against hostile takeover by enemy electronic warfare systems. The
drone, which is manufactured by the company ZALA AERO GROUP (which is part of the
Kalashnikov concern), will ignore any incoming commands from an alien source and, in the
event of loss of contact with the base, will switch to automatic mode and return to base under
its own steam.
The state-of-the-art unmanned air vehicle (UAV) ZALA 16E5 is capable of carrying out
aerial reconnaissance while remaining in the air for up to 16 hours consecutively and
transmitting an image to the operator at a distance of up to 150 km. The flying drone’s built-in
equipment includes photographic and video cameras, night vision instruments, and a thermal
imaging device. And images received from them are superimposed on one another, allowing
the operator to monitor a terrain at any time of day or night.
At the present time, the 16E5 DVS unmanned air vehicle is undergoing factory tests, which
will last until the end of the current year,” the ZALA Company’s spokesman, Nikita Khamitov,
told Izvestiya. “On the basis of the results of testing, the drone has received a number of
improvements, including the replacement of its electric engine with a more compact and
powerful internal combustion engine, which made it possible to increase flight duration and
maximum speed several times over. We plan to deliver the UAV to the FSVNG for testing
already at the beginning of 2017.

The modus operandi of a system for taking hostile control of drones is fairly simple: Electronic reconnaissance stations analyze the UAV’s
control signal and create a copy of it. After this, the station severs the drone from the original control signal with powerful interference,
replacing it with the fictitious one. The tailor-made Russian software, which, in Khamitov’s words, is the exclusive design of ZALA GROUP,
renders UAVs invulnerable to enemy electronic warfare systems. The control signal is encrypted by a special algorithm, and when an attempt
is made to replace the communications channel or jam its built-in system, it will detect the substitution and issue a command to return the
apparatus to its place of launch by the shortest route.”

The Zala 421 16E5 on display at an arms show.
Source: https://21stcenturyasianarmsrace.com/2015/11/10/the-drone-index-zala-421-16e5/

OE Watch | December 2016

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia Supplies China with 3-D Electronic Maps for
the Su-35 Fighter
“...the system makes it possible to create fairly complex electronic flight maps...”
OE Watch Commentary:
For the past year, Russia and
China have negotiated over the
decision to offer China digital
maps. In late October, a decision
was made to do so. China does
not possess a present capability
to make electronic maps,
according to Russian spokesman
Givi Dzhandzhgava, deputy
general director of an electronic
technologies concern. As the
accompanying piece from Izvestia
discusses, the 3-D maps depict
the terrain, object on the ground,
and enemy positions and air
defense systems. With the maps,
Chinese pilots will be able to fly
at much lower altitudes and hit
enemy target with higher accuracy.
Russian military expert Yuriy
Lyamin noted that by accepting
Russian software “China will bind
itself to us for the entire working
life of the Su-35s.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “Russia to Supply 3-D Electronic Maps for Su-35s to China. Thanks
to Electronic Information Chinese Pilots Will be able to Carry Out Flights at Ultralow
Altitudes and Hit Targets Accurately,” Izvestiya Online, 1 November 2016.
The 3-D cartography is carried out by Mobilnyye Informatsionnyye Sistemy [Mobile Information
Systems] NPO [Science and Production Association] in conjunction with the Geokosmos company.
The method is based on the use of an air-based laser scanner combined with a high-resolution
digital aerial photography device and a module of the GPS\GLONASS satellite system for
determining coordinates. Scanning the space, the laser records the inclined distance to the point
of reflection and the value of the angle. The operation of the laser-ranging system results in a 3-D
coordinates-linked “cloud” of laser points reflected from objects in the terrain and the surface of
the land. The processing of these data by special software subsequently shapes a 3-D model of the
terrain.
According to Izvestiya’s information it is a question of the cartographic depiction of Chinese
territory alone. In this context along with the software Beijing will be supplied with SPPZ-35
firmware systems for planning and preparing flight assignments, developed and manufactured by
the Ramenskoye Instrument Making Design Bureau (RPKB).
The product makes it possible to systematize information on the tactical situation, weather
conditions, and geographical relief of the terrain,” Daniil Brenerman, general director of the
enterprise, tells Izvestiya. “The SPPZ-35 creates an interactive layout of the aircraft’s flight plan
and inputs data for the use of air-launched weapons, the set of communications systems, and
programs for firing decoys, combining all these data into a single electronic document that will be
loaded into the fighter’s onboard computer by means of a flash drive.
According to the specialist, the system makes it possible to create fairly complex electronic
flight maps incorporating information on the aerial navigation situation in the region of flight,
the boundaries of prohibited and dangerous zones where test flights are taking place, in-flight
refueling, flights outside the lower echelon, data on artificial isolated and group obstacles, and
navigation and flight support aids.”

Sukhoi Su-35S at MAKS-2011 airshow.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a9/Sukhoi_Su-35S_at_MAKS-2011_airshow.jpg

OE Watch | December 2016

50

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Karen Kaya & Matt Stein

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

The Evolution of Turkish-Russian Relations
On 9 August 2016, Russian President Putin and Turkish President
Erdoğan met in St. Petersburg to restore the relationship between
Turkey and Russia. Their growing friendship had come to an abrupt
end when Turkey had shot down a Russian fighter jet in November
2015. The meeting resulted in some reconciliation between the two
countries, particularly the effort to re-establish economic ties. It was
an important moment in the complex ties between the two countries,
with regional economic and security consequences. An examination
of Turkish and Russian perspectives provides insight into how each
country sees its interests in relation to the other; and how this might
impact the future of Turkish-Russian relations. The general view on
both sides appears to be that while there may be good prospects for
reconciliation in the economic, energy cooperation and trade fields;
Syria and wider security challenges will continue to be a thorn in relations.

Source: http://www.sigmalive.com/en/news/international/138172/russiaturkeyrelations-freezing-over-fast

Background
Turkey and the Soviet Union were on opposite sides of the Iron
Curtain throughout the Cold War, and relations were slow to take root
in the post-Cold War era. Turkish President Erdoğan’s rise to power
in Turkey in the early 2000’s reversed decades of Cold War freeze and
ushered in an era of economic cooperation, with Russia becoming
Turkey’s top trade partner at one point. In December 2004, Putin
became the first Russian head of state to visit Turkey since the Russian
and Ottoman empires established relations in the 15th century. This
was followed by Erdoğan’s visit to Moscow in January 2005 and another visit a few months later. Ideological differences which defined the
countries’ relations during the Cold War era made way for a collaborative relationship, with some competitive overtones.
Starting in 2005, Turkish-Russian relations took on a new importance, in the form of energy. Trade had increased gradually since the
end of the Cold War; but the real boost came with the growth of Russian natural gas exports to Turkey. Over the next decade, the bilateral visits and volume of trade continued to flourish. Russian tourists
flocked to Turkey, becoming the second largest group of tourists in
Turkey by 2015. Turkey chose Russia’s state-run atomic energy company to build its first nuclear power plant.
During this time, there were stark differences in the two countries’
geo-political interests, but these differences did not seem to obstruct
the mutually beneficial economic ties and a strong rapport on the
leadership level. In Turkey, this was characterized as ‘compartmentalization’ of issues.1 This meant that despite fundamental disagreements between Ankara and Moscow on issues including Syria, Egypt,
Ukraine, Georgia, Armenia, Chechens, Kurds, and a competition for
influence in Central Asia, the two presidents could still work togeth-

SPECIAL
ESSAY

er to increase trade and forge a close energy partnership. This era of
‘compartmentalization’ ended with Turkey’s downing of the Russian
jet in November 2015 that briefly violated Turkish airspace; and the
subsequent trade and economic sanctions that Russia imposed on
Turkey.2

Economic and military ties
The Russian government imposed sanctions against Turkey soon after the downing of the Su-24, including a ban on the import of Turkish
goods, the cancellation of the visa-free regime, and restrictions against
tour groups traveling to Turkey. Over 4 million Russian tourists had
visited Turkey in 2014.3 An examination of the imports and exports
between the two countries from 2000-2014 show that Russian exports to Turkey have been considerably larger than Turkish exports
to Russia.4 These economic ties all came to a halt in November 2015.
The combined economic damage, along with a sense of isolation in
the region, led Erdoğan to express his sorrow and apologies for the
November incident, in a cleverly worded letter he sent to Putin on 26
June 2016, which helped reverse the negative trend in relations.5
The meeting between Putin and Erdoğan on 9 August 2016 included reviving “Turkish Stream,” a proposed natural gas pipeline
from Russia to Turkey across the Black Sea which had been put on
hold since November 2015.6 Turkey has been an important customer of Russian natural gas and according to one estimate from 2015,
the country imported 27 billion cubic meters of natural gas. Turkish
Stream has a potential capacity of 63 billion cubic meters, but it may
be as low as 15.75 billion.7 The total cost of the pipeline is estimated
at $12.8 billion, though it is unclear how the project will be financed.8
Charter flights for Russian tourists resumed following the meeting, but
it is expected to take 2-3 months before it has a noticeable impact for
the Turkish economy.9
Outside of economic ties, the Russian government took steps to
re-establish and improve its military relationship with Turkey. Even
before the Erdoğan-Putin meeting took place, the Russian Ministry of
Defense (MoD) proposed a new set of procedures to improve Russian-Turkish command and control for air operations in order to avoid
another incident.10 A “hot line” was established between the General
Staffs of Russia and Turkey. Putin and Erdoğan also created a committee made up of political, military, and intelligence officials in order to
coordinate efforts in Syria. Officials noted that while both sides have
different views on various security issues in Syria, they want Syria to
remain a unified state.11

Conflicting Interests in Syria
While the meeting between Erdoğan and Putin resulted in some
reconciliation between the two sides, Russian media and security
analysts have noted conflicting interests over the situation in Syria. One of the main differences over Syria is the Russian support for
President Bashar al-Assad while the Turkish government wants him
removed from power.12 In addition to this, Turkey has been fighting
with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) for a number of years, while
Russia’s relationship with Kurds in Syria has been supportive, though
not always clear. The Russian government has provided some political
support for Kurds in Syria and there are reports that the government
has also provided weapons in addition to air strikes which targeted
groups fighting the Kurds.13 Russia media has also not been clear about
what support the government provides Kurds, but acknowledged that
any support is detrimental to any reconciliation with Turkey.14

(continued)

OE Watch | December 2016

51

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Karen Kaya & Matt Stein

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: The Evolution of Turkish-Russian Relations

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Russian bases and troop deployments in Syria as of 25 December 2015. A higher resolution version of the map can be found at the source link and it shows Russian
forces are deployed in two main locations: the port of Tartus (on the map as “Тартус”) and the Khmeimim airbase, south of the city of Latakia (Латакия). On the far left
the map also lists the names and types of Russian ships in the Mediterranean and involved in the operation, the types of air defense systems, and the numbers and
types of aircraft based in Syria and those conducting air strikes out of Russia.
Source: http://images.shoutwiki.com/acloserlookonsyria/6/64/Situation_in_Syria_Dragon_First_1.png

While the Russian government has shown support for Assad, it is
not always been unconditional. Russia’s support for Assad takes place
because of an interest in protecting its influence in the Middle East
and its naval facility in Tartus, which provides the Russian Navy a port
in the Mediterranean Sea. Syria has been a Russian ally for a number
of years, dating back to the Soviet Union’s security assistance to the
Syrian government and has continued to the present with assistance
for Assad.15 Russia is also interested in preventing violence and extremist groups in Syria from spreading and the government believes
that the removal of Assad would allow this to happen as it sees no viable alternative leadership. The Russian government has viewed the uprising in Syria that started in 2011 as an internal issue and stated that
only Syrians should be allowed to decide who will lead their country.16

Sometime in the summer of 2015 Assad reportedly requested that
Russia conduct air strikes against opposition forces in Syria. Russian
began deploying forces to Syria in August and September, and carried
the first airstrikes on 30 September. The Russian government claimed
that the airstrikes targeted terrorist groups, but other reports noted
that they struck Assad’s opposition. The airstrikes have also allowed
Russian access to the Khmeimim airbase, from where it has continued
to conduct operations.17
From the Turkish perspective, Russia’s involvement in Syria complicated its plans in the region. It tipped the balance of power in favor
of the regime of Assad, which Turkey was insisting, “must go.”18 Prior
to Russia’s involvement, Turkey was working for a ‘safe-zone’ along the
Turkey-Syria border, which would drive the Islamic
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

52

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Karen Kaya & Matt Stein

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: The Evolution of Turkish-Russian Relations

SPECIAL
ESSAY

nal issue or an external problem. Because the Syria issue is our domesState (ISIS) out of the 68-mile area west of the Euphrates River. Turkey
tic issue. We have an 850 km border with Syria, along with familial,
hoped to stop Kurdish expansion in the north of Syria, particularly to
historical and cultural ties. Therefore what happens in Syria can never
prevent the Syrian Kurds from achieving territorial continuity among
allow us to be idle observers to it. Just the opposite- we need to hear
their three cantons in northwestern Syria, along Turkey’s borders.
the voices there, we do hear them, and of course, we have to do what’s
Russia’s involvement in Syria, and the subsequent crisis in relations
necessary.”24
due to Turkey’s shoot down of a Russian jet in November 2015, upended these plans and brought Russian-Turkish tensions to an all-time
high. The Russian government accused Turkey of supporting terrorRecent Developments: Operation Euphrates Shield
ism through purchases of oil from ISIS and claimed that the downing
of the Su-24 took place because the bomber had just completed an
On 24 August, the Turkish Armed Forces launched Operation
air strike against ISIS’ oil production. President Putin and Russian
Euphrates Shield against the Islamic State and Kurdish forces in Syria.
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov both made statements that accused
Through a combined arms assault, Turkish forces quickly crossed the
Turkey of buying oil from ISIS and this accusation would be repeated a
border and captured territory west of the Euphrates River in Syria
number of times by Russian officials and appeared in the media in the
(including the city of Jarabulus) in an effort to remove ISIS and to
weeks following the incident.19
force the Kurds in Syria east of the river.25 Russian officials expressed
concern about the operation aggravating the situation in Syria, but reAt some point, the Turkish press even warned against the risk of
20
frained from condemning it.26 While the Russian government did not
armed conflict between the two sides. From the Turkish perspective,
Russian airstrikes in Syria helped the Syrian Kurdish group called the
criticize the goals of the operation, the Russian Strategic Studies InstiYPG—the armed wing of the Democratic Union Party (PYD); which
tute noted that the operation appears to be aimed more at Kurds than
Turkey considers to be the extension of the outlawed Kurdistan Workthe Islamic State and other sources believed that the operation would
ers’ Party (PKK). Turkey was also disappointed when the PYD opened
eventually change and Turkey still wants to remove al-Assad from
21
an office in Moscow in February 2016.
power. The Russian press also noted that the Turkish government gave
advance notice to Russia of
Turkey’s frustration rethe operation.27
garding this issue is impossible to understand without
Turkey’s operational
looking at what was hapgoals were twofold: To clear
pening inside of Turkey at
the area of ISIS and also
the time. There was a peace
to ensure that the Syrian
process with the PKK, and
Kurdish PYD forces do not
Turkey was seeing a perifill the vacuum. As Turkish
od of relative stability and
President Erdoğan said on
absence of terror attacks by
6 September, “We need to
the group. However, Russia’s
demonstrate our presence
involvement in Syria, which
in the region. If not, terTurkey believes to have emrorist groups such as [IS],
boldened the Syrian Kurds,
the PKK and its Syrian
also had the effect of emoffshoot the YPG will fill
boldening the PKK in Turthe vacuum.”28 Similarly,
key. In the summer of 2015,
Burhanettin Duran from the
the PKK ended its peace
pro-government Foundaprocess and escalated its tertion for Political, Economic
ror attacks inside of Turkey. Operation Euphrates Shield: The situation as of 19 September 2016.
and Social Research in
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turkish_military_intervention_in_the_Syrian_Civil_War#/
Turkish officials believe that media/File:Turkish_Offensive_in_Northern_Syria.png
Ankara, says Turkey’s aim is
the Russian regime not only
to develop a comprehensive
provides support and arms
approach not to just fight
to the Syrian Kurdish forces, but also played a key role in the PKK’s
ISIS, but also to block PKK and PYD aspirations in Iraq and Syria.29
decision to start fighting again inside Turkey. Ankara regards the
The Kurds and Syria will likely be the key issues in the Turkcurrent escalation in PKK attacks in Turkey, as an outcome of Russian
ish-Russian relationship, at least in the short term. The indications
22
actions in Syria. As an expert notes:
are that Moscow will continue to support Ankara’s enemies in Syria,
specifically the Assad regime and the Syrian Kurds. Turkish analysts
believe that the current rapprochement is based more on necessities
“The support that Russia gives Kurds is a huge blow to Turkey. This
and interests; rather than any kind of strategic alignment.30 They note
support will mean the unification of the Kurdish cantons established by...
the PYD, [which will mean] their extension from the entire border rethat Turkey is trying to find ways to ensure that it gets included in the
‘game’ in Syria; and that Operation Euphrates Shield is an effort to engion... This will mean the establishment of a unified Kurdish entity along
sure this.31 In addition, the negative rhetoric used by both sides against
the Turkish border, which can threaten the country’s security; and carries
the risk of sabotaging the political solution efforts that Ankara has started
the other when relations were frozen, means that it will take some
23
with the Kurds to end a war that has been going on for 30 years.”
time for the sides to re-establish trust. Despite these divergent stances
on geo-political issues, relations are likely to be revived in economic
cooperation, particularly in the energy field. 
For this reason, Turkish officials view the Syrian crisis as a “domestic issue.” In 2011, when the crisis erupted, then-Prime Minister (now
President) Erdoğan said: “We do not view the Syria issue as an exter(continued)
OE Watch | December 2016

53

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Karen Kaya & Matt Stein

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: The Evolution of Turkish-Russian Relations

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Notes
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Kadri Gürsel, “Rusya’yla Uçak Krizi Öncesine Dönülemez (It is not Possible to
Return the Pre-Jet Crisis [Period] with Russia),” Cumhuriyet.com, 12 August
2016. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/koseyazisi/583192/Rusya_yla_ucak_
krizi_oncesine_donulemez.html
“Rusya ve Türkiye Suriye’de Neden Ayrı Düşüyor? (Why are Russia and Turkey
thinking so Differently on Syria?),” Ankarastrateji.org, 26 December 2015,
http://ankarastrateji.org/yorum/rusya-ve-turkiye-neden-suriyede-ayr-duuyor/ Turkey had not joined other European Union and Western countries in
applying economic sanctions against Russia for its aggression against Ukraine.  
Mikhail Korostikov, Olga Kuznetsova, Aleksandra Mertsalova, and Elena
Chernenko, “Ужесточению режима дана виза (The tightening of the current
visa regime),” Kommersant, 28 November 2015, http://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/2865156; Roman Kretsul, “Массовых чартерных перевозок в Турцию
в этом году не будет (There will no mass charter flights to Turkey this year),”
Izvestiya, 30 August 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/629391
The Observatory of Economic Complexity, “Visualizations, What does Russia
export to Turkey? (2014),” http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/visualize/tree_map/
hs92/export/rus/tur/show/2014/; “Visualizations, What does Turkey export
to Russia? (2014),” http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/visualize/tree_map/hs92/
export/tur/rus/show/2014/
Henri Barkey, “The Russian-Turkish Fling: Off Again on Again,” The
American Interest, 17 August 2016. http://www.the-american-interest.
com/2016/08/17/the-russian-turkish-fling-off-again-on-again/
Elizaveta Kuznetsova, “«Турецкий поток» поделят пополам (“Turkish
stream” will be divided in half),” Kommersant, 11 August, 2016, http://
kommersant.ru/doc/3060544
Andrey Gurkov, “Opinion: Erdogan, Putin and the touchy Turkish Stream,”
DW, 7 August, 2016, http://www.dw.com/en/opinion-erdogan-putin-andthe-touchy-turkish-stream/a-19454975; Gazprom Export, “Press, Delivery
Statistics, http://www.gazpromexport.ru/en/statistics/
Kuznetsova, “«Турецкий поток» поделят пополам (“Turkish stream” will be
divided in half),”; “Эрдоган готов заплатить за «Турецкий поток» (Erdogan
is prepared to pay for “Turkish stream”),” BFM, 11 August, 2016, https://
www.bfm.ru/news/330712
Kretsul, “Массовых чартерных перевозок в Турцию в этом году не будет
(There will no mass charter flights to Turkey this year),”; Yekaterina Zapara,
“Первые чартеры в Турцию вылетят 3 сентября (The first charter flights
to Turkey will depart on 3 September),” Izvestiya, 30 August, 2016, http://
izvestia.ru/news/629576
Nikolay Surkov, “Турецких пилотов научат взаимодействовать
с российскими (Turkish pilots will learn to interact with Russian
counterparts),” Izvestiya, 8 August, 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/625665
Aleksey Zabrodin, “Сирия проверит на прочность ренессанс дружбы
Москвы с Анкарой (Syria will verify how solidity of the friendship
renaissance of Moscow with Ankara),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 12 August,
2016, http://www.ng.ru/world/2016-08-12/1_siria.html
Maksim Yusin, “Почему России и Турции будет сложно стать
стратегическими партнерами (Why it will be difficult for Russian and Turkey
to become strategic partners),” Kommersant, 9 August, 2016, http://www.
kommersant.ru/doc/3059503
Igor Kryuchkov, “Курдский фактор раздора (The Kurdish factor of
contention),” Gazeta.ru, 23 January, 2016, https://www.gazeta.ru/
politics/2016/01/22_a_8036459.shtml; Maxim Suchkov, “How Russia
sees Kurdish quest for autonomy,” Al-Monitor, 6 May, 2016, http://www.
al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/05/russia-syria-iraq-kurds-questautonomy.html; Fehim Tashtekin, “Russia, US and the Kurds: the friend of my
enemy is – wait, what?,” Al-Monitor, 3 May 2016, http://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2016/05/turkey-russia-syria-kurds-cooperate-russians.
html
Yusin, “Почему России и Турции будет сложно стать стратегическими
партнерами (Why it will be difficult for Russian and Turkey to become
strategic partners),”; Volkan Ozdemir, “КАРТ-БЛАНШ. Путин и Эрдоган
встретятся, чтобы определить отношения на годы вперед (CarteBlanche. Putin and Erdogan will meet in order to work out relations for the
coming years),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 9 August, 2016, http://www.ng.ru/
politics/2016-08-09/3_kartblansh.html
Dmitry Trenin, “Russia’s Line in the Sand on Syria,” Foreign Affairs, 5 February
2012, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/syria/2012-02-05/russias-linesand-syria; Ilya Barabanov, Ivan Safronov, and Yelena Chernenko, “Разговор
по прямому поводу (A direct conversation),” Kommersant, 21 September
2015, http://kommersant.ru/doc/2814812

16. Правительство России (The Government of Russia), “Новости (News),
6 августа 2015, четверг (6 August 2015, Thursday), Интерью Дмитрия
Медведева египетской газете «Аль-Ахрам» (Dmitry Medvedev’s
interview with the Egyptian newspaper “Al-Ahram” http://government.ru/
news/19157/; “Войну в Сирии закрыли на технический перерыв (The
war in Syria has closed for a technical break),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 12
September 2015, http://www.ng.ru/editorial/2016-09-12/2_red.html
17. “Договор о размещении авиагруппы РФ в САР заключен на бессрочный
период (The agreement on the deployment of the Russian air group for an
indefinite period has concluded),” RIA Novosti, 14 January 2016, https://ria.
ru/syria_chronicle/20160114/1359734984.html; Ivan Safronov and Sergey
Goryashko, “Россия в Сирии: вид сверху (Russia in Syria: the view from
above),” Kommersant, 26 October 2015, http://kommersant.ru/doc/2836487
18. “Turkish PM says Assad must go before any change in Turkey’s stance,”
Hurriyet Daily News, 14 July 2016, http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/
turkish-pm-says-assad-must-go-before-any-change-in-turkeys-stance-.
aspx?PageID=238&NID=101580&NewsCatID=510
19. Galina Dudina, Mikhail Korostikov, Olga Kuznetsova, Ivan Safronov, Yelena
Chernenko, and Maksim Yusin, “Огонь на расторжение (Shooting to divide),”
Kommersant, 25 November 2015, http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/2861705;
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, “Press Service,
Minister Speeches, Statements and speeches by Minister of Foreign Affairs
Sergey Lavrov, Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov’s interview with Russian and
foreign media, Moscow, November 25, 2015,” http://www.mid.ru/en/press_
service/minister_speeches/-/asset_publisher/7OvQR5KJWVmR/content/
id/1948861; Irek Murtazin, “Минобороны сдает секретные карты? (Is the
Ministry of Defense giving out secret maps?),” Novaya Gazeta, 4 December
2015, http://www.novayagazeta.ru/politics/71010.html
20. “Türkiye-Rusya gerilimi NATO’yu ürkeklestirdi (Turkey-Russia tensions have
made NATO nervous),” Zaman.com.tr, 18 February 2016, http://www.zaman.
com.tr/dunya_turkiye-rusya-gerilimi-natoyu-urkeklestirdi_2347539.html
21. “Moskova’da PYD ofisi (PYD office in Moscow),” Milliyet.com.tr, 11
February 2016, http://www.milliyet.com.tr/moskova-da-pyd-ofisi-/dunya/
detay/2192651/default.htm
22. Asli Aydintasbas, “With Friends Like These: Turkey, Russia, and the End of
an Unlikely Alliance,” European Council on Foreign Relations, 23 June 2016,
http://www.ecfr.eu/publications/summary/with_friends_like_these_turkey_
russia_and_the_end_of_an_unlikely_7048
23. Samir Ilyas, “Rusya’nin Suriye Kürtleri hesabi (Russia’s calculations on Syrian
Kurds),” Al Jazeera, 12 April 2016, http://www.aljazeera.com.tr/gorus/
rusyanin-suriye-kurtleri-hesabi
24. Izbul, Can. “Erdoğan: “Suriye İç Meselemiz, Gereğini Yapmak Durumundayız
(Erdoğan: “Syria is our Domestic Issue, We have to do whatever is
Necessary”). Amerika’nin Sesi (Voice of America), 7 August 2011. http://
www.amerikaninsesi.com/a/erdogan-suriye-ic-meselemiz-geregini-yapmakdurumundayiz-127078293/898713.html
25. Metin Gurcan, “What’s Turkey really up to in Syria?,” Al-Monitor, 25 August,
2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/08/turkey-syriaeuphrates-operation-possible-outcomes.html
26. Evgeniy Medvedev, “Турецкая операция против ИГ мутировала в войну
с курдами (The Turkish operation against ISIS mutated into a war with
the Kurds),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 29 August, 2016, http://www.ng.ru/
world/2016-08-29/1_turkey.html; Evgeniy Medvedev, “Анкара срывается в
курдское пике (Ankara breaks off into a Kurdish dive),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
30 August, 2016, http://www.ng.ru/world/2016-08-30/6_ankara.html
27. Nikolay Surkov, “Генеральные штабы России и Турции связала прямая
линия (The General Staffs of Russia and Turkey connected a direct line),”
Izvestiya, 12 August, 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/626858#ixzz4HAAywTzW;
Nikolay Surkov, “Россия запросила у Турции планы воздушной кампании
в Сирии (Russia requested plans of Turkey’s air campaign in Syria),” Izvestiya,
26 August, 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/628933
28. Semih Idiz. “Turkey demands role in Mosul battle, but coalition unconvinced,”
Al Monitor.com, 15 September 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2016/09/turkey-iraq-syria-isis-raqqa-mosul.html#ixzz4KTTJ21kd
29. Ibid.
30. Soli Özel, “Rusya ziyaretinden sonra (After the Russia visit),” Haberturk.com,
14 August 2016. www.haberturk.com/yazarlar/soli-ozel/1281581-rusyaziyaretinden-sonra
31. Metin Gürcan, “Turkey Reaches Critical Crossroads in Syria,” Al Monitor,  9
September 2016, www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/09/turkey-syriaeuphrates-shield-reach-crossroads.html

OE Watch | December 2016

54

