fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 6
Issue #9
September 2016

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment
SPECIAL ESSAY

Sri Lanka: Iran’s New
Strategic Partner?

An Iranian ship entering
Colombo, 9 February 2015
MIDDLE EAST
3

Iraq: The Tactical and Political Challenges of the Mosul
Offensive
4 Syria: A Potential Turning Point in the Fight Against ISIS
5 Iran Demands Release of Nigerian Shi’ite Cleric
6 Iran: Revolutionary Guards Take Part in Russian Military
Games
7 Iran: New UAV to Disrupt Enemy Communications
8 Al-Rukban and Jordan’s Elusive Desert Adversary
10 Syrian Subterranean Warfare: Suicide Fighters and
Quadcopters

AFRICA

11 Yet Another Hardship from Living Under Boko Haram...the
Return of Polio
12 Shekau Ousted as Boko Leader, Then Apologizes?
13 Boko Haram Leadership Split to Bring More International
Attacks
14 Info Ops and Chibok Girls
15 Why it’s Hard to Defeat Boko Haram
16 African Union: Peace and Security Updates
17 Unique Responses to Terrorism in West Africa
19 Nigeria Terrorism Alert Coincides with Boko Haram
Leadership Rift

LATIN AMERICA

20 El Salvador: MS-13 Indictment Points to Black Market
Weapons for Elite Gang Force
21 China Donates Weapons to Ecuador
21 Bolivarian Regional Apparatus in Ill Health
22 Questions Surrounding the Colombian Peace Plebiscite
22 Joke or Smart Strategy in Venezuela?
23 Drug Trafficking Landscape in Guatemala Continues to
Evolve

24 San Andres Island Serves as a Colombian Trafficking Hub in
Central America
25 Police Reveal New Trafficking Scheme
26 Criminals Raid Gold Mine in Sonora
27 Police Deactivate “Car Bomb” in Central Mexico
27 Mexican Navy Deploys New Unmanned Aerial System
28 Major Cocaine Busts in Manzanillo

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

29 Indian Defense Ministry Funds Arunachal Pradesh Border
Highway
30 Indian Student Satellite to Augment PNT
31 Growing Indonesian and Cambodian Defense Cooperation: A
Counter to China?
32 Santoso is Gone But Threats Remain
33 Islamic State’s Pivot to Southeast Asia
34 Has ASEAN Become China’s Pawn?
35 Vietnam’s UAV Development:
From Civilian Uses to South China Sea Defense
36 Weapons over Ideology: Vietnam Diversifies Partners in
Missile Upgrade

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

37 Japan Researching Removal of Space Debris
39 Japanese Startup Specializes in Small Satellite Lift
40 Military-Civilian Unity:
An Important Part of the China Dream
40 China-Taliban Relations: How Strong Are They?
41 China and the Levant

CENTRAL ASIA

43 A Pakistani Government Helicopter Crashes in Afghanistan
44 Protecting the Port of Aktau, Kazakhstan

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

45 Russia’s Current, and Possibly Future, Western Military
Dispositions
47 Evolving Combined Arms Maneuver: The Company Tactical
Group?
49 Russia Opening Underground Warfare Center
50 The “Killer Satellites” Threat to US Space Based Capabilities
52 A Kremlin Message on Syria in Russian Media
53 Fomin: Parity between Armenia and Azerbaijan; Middle East
Needs Russian Weapons
54 Russian Columnist on Putin’s Meeting with Iranian, Azeri, and
Turkish presidents
55 Russian Military Spending Remains Robust and Opaque
57 Russian Laser-Info Weapons
58 Grozny-August 1996 Revisited
60 Islamic State Declares War against Russia
61 Russia’s Victorious Military Games
62 Controlling the Arctic Ocean
63 Far Northern Dirigibles
64 Russian Ministry of Defense Company in Charge of Arctic
Logistics
65 Turkey-Russia Ties: It’s Complicated
66 The Russian Take on Russian-Turkish Reconciliation: Avoiding
Another Incident in the Air

SPECIAL ESSAY

67 Sri Lanka: Iran’s New Strategic
Partner?

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, and Deliver
the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For 30 years, FMSO has
conducted open source research on
foreign perspectives of defense and
security issues, emphasizing those topics
that are understudied or unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and analysis
from a diverse range of foreign articles
and other media that our analysts and
expert contributors believe will give
military and security professionals an
added dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 6 | Issue 9

September | 2016

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jason Warner
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

Materials, outside of the original foreign press article,
under copyright have not been used. All articles published
in the Operational Environment Watch are not provided
in full, and were originally published in foreign (non-US)
media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and graphics
to these articles to conform to organizational standards.
Academic conventions, source referencing, and citation
style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the
US Government. Release of this information does not
imply any commitment or intent on the part of the US
Government to provide any additional information on any
topic presented herein.

Kevin Freese
Alma Keshavarz
Indo-Pacific Asia

Cindy Hurst
Anthony Ortiz
Jacob Zenn
China, Korea, Japan

Kevin Freese
Cindy Hurst
Lucas Winter

		
Central Asia

Matthew Stein

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Anna Borshchevskaya
Ray Finch
Les Grau

The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil

Kevin Freese

Karen Kaya
Matthew Stein
					
Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editors

Ray Finch
Karen Kaya

Design Editor
ON THE COVER: An Iranian ship entering Colombo, 9 February 2015.
Source: http://cdn.yjc.ir/files/fa/news/1395/4/12/4776330_715.jpg

Keith French

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iraq: The Tactical and Political Challenges
of the Mosul Offensive
“

OE Watch Commentary: Despite suffering heavy losses in Iraq
In such a large city [like Mosul] street
and Syria, the Islamic State (ISIS) still controls Iraq’s second largest
by street fighting, with booby-trapped
city, Mosul, which has high symbolic and strategic importance for
the group. However, there are signs that an offensive to drive ISIS
buildings, promises to be costly and time
out of Mosul is imminent. The accompanying passages discuss the
consuming...
tactical challenges of liberating Mosul, including booby-trapped
buildings, street-by-street fighting in a large city, human
shields, and the prospect of a huge refugee crisis. These
Source: “Mosul: The next humanitarian disaster waiting to happen,” Deutsche
Welle, 19 August 2016. http://www.dw.com/en/mosul-the-next-humanitarianpoint to a potentially long and bloody battle in Mosul.
Further complicating the issue is Iraq’s internal divisions: disaster-waiting-to-happen/a-19489059
competing groups want to take part in the offensive, with
“All signs suggest that an offensive to drive IS from Mosul is imminent... After
the goal of having control over the territory after it is
the fall of Fallujah in June, Mosul is the last major bastion of IS in Iraq. As
taken from ISIS.
the country’s second largest city, it has high symbolic value for IS in addition
As the first passage points out, after the fall of Fallujah
to its strategic importance. It was here that “IS” chief Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi
in June, Mosul is the last major bastion of ISIS in Iraq.
proclaimed a caliphate two years ago. But the liberation offensive will involve
As the country’s second largest city, it has high symbolic
the risk that the estimated approximately 1.3 million civilians remaining in Mosul
value for ISIS in addition to its strategic importance. It
will be caught in the crossfire. Both the UN refugee agency, the UNHCR, and the
was here that the group’s chief Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) are preparing for large waves of
proclaimed a caliphate two years ago. However, the
refugees.
effort to liberate Mosul involves the risk of 1.3 million
“The upcoming battle for the liberation of the city of Mosul will cause an
civilians being caught in the crossfire, given that ISIS
unprecedented crisis - and hundreds of thousands of refugees.
often prevents the population from fleeing and uses
people as human shields. The passage also points out that
the United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR) and the
Source: Henri Barkey, “The Raqqa Imperative,” The National Interest, 8 April
2016. http://www.the-american-interest.com/2016/04/08/the-raqqa-imperative/
International Committee of the Red Cross are preparing
for large waves of refugees.
“Although Mosul is a much larger target and rescuing civilians from IS’s
The second passage also points out that liberating a
occupation is a critical goal, in such a large city, street by street fighting, with
large city like Mosul, which will entail street by street
booby-trapped buildings, promises to be costly and time consuming...
fighting, with booby-trapped buildings, promises to
Mosul is where the Iraqi army collapsed in June 2014, quickly abandoning its
be costly and time consuming. The author also points
positions and tons of equipment in the face of a rag-tag army of jihadists.
out that Mosul was where the Iraqi army collapsed in
“Further complicating this question is a coordination nightmare: Iraqi Kurdish
June 2014, quickly abandoning its positions and tons of
forces, the peshmerga, would also take part in the operations, and irregular Shi’a
equipment in the face of a rag-tag army of jihadists.
forces from down south are pushing for a role as well.”
As the second passage points out, further complicating
the issue is a coordination nightmare: Iraqi Kurdish
Source: Youssef Hamza, “Battle for Mosul exposes fractures that threaten to haunt
forces, the peshmerga, would like to take part in the
post-ISIL Iraq,” The National AE, 21 August 2016, http://www.thenational.ae/
operations, as would the irregular Shi’a forces, who are
world/middle-east/battle-for-mosul-exposes-fractures-that-threaten-to-haunt-postalso pushing for a role. However, as the final passage
isil-iraq#page2
discusses, Kurds’ desire to take part is being resisted
by the central government in Baghdad, which would
“The Kurds are another group whose desire to send their peshmerga fighters
like their role to be limited. The piece points out that
into Mosul is being vigorously resisted by the government. Baghdad fears they are
Baghdad fears the peshmerga are unlikely to return to
unlikely to return to government control any territory they capture from ISIL or
government control any territory they capture from ISIS
use that ground as a bargaining chip in future negotiations with authorities over
or use it as a bargaining chip in future negotiations with
a host of outstanding issues...The government insists the peshmergas’ role in the
authorities over other issues. In addition, Shiite militia
assault on Mosul should be restricted to support outside the city...
leaders say that if the Kurdish peshmerga are allowed
Shiite militia leaders, most of whom have little or no love for the regional Kurdish
to take part in the Mosul offensive, they should be too.
government, have made it clear that if the peshmerga is allowed to take part in the
Thus, the battle for Mosul exposes fractures that will
assault on Mosul, then they should be too.”
threaten Iraq even after ISIS is cleared. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

”

OE Watch | September 2016

3

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Syria: A Potential Turning Point in the Fight Against ISIS
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) is being pushed back in
Syria. Most recently, the city of Manbij, a key
stronghold for ISIS in northern Syria, has been
reported 98% cleared of ISIS. Manbij was a
major border crossing point where foreign fighters
used to join the group in Syria, and a vital hub
for the group’s smuggling business. Thus, this
development is being hailed as a major victory
towards the eventual extermination of ISIS. The
accompanying passages from Arab and Turkish
sources discuss this city’s importance in the fight
against ISIS.
As the first passage from a Gulf-region news
source points out, on 12 August, the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF)—a coalition of Arab
and Kurdish fighters—announced that they had
liberated Manbij. The passage notes that the
operation was dramatically slowed down by ISIS’s
use of civilians as human shields. It points out
that the recapture of Manbij is a major blow to
ISIS’s self-proclaimed caliphate across Syria and
Iraq. The city was of great symbolic importance
as one of ISIS’s larger strongholds. It was a vital
hub for the group’s substantial smuggling business
and a center for the foreign fighters from Europe
who wanted to join it.
The second passage, from a Turkish news
source notes that Manbij was ISIS’s “door to
Europe” and claims that it has now been cleared
of the group after a 70 day operation. The third
passage also notes that the Manbij offensive is an
important turning point in the fight against ISIS.
It points out that the effort to push ISIS back is
entering a new stage; claiming that the coalition
has recovered 50 per cent of the territory that ISIS
seized in Iraq and Syria in 2014.
Despite this important victory, the political
question of who will govern Manbij is more
complicated. The SDF, who led the campaign to
expel ISIS from Manbij, includes a lot of Kurdish
fighters. As such, the Kurds might expect to rule
the city, as noted in the final passage. However,
Turkey and the Syrian opposition have already
warned against Kurdish attempts to dominate the
city. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Manbij was ... a vital hub for
[ISIS’s] substantial smuggling business
and a center for the misguided foreign
recruits from Europe who wanted to
join [the group].”

“Manbij, which was ‘the door to Europe’ for ISIS, has been
cleared of [the group] after a 70-day operation...”

Source: http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/07/led-air-strikes-kill-21-civilianssyria-160719045329897.html

Source: “Coalition deserves to celebrate its victory in Manbij,” Gulf News, 14 August
2016. http://gulfnews.com/opinion/editorials/coalition-deserves-to-celebrate-its-victoryin-manbij-1.1879002
“..[T]he expulsion of Daesh from the Syrian regional city of Manbij is an important
step forward to the eventual extermination of this group.
On Friday [12 August] the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) announced that they had
fully liberated Manbij, after two years of occupation and a grim battle since June that
displaced almost 100,000 civilians and left more than 400 dead.
The speed of the SDF’s advance into Manbij was dramatically slowed down by Daesh’s
use of civilians as human shields, which forced the SDF to clear the city house by
house. This has been a hallmark of Daesh’s former urban strongholds like Tikrit and
Ramadi in Iraq, and it will make the eventual struggle to retake Mosul in Iraq and
Raqqa in Syria all the more harder.
The recapture of Manbij is a major blow to Daesh’s self-proclaimed caliphate across
Syria and Iraq. The city was of great symbolic importance as one of Daesh’s larger
strongholds, but in addition since it was only 25 miles (40km) from the Turkish border,
Manbij was also a vital hub for Daesh’s substantial smuggling business and a center for
the misguided foreign recruits from Europe who wanted to join Daesh.”
Source: “Membiç IŞİD’in elinden kurtarıldı (Manbij has been saved from ISIS),”
Cumhuriyet.com.tr, 12 August 2016. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/
turkiye/583598/Membic_ISiD_in_elinden_kurtarildi.html
“Manbij, which was ‘the door to Europe’ for ISIS, has been cleared of [the group] after
a 70’day operation...”
Source: Hassan Hassan, “How Manbij can deliver a post-ISIL success story,” The
National, 21 August 2016. http://www.thenational.ae/opinion/comment/how-manbijcan-deliver-a-post-isil-success-story
“ The fight against ISIL is entering a new stage. The ... coalition has now recovered 50
per cent of the territory that ISIL seized in Iraq and Syria in 2014....
“Since they led the battle and lost many fighters, the Kurds might expect to rule
the city. Turkey and the Syrian opposition have already warned against attempts to
dominate.”
OE Watch | September 2016

4

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran Demands Release of Nigerian Shi’ite Cleric
OE Watch Commentary: Over the last decade, Iranian authorities
have moved from considering themselves a regional power in the Persian
Gulf, to a pan-regional power also projecting force in the northern Indian
Ocean, to a country that defines its
strategic boundaries as the Eastern
Mediterranean and Gulf of Aden.
But while Iran’s direct military
involvement in Syria and Iraq and its
involvement by proxy in Lebanon,
Yemen, and perhaps Bahrain attract
US and broader international concern,
Iranian authorities increasingly seek
to leverage religious and cultural
ties further abroad. Here, there
has long been an Iranian focus on
Africa broadly and West Africa more
specifically. Iranian authorities have
both tried to leverage the Lebanese
Shi‘ite diaspora community that settled
across the region decades ago as well
as proselytize to create new Shi’ite
communities. This has created tension
in the past. Morocco, for example, cut
diplomatic ties with Iran in 2009 for,
among other reasons, Iranian efforts to
spread Shi’ism in the Kingdom. Gambia
and Senegal both severed ties with Iran
after accusing the Islamic Republic of
supporting rebels or smuggling arms.
In 2010, Nigerian customs authorities
seized a shipment of weaponry from
a ship whose manifest and containers
falsely labeled them as building materials.

“Zarif…strongly urged Nigeria to free Sheikh
Ibrahim Zakzaky”

It is against this backdrop that Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif’s
advocacy on behalf of Sheikh Ibrahim Zakzaky, Nigeria’s most prominent Shi’ite
leader becomes important. Zakzaky is leader of the Islamic Movement in Nigeria,
and began advocating for a Shi’ite Islamic Republic on Nigerian territory in 1979,
as Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini triumphed in Iran. In subsequent years, Zakzaky
has often parroted Iranian policy positions, condemning Israel’s existence and
celebrating Qods Day on the last Friday of Ramadan. On 25 July 2014, the Nigerian
military clashed with Zakzaky’s followers during Qods Day commemorations in
Zaria, killing almost three dozen. The following year, 60 people died in clashes
between the military and Zakzaky’s supporters after the Nigerian government
accused Zakzaky’s followers of responsibility for an assassination attempt on
Nigerian Army Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Tukur Buratai. In the aftermath of
that incident, the Nigerian government arrested Zakzaky.
Zakzaky has long dismissed any formal ties to Iran, and he has denied receiving
money from the Islamic Republic. However, Zarif’s advocacy suggests his ties to
Iran are significant. The Iranian advocacy for Zakzaky comes alongside similar
Iranian advocacy for Sheikh Isa Qasim, a Bahraini ayatollah whom authorities
have placed under house arrest, but stands in sharp contrast to the failure of Iran to
advocate for Saudi Shi’ite leader Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr before he was put to death.
Nimr, however, was from the Shirazi school of Shi’ism and generally opposed
clerical rule as practiced in Iran. The fact that Zarif has chosen Zakzaky as the
subject for advocacy might suggest that Nigerian suspicions that the imprisoned
sheikh seeks to create the Shi’ite equivalent of Boko Haram have some merit. End
OE Watch Commentary (Rubin).

Sheikh Ibrahim Zakzaky before his arrest.
Source: Alalam.ir, http://goo.gl/FqiLuN

Source: “Dar Khvast Jedi Zarif baraye Azadi Sheikh
Ibrahim Zakzaky,” (“The Serious Demands of
[Foreign Minister] Zarif for the Freedom of Sheikh
Ibrahim Zakzaky “), Islamic Students’ News Agency,
28 July 2016, http://goo.gl/RQAvRZ

Zarif Demands Freedom for Sheikh Zakzaky
The foreign minister of our country, who during
the middle of the week visited Nigeria during his
tour of West Africa, in a meeting with the president
and foreign minister of this country, strongly urged
them to free Sheikh Ibrahim Zakzaky. According
to ISNA [Islamic Students’ News Agency], Hojjat
al-Islam Ali Falah Zarumi, representative of AlMustafa University [in Qom], who was in the Iranian
delegation to Nigeria, said, “Dr. Zarif in his meetings
with Nigerian officials, including the president of the
republic and minister of foreign affairs, expressed
grave concern about the physical situation of Sheikh
Ibrahim Zakzaky and about the issue of his freedom,
seriously called on all Islamic sects to maintain unity.
The Foreign Minister of Iran emphasized that freedom
for Sheikh Zakzaky would have a productive impact
on the battle against extremists like Boko Haram in
Nigeria.
OE Watch | September 2016

5

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Revolutionary Guards Take Part in
Russian Military Games
“Forces drawn from the best of the best of the
OE Watch Commentary: In Western policy circles, Iran’s
relationship with Russia is often discussed in terms of arms
purchases or
Russia’s willingness
to give diplomatic
cover at the United
Nations for Iranian
ambitions. However,
even as the RussoIranian diplomatic
relationship has
achieved a warmth
not seen in more
than 500 years,
many Iranians retain
their historical
distrust of Russia,
arguing that Russia
will drop its support
for Iran in an instant
should it become in
Moscow’s interest to
do so.

army, Revolutionary Guard, and Basij…will
participate in Russia’s International Army Games.”

Students in Iran sign up to defend the Shrine of Zainab in Damascus, Syria.
Perhaps this is one
Source: Namnak.com, http://goo.gl/z1uBzw
reason why Russia
is sponsoring—and
the Iranian military
A Russian soldier checks an Iranian participant’s weapon.
participating fully
Source: Mashreghnews.ir, http://goo.gl/pg1NX7
in—the International Army Games, a sort of military Olympics. While
almost a couple dozen countries are participating, Iran’s participation
Source: “Avalin Tasavir az Hazur Takavuran-e Artesh va Sepah
is relatively broad and not simply symbolic. Indeed, Iran is competing
dar Rusiya” (“The First Photos from the Presence of Army and
in more events than any other country beside Russia, China, Belarus,
IRGC Rangers in Russia.”) Tasnim.ir, 27 July 2016. http://goo.gl/
Kazakhstan, and Venezuela. In the excerpted article, the hardline
VR7DKA
Tasnim online portal close to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
outlines seven competitions. While some—like the sniper competition
Iranian Military in Russia’s ‘Military Olympics’
might be self-evident, other events are less clear: The tank biathlon
The exercises of our country’s premier armed forces in an
involves individual and relay races in T-72 tanks over obstacles courses
international military competition in Russia have begun. From
and with requirements to fire on targets along the way. Suvorov attacks
our country, seven teams will participate in the tournament:
involve similar exercises, but in BMP-2 infantry fighting vehicles.
frontier snipers, tank biathlon, Suvorov attacks, airborne
The Airborne Platoon competition involved BMD-2 airborne fighting
platoon, Elbrus ring (mountain unit), Seaborne assault, and
vehicles or BTR-82A armored personnel carriers, D-10 series parachute
depth. It was declared that these forces were drawn from the best
systems, and Arbalet parachute systems and requires parachute landings,
of the best from the army, Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps,
races, target competition with small arms and grenade launchers,
and Basij. The members of the teams dispatched by Iran trained
overcoming water obstacles, and relays. The Depth competition tests
for six months to achieve physical fitness, and for ten days before
swimming, underwater orientation, and underwater search and rescue,
they departed, they also boarded in the Islamic Revolutionary
and the Elbrus Ring competition is a mountaineering and climbing
Guard Corps’ Imam Hussein University. The International Army
competition.
Games for the leading countries of the world held in Russia and
Soft power is important, and Russia’s International Army Games
Kazakhstan are now in their second iteration. The games were
seem a means to promote personal relations between elite troops not
previously held in 2015. Until now, 23 countries have confirmed
only between Russia and Iran, but also among a broader array of
that they will participate… These games will begin on August 1
countries which increasingly form a pro-Russian even if informal axis in
and conclude on August 14, and will take place in several cities
opposition to the United States. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
in Russia and Kazakhstan.

OE Watch | September 2016

6

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: New UAV to Disrupt Enemy Communications
OE Watch Commentary: Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
are increasingly a platform which Iranian military doctrine
emphasizes. Every month, Iran seemingly unveils a new UAV
or UAV capability. While
Iran had developed its first
UAVs in the 1980s, in just the
first six years of this decade
it has developed separate
reconnaissance drones,
“kamikaze” drones, and other
attack drones In addition,
it has claimed the ability to
navigate drones by satellite
GPS overcoming the need for
line-of-sight control. If the
article excerpted here—and
reprinted nearly verbatim
in a number of Iranian
newspapers the same day
or in the two days after—
is accurate, then Iran has
augmented its UAV fleet with
drones capable of jamming
enemy communications and
disrupting communications
between an adversary’s
drones and its controllers.

“One of the most important achievements…was a UAV
capable of disrupting enemy communications”

Iran’s new UAV designed to jam enemy communications

Source: Tasnimnews, http://newsmedia.tasnimnews.com/Tasnim/Uploaded/Image/1395/03/03/139503031653414637756774.jpg
It remains unclear,
however, whether Iran has
Source: “Ravanmaye az ‘Pehpad-e Akhlalgar’ nazaja va
actually achieved this technology or if its claims are merely aspirational—
Qabaliyat Ayjad Barazit dar Samaneh-haye Ertebat-e
after all, the Iranian press often exaggerates. However, both Iran’s hacking
Doshman” (“Launch of ‘Disruptive UAV’ Capable of
and engineering prowess are advanced and so, even if the new drone has yet
Jamming the Communications Systems of the Enemy”),
to fulfill its aims, it is likely Iran will soon achieve such a capability that will
Iran Students Correspondents Association, 2 August 2016,
impact regional countries’ drone fleets if not that of the United States.
http://www.iscanews.ir/news/666873

The Iranian emphasis on drones seems to be a bet on asymmetric warfare
strategies. While Iran is increasingly engaged militarily throughout the region,
it projects its power largely by proxy or with a limited number of ‘trainers.’
Even as tension rises and perhaps conflict on some level looms with Saudi
Arabia or other Gulf Cooperation Council states, it is doubtful Iran will
ever willingly engage in direct naval warfare or battles between standing
armies. It might seek to reinvigorate its air force with planes purchased from
Russia or China or revamp its naval fleet, but the emphasis on various UAV
platforms suggests that the Iranian military is preparing for a different, lowerintensity conflict in the future: a type of conflict in which drones harass or
seek to stymie high-price platforms used by its Arab neighbors and the Arab
monarchies across the Persian Gulf. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Launch of UAV to Disrupt Enemy
Communications
The latest achievements of the army were shown this
morning in the most recent exhibition of defense equipment,
and Army Chief [Ahmad Reza] Poudestan visited these
achievements. One of the most important achievements on
display in this exhibition was a UAV capable of disrupting
enemy communications that was for the first time exhibited
and unveiled. In addition to this UAV, other UAVs with
imaging capabilities and a laser system able to disrupt the
surveillance of other drones was also shown.

OE Watch | September 2016

7

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Al-Rukban and Jordan’s Elusive Desert Adversary
OE Watch Commentary: Jordan faces a complex challenge at
the al-Rukban desert crossing with Syria, near the border with Iraq.
In the course of a few months
starting in November 2015, an ad
hoc refugee camp at the border
swelled from a few thousand to
an estimated 100,000 refugees.
Most of the refugees are vulnerable
women and children living in
makeshift tents clustered next to
the Jordanian side of the border,
in a neutral zone between Syria
and Jordan known as “the Berm.”
Conditions are harsh and the
camp is dependent on outside
sources for water and other basic
necessities. Jordanian intelligence
services believe ISIS operatives
and sympathizers are hiding among
the refugees. Jordan has already
taken in hundreds of thousands of
Syrian refugees, primarily from
areas where cross-border social
ties are strong. Most of al-Rukban’s
refugees hail from ISIS-controlled
territory and have no social ties to
Al-Rukban Density Map from July 2016
Jordan.

“…perhaps even a border war with Bashar
al-Assad’s regime…”

Source: http://reliefweb.int/map/syrian-arab-republic/shelter-density-map-rukban-border-crossing-jordan-syria-border-27jul-2016

On 21 June, an explosives-laden
vehicle crashed through the alRukban crossing, killing a handful of Jordanian personnel. Jordan
immediately sealed the border and declared it a closed military zone.
The attack was launched from the camp and claimed by ISIS, as
noted in the first accompanying article. With the exception of water,
delivery of basic aid was halted (on 4 August, relief organizations
conducted a one-time cross-border food drop using large cranes).
The second accompanying article, published in al-Jazeera in
late June 2016, argues that a clash between ISIS and the Jordanian
military looms. The article claims that the Jordanian military has
a precise list of ISIS and al-Qaeda-linked targets along the border,
but fails to note that most if not all of these targets are in populated
areas to the west, socially and geographically distant from the desert
surrounding al-Rukban. The article mentions a new Jordanian
military unit called the “Desert Hawks” (Suqur al-Sahara), which
is to act as a desert “mobile strike force” capable of engaging ISIS
targets within a limited range across the border in Syria and Iraq.
The name choice is odd, given that Syrian loyalist forces have had
their own anti-ISIS mobile desert strike force called the Desert
Hawks since 2013.
The Syrian Desert Hawks emerged in 2013 under the patronage
of regime insiders with interests in Syria’s steel, iron and energy
industries. Their original field commander’s day job was leading
operations in the Syrian Desert for the notorious Palmyra branch of
Syrian Military Intelligence (“the Badia Branch”).
(continued)

Source:
‫اعتقال االردن لعناصر في المخابرات تورطت في فضيحة بيع اسلحة‬
(Jordan Arrests Intelligence Agents Implicated in Weapons Selling
Scandal,)” Rai al-Yaum, 27 June 2016. http://www.raialyoum.
com/?p=465177
Perhaps the biggest shock comes from the car bomb that exploded
at a Jordanian military checkpoint last Tuesday, in the al-Rukban
border area. The car came from the refugee camp on the Syrian
side of the border, and led to the death of seven soldiers and aid
workers. The car was part of a batch of 4x4s that were provided to
Syrian opposition groups via Jordan. ISIS subsequently claimed
responsibility for the attack.
Source:
‫المواجهة بين األردن وتنظيم الدولة تقترب من مسافة الصفر‬
“Clashes Between Jordan and ISIS Looming,” al-Jazeera, 28 June
2016. http://goo.gl/Yl6LNx
Jordan has a map of precise and important targets for ISIS and its
affiliates in areas near the border, in addition to a separate map with
Nusra Front targets… the formation of a Jordanian military brigade
called the “Desert Hawks,” which will function as a mobile strike
force to deal with the threat of ISIS. They will operate within Syrian
and Iraqi territory near the border. The force has small military
vehicles ready for quick deployment and execution.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

8

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: Al-Rukban and Jordan’s Elusive
Desert Adversary
The Palmyra branch is believed to have informants and operatives in
ISIS-controlled territory, and opposition media has accused Desert
Hawks leaders of brokering trades between ISIS and the government.
In the third accompanying article, a former Jordanian minister
argues that Jordan should be focused on Syrian loyalist forces rather
than on ISIS. Writing in the prominent Saudi Arabian daily alSharq al-Awsat, he claims that Syrian military intelligence and its
allies and proxies deliberately facilitated the sudden growth of the
al-Rukban refugee camp. The camp has become a bargaining chip
for pressuring Jordan, he believes, under the threat of sowing panic
among refugees and forcing them to storm the border en masse.
Rather than a fight with ISIS, the author sees in al-Rukban the
potential for a border war with the Syrian loyalist camp.
Jordan faces an elusive desert adversary who hides behind
refugees and blurs the line between Syria’s loyalist, moderate
and jihadist camps. Further complicating the picture,
according to the first accompanying excerpt, the truck
used in the al-Rukban attack was originally provided to
vetted Syrian rebels via Jordanian operatives. As ISIS
comes under attack on various fronts, the Syria-JordanIraq border area near al-Rukban may be an attractive
destination for fighters fleeing the self-declared caliphate’s
population centers. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

Source:
‫مخيم الركبان دولة لـداعش بدل دولته القديمة‬
“Al-Rukban Camp a New ISIS State,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 30 June
2016. http://goo.gl/83VK83
Jordan has foiled many attempts by Bashar al-Assad’s regime
intelligence and security agencies to bring ISIS, Hizbullah and
foreign sectarian organizations - particularly from Afghanistan - to
Jordan’s northern border… Jordan was suspicious of the sudden
displacement from Raqqa, Deir Ezzour and other areas to alRukban, particularly since Bashar al-Assad’s intelligence agencies,
Hizbullah, and the al-Quds Brigade oversaw the movement …
Jordan has begun to deal with this camp as a terrorist base and now
has to deal with saboteurs who could provoke a series of destructive
explosions to force al-Rukban’s residents to flee en masse across the
Jordanian border. Despite all the rapid precautions that have been
taken in this regard, if this were to happen there would be great
turmoil, which could lead to the use of military strike force and
perhaps even a border war with Bashar al-Assad’s regime if this
were necessary…

Jordanian - Syrian Border
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Jordanian-Syrian_border_in_Dec_2009.jpg

OE Watch | September 2016

9

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Syrian Subterranean Warfare: Suicide Fighters
and Quadcopters
OE Watch Commentary: The cult of the inghimasi is
an important though understudied element of subterranean
warfare in Syria and Iraq. The term inghimasi literally means
one who submerges, plunges or fully immerses; it is used to
denote fighters who have no expectation of returning alive
from their mission (for more information, see: “The Islamic
State’s Suicide Fighters,” in the June 2015 issue of OE Watch).
The inghimasi have acquired an exalted status, particularly
among jihadist factions. Sunni rebel groups in Syria and Iraq
have built up sizable units of effective suicide shock troops,
through a combination of military training and indoctrination.
One of the most ambitious recent inghimasi operations was a
late April operation in which Free Syrian Army-linked rebels
in Aleppo used sewer lines in an attempt to sneak an alleged
600 fighters across loyalist lines. If successful, the attack
would have been among the Syrian conflict’s most effective
subterranean operations. Loyalist forces were alerted by “the
noise from 600 fighters moving with their ammunition through
an underground tunnel,” and they dropped toxic gas bombs
and explosive charges into the tunnel. Rebels acknowledged 21
deaths and 64 injuries in their ranks. Most of the attack force
withdrew, and the government quickly posted videos online
showing its forces clearing the sewage tunnel.
The week after the failed inghimasi attack, a different
Aleppo rebel faction killed nearly 50 loyalist forces by
demolishing their building from below. Tunnel mining is
simpler, safer, and often more effective than sending forces
through attack tunnels, particularly for rebels with manpower
surpluses but limited equipment and training. Syrian rebels
have effectively mined tunnels since at least 2013. Only in the
last few months have their propaganda videos included aerial
images of the detonation.
The bombing mentioned above, as well as one in July which
destroyed a government-held building in downtown Aleppo,
both include blast footage filmed by a small quadcopter. In
addition to capturing good propaganda images, these flying
video cameras can greatly improve the situational awareness of
tunnel diggers. Alongside shovels, pickaxes, and wired electric
and communications systems, they will likely become basic
equipment for tunneling units.
Tunneling has become a tactic of choice for insurgents in
both Syria and Iraq. Tunnel diggers leave behind a robust
social media trail, which will be further enriched with the
spread of quadcopter footage. According to the second
accompanying article, activists have published details on a
citywide tunnel network dug by ISIS fighters in preparation
for the defense of Mosul. One should expect aerial video
surveillance capabilities to be a component of this underground
defense system. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…the noise from 600 fighters moving with their
ammunition through an underground tunnel…”

Aerial footage of tunnel bomb, downtown Aleppo, July 2016
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wtt71Huc-UE

Source:
‫ مقاتال غرب حلب‬21 ‫تفاصيل العملية الكبيرة التي فقد بها الثوار‬
“Details on the Major Operation in Which Rebels Lost 21 Fighters in West
Aleppo,” Arabi 21, 2 May 2016. http://goo.gl/AD8HmY
The Rashidin Operations Room denied that the reason for the operation’s
failure was a leak to regime forces or betrayal, instead attributing it to
“the noise from 600 fighters moving with their ammunition through an
underground tunnel”… the operation began with 600 fighters infiltrating
through a sewer tunnel approximately 4 kilometers long and 1.5 meters
in diameter. The fighters were below ground for five hours before regime
forces discovered the operation, after which they dug holes in the tunnel
and dropped gas and smoke bombs inside. The Mujahideen Army then
directed its artillery fire toward the tunnel, forcing regime forces to
withdraw from above the tunnel. Before doing so regime forces dropped
an explosives charge in an attempt to cave in and block the tunnel. By
divine grace the pathway was not blocked and the fighters had mallets and
chisels, which they used to expand the tunnel where the explosion occurred
in order to withdraw.
Source:
‫ أنفاق لداعش في الموصل‬..‫بعد شوادر الرقة‬
“Following Raqqa’s Tarps… ISIS Tunnels in Mosul,” al-Arabiya, 7 June
2016. http://goo.gl/rMeoUG
Syrian activists published a report that details where these tunnels can
be found. The report claims that ISIS dug trenches to connect the city’s
neighborhoods and facilitate the movement of its leaders. The tunnels
are found throughout the city. Some have been completed, while others
are in process. The most important ones include the tunnel behind the 2d
Division HQ, formerly al-Kindi Base, which had previously been prepared
as a hedge but has now been greatly improved…

OE Watch | September 2016

10

AFRICA

Top

Yet Another Hardship from Living Under Boko Haram...
the Return of Polio
OE Watch Commentary: With its last
reported case of wild-type polio on 24 July
2014, Nigeria was cautiously optimistic that
it could go one more year without any new
outbreaks, earning it certification as being
polio free by the World Health Organization.
Unfortunately, as the accompanying article
relates, such certification will have to be
postponed because two fresh cases have been
reported in Gwoza and Jere, areas that until
recently were under control of Boko Haram.
With the insurgency raging, and with Boko
Haram opposed to Western science, including
vaccinations, it was not just difficult to
reach rebel controlled areas for vaccination
campaigns, it was sometimes deadly as the
terrorist group targeted public health workers.
As a result, large numbers of people went
without vaccination against this crippling
disease. When the Nigerian military liberated
regions previously controlled by Boko
Haram, public health workers could finally
both vaccinate and monitor the previously
inaccessible populations, leading to the
discovery of the two new cases.
It is difficult to say if Nigeria was truly polio
free during the past two years or if it was just
unreported from certain areas. What is known
though is that polio has the potential to spread,
which is why at least three special vaccination
campaigns are planned. Unfortunately, there
is a strong possibility that based on previous
experiences these will have only limited success
in rebel controlled territory, increasing the
likelihood that new cases of polio will occur,
and thus forcing the Nigerian people living
under Boko Haram who have already suffered
so much to endure yet one more hardship. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“All these [polio] cases are coming out of areas that were
liberated by the gallant activities of our soldiers.”

Through targeting vaccination workers and other means, Boko Haram enables the polio
virus, pictured above, to spread.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polio.jpg

Source: Judd-Leonard Okafor, “How polio returned to Nigeria,” Daily Trust (Nigeria),
11 August 2016, http://www.dailytrust.com.ng/news/general/how-polio-returned-tonigeria/158649.html
Its last case of polio on record was 24 July 2014, and its zero-case status had held firm
for two straight years.
The new cases come only weeks after its second-year milestone—and months before it
was to clinch World Health Organisation certification after solid three years without the
virus.
One infection was found in a child in Gwoza council area, the other in Jere council
area—two places that had been inaccessible in the height of the insurgency.
“It wasn’t that we were not doing the job. A chunk of the state was out [ of ] reach. We
couldn’t reach children there,”...
“With this confusion, where people were cut off and health workers were very big
targets, we couldn’t reach these populations being liberated,”….
The two children making up Nigeria’s standing cases of polio virus infection are among
thousands born since then and have “had no contact with civilization since they were
liberated,” …
“But we did not expect that there would be polio. We were expecting nutrition and other
problems.”

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal highlighting
current threats in the Operational Environment.
It is produced by the Threats Intelligence Support Activity (US
Army TRADOC G-2) and posted at:
https://www.us.army.mil/suite/files/25364306.
OE Watch | September 2016

11

AFRICA

Top

Shekau Ousted as Boko Leader, Then Apologizes?
OE Watch Commentary: In early
August 2016, ISIS released a video
declaring that its affiliate, Boko Haram,
in West Africa, had a new leader: Abu
Mus’ab Al-Barnawi, the son of the
founder of Boko Haram, Muhammed
Yusuf. The announcement was totally
unexpected, not least to Boko Haram’s
current leader, Abubakar Shekau, who
came out days later, rejecting that alBarnawi was in fact a legitimate new
leader of the group. Instead, Shekau
insisted, he was still the head of Boko
Haram. This announcement of al-Barnawi
as the new ISIS-appointed head of Boko
Haram has created two internal factions
of Boko Haram. The two attached pieces
focus on understanding and interpreting
Shekau’s rejoinder.
The first accompanying passage offers
excerpts of Shekau’s rejoinder about
the appointment of al-Barnawi. In the
broadest terms, Shekau admits that
he and Boko Haram have heard of the
appointment of al-Barnawi as the new
head of Boko Haram, but refuse to accept
al-Barnawi’s leadership, based on his lack
of qualifications, which Shekau details in
eight points. He also refers to al-Barnawi
as an ‘Irja[i],” a term which Shekau uses
to describe insufficiently radical jihadists.
In addition to suggesting the list of new
targets that Boko Haram will pursue, the
video closes with Shekau insinuating that
he will remain at the head of Boko Haram,
and that the movement will remain loyal
to ISIS, despite the attempted reshuffle.
The second editorialist, from nearby
Burkina Faso, analyzes the Shekau
video, and suggests that rather than being
interpreted as an act of defiance against
the ISIS decision, it should instead be read
as an apology of sorts. At the core of the
appointment of al-Barnawi was lingering
tension between ISIS leader al-Baghdadi
and Shekau, particularly over Boko
Haram’s tendency to attack Muslims,
which ISIS did not like. Thus, the author
of this article suggests that the video
was less defiant, and more of a shrouded
apology to ISIS, intended, as the author
suggests, as “an act of humanity, intended
to stay in the good graces of Daesh.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Warner)

“This declaration from Abubkar Shekau [to stay

at the head of Boko Haram, but stop targeting
Muslims] which might initially seem like an act of
defiance of the Islamic State, actually seems to us to
be more of an act of contrition...”
In August, ISIS named Abu Musab al-Barnawi the new head of Boko Haram. Boko Haram’s
current leader, Abubakar Shekau, has claimed that this appointment is illegitimate.
Source: http://sango-ti-kodro.over-blog.com/2016/08/boko-haram-le-nouveau-chef-c-estabu-musab-al-barnawi.html

Source: No author cited, “I’ll fight Nigeria, whole world, Boko Haram’s Shekau boasts in new
video.” Vanguard (Lagos), 8 August 2016. http://www.vanguardngr.com/2016/08/ill-fightnigeria-whole-world-boko-harams-shekau-boasts-new-video/
[Transcript of Shekau’s video message]:
“News has recently come to us through the media outlets, including those of the infidels. The
news was that someone has been made leader or vicegerent of our movement in West Africa.
But we are telling you that the appointed person has no qualifications to become our leader.
We have listened and heard from them and their comment and how they tried to defame
Ahlil Sunna wal jamaaa and we are further convinced that such a person cannot become our
leader….
“Besides, our leader, Abubakar Shekau, has sent you an eight-point message detailing why
the person you appointed cannot lead because he is one of those that are called irjai. You
(Albagdadhi) have sent a message back to our leader asking for the meaning of Irjai which he
explained to you and you have failed to get back to us till date….
“We have not reneged on our professed loyalty in the leadership of Albagdadi. We are still
with him. But we will not entertain any middle man to come between us and the Khalifa
Albagdadhi until we meet face to face with the Khalifa or get a video or audio message from
him, then we will reveal to him core secrets about those they are building their trust on…”
Source: “Saho” (Pseudonym), “Nigeria: Sortie du chef de Boko Haram - L’acte de contrition
de Shekau? (Nigeria: Departure of the BH Head of Boko Haram: An Act of Contrition from
Shekau?)”, Le Pays (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso),10 August 2016. http://lepays.bf/sortiechef-de-boko-haram-lacte-de-contrition-de-shekau/
Abubakar Shekau, the leader of Boko, in a new video, contests the new decision of the Islamic
State as regards his ouster as the head of the group…
This declaration from Abubkar Shekau, which might initially seem like an act of defiance
of the Islamic State, actually seems to us to be more of an act of contrition, given that many
members of the Islamic State find Shekau to be too radical and extremist, responsible for the
deaths of tens of thousands of people since 20009, Muslims being in the majority. This decision
to stop targeting Muslims from the man who refers to himself as “the imam of Boko Haram in
Nigeria, and of the entire world” seems to be an act of humanity, intended to stay in the good
graces of Dasesh.
As evidence of penance, Shekau has vowed to remain loyal to the Islamic State, and taking
personal responsibility for the group’s actions. Thus, the squabble within Boko Haram does
not necessarily signal a weakening of the jihadist group, but instead, suggests the emergence
of a double-edged sword. On one hand, the existence of two rival factions now means that they
might attempt to “out-radicalize” each other, leaving Nigeria and its neighbors in a pool of
blood. On the other, if Shekau actually is gone, this means that he might be replaced by an even
more deadly leader. Whatever the outcome, the decision of the Islamic State has had the effect
of waking up the monster (Shekau)….giving him the opportunity to demonstrate to the world
that he isn’t finished just yet.
OE Watch | September 2016

12

AFRICA

Top

Boko Haram Leadership Split to Bring More International
Attacks
“We are also warning you the infidels of the West African
OE Watch Commentary: As detailed
in the previous piece (“Shekau Ousted
as Boko Leader, Then Apologizes?”), in
August 2016, ISIS named Abu Mus’ab
Al-Barnawi as the new leader of Boko
Haram. While some of the implications
of the shift were previously detailed,
perhaps the most significant impacts will
be seen in the nature of Boko Haram’s
tactics. The accompanying passages
from the Nigerian press discuss an
important shift in the group’s tactics.
In the aftermath of the announcement
that ISIS had appointed a new head,
Boko Haram’s current head, Abubakar
Shekau announced that the group would
shift its tactics. One of the primary
rifts with ISIS has been Boko Haram’s
willingness to attack Muslims, of which
ISIS does not approve. As a result of his
desire to stay in the good graces of ISIS,
Shekau has vowed to change tactics. In
promising to halt (or limit) attacks on
Muslims, Shekau has sought to ramp
up efforts against other adversaries,
doubling down on his threats to attack
other areas of Nigeria, and other parts of
West Africa.
As the accompanying passages
discuss, one of the main shifts in Boko
Haram’s presumed tactics is expanding
the group’s reach, both within and
outside of Nigeria. Particularly important
is the call to other West African
countries, namely Niger, Cameroon, and
Chad, to expect more violence there.
As Shekau stated forebodingly, “We
are also warning you the infidels of the
West African countries that in no distant
time, you are going to be visited with a
calamity from us that will marvel you all
for a long time to come. We will shock
the world very soon. Watch out for us.”
Internally, as Zenn relays in an article
in this issue (“Nigeria Terrorism Alert
Coincides with Boko Haram Leadership
Rift”), the announcement of al-Barnawi
has put the Nigerian government on a
so-called “Red Alert,” due to attacks in
the Federal Capital Territory looking
to be more imminent. End OE Watch
Commentary (Warner)

countries that in no distant time, you are going to be visited
with a calamity from us that will marvel you all for a long time
to come. We will shock the world very soon.”

The ISIS appointment of Abu Musab al-Barnawi to the head of Boko Haram is supposed to signal a change of
Boko Haram’s tactics, which includes halting or limiting attacks on Muslims, as well as ceasing to use women
and children, like those pictured here, as suicide bombers.
Source: http://www.unmultimedia.org/radio/english/2015/11/change-of-tactics-for-boko-haram-followingmilitary-push/#.V7wvTa5kA2c

Source: No author cited, “I’ll fight Nigeria, whole world, Boko Haram’s Shekau boasts in new
video,” Vanguard (Lagos), 8 August 2016. http://www.vanguardngr.com/2016/08/ill-fightnigeria-whole-world-boko-harams-shekau-boasts-new-video/
[Transcript of Shekau’s video message]:
“…We are also warning you the infidels of the West African countries that in no distant time,
you are going to be visited with a calamity from us that will marvel you all for a long time to
come. We will shock the world very soon. Watch out for us.
“The Chief of Army Staff, General Buratai and the army spokesman, Kukasheka; we are going
to show you our strength in Nigeria. The world should know that we are no longer out to fight
Nigeria but our battle is of the entire world. And the battle has just begun. It is going to be a
fresh battle for you soldiers of Nigeria. Die you all in your rage.
“To you, President Buhari, very soon you will see us inside your home, the presidential palace.
You will hear from us right in there by the will of God. Abuja will hear from us very soon. We will
demolish infidels and bring down the green white green and replace it with our flag…..
“Die you all in your rage. We are out to wage war on the world.”
Source: No author cited, “Nigeria: Boko Haram Threatens to Attack Infidels of the West African
Countries, Buhari’s Presidential Villa,” Vanguard (Lagos), 9 August 2016. http://allafrica.com/
stories/201608100061.html
In an apparent bid to reaffirm his relevance, Boko Haram’s former leader, Abubakar Shekau,
has threatened fresh but more vicious attacks on Nigeria, saying this would culminate in an
attack on President Muhammadu Buhari in the Presidential Villa, Abuja.
…In the concluding part of the video message that featured the group speaking from a thick
forest that conforms with the Nigerian vegetation during the rainy season, the masked speaker
threatened more vicious war against Nigeria and its West and Central African neighbours,
including Cameroon, Chad and Niger, very soon.
OE Watch | September 2016

13

AFRICA

Top

Info Ops and Chibok Girls
OE Watch Commentary: As reported in the
Nigerian press, Boko Haram recently released
a statement claiming that the Nigerian Air
Force had killed some of the Chibok Girls in an
air raid that it conducted in the
Sambisa Forest, the area outside
of Maiduguri where Boko Haram
is known to hide. For its part, the
Nigerian Air Force denied these
accusations, claiming that this
could not have happened, because
it was conducting very targeted
operations.

“It is extremely difficult and rare to hit innocent people during
airstrikes because the operation is done through precision
attack on identified and registered targets and locations.”

As readers will recall, the
Chibok Girls are a group of some
276 school-aged girls that were
abducted by Boko Haram in
April 2014 from their school in
the village of Chibok. National
outrage over the capture of the
girls had ensued. While some of
the girls are said to have escaped,
the vast majority are still believed
Boko Haram claims that the Nigerian Air Force killed some of the Chibok Girls in a recent
to be in captivity, or, are married off around the
raid. The Air Force denies these assertions..
Source: http://www.yukibox.com/a-ray-of-light-on-chibok-girls-by-shehu-garba/
country, or outside of it. The Chibok Girls stand
as the starkest symbol of Boko Haram’s ability
Source: Uwugiaren, Iyobosa and Zacheaus Somorin, “Nigeria: Boko Haram Accuses
to strike at the heart of the Nigerian social
Airforce of Killing Abducted Chibok Girls,” This Day (Lagos, Nigeria), 15 August 2016.
psyche, and the military’s general inability
http://allafrica.com/stories/201608150273.html
combat it.
The recent allegations that the Air Force
had killed some of the Chibok Girls—and
the denials from the government that this
actually happened—are unsurprising.
Boko Haram’s motivations for making the
claim—true or not—is to vilify the Nigerian
military as being both incompetent, as
well as indifferent to the general Nigerian
populace’s well-being. Painting the Nigerian
government and military as the source of
many of the region’s problems, and not the
answer to them, has long been at the core of
Boko Haram’s message, since the ascension
of Shekau to the group’s head in 2009.
Importantly, Boko Haram is also attempting
to continue to leverage the girls as bargaining
tools, demanding that parents of kidnapped
girls lobby the Nigerian government for the
release of Boko Haram detainees in exchange
for the girls. The Nigerian Air Force is
characteristically rejecting the notion of any
malfeasance. End OE Watch Commentary
(Warner)

…Boko Haram, on Sunday accused the Nigerian Airforce of killing some of the girls
abducted from Chibok, Borno State in 2014.
The terror group in its latest video, released by the Abubakar Shekau faction, purportedly
showing some of the missing girls, alleged that some of the girls were killed during the
Airforce’s strikes on its camps in Sambisa Forest.
But the Defence Headquarters swiftly refuted Boko Haram’s claim, saying that while it was
still studying the video to ascertain its veracity, it was improbable that its airstrikes could
have killed innocent citizens since the defence forces took extra care to protect civilian
population in the theatre of war.
“It is extremely difficult and rare to hit innocent people during airstrikes because the
operation is done through precision attack on identified and registered targets and
locations,” it said in a statement released by its Director of Information, Brigadier-General
Abubakar Rabe.
According to Rabe: “The Precision Airstrike is very effective at taking out targeted enemies
because it is not a random operation. We are nevertheless studying the video clips to examine
if the victims died from other causes rather from the allegation of airstrikes.”…
The video shows purported recent footage of dozens of the abducted school girls with a
veiled fighter claiming, some of the girls had been killed in air strikes. One of them identified
as Maina Yakubu, said she was from Chibok. She said: “What I want to tell my parents and
the federal government is that the federal government should please release Boko Haram
members in custody of security agents so we too can be released.
Apparently to buttress the claim that some of the girls were dead, unidentified bodies were
shown on the ground.
OE Watch | September 2016

14

AFRICA

Top

Why it’s Hard to Defeat Boko Haram
OE Watch Commentary: Despite rhetoric that Boko Haram
is increasingly being weakened, the group has yet to be defeated
fully. To the contrary, its attacks continue, and despite the recent
leadership infighting - which might suggest a weakening - the group
remains remarkably resilient. Below are two perspectives as to just
why this remains the case.
The first article details perspectives from the Chief of Army Staff
of Nigeria, Tukur Buratai. As he discusses, the primary reason that
the Army cannot successfully defeat Boko Haram relates to the
nature of the war terrain. First it is vast, covering three Nigerian
states, as well as the countries that neighbor northeastern Nigeria,
including northern Cameroon, southeastern Niger, and western
Chad. Not only is the space massive, but the terrain is dense, thus
making aeriel surveillance difficult. This reality is exacerbated
by the current rainy season: not only does it create even more
foliage cover, but, as he says it is now “very difficult to move heavy
equipment, heavy tracking vehicles into some of those areas. The
best time is the dry season.”
Taking a more internally-focused approach, the second article
details why Boko Haram remains resilient, even in the face of
splintering. Observers in this article relay that precisely because
the group is splintering, the command and control capabilities of a
central leadership network are diminished, thus allowing smaller,
sub-groups to work semi-autonomously. Though this means fewer
capacities to coordinate, it also means a more diffuse fighting
network, which is inherently more difficult to track and trace.
This article also mentions the difficulties posed by the vast area of
operation. End OE Watch Commentary (Warner)

“The land is so vast, the

North East is very, very
vast; you never appreciate
it until you fly over that
area or even drive around.
..Those remote areas are so
diverse and thick with very
difficult terrain.”

Despite assurances that Boko Haram has been declining in strength over the past
year, the group has shown itself to be remarkably resilient. A commonly cited
reason is due to the group’s large area of operation, the Nigerian components of
which are shown in orange, above.
Source: https://www.nctc.gov/site/groups/boko_haram.html

Source: “Nigeria: Why It’s Difficult to Wipe Out Boko Haram From
North East - Army Chief,” Premium Times (Abuja, Nigeria), 9
August 2016. http://allafrica.com/stories/201608100036.html

The Chief of Army Staff, Tukur Buratai, says there are still remnants of Boko Haram
terrorists in parts of the North East due to the vast nature of the region….
“They still exist in the region, especially Borno, as the area is diverse and some cannot
be easily accessed….”The land is so vast, the North East is very, very vast; you never
appreciate it until you fly over that area or even drive around. ..Those remote areas are
so diverse and thick with very difficult terrain.”
“Now that it is the rainy season, it is very difficult to move heavy equipment, heavy
tracking vehicles into some of those areas. The best time is the dry season,” he said….
Source: Caryol, Rémi. “Face à l’offensive des armées, la résilience de Boko Haram”
(Against Army Offensives, the Resilience of Boko Haram)” Jeune Afrique (Paris), 18
August 2016. http://www.jeuneafrique.com/mag/347415/politique/face-a-loffensivearmees-resilience-de-boko-haram/

When it comes to Boko Harm, he is considered tired, if not dying. After months of silence, he surfaced on 3 August. In his message, he
contested the new nomination of a new head of Boko Haram, named by the Islamic State, confirming that today, Boko Haram is deeply
divided….
Yet, even if it is in on the defense, “it is for now, very unlikely that the movement, formed from diverse segments across a vast and specialists
in terrorist attacks, could be eliminated in a decisive battle,” said the International Crisis Group, in a report from May. Even if it is difficult
to establish a clear schema of the group,” the NGO believes that “the assaults from the armies of the subregion have diminished the core of
the network, diminishing its capacity to ensure coordination and and carving out smaller divisions of the group in more diverse locales. Put
otherwise, Boko Haram might be less well-organized than before, but that does not mean that the menace is less, and indeed, the opposite
might well be the case.
OE Watch | September 2016

15

AFRICA

Top

African Union: Peace and Security Updates
OE Watch Commentary: The
African Union (AU) has been
uncharacteristically in the news for
the past several months. Below are
two facets related to the AU’s role in
peace and security on the continent
that observers might well follow in
the coming months.
The first story relates to the
AU Peace and Security Council’s
decision to start a national dialogue
in Libya. After the October 2011
killing of Libyan President Moammar
Qaddafi, the country split into two
rival governing factions, which led
to the entrance of ISIS in 2014, and
destabilized much of the Sahara and
Sahel. In short order, Libya went
from being the primary funder and
most ardent champion of the AU,
to arguably, one the AU’s highest
priority areas of state collapse,
alongside the likes of South Sudan.
As discussed in the article, the AU’s
hope in bringing together various
parties in Libya for dialogue is
twofold: to help return stability to
the country and the region; and to
make tangible gains in its counterterrorism profile. This AU decision is
ambitious, and shows its increasing
seriousness about its role in peace and
security around the continent.
The second story relates to
the upcoming elections for the
Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, the organization’s
highest executive. After the AU
failed to elect a leader in a vote in
July, a new slate of candidates has
come to fore. Arguably the leading
candidate is the former Commissioner
of the African Union’s Peace and
Security Council, current Algerian
foreign minister Ramtane Lamamra.
As the article details, Lamamra is
“respected” and a “firm favorite in
Addis Ababa,” a sentiment echoed by
many in circles familiar with the AU.
In short, should Lamamra get elected
to the AU’s top post, it would signal
an ever-deeper profile in conflict
prevention for the organization. End
OE Watch Commentary (Warner)

“The humanitarian and security situation in post-2011 Libya has
long been a concern for the AU. As highlighted by the report of the
AU Commission (AUC) in 2014, ‘the fate of the Libyan people is
inseparable from that of the rest of their African sisters and brothers,
with whom they have historical ties’….”

Candidates for the new Chairperson of the African Union Commission include Algerian Ramtane Lamamra, the
widely-admired former Commissioner of the African Union’s Peace and Security Council. Should he get elected in
January 2017, the AU could adopt an even more robust focus on peace and security.
Source: http://www.afribar.org/2016/01/14/au-executive-council-concerned-about-illegal-occupation-of-western-sahara/

Source: Institute for Security Studies, “African Union Peace and Security Council Report Number
83.” Institute for Security Studies (Addis Ababa, Ethiopia), August 2016. https://www.issafrica.
org/publications/peace-and-security-council-report
At the recent AU summit, AU Peace and Security Commissioner Smal Chergui said that the
AU chairperson had decided to initiate a meeting on national dialogue and reconciliation in
Libya. ‘Hopefully, at this stage, this is what the Libyan people need to bring them together, for
reconciliation [to happen] and to see how we can really contribute to the effort of putting an end to
the crisis,’ he said…
The humanitarian and security situation in post-2011 Libya has long been a concern for the AU.
As highlighted by the report of the AU Commission (AUC) in 2014, ‘the fate of the Libyan people
is inseparable from that of the rest of their African sisters and brothers, with whom they have
historical ties….’
In view of the external interference in Libya, the AU has consistently stressed ‘the unity, territorial
integrity, political independence and sovereignty of Libya’ in all its communiques. The AU insists
that ‘there can be no military solution to the current crisis in Libya’ because military interferences
in the country can only exacerbate and further polarise the situation, ‘thereby making it more
difficult to reach a peaceful political solution fully owned by the Libyan stakeholders’. Based on
this, the AU’s response has focused on pushing for a political solution. In this context, the external
powers that continue to provide military support to different factions in the region remain the focus
of attention.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

16

AFRICA

Top

Continued: African Union: Peace and Security Updates
Source: Elissa Jobson, “Why the choice of the AU chair matters so much in today’s multipolar world,” The East African (Nairobi, Kenya).
6 August 2016. www.theeastafrican.co.ke/OpEd/comment/Why-choice-of-AU-chair-matters-so-much-in-today-multipolar-world/4347503334748-8lceucz/index.html?utm_content=buffer9b392&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer
Heads of state, gathered in Kigali on July 18 for the African Union summit, were unable to choose a replacement for Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma, the outgoing chair of the AU Commission (AUC), who will step down after serving one term in office…
Consequently, the election has been postponed until next January’s summit and the nomination process reopened. Former Tanzania president
Jakaya Kikwete is often touted as a possible next chair — he was rumoured to have been interested in running this time around but was too
late to be added to the ballot. Prof Abdoulaye Bathily, a Senegalese politician turned diplomat who is currently the UN Secretary-General’s
special representative for Central Africa, is another possible contender who missed the April deadline.
A firm favourite in Addis Ababa, the seat of the AU’s headquarters, is Algeria’s Foreign Minister Ramtane Lamamra, a highly respected
former AU Peace and Security Commissioner. Other names in the mix include Donald Kaberuka, the much-lauded former African
Development Bank president, and Carlos Lopes, the charismatic intellectual at the helm of the UN Economic Commission for Africa.

Unique Responses to Terrorism in West Africa
OE Watch Commentary: Terrorism is increasingly becoming the
order of the day in West Africa. In broad terms, three groups dominate
the landscape: ISIS, Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), and Boko
Haram, in addition to other numerous affiliates and subgroups. While
the primary onus for fighting such groups is typically placed on the
administrations of states facing the threats themselves, the accompanying
passages offer some examples of how civil society groups, non-affected
African states, and international organizations are working to contribute
to counter-terrorism efforts in West Africa.
As the first article details, local Muslim groups in Nigeria have
interpreted the appointment of al-Barnawi as the new head of Boko
Haram as a particularly dangerous phenomenon for Nigeria’s Christian
communities; as both Shekau’s faction and al-Barnawi’s factions look to
cease targeting Muslims, and instead focus on Christians. Indeed, a large
part of ISIS’ appointment of al-Barnawi relates to Boko Haram’s refusal
to abide by ISIS dictates that it not attack Muslims, which the former did
unabashedly. As such, as the article relays, Muslim groups are banding
together to protect Christians from what they view as an impending
round of violence.
In a somewhat related vein, the second article details the efforts of
Muslim imams and ulemas from around West Africa to combat terrorism,
at a meeting held in Senegal. It details the ways in which Muslim leaders
have begun to coalesce and strategize about ways that the Islamic faith is
being manipulated by Islamist groups for nefarious purposes.
The third article details how Morocco, a country that faces no real
threat from Boko Haram, has offered to send arms to the government of
Niger in order to combat the group. However, an important recognition,
as detailed by the article, is that Morocco’s offer of assistance might well
be read as a power-play to gain more regional influence in West African
affairs, especially as compared to its rival, neighboring Algeria, who
has been developed in African counter-terrorism efforts. Finally, the last
article details how Interpol is helping Burkina Faso to centralize its police
information, so that it can track suspected criminals (and potentially
terrorists) in lockstep with the broader international community. End OE
Watch Commentary (Warner)

“We imams have decided to combat the

jihadism that uses the Muslim religion as a
pretext for violence.”

Source: “Nigeria: Muslim Groups Mobilise Protection for
Christians,” Daily Trust (Abuja), 10 August 2016. http://www.
dailytrust.com.ng/news/general/-muslim-groups-mobiliseprotection-for-christians/158468.html
The Muslim Public Affairs Centre (MPAC) Nigeria and the
Muslim Rights Concern (MURIC) have urged Muslims across
the country to protect Christians against the threats of Boko
Haram militants.
In separate statements, the MPAC Executive Chairman, Disu
Kamor and MURIC Director, Prof. Isiaq Akintola, condemned
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Syria (ISIS)-appointed
leader of Boko Haram, Abu Mus’ab Al-Barnawi’s call to kill
Christians and attack churches.
“What ISIS’s announcement means is that terror campaigns of
Abubakar Shekau will now be replaced by the terror campaigns
of Abu Musab al-Barnawi. Both Abubakar Shekau and alBarnawi are mercurial personalities bent on destructive, hatefilled violence aimed at drowning out the voices of normative
Islam and cultivating a real hatred in the hearts of those
outside of Islam,” he said.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

17

AFRICA

Top

Continued: Unique Responses to Terrorism in West Africa
Source: Jabouk, Mohammed. “Le Maroc pourrait livrer des
armes au Niger pour lutter contre Boko Haram (Morocco
could deliver arms to Niger to fight Boko Haram),”
Yabiladi (Morocco), 29 June 2016. http://www.yabiladi.
com/articles/details/46109/maroc-pourrait-livrer-armesniger.html
Morocco is considering sending arms to Niger to use
against insurgents from Boko Haram. The announcement
of this possible delivery comes only two days after the visit
of the chief Nigerien diplomat to Algeria….
The fight against terrorism is one of the cards that
Morrocco holds to exert its influence in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Proof of this strategy, the kingdom could send
military materiel, notably arms, to Niger to combat the
murderous attacks of Boko Haram, emanating from
Nigeria….
It’s the first time that Morocco has directly furnished
military materiel to an African country engaged in the fight
against terrorism…The kingdom did participate in the 2014
training of 200 Malian soldiers to combat terrorist groups.

Muslim clerics meet to discuss ways to reduce the influence of extremist interpretations
of Islam at a meeting in Dakar, Senegal, in June 2016.
Source: http://www.wombolombo.com/articles/107801/lutte-contre-le-terrorisme-a-dakarles-ulemas-font-bloc-contre-lextremisme-violent

Source: Coulibaly, Satrurnin. “Afrique de l’Ouest: Lutte contre le
terrorisme - A Dakar, les Ulemas font bloc contre l’extrémisme violent
(West Africa: Fight Against Terrorism: Ulemas create a block against
violent extremism),” Sidawaya (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso), 8 June
2016. http://www.wombolombo.com/articles/107801/lutte-contre-leterrorisme-a-dakar-les-ulemas-font-bloc-contre-lextremisme-violent

Source: “Burkina Faso: Lutte contre le terrorisme - Un nouveau
projet présenté au Premier ministre (Burkina Faso: Fight
Against Terrorism),” Fasozine (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso),
16 August 2016. http://burkina-faso.niooz.fr/lutte-contre-leterrorisme-un-nouveau-projet-presente-au-premier-ministrefasozine-9328142.shtml

Gathering in Dakar, Senegal, a group of ulemas (religious scholars),
imams, and preachers from the Sahel are waging war against violent
extremist in the region, as West Africa is ever more a target of terrorist
attacks.

After a meeting of the International Organization of Criminal
Policy (OIPC - Interpol) in Ouagaoudou in May 2016…it was
announced that that a project for the centralization and access
of criminal and police information would begin to take place in
Burkina Faso, and throughout West Africa….

Coming from eight member countries from “Unity of Fusion and
Liaison” (UFL) - Algeria, Burkina Faso, Libya, Mali, Mauritania,
Niger, Nigeria, and Chad - a Sahelian group that provides services
and teaching about counterorrism, has been joined by Cote d’Ivoire,
Guinea, and Senegal as observer countries, as well preachers, imams,
raising their voices against the propagation of violent extremism.
The meeting brings together more than 60 religious experts allowed
them to work together for the purposes of creating a scared union
against radicalization…. “We imams have decided to combat the
jihadism that uses the Muslim religion as a pretext for violence,”
declared an Ivorian imam, Cheick Ibrahim Koné.

This is a project that consists of assembling police and other
security information and at the heart of a country, and to
coordinate and centralize information. This is a project that
works to create a platform to exchange information between the
15 countries of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). It’s a a project that has, at its base, the goals of
making Burkina Faso’s (police and security) systems to become
compatible with Interpol’s, with the goal of instantaneously
exchanging information around the world.

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the state became independent
in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation with Russia, the United States and other partners,
but there have also been internally driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past
several years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have
contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end 2016. While the result has yet to be announced, an examination
of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the
impact this could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20-%20Transition%20in%20the%20Armed%20Forces%20of%20Kazakhstan%20-%20From%20Conscripts%20to%20Contract%20Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | September 2016

18

AFRICA

Top

Nigeria Terrorism Alert Coincides with Boko Haram
Leadership Rift

“Similarly, schools that are being re-opened in Adamawa,

OE Watch Commentary: In August, Boko
Haram underwent a major leadership change.
This has been seen in videos from the group’s
two factional leaders (one, Abu Musab alBarnawi, with ISIL and the other, Abubakar
Shekau, who seceded from ISIL), a leaked audio
from a commander in the ISIL-affiliated faction
condemning Shekau, and a publication from ISIL
declaring the new ISIL-affiliated leader as its
governor for West Africa Province, meaning that
Shekau was dropped from the position. Despite
the factional rifts in Boko Haram, Nigeria is
upgrading the threat level from Boko Haram
throughout the country. It seems the government
is expecting the factions to outbid each other in
an effort to gain attention and show relevance.
In the excerpted article for Vanguard on 10
August, the government explained that there
is red alert for attacks in Abuja. This was the
first time such an alert has been made in about
two years. The government considers prisons,
schools and markets as likely targets of attack.
Attacks on civilian targets suggest that Shekau’s
faction is the one most threatening to Abuja
because he is known for targeting civilian areas.
The other faction, which is affiliated to ISIL is,
however, known for attacking prisons. Despite
the factional feud, it is possible that militants in
both factions will still collaborate.
The military has succeeded in counterinsurgency to the extent that it has retaken
the majority of Boko Haram-held territory in
the country’s northeast, but resources will be
stretched thin if Boko Haram commences a
new wave of asymmetric attacks in the middle
or south of the country. Such attacks would
undermine the government’s current narrative
of success and, moreover, show that while rifts
in Boko Haram’s leadership leave openings to
further divide and weaken the militants, there is
also a possibility of a diversification of the threat.
The Nigerian government has received
criticism from the public, press and international
community for not alerting the public of risks
in the past. This time, however, the government
is seeking to stay ahead by issuing this alert
and not becoming overly optimistic about the
leadership rift spelling the demise of Boko
Haram. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Borno and Yobe states are also at risks, in the light of the wide
ranging plot by the group to cause large-scale destruction.”

Longtime Boko Haram leader Abubakar Shekau, featured in the adjacent image, has been deposed
by rival factions that are now recognized by ISIL, but the Nigerian army does not expect a reduction
in the threat level.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/content/who-is-running-boko-haram/3454310.html

Source: Boko Haram: Army places military on red alert,” Vanguard, 10 August 2016.
http://www.vanguardngr.com/2016/08/boko-haram-army-places-military-red-alertnationwide/
The Nigerian Army has placed its officers and soldiers across the country on
red alert, following ‘very credible’ intelligence that Boko Haram terrorists have
concluded arrangements to attack the Federal Capital Territory, FCT, and other
sensitive areas across the country. According to the intelligence, Boko Haram
terrorists plan to bomb areas with large gatherings of people, such as markets,
schools, among others. They also plan to attack police stations, invade armouries to
get arms and attack prison facilities, ensure jailbreaks and recruit new members.
These revelations came to light when Vanguard stumbled on a signal sent by the
office of the Chief of Army Staff, Lt. General Tukur Buratai, to military formations
in all parts of the country. The signal was entitled: “Plans by Boko Haram terrorist
group to attack in FCT and other parts of the country”
It would be recalled that in recent days, ISIS said they had appointed Al-Barnawi,
son of late founder of Boko Haram, Mohammed Yusuf, as the new leader of the sect,
while [Abubakar] Shekau resurfaced in a video and said the group would target the
FCT.
OE Watch | September 2016

19

LATIN AMERICA

Top

El Salvador: MS-13 Indictment Points to Black Market
Weapons for Elite Gang Force
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 July, El Salvadoran
authorities seized dozens of businesses, froze bank accounts, and
arrested 77 gang members associated with Mara Salvatrucha,
or MS-13. La Prensa Grafica, the El Salvadoran press, initially
broke the story on “Operación Jacque,” or “Operation Check.”
El Universal also obtained a copy of the 1,355-page indictment,
which detailed the investigation. Attorney General Douglas
Meléndez delivered remarks on the indictment in San Salvador
after a year-long investigation into MS-13’s financial structure.
Police reports revealed that the gang, which was designated a
terrorist organization by the country in 2015, was laundering
money through car dealerships, imports and exports, motels, and
brothels among other avenues.
Additionally the articles noted that from April 2016, MS13 purchased at least 30 bulletproof vests at $300 apiece and
obtained a larger shipment of arms, which included grenades and
rocket launchers, from the Mexican black market. The articles’
authors also indicated that this was all part of a larger plan of the
gang to destabilize the country with is own elite force. End OE
Watch Commentary (Keshavarz/Bunker)

Source: Cristian Meléndez and Ana María González, “FGR: “El Piwa”
intentó organizar segunda tregua” (Attorney General’s Office: “Piwa”
wanted to organize a second truce), La Prensa Grafica, 10 August 2016.
http://www.laprensagrafica.com/2016/08/10/fgr-el-piwa-intento-organizarsegunda-tregua
“Page 149 of the indictment states that MS-13 members sought weapons
in Guatemala and Mexico from $2,000 to $3,000 that are capable of
shooting down helicopters.”
Source: José Meléndez, “Iban ‘Maras’ por fusiles mexicanos ilegales”
(MS-13 sought illegal weapons from Mexico), El Universal, 11
August 2016, http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/articulo/nacion/
seguridad/2016/08/11/iban-maras-por-fusiles-mexicanos-ilegales
“Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13), one of two of the most dangerous gangs in
Central America that has deep ties in Mexican and U.S. cities, wanted
to buy 500 black market weapons from Mexico to arm an elite force
that would attack political and judicial authorities, businessmen, and
Salvadoran military and policy in order to destabilize El Salvador.”

MS-13 Graffiti.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mara_Salvatrucha_-_MS13.jpg

OE Watch | September 2016

20

LATIN AMERICA

Top

China Donates Weapons to Ecuador
OE Watch Commentary: China is donating aid to
Ecuador to help strengthen the operational capacity of
Ecuadoran military outposts in the general area of the
earthquake that struck the country earlier this year. The
Ecuadoran government re-deployed a large contingent of
military personnel to lead recovery efforts. More than
600 people were killed and many thousands injured in that
natural disaster. The earthquake’s epicenter was in Ecuador’s
northwestern Manabí Department, the capital and largest
town of which is Manta. The region affected by the quake
also extends into the province of Esmeraldas, which borders
on Colombia to the north. This engagement with China
reflects the Ecuadoran government’s alignment with the
Bolivarian movement, which is led from Cuba and Venezuela
and which takes a general anti-US geopolitical stance. The
detail of the type of aid, e.g. AK47s, is interesting as it
might reflect an Ecudorian decision to beef up toward the
Colombian border for one reason or another. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…centering on military encampments in the
region of the earthquake of 16 April...”

Source: “China donó a Ecuador 10 mil fusiles AK47 y tres lanchas
patrulleras,” [China donated 10 thousand AK47 rifles and three patrol
boats to Ecuador] El Universo, Guayaquil, 15 August 2015. http://www.
eluniverso.com/noticias/2016/08/16/nota/5745396/china-dono-ffaa-10mil-fusiles
“According to ministry [Ecuadoran defense ministry] technicians, the
rifles would be a ‘modern version’ of the AK47…this last [shipment] is
part of the aid [package] decided upon for 2016, centering on assistance
to military encampments in the region of the earthquake of 16 April…
Yulin [Wang Yulin, Chinese Ambassador to Ecuador] noted that both
donations correspond to a total of 9 million [denomination uncertain] in
aid to increase operational capacity, apart from the assistance that was
given in response to the earthquake. Patiño [Ricardo Patiño, Ecuadoran
Minister of Defense] highlighted that China took items from its strategic
reserves to donate them to the Ecuadoran military.”

Bolivarian Regional Apparatus in Ill Health
OE Watch Commentary: The Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) was created by
treaty in 2008 and began operating, more or less,
in 2011. It was purposed to offset and ultimately
replace the Organization of American States
(OAS) as the predominant regional diplomatic
organization. Among UNASUR’s key differences
from the OAS was the exclusion of Canada,
Mexico and the United States, coupled with
the prominent inclusion of Cuba. Ultimately,
according to the vision, UNASUR would
grow into something like the European Union,
controlled by member parties of the Forum of
Sao Paolo with leadership from the ‘bolivarian’
governments, especially Venezuela’s. The
Venezuelan crisis is now putting UNASUR
against the ropes. It operates by consensus, and
there now appears to be no consensus among its
members to supplant the OAS. The government
of Venezuela under Hugo Chávez made control of
the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR)
another pillar of the bolivarian effort to lead
regional political and economic decision making.
Now that Argentina and Paraguay have turned
out their pro-bolivarian parties, and the Brazilian
government is at least temporarily in nonbolivarian hands, MERCOSUR is also looking
like it will not be siding with the bolivarian
government in Venezuela. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…several of its Member States said that the
UNASUR meeting should be suspended...”
Source: Emilio J. Cárdenas, “Unasur” ha sido, finalmente, puesta en su lugar”
(UNASUR has finally, been put in its place), Diario Exterior, Madrid, 30 June 2016,
http://www.eldiarioexterior.com/finalmente-ponen-a-unasur-en-su-lugar-47840.htm
“The Venezuelan question is exactly what put UNASUR under the Organization of
American States (OAS)…very soon what it [UNASUR] really is will be made evident:
a clearly redundant organism, created for the purpose of fortifying - more or less
covertly - the now discredited ‘bolivarians’….several of its Member States said
that the UNASUR meeting should be suspended for the simple reason that the issue
[Venezuela’s internal crisis] was already in the hands of the OAS….It is Caracas
that, let us remember, holds the presidency pro tem of UNASUR, [but] in spite of its
familiar and arrogant way of acting, could not block the suspension of its activity.”
Source: “¡No Incluye a Venezuela! Paraguay: ‘Mercosur es propiedad de los 4 cuatro
Estados fundadores’” (It Doesn’t Include Venezuela!: Paraguay: ‘Mercosur is property
of the 4 founding States’), DolarToday, 17 August 2016, https://dolartoday.com/
incluye-venezuela-paraguay-respondera-las-insolencias-de-maduro-mercosur-espropiedad-de-los-4-cuatro-estados-fundadores/
“Venezuela is not recognized as president. Paraguay is one of the countries of
Mercosur, along with Argentina and Brazil, that does not recognize Venezuela’s
unilateral decision, made at the end of the month, when it announced that it would
take charge of the presidency pro tem of the block according to the alphabetical
rotation established in its regulations….Until then, the presidency had been exercised
by Uruguay, which ended its mandate without the traditional summit of Chiefs of
State of Mercosur, which Paraguay conditions as indispensable for there to be a
transference.’”
OE Watch | September 2016

21

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Questions Surrounding the Colombian Peace Plebiscite
OE Watch Commentary: Before
too long, the Colombian administration
led by President Juan Manuel Santos
is to convene a Yes/No vote on the
implementation of the agreements
that the government and the FARC
are seemingly about to complete
in Havana. There are a number of
questions in the air about the process
and its consequences. A useful
article, albeit from an opinion source
not highly enthusiastic about the
negotiations, appeared in Colombian
newspapers that outlines ten of those
questions and offers simple answers.
We provide translation of four of
those Q&A’s, which we think are
most useful to OE Watch readers. It
is already known that in order for
the agreement to evidence the public
support necessary (such as to empower
the administration to proceed with
implementation of the accords), the
number of yes votes has to reach only
13% of the suffrage, that is, of the total
number of qualified voters nationally.
President Santos has set 2 October
as the date for the plebiscite, and the
congress is likely to approve that date.
If the congress approves the date,
which it is very likely to do, campaigns
for the yes and no votes will begin on
Wednesday, 7 September. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…If the ‘No’ wins it is necessary to return to renegotiate the
agreements...”
Source: Colprensa, “Estas son las dudas que rodean el plebiscito por la paz” (These are the
questions surrounding the plebicite for peace), El País, Cali, 18 August 2016. http://www.elpais.
com.co/elpais/colombia/proceso-paz/noticias/estas-son-dudas-rodean-plebiscito-por-paz
Q. What happens if the ‘No’ wins?
A. …If the ‘No’ wins it is necessary to return to renegotiate the agreements because the court
decision clearly states that it is not about the right to peace but rather to approve or disapprove
the content of the agreement that they reached in Havana….
Q. Once the plebiscite has been voted, will it be possible to renegotiate the agreement?
A. Eduardo Cifuentes Muñoz (ECM), ex-president of the Supreme Court: …This does not mean
that in the future the parties can not consider a renegotiation…
Q. Can the plebiscite be conducted even though the FARC has not yet turned in their weapons?
A. Juan Fernando Cristo, Minister of the Interior: The court decision does not oblige the FARC
to abandon its weapons before the convocation of the plebiscite; on the contrary, it indicates that
the group make an express declaration that it will abandon [future tense] weapons and its violent
action….
Q. Must amnesty for reinserted guerrillas be defined before convoking the plebiscite?
A. …No, this question has already been decided, amnesties cannot be made until after the
plebiscite. It is not a condition for convoking them, it is a condition according to the FARC, but
the decision of the Court regarding this question is the opposite: amnesties must be produced
after the realization of the plebiscite and not before….
Source: Manuel Reyes Beltrán, “El miércoles comenzarían campañas por el SÍ y el NO en
plebiscito por la paz” (Campaigns for the Yes and No votes in the peace plebiscite will begin
Wednesday), Radio Santafé, 27 August 2016, http://www.radiosantafe.com/2016/08/26/proximomiercoles-comenzarian-campanas-por-el-si-y-el-no-en-plebiscito-por-la-paz/
The respective and anticipated campaigns for the Yes and for the No in the peace plebiscite can
begin Wednesday next week [7September]…[for the plebiscite] which has been set for October 2
by President Santos.”

Joke or Smart Strategy in Venezuela?
OE Watch Commentary: This report seems as though it should have
been created by The Onion as parody, but it has been picked up by many
standard news outlets. According to the accompanying article, the socialist
economic planners in Venezuela decided to fine bread shops if customers
formed long lines to buy the shops’ bread. Shortage of flour and other
inputs has apparently led to delayed and reduced baking in many stores,
impelling the formation lines in those or other stores. Government officials,
however, publicly claim that the lines are contrived—that they are a form
of demonstration in which fake line-waiters are sent to make the shortages
appear worse than they are, thus causing public unease and exacerbating
lack of faith in the regime. Not impossible perhaps, but for opponents of
the regime the real reason for the fines is to make it appear as though the
shortages are not as bad as they are. Never mind the economics, this is
making market theatre of the absurd slump toward bazaar of the bizarre. In
related news, the opposition parties have scheduled a major protest march in
Caracas for September 1. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…The superintendent…assured
that with this measure, the strategy
of ‘generating anxiety’ among
consumers will be dismantled…”
Source: “La Culpa Es Del Sofá: Panaderías que tengan
colas serán multadas” (It’s the sofa’s fault! Bread stores
that have waiting lines will be fined), DolarToday, 18
August 2016. https://dolartoday.com/la-culpa-es-del-sofapanaderias-que-tengan-colas-seran-multadas/
“…The superintendent, William Contreras, assured that
with this measure, the strategy of ‘generating anxiety’
among consumers will be dismantled, a strategy which in
his opinion is part of a political motivation and not due to
shortages of product….”
OE Watch | September 2016

22

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Drug Trafficking Landscape in Guatemala
Continues to Evolve
“

…Cocaine trafficking through Guatemala has been modified
OE Watch Commentary: Starting
around 2007, Mexican drug cartels such as
and it is now carried out mainly through the waters of the
Los Zetas, the Gulf Cartel, and the Sinaloa
Pacific in boats coming from Colombia and Ecuador, drastically
Cartel began establishing trafficking
networks in Guatemala. To achieve
reducing clandestine flights.
success, they partnered
with traditional Guatemalan
transport groups run by the
Mendoza and Lorenzana
families, amongst others.
At first, Los Zetas worked
alongside these family
enterprises but later
looked to gain complete
control of routes in Peten
(north), Huehuetenango,
and Quiche (west). Their
desire for absolute control
increased violence in the
aforementioned areas and
also drew the attention of
authorities who launched
subsequent campaigns to
arrest and extradite Los
Zetas and key Guatemalan
transport group leaders in
these areas as discussed by
Self-propelled semi-submersible laden with 7 tons of cocaine is being seized by elements of the US Coast Guard 200 miles south
the first two accompanying
from Guatemala.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Drugsub-Coast_Guard.jpg
excerpts.

”

During this same time
period, the Sinaloa Cartel established
firm control of Pacific routes which
are highly important given that the
400km Guatemalan coastline serves
as a key entrance and exit point for
methamphetamines from Asia and
cocaine shipments from Colombia
and Ecuador. The Sinaloa Cartel also
maintained peaceful relations with
Guatemalan transport groups allowing the
organization to maintain a lower profile
than Los Zetas. These actions, coupled
with the arrests of key Los Zetas leaders
and transport leaders in the region, have
resulted in a shift of drug routes from
the north and west of Guatemala to the
Pacific as indicated by the second excerpt.
A secondary result of this shift is that
maritime routes are once again gaining
popularity over clandestine aerial routes
that were preferred in Los Zetas territory.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Los Zetas provocan cambios en la estructura criminal de Guatemala (Los Zetas
Precipitate Changes in Guatemala’s Drug Trafficking Structure).” Expansion. Accessed
from http://expansion.mx/nacional/2010/12/31/los-zetas-provocan-cambios-en-la-estructuracriminal-de-guatemala
“In the past, Mexican drug cartels cooperated with Guatemalan cartels as they (Guatemalan
cartels) served as intermediaries for drug shipments moving north. As part of this cooperation,
Guatemalan cartels maintained their territory which helped to keep levels of violence in the
country low. Starting around 2008, Los Zetas began to actively fight for control of routes which
increased violence levels in the country and drew the attention of authorities.”
Source: “Gobernación identifica tres grupos en control del narcotráfico (Government Identifies
Three Groups Controlling Drug Trafficking Operations in Guatemala).” Prensa Libre.
Accessed from http://www.prensalibre.com/guatemala/comunitario/gobernacion-identifica-tresestructuras-en-control-del-narcotrafico
“The arrest and further extradition to the United States of some 30 powerful local drug
traffickers, members of family clans such as Los Lorenzana and Los Mendoza amongst them,
as well as the persecution to the bloodthirsty Zetas, has caused a change in the chess game of
drug trafficking in Guatemala. At present, three main groups to include the Sinaloa Cartel of
Mexico are controlling operations in the country.”…
…“Cocaine trafficking through Guatemala has been modified and it is now carried out mainly
through the waters of the Pacific in boats coming from Colombia and Ecuador, drastically
reducing clandestine flights.”
OE Watch | September 2016

23

LATIN AMERICA

Top

San Andres Island Serves as a Colombian
Trafficking Hub in Central America
OE Watch Commentary: Islands in Central
America and the Caribbean have served as smuggling
hubs for well-known criminal organizations such as
the Cali and Medellin Cartels since the early 80s due
to the multitude of options. Islands and archipeligos
dot the region where an estimated 90% of all cocaine
shipments pass through before their eventual arrival to
the US. Well-known trafficking islands in the region
currently include the Corn Islands in Nicaragua, Guna
Yala in Panama (boasts an archipelago with over 365
small islands), the Bay Islands in Honduras, and San
Andres Island in Colombia.
All of the aforementioned locations have gained
popularity in recent years as they can be used
as layover points to store cocaine shipments, as
handoff points where shipments can be dropped
from aerial flights or simply exchanged at high-sea,
or as logistical hubs to refuel fast boats. Rarely can
one location provide all these advantages, but San
Andres Island does; which is likely why it serves as a
key trafficking hub for Colombian cartels in Central
America.
San Andrés is located just 110 kilometers off
the coast of Nicaragua and 730 kilometers from
Colombia. It has been a smuggling hub for centuries
because of its proximity to both Central America and
the Caribbean and its logistical appeal as indicated
by excerpt one. San Andres in particular was initially
used by the Medellin Cartel in the early 80s to deaddrop aerial cocaine shipments at high sea where
they would be recovered by fishermen. As Colombia
improved its aerial radar monitoring system, maritime
shipments via go fast boats quickly gained popularity
and San Andres convered into more of a logistical
stop-over point used to refuel the water vessels. In
time, trafficking methods once again morphed as
cartels contracted locals to operate fast boats because
of their knowledge of geographical constraints
surrounding the island as discussed in excerpt two.
During the recruitment process, cartels quickly
learned that the locals in San Andres represented
an indispensable resource given their knowledge
of the area and their willingness to participate or at
least accept trafficking activity as discussed in the
third excerpt. At present, no one knows for sure how
many of the islands’ 77,000 reported inhabitants are
currently working at the service of Colombian drug
cartels, but excerpt three indicates that there could be
over 800. What is certain is that San Andres Island is
and will likely continue to serve as an important drug
hub for Colombian Cartels in Central America. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Those most likely to be recruited by drug
trafficking organizations are young males
willing to be bought for ‘easy’ money.”
Source: “San Andres es un paso estrategico para el narcotrafico: Comandante
de la isla (San Andres is a Strategic Trafficking Point for Drug Trafficking
Organizations According to Colombian Military Commander).” El Pais. Accessed
from http://www.elpais.com.co/elpais/judicial/noticias/san-andres-pasoestrategico-para-narcotrafico-comandante-isla
“We (San Andres Island) are considered to be a transit zone that connects
the Caribbean with Central America. For this reason, it is necessary for drug
shipments to pass through our waters before their eventual delivery onto
mainland. San Andrés in particular is a strategic island in the region as it is used
as a refueling point for fast boats continuing on to Central America or Mexico.

San Andres Island.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:San_Andres_Island.png

Source: “Porque San Andres (Why San Andres).” La Semana. Accessed from
http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/porque-san-andres/25010-3
“Those most likely to be recruited by drug trafficking organizations are young
males willing to be bought for “easy” money. These individuals are either
unemployed or earn lesser salaries than other types of work on the island. Most
commonly, they are expert high sea navigators who can easily maneuver the rocky
and reef laden areas surrounding the island.”
Source: Narcoislas, un tesoro entre dos oceanos (Narco Islands, A Treasure
between Two Oceans).” Animal Politico. Accessed from http://www.
animalpolitico.com/2013/09/narcoislas-un-tesoro-entre-dos-oceanos/
“There could be between 500 and 800 locals working for trafficking
organizations in one way or another. But in the archipelago’s tight-knit
community, local attitudes also have a lot to do with why it is hard to sever the
drug trade’s roots on the islands. According to a 2014 survey, San Andrés was
more accepting of drug trafficking than any other Colombian city, with 42 percent
of respondents saying they did not have a problem with traffickers in the area.
Only 24 percent rejected corrupt practices.”
OE Watch | September 2016

24

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Police Reveal New Trafficking Scheme
OE Watch Commentary: In recent months, authorities
in Central and South America have struggled to find ways
to manage the large influx of Cuban migrants entering into
the region as part of their journey to the United States.
The general consensus has been to simply let them pass in
accordance with the humanitarian agreements signed by
select countries, but on 9 May 2016, Panamanian President
Juan Carlos Varela announced his decision to close select
shared border crossing points with Colombia in an attempt
to slow the migratory crisis currently plaguing the region.
Select open source channels indicated that this change came
about after Panamanian and Colombian authorites discovered
that Clan Usaga (a drug trafficking organization based out
of Colombia) is using illegal Cuban migrants (in addition to
those from other nations) to transport anywhere from 25-30
kilograms of cocaine in exchange for passage from Colombia
to Panama and then on to Central America as indicated in
the first excerpt.
To make the drug smuggling operation a success, Clan
Usaga is said to work directly with human smuggling groups
that are willing to waive the $2,000 cost normally charged to
migrants for passage from Colombia to Panama as discussed
in excerpt two. In some cases, migrants are offered up to
$5,000 which allows them to complete their journey to the
border of the United States with a “coyote”—a guide paid
to transport illegal migrants. Those who accept the deal
generally depart from Turbo, Colombia as discussed in
excerpt three. From there, they are transported to the densely
forested Darien province in Panama where they backpack
for approximately five days until they arrive to the coast
where they are picked up and transported north. Given that
this method has been utilized by the FARC in the past with
indigenous peoples from Panama, it does not come as a
big surprise that it has been adapted by Clan Usaga to take
advantage of the current migratory crisis occurring in the
region. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“As part of this new modus operandi, migrants
carry anywhere from 25-30 kilograms of cocaine
through the Darien province. This journey is
said to take up to 5 days.”
Source: “Policía revela ‘el hormigueo’, nueva modalidad del Clan Úsuga
para sacar droga del país (Police Reveal New Micro-Trafficking Scheme
Utilized by Clan Úsuga to Move Drugs from Colombia to Panama).”
Noticias CM. Accessed from http://www.cmi.com.co/policia-revela-elhormigueo-nueva-modalidad-del-clan-Úsuga-para-sacar-droga-del-pais
“Clan Usaga has known trafficking routes that extend from Uraba,
Colombia into Darien, Panama. Recently, this group begain using
migrants (Cuban, African, and Asian) to transport drugs along this route.
As part of this new modus operandi, migrants carry anywhere from 25-30
kilograms of cocaine through the Darien province. This journey is said to
take up to 5 days.”
Source: “Narcotraficantes colombianos usan migrantes para transportar
drogas (Colombian Drug Traffickers Use Migrants to Transport Drugs).”
Pura Noticia. Accessed from http://www.puranoticia.cl/noticias/
internacional/narcotraficantes-colombianos-usan-a-migrantes-paratransportar-drogas/2016-01-04/134056.html
“Authorities reported that Clan Úsuga is using migrants to traffic drugs
with the help of local human smuggling groups. This method represents
one of many that is used by the group to move shipments from origin
to destination. Furthermore, it provides migrants financial opportunity
as they are paid anywhere from $2,000-$5,000 for their cooperation in
addition to free transport from Colombia into Panama.”
Source: “Mafia usa a migrantes ilegales para llevar cocaine hacia
Panama (Mafia Uses Illegal Migrants to Transport Cocaine to Panama).”
El Tiempo. Accessed from http://www.eltiempo.com/politica/justicia/
transporte-de-cocaina-en-la-frontera-con-panama/16593159
“The municipality of Turbo represents a convergence point for illegal
immigrants and drug shipments. From this location, both use maritime
routes to arrive in Panama where they begin their eventual journey to
Central America towards the United States.”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is about a
broader set of conflicts than just ‘insurgency.’ In
its 144 sections, Geoff Demarest raises new and
overlooked concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up debate and
critical thinking. As Geoff Demarest puts it: “I hope
that some of the ideas in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf
OE Watch | September 2016

25

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Criminals Raid Gold Mine in Sonora
OE Watch Commentary: In late July, unidentified
criminals successfully raided the Canadian-owned La
India gold mine, located in the remote and mountainous
region straddling the states of Sonora and Chihuahua
in northwest Mexico. The precise amount of gold stolen
has not been revealed, but could be substantial. Even
locating the mine would require detailed local knowledge
– a successful raid suggests the perpetrators had access
to inside information. The sophistication of the attack
also indicates likely organized crime involvement. The
excerpted passages from Mexican news sources discuss
the raid.

Source: Daniel Sánchez Dórame, “Comando asalta mina de oro en Sonora
(Command assails gold mine in Sonora),” Excelsior, 21 July 2016, http://
www.excelsior.com.mx/nacional/2016/07/21/1106176.
… An armed command assaulted the La India gold mine, located in the
municipality of Arivechia in the mountains of Sonora … the robbery was
perpetrated by various suspects associated with a criminal organization, who
evidently had experience and knowledge of the security measures implemented
by the mine … at this time authorities have not reported arrests of any
suspects …

As discussed in the February 2016 issue of OE Watch
(“Mexican Cartels Operate Diverse Enterprises”),
Mexican criminal organizations have been increasingly
diversifying their activities. This is specifically
attributable to several high-profile successes by Mexican
authorities. As the government apprehends and/or
kills leaders of federated cartels, subordinate gangs
disintegrate from the larger groups and lose access
to transnational smuggling networks. They adapt by
expanding into activities less lucrative than narcotics
smuggling. Mexico is the source of much mineral wealth,
including precious metals such as gold and silver, so one
of the trends that has manifested is criminal interest in
mining activities.
Placed in this context, although the raid on the La India
mine was a victory (so far) for the criminals involved,
it actually could be an indicator that drug cartels are
losing the Mexican drug war. Nevertheless, it represents
a real security challenge for Mexico, because criminal
diversification (which includes increased violence)
affects the Mexican populace more directly than
drug smuggling, in which Mexico is more of a transit
than a target country. In the long run, as the Mexican
government is more successful in stopping smuggling,
it could actually lose popular support for security
operations. End OE Watch Commentary (Freese)

Copper canyon, in Chihuahua, is illustrative of the complex terrain in
northwest Mexico.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Barranca_del_cobre_2.jpg

Source: Cristina Gómez Lima, “Sonora: commando armado asalta mia de oro
(Sonora: armed commando assaults gold mine),” La Jornada, 20 July 2016,
http://www.jornada.unam.mx/ultimas/2016/07/20/sonora-comando-armadoasalta-mina-de-oro.
Armed men raided … the La India Mine … and stole unspecified amounts
of gold …the criminal group had a well-planned modus operandi … The
Canadian mine employed 368 persons and has not previously had security
problems … The Company opened the mine in 2011 … and began commercial
extraction during 2014 …

Arivechia, Sonora

Source: https://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/theworld-factbook/geos/mx.html

OE Watch | September 2016

26

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Police Deactivate “Car Bomb” in Central Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: Although not unheard of, improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) are not the most common weapon that Mexican cartels
employ, so it is no surprise that there has been significant press coverage
of a mid-August 2016 incident in Guanajuato when police discovered
a vehicle rigged with explosives. The accompanying passage from a
Mexican newspaper article discusses the details of the incident, which raises
important questions about the use of IEDs by Mexican gangs.
As the accompanying passage states, two individuals claimed that a man
operating under alias contracted them to drive a vehicle from Guanajuato
to Michoacán, and that the device would allegedly be transferred at the
destination. The location of the incident is noteworthy. Michoacán has
struggled for decades with rampant criminality. Guanajuato, conversely,
has been less impacted by crime historically, although parts of the state
have been contested by rival gangs in the past few years, leading to
increased violence.
The real question is whether this IED is an isolated incident or if it is
the beginning a new, emerging trend of increased preference for IEDs by
Mexican gangs. End OE Watch Commentary (Freese)

Source: Carlos Quiroz and Andrés Guardiola, “Desactivan
‘coche bomba’ en Guanajuato; iba a Michoacán (Disabled
‘car bomb’ in Guanajuato; headed to Michoacán),”
Excelsior, 12 August 2016, www.excelsior.com.mx/
nacional/2016/08/12/1110418.
Federal Police Officers arrested two suspects who were
transporting an explosive device, apparently home-made …
the driver … told federal police that he and his companion
had left Celaya, Guanajuato and were traveling to La
Piedad, Michoacán. The companion … warned officers
that he had to start the vehicle immediately, because if it
remained stopped more than 30 minutes it would explode
… the copilot admitted to officers that a man identified as
Cholo KA El Mocho had paid them each $(MXN) 1,000
to transport the device from Celaya to La Piedad, where
it would be dismantled and installed in another vehicle …
16th Military Zone soldiers came to the site … they found
a black plastic bag with an electronic device and a remote
control …

Mexican Navy Deploys New Unmanned Aerial System
OE Watch Commentary: As of late July 2016, the Mexican
Navy had fielded Arcturus T-20 unmanned aerial systems
(UAS). Acquisition of the UAS was a collaborative venture
between Mexico’s Navy, Natural Resources, and Agriculture
Departments, with a primary mission of protecting endangered
maritime fauna from poaching. As the first excerpted article
from a Mexian Navy press release discusses, this wildlife
conservation mission is in line with national priorities. As
of early August 2016, the UAS program had already yielded
positive results, according to the second accompanying passage.
While the Mexican Navy has made international headlines
for arresting drug cartel leaders, protection of maritime
species remains an important mission. The Navy is not just a
warfighting service but also a maritime law enforcement agency,
emergency rescue service, and scientific research service. Plus,
combatting poaching also combats organized crime: Mexican
gangs are the primary culprits, selling poached fish overseas –
especially to customers in China.
The Mexican Navy also has a history of interagency
cooperation, including multi-purpose surveillance and
reconnaissance programs. For example, Mexico’s overhead
imagery satellites are used for environmental monitoring,
oceanography, and disaster response. The collaboration between
the Navy, Natural Resources and Agriculture Departments to
protect endangered species is consistent with this operational
model. End OE Watch Commentary (Freese)

Source: Unattributed author(s), “Entrega e inicio de operaciones de
un Sistema Aéreo no Tripulado (Delivery and start of operations of
an Unmanned Aerial System),” Mexican Navy Press release 126/16,
28 July 2016, http://www.gob.mx/semar/prensa/entrega-e-inicio-deoperaciones-de-un-sistema-aereo-no-tripulado.
In the context of interinstitutional collaboration between the
Departments of the Navy, Natural Resources, and Agriculture… the
“Arcturus T-20” Unmanned Aerial System began operations. This
surveillance system is meant to support population recovery for the
vaquita porpoise and conduct activities against illegal fishing of
the totoaba fish… the system… will include three planes with highresolution cameras, a mobile ground-control vehicle, a logistic vehicle,
control and satellite antenna, a pneumatic launcher… the Natural
Resources secretary emphasized that protection of natural patrimony
is a priority for the administration of President Enrique Peña Nieto …
Source: Carlos Madrazo Silva, “Avances tecnológicos y preservació
del habitat natural (Technological advances in preservation of the
natural habitat),” Siempre, 06 August 2016, http://www.siempre.com.
mx/2016/08/avances-tecnologicos-y-preservacion-del-habitat-natural/.
… the airplanes are made from carbon fiber; they have infrared
cameras, which allow them to fly at night … and flying range of 12
hours and 100km over the sea, reaching an altitude of 18,000ft and
speed of 65knots. Most importantly, with the implementation of this
program they have already been able to rescue 10 whales, 13 totoabas,
and 11 gulf turtles …

OE Watch | September 2016

27

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Major Cocaine Busts in Manzanillo
OE Watch Commentary: In mid-July,
Mexican sailors acted on national intelligence
tips and discovered a massive shipment of
cocaine hidden in barrels of picante salsa that had
arrived in Manzanillo, a city in the Mexian state
of Colima, from Ecuador. A week later, Navy
personnel at Manzanillo seized a smaller, but
still huge, shipment of cocaine from Guatemala,
this time hidden in refrigerators. Although drug
cartels have used food to conceal drug shipments
for many years, the picante cocaine shipment
was large even by Mexican standards. The
accompanying excerpted articles from Mexican
news sources discuss these operations.
The prima facie takeaway is that drug cartels
continue to use creative and diverse methods to
conceal their shipments. Perhaps what is more
important is the location. Manzanillo remains
a major smuggling hub for drugs and precursors
being shipped into Mexico for later diversion to
other markets (not just in North America, but
increasingly in Europe and Asia). The reason
is partially attributable to infrastructure – most
of the world’s commerce moves by sea and
Manzanillo is an important Pacific port with
enough legitimate commercial throughput to
conceal illegal traffic. However, the prevalence
of drug trafficking in Manzanillo, as opposed
to other Mexican west-coast ports, suggests a
criminal plaza that is particularly entrenched,
possibly the port of preference for maritime
smugglers. End OE Watch Commentary
(Freese)

Source: Unattributed author(s), “Decomisa Semar 13 toneladas de cocaína que venían
a Mazatlán (13 tons of cocaine en route to Mazatlan confiscated),” Noroeste redaction
from El Universal, 13 July 2016, http://beta.noroeste.com.mx/publicaciones/view/
decomisa-semar-13-toneladas-de-cocana-que-venan-a-mazatln-1036311.
A shipment of cocaine diluted in picante salsa was discovered by Navy Department
personnel in Manzanillo, Colima. The drug was inside a container that had arrived
from Guayaquil, Ecuador, with an intended destination of Mazatlán, Sinaloa … The
discovery resulted from intelligence work of Federal government agencies, which led
to them conducting a non-intrusive search of the suspicious container …

Manzanillo

Source: Unattributed author(s), “Semar y SAT decomisan 390 kilos de cocaína
dentro de refrigeradores en Manzanillo (390 kilos of cocaine inside refrigerators
in Manzanillo confiscated),” Ángelguardián.mx redaction, 20 July 2016, http://
angelguardian.mx/semar-y-sat-decomisan-390-kilos-de-cocaina-dentro-derefrigeradores-en-manzanillo/.
… personnel assigned to the Sixth Naval Region, supported by Customs
Administration Service personnel, seized a container transporting refrigerators
… containing 390.4kg of cocaine … the container arrived aboard the ship APL
HOLLAND, registered in Singapore … destined for Puerto Quetzal, Guatemala … the
shipment arrived from Buenaventura, Colombia …

Cranes at Manzanillo
port.
Source: Unattributed
author(s),
“Mejoramiento para el
Puerto de manzanillo,”
Secretaría de
Communicaciones
y Transportes, 31
October 2013,
https://www.flickr.
com/photos/sct_
mx/27016424032/in/
photostream/.

OE Watch | September 2016

28

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Indian Defense Ministry Funds Arunachal Pradesh
Border Highway
“The Director General of Military Operations of the Army had objected
OE Watch Commentary: Although
the Indian Army initially voiced
concerns about the tactical, strategic,
and sustainment implications of the
project, the Indian Defence Ministry
has approved funding for a highway
to be constructed along the disputed
McMahon Line, in order to connect the
extremities of the northeastern state of
Arunachal Pradesh. The project is being
funded nationally, but it is also a state
initiative, and is ostensibly driven by
economic interests. The accompanying
passages from Indian news sources
discuss this development.
India has to balance its interests in
developing Aranachal Pradesh with
the risk of provoking China. China
disputes the McMahon Line, and road
construction is a sensitive topic because
it was one of the disputes leading to the
1962 Sino-India War.
As the third passage discusses, the
timing is also sensitive, because it comes
just weeks after India deployed 100 T-72
tanks to the northwestern part of its
border, the Himalayan region of Ladakh,
in response to alleged Chinese border
incursions. Ladakh, like the Aranachal
Pradesh border, is also contested with
China. With regards to the tanks
themselves, it is unclear which versions
of the T-72 India is deploying. India
has several models available, ranging
from imports to domestically-produced
versions. Because of the extreme
climate, which can reach temperatures
that affect fuel performance, knowing
which versions have been deployed
would reveal how and when India plans
to employ the tanks.
India can justify the road construction
in Aranachal Pradesh as economically
essential and can justify the tank
deployments as a response to aggressive
Chinese behavior. However, the real
questions are whether China chooses
to perceive these actions as also being
aggressions, and whether China chooses
to respond. If so, tensions could escalate
in an already contentious region. End
OE Watch Commentary (Freese)

to the road’s proposed alignment as it was running too close to the
disputed sections of the McMohan [sic] Line.”

Source: Unattributed author(s), “Defence Ministry Approves 2000-km Highway for Arunchal,”
Northeast Today, 7 August 2016, http://www.northeasttoday.in/defence-ministry-approves-2000km-highway-for-arunachal/.
The Ministry of Defence has approved a strategically vital 2000-km highway that connects
the western and eastern extremities of Arunachal Pradesh – Tawang to Vijaynagar – after
incorporating the Army’s views on the alignment of the road … The Director General of Military
Operations of the Army had objected to the road’s proposed alignment as it was running too
close to the disputed sections of the McMohan [sic] Line … the area has very little population
and sustaining the safety and civilian traffic would end up being the responsibility of the armed
forces. Also, the road could be used by insurgents to slip-in and out of the country. There is no
boundary marked on the ground, perception on the exact alignment of the McMohan [sic] Line
vary by a few miles on either side in India and China …

“This is the second time

in history that India has
deployed the T-72 tanks in
the Himalayan region. The
first was in 1962 during the
Indo-China war [sic] …”
Indian T-72.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:T-72_Ajeya1.jpg

Source: Unattributed author(s), “Arunachal asks for approving 200-km [sic] Tawang-Vijayanagar
Road,” The Economic Times, redaction from PTI, 15 March 2015, http://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/news/economy/infrastructure/arunachal-asks-for-approving-200-km-tawangvijayanagar-road/articleshow/46573096.cms.
Arunachal Pradesh has urged the Centre to approve the proposed 2,000-km road from Tawang
to Vijaynagar to provide connectivity to the border areas along the MacMohan [sic] line by
declaring it as National Highway. State PWD Minister Gojen Gadi made the plea during a
meeting with Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju … Both the roads are pet
projects of Rijiju, which he had announced here in July 2014.
Source: S.V. Krishnamachari, “Indian Army deploys T-72 tanks in Ladakh to counter
Chinese military build-up,” International Business Times, 20 July 2016, http://www.
ibtimes.co.in/indian-army-deploys-t-72-tanks-ladakh-counter-chinese-military-build687232#H0pjM1qviHVG1Zma.97.
The Indian Army has moved more than 100 T-72 tanks to its disputed border with China in the
mountainous region of Ladakh in Jammu & Kashmir … This is the second time in history that
India has deployed the T-72 tanks in the Himalayan region. The first was in 1962 during the IndoChina war [Comment: The author probably means “tanks” in general, not T-72s, which did not
exist in 1962.], when the Indian Army airdropped five tanks in Ladakh, which has seen frequent
incursions by the People’s Liberation Army of China … The latest incursion … was on March 8
this year ... The Chinese PLA had made similar incursions … in April 2015 and twice in 2014 …
The build-up by India on its China border in the Ladakh region comes in the wake of reports that
China has scaled up its presence …
OE Watch | September 2016

29

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Indian Student Satellite to Augment PNT
OE Watch Commentary: The Indian Space Research
Organization (ISRO) is preparing for a September launch that
will include a domestically-built student microsatellite, named
“Pratham,” as a secondary payload. As the accompanying
passages discuss, the satellite mission is to study the ionosphere
to predict storms and improve India’s Position, Navigation,
and Timing (PNT) constellation. The primary payload will be
ScatSat, a microsatellite developed by ISRO itself.
ISRO launched the final satellite of India’s domestic PNT
constellation, NAVigation with Indian Constellation (NAVIC)
in late April 2016. As discussed in the June 2016 issue of OE
Watch (“India’s NAVIC Constellation Is Underway”), the space
component NAVIC constellation is fully capable of operations
(although the PNT system requires end-user hardware that
is still being developed and deployed). Functionality does
not equate to optimization, however. One obvious method to
optimize performance is to increase the number of satellites in
sight of the target location, allowing more precise location. In
this case however, the Pratham project appears to be trying to
understand – in hopes of ultimately improving – the variables
that degrade the signal itself. This could be particularly
beneficial when ionosphere activity is elevated.
The technical aspect of this topic may be less important than
its strategic implications. The Pratham project demonstrates
that interest in India’s domestic PNT capability extends beyond
military or even government circles – larger swathes of Indian
society support and want to contribute to improving Indian
space capability. End OE Watch Commentary (Freese)

Source: Tanaya Singh, “‘Pratham’ Satellite Developed by IIT-B Students
to Be Launched by ISRO next Month,” The Better India, 03 August 2016,
http://www.thebetterindia.com/63439/isro-iit-bombay-pratham-studentsatellite/.
Pratham, a microsatellite developed by IIT Bombay will be launched
by Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) from the Satish Dhawan
Space Centre, Sriharikota in September … the satellite will finally be
launched with ISRO’s main satellite ScatSat and few other satellites on
board a four-stage Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The brain
child of two IIT-B students … the main function of the satellite will be
to measure the electron count of the ionosphere, which can be used for
tsunami alerts and also to increase the accuracy of Global Positioning
System in India. Many communication errors can be corrected with the
help of counting electrons … Currently, Pratham is in the clean room of
ISRO Satellite Centre in Bengaluru and the exact launch date is yet to be
finalized …
Source: Shivangi Sharma “ISRO to blast IIT-B’s Pratham satellite using
PSLV in September,” The TeCake, 02 August 2016, http://tecake.in/news/
space/isro-blast-iit-bs-pratham-satellite-using-pslv-september-21431.html.
ISRO’s Satellite Pratham will be launched in September along with PSLV
(Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle) … ISRO will soon announce the date for
the event … Pratham will be a co-passenger of ScatSat, which is ISRO’s
main satellite. Initially, the two satellites are planned to set into different
orbits for about 30 minutes … Pratham will be placed 720 km above the
altitude of the earth …

China’s cyber policy has become
partly visible to foreign nations
through observation, tracking, and
inference. The policy appears to
have three vectors. These three
aspects—peace activist, espionage
activist, and attack planner—
dominate China’s cyber policy. Some
are always hidden from view while
others are demonstrated daily.
Three Faces of the Cyber Dragon is
divided into sections that coincide
with these vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf

OE Watch | September 2016

30

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Growing Indonesian and Cambodian Defense
Cooperation: A Counter to China?
OE Watch Commentary: The following excerpts
are drawn from two articles that, put side-by-side, could
prompt the conclusion that Cambodia—China’s closest
ally in Southeast Asia—might possibly shift its support
from China to Indonesia, which has been at odds with
China over territorial issues. The first article is about
growing defense cooperation between Indonesia and
Cambodia and the second describes Cambodia’s hopes
of purchasing two warships from China earlier this
year.
On 17 August, Indonesia marked its Independence
Day by sinking 60 boats that it had seized for illegally
fishing near its borders. (Note: Maritime and Fisheries
Minister Susi Pudjiastuti has reportedly organized the
destruction of more than 200 fishing boats since 2014).
Many of the boats were seized near the Natuna Islands,
a 272 archipelago claimed by Indonesia. The event was
a clear warning to neighboring countries, including
China, that Indonesia will not tolerate “illegal” fishing
in its waters. Due to territorial issues, Indonesia’s
relationship with China has been waning in recent
months. China’s claimed territory in the South China
Sea partly overlaps Indonesia’s exclusive economic zone
near the Natuna Islands. While China does not dispute
Indonesia’s claim to the Natuna islands, it insists it has
the right to fish within close proximity of the islands,
upon which nearly 100,000 Indonesians live.
Meanwhile, six months earlier, Cambodia, which
has been described as China’s closest ally in Southeast
Asia, had reportedly been contemplating the purchase
of two Chinese warships following its first-ever joint
naval exercise between it and China. According to the
second article, Admiral Tea Vinh, commander of the
Royal Cambodian Navy believed that possessing the
Chinese ships would bolster both maritime security and
Cambodia’s reputation. Another Cambodian admiral
predicted an increase in shipping traffic off the coast
of Cambodia if China’s maritime Silk Road came to
fruition. Any such deal, however, has not yet happened.
Now, according to the first article, “Indonesia is
willing to offer Cambodia navy ships at a discount and
would like the Kingdom to be involved in joint patrols
in the region.” Furthermore, both sides have discussed a
new defense cooperation agreement, which will provide
increased military training, weapons, and uniformed
sales to Cambodia.
The more recent report is interesting in that it begs
the question of what, if any, are Indonesia’s intentions?
How might it play out for Cambodia and, more so, could
it lessen Cambodia’s ties to China? End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“[Indonesia and

Cambodia] discussed a
new defense cooperation
agreement, which
will include increased
military training and
potential weapons and
uniform sales.”
Location of the Natuna Islands.
Source: Public Domain, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=17066

Source: Shaun Turton and Vong Sokheng, “Indonesia, Cambodia Discuss
Defense Cooperation,” Phnom Pehn Post, 11 August 2016, http://www.
phnompenhpost.com/national/indonesia-cambodia-discuss-defencecooperation.
Indonesia is willing to offer Cambodia’s navy ships at a discount and would
like the Kingdom to be involved in joint patrols in the region… [both countries]
discussed a new defense cooperation agreement…, which will include increased
military training and potential weapons and uniform sales… According to
Indonesia’s Defense Attaché office, the MoU [memorandum of understanding]
would allow Indonesia to train soldiers from all Royal Cambodian Armed
Forces branches… In an interview yesterday at the Cambodiana Hotel,
[Defense Minister Ryamizard] Ryacudu said he would also float the proposal of
selling Cambodia warships so it could cooperate more closely with Indonesia’s
naval operations, particularly joint patrols in the northern South China Sea.
The country [INDONESIA] is among the most influential in the ASEAN bloc,
which has been split by the divisive South China Sea dispute, particularly after
a decision by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague, which dismissed
most of China’s claim to the waters.
Source: Khuon Narim and Peter Ford, “Cambodia Wants Two Warships from
China, Admiral Says,” The Cambodian Daily, 25 February 2016, https://www.
cambodiadaily.com/news/cambodia-wants-two-warships-from-china-generalsays-108943/.
[Royal Cambodian Navy Commander] Adm. [Tea] Vinh did not say what
kind of ships the navy was interested in acquiring, nor whether it intended
to purchase them outright. He said the vessels would bolster both maritime
security and Cambodia’s reputation.
“We want to stop our neighboring countries from looking down on us,” he
said. “I want these two big ships, not for making war, but just to show that they
can’t look down on Cambodia.”…
Rear Adm. Yu [Manjiang] also predicted an increase in shipping traffic off the
coast of Cambodia if Chinese President Xi Jinping’s plan for a Maritime Silk
Road comes to fruition.
“China has a lot of [cargo] ships that will need to cross through and they will
partly need the Cambodian navy to protect them,” he said.
OE Watch | September 2016

31

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Santoso is Gone But Threats Remain
OE Watch Commentary: While the killing
of Indonesian Islamist extremist leader Santoso
in late July is a major victory for Indonesian
authorities, analysts caution that other extremist
cells now pose a greater threat. According to
excerpts from the accompanying article in
mainstream Indonesian daily Coconuts Bali,
Santoso was a potent jihadi symbol who inspired
legions of other militants.
As pointed out in the accompanying article,
according to Sidney Jones, director of the
Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict, a
Jakarta think-tank, Santoso built a local terror
network. Jones points out that, “There have
been well over 100 people who have gone
through [Santoso’s] training network, and
therefore developed some kind of ties with
him, so that he has become the symbolic heart
of the jihadi movement.” He also notes, “The
combination of his attacks on police, plus his
training, contacts with Syria, and his symbolic
importance, make him an important catch.”
As described in the accompanying article,
Santoso and his ragtag bunch of poorly
armed fighters, called the Eastern Indonesia
Mujahideen, had been hiding out in the jungles
and mountains around Poso, Sulawesi for several
years, with the area gaining a reputation as a
militant hotbed. His group rose to prominence
after carrying out deadly assaults on security
forces and by training militants from across the
archipelago. Indonesian security forces were
able to finally kill Santoso during a shootout in
Tambarana village in Poso after authorities were
able to corner him in the jungle during their long
quest to catch him.
The article also points out that Santoso and his
group of fighters, which dwindled to around 20
following the authorities’ campaign, were among
the few in Indonesia that remained a real threat,
after a years-long, largely successful crackdown
which severely weakened other militant groups.
In recent times, Chinese Uighur radicals joined
the militants, and Santoso also developed links
with Indonesians fighting with Islamic State, (IS)
who are believed to have sent him substantial
funds. End OE Watch Commentary (Ortiz)

For more information, see: “Indonesian Security
Forces Close In on Santoso while Islamic State
Continues to Support Local Extremist Groups,”
OE Watch, Jan 2016

“[Santoso] was a potent jihadi symbol who kept up a violent
struggle in the world’s most populous Muslim-majority
nation that inspired legions of other militants.”

Indonesian armed Police officers during the January 2016 Jakarta terrorist attacks in Jakarta.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Jakarta_attacks#/media/File:Indonesian_BRIMOB_police_
officers.jpg

Source: “Santoso: ‘Symbolic heart’ of the Indonesian jihadi movement killed,”
Coconuts Bali, 20 July 2016. http://bali.coconuts.co/2016/07/20/santoso-symbolicheart-indonesian-jihadi-movement-killed
“Indonesian Islamist extremist leader Santoso, killed in a shootout with security forces,
was a potent jihadi symbol who kept up a violent struggle … that inspired legions of
other militants.
But while the killing of the Islamic State (IS) group supporter is a major victory for
authorities, analysts caution that other extremist cells now pose a greater threat. …
Santoso and his ragtag bunch of poorly armed fighters, called the Eastern Indonesia
Mujahideen, had been hiding out in the jungles and mountains around Poso on the
central island of Sulawesi for several years, with the area gaining a reputation as a
militant hotbed.
His group rose to prominence after carrying out deadly assaults on security forces
and by training militants from across the archipelago. In recent times Chinese Uighur
radicals joined the militants, and Santoso developed links with Indonesians fighting with
IS, who are believed to have sent him substantial funds.”
“There have been well over 100 people who have gone through his training network,
and therefore developed some kind of ties with him, so that he has become the symbolic
heart of the jihadi movement,” Sidney Jones, director of Jakarta think-tank the Institute
for Policy Analysis of Conflict, …
“The combination of his attacks on police, plus his training, contacts with Syria, and
his symbolic importance, make him an important catch.”
The security forces’ sustained campaign to pin Santoso down finally paid off Monday,
when he was killed in a shootout in Tambarana village in Poso.
Santoso and his group of fighters—which have dwindled to around 20 following the
authorities’ campaign—were among the few in Indonesia that remained a real threat,
after a years-long, largely successful crackdown severely weakened other militant
groups.
… as authorities had him cornered in the jungle during their long quest to catch him.”
OE Watch | September 2016

32

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Islamic State’s Pivot to Southeast Asia
OE Watch Commentary: The announcement
of Wilayah Philippines, or Philippine Province,
in the southern Philippines epitomizes a new
Islamic State (IS) strategy to “pivot” to Southeast
Asia and signals a direct threat to countries in
the region as IS Central comes under pressure in
the Middle East. According to the accompanying
commentary from S.Rajaratnam School of
International Studies, IS has explicitly laid claim
to Southeast Asia and the group’s actions are a
powerful signal that it has political, ideological
and military claims over the region. Another
commentary notes that IS has already begun to
lay the groundwork in the province by forming a
new brigade in July, the Katibah Al-Muhajir or
The Brigade of the Migrant.
According to the accompanying commentary,
as an official province, Wilayah Philippines will
be fully expected to intensify and coordinate
operations within Southeast Asia, which will
likely lead to increased terrorist attacks in the
region. The passage notes that Southeast Asia
should brace itself for more IS-linked jihadi
attacks in the coming months, given that the
region has already seen recent IS-inspired attacks
in Jakarta, Indonesia and Puchong, Malaysia; and
the likelihood that the fledgling province will
actively seek to legitimize its existence.
The second commentary points out that the local
jihadi group called the Brigade of the Migrant
has already established a presence the region. To
date, IS has supposedly accumulated 10 battalions
of the local group in six locations in southern
Philippines. To attract prospective foreign
jihadists, a potential member can reportedly
secure his travel arrangements from Malaysia to
the Philippines, and be given a complimentary
weapon for approximately US$123.
According to both commentaries, the group’s
presence provides IS a unique sanctuary, similar
to the way the Al Qaeda-linked and Indonesianbased Jemaah Islamiyah network has found a
similar permissive setting in the same area since
the late 1980s. Their presence has also turned the
tri-border maritime area between Philippines,
Malaysia and Indonesia along the Sulawesi Straits
into a new epicenter of jihadis loyal to IS. End
OE Watch Commentary (Ortiz)

For more information, see: “Islamic State is
Promoting Local Terrorism in Southeast Asia,” OE
Watch, Aug 2016

“Wilayah Philippines [WP] signals a direct threat to

countries in the region even as IS Central comes under
pressure in the Middle East”

Southeast Asia’s largest mosque Istiqlal Mosque in Jakarta, Indonesia.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Istiqlal_Mosque,_Jakarta#/media/File:Istiqlal_Mosque_Monas.jpg

Source: “Islamic State’s Wilayah Philippines: Implications for Southeast Asia,”
S.Rajaratnam School of International Studies, 21 July 2016. https://www.rsis.edu.sg/
rsis-publication/rsis/co16187-islamic-states-wilayah-philippines-implications-forsoutheast-asia/#.V6IlsTWGpnk
“The announcement of Wilayah Philippines [WP] in southern Philippines epitomises
a new IS strategy to “pivot” to Southeast Asia. It signals a direct threat to countries
in the region even as IS Central comes under pressure in the Middle East.
… WP the self-proclaimed caliphate has explicitly laid claim to Southeast Asia. It is
IS’s most powerful signal yet that it has political, ideological and military claims over
the region …
As an official wilayah, WP will fully be expected to intensify and coordinate
operations within the region. It means that the probability of increased terrorist
attacks in the region has just gone up. Already IS-inspired attacks have taken place in
Jakarta and Puchong near Kuala Lumpur. Southeast Asia should brace itself for more
IS-linked jihadi operations in the coming months, as the fledgling wilayah actively
seeks to legitimise and announce its existence.
The presence of local jihadi groups in southern Philippines, moreover, provides IS
a unique sanctuary, much like the way the Al Qaeda-linked and Indonesian-based
Jemaah Islamiyah network found a similar permissive milieu in the same area since
the late 1980s. Already, Katibah al-Muhajir, a Southeast Asian combat unit has been
established in WP in July 2016.”
Source: “The Tri-Border Area: Jihadi Epicentre in Southeast Asia,” S.Rajaratnam
School of International Studies, 21 July 2016. https://www.rsis.edu.sg/rsispublication/rsis/co16186-the-tri-border-area-jihadi-epicentre-in-southeast-asia/#.
V6IlsjWGpnk
“… a new brigade for migrants, the Katibah Al-Muhajir (KaM) or The Brigade of
the Migrant. For approximately 500 Malaysian Ringgit, a prospective foreign jihadist
can secure his travel arrangements, from Malaysia to the Philippines, and be given a
complimentary weapon. IS has ostensibly accumulated 10 battalions in six locations
in southern Philippines according to the ANA.…”
OE Watch | September 2016

33

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Has ASEAN Become China’s Pawn?
OE Watch Commentary: Apparent
disagreements within ASEAN over the South
China Sea highlight divisions in the group and
how its unity is coming under severe stress,
according to excerpts from the S. Rajaratnam
School of International Studies commentary.
ASEAN’s disunity could be the start of what the
group has strenuously and assiduously avoided
thus far: ASEAN as pawns in great power
competition.
According to excerpts, the joint statement of
the 49th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting on
24 July followed a period of deadlock, where the
group could not move its statement forward as it
emerged that Cambodia prevented any reference
to the Permanent Court of Arbitration’s legal
award. ASEAN’s released statement then
remarkably omitted any reference to the
tribunal’s legal ruling on the South China Sea
arbitration case initiated by the Philippines.
As pointed out in the first accompanying
commentary, Cambodia’s actions should cause
increasing discomfort for ASEAN since this
was not an isolated incident. In July 2012, the
ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting failed
to issue a joint statement for the first time in
ASEAN history with observers noting the
‘spoiler role’ that Cambodia played then, as
also pointed out in the second passage. More
recently, a month before the 49th ASEAN
Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, a statement that
was strongly worded on the South China Sea
issue was initially released by Malaysia, but
retracted three hours later as a result of Laos
and Cambodia blocking it.
As the excerpt from the accompanying
commentary indicates, some countries have
proven willing to forego both ASEAN centrality
and sacrifice its own and ASEAN’s reputation to
cooperate with China. According to the excerpt,
this should be extremely disturbing for ASEAN
leaders since these noncompliant members
have shown little flexibility. The commentary
concludes that ASEAN’s unity, and by extension
its centrality and international reputation,
will continue to come under strain due to the
opposing interests and postures of one or two
parties. End OE Watch Commentary (Ortiz)

For more information, see: “Vietnam and China
are Both Trying to Win Over Cambodia,” OE
Watch, Jul 2016

“This could be the start of what ASEAN has

strenuously and assiduously avoided thus far:
ASEAN as pawns in great power competition.”

ASEAN members’ flags in Jakarta.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_of_Southeast_
Asian_Nations#/media/File:ASEAN_Nations_Flags_in_Jakarta_3.jpg.

Source: “What Price Asean Unity?,” S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, 5
August 2016. https://www.rsis.edu.sg/rsis-publication/rsis/co16200-what-price-aseanunity
Apparent disagreements within ASEAN over the South China Sea question has
highlighted cleavages in the grouping and how its unity is coming under severe stress.
…
ON 24 JULY 2016, the Joint Communiqué of the 49th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’
Meeting in Vientiane, Laos was released. The statement, remarkably, omit any
reference to the Permanent Court of Arbitration’s legal ruling on the South China
Sea arbitration case initiated by the Philippines. The statement came after a period
of deadlock, played out publicly through the media, where ASEAN could not move
the statement forward as it emerged that Cambodia prevented any reference to the
tribunal’s legal award.
It should also cause ASEAN increasing discomfort that this was not an isolated
incident. One recalls the failure of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Phnom
Penh, Cambodia in July 2012 to issue a joint communiqué for the first time in ASEAN
history with observers noting the ‘spoiler role’ that certain ASEAN countries played
then.
Fast forward four years later, while not an exact repeat, the echo is clear: There are
some countries, such as Cambodia, that has proven itself willing to forego both ASEAN
centrality and sacrifice its own and ASEAN’s reputation to cooperate with China. This
should be extremely disturbing to ASEAN leaders, especially since these recalcitrant
members have shown little flexibility.
A month before the 49th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Vientiane, a somewhat
similar incident took place during a special ASEAN-China Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
in Kunming, China. A statement that was strongly worded on the South China Sea issue
was initially released by Malaysia. However, barely three hours later it was retracted
as a result of Laos and Cambodia blocking it,… .
In short, ASEAN’s unity – and by extension its centrality and international reputation
– will continue to come under strain due to the opposing interests and postures of one
or two parties. Furthermore, this could be the start of what ASEAN has strenuously
and assiduously avoided thus far: ASEAN as pawns in great power competition.
Source: “Behind the scenes of ASEAN’s breakdown,” Asia Times Online, 27 July
2012. http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/NG27Ae03.html
Until Cambodia spoke, no country took exception to the interventions by the
Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. When it was Cambodia’s
turn to speak its foreign minister queried why it was necessary to mention Scarborough
Shoal, where China and the Philippines were recently engaged in a two-month standoff.
OE Watch | September 2016

34

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Vietnam’s UAV Development:
From Civilian Uses to South China Sea Defense
OE Watch Commentary: The People’s Army of
Vietnam first began experimenting with Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) as early as 1993. However,
only in the 2000s did UAVs become common for
civilian uses. In the past few years, as a result
of increasing tensions with China over disputed
islands in the South
China Sea, Vietnam
has also used UAVs for
military purposes, such
as training, surveillance,
border patrols, and search
and rescue.
The excerpted article
from Viettimes of the
Vietnamese press on 28
July discussed Vietnam’s
latest efforts to develop
UAVs for military
purposes. Landing a deal
with India on a satellite
tracking station in Ho
Chi Minh City, Vietnam
seeks to establish greater
intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance
(ISR) capabilities. As
Vietnam is on the front line of the South China Sea
dispute with China, an increase in ISR capabilities,
particularly long-range UAVs, will increase Vietnam’s
ability to monitor Chinese movements around
disputed islands in the South China Sea, particularly
those that are farther off the Vietnamese coast. For
Vietnam, this is an important part of deterring China
and being prepared to respond to Chinese actions that
threaten islands that Vietnamese controls and claims.
The article’s reference to UAVs only for defense
purposes suggests that armed UAVs are not
imminently going to be part of Vietnam’s arsenal.
If Vietnam were to deploy armed UAVs it would
heighten the risk of a violent confrontation with
China. This would not only increase tensions
between China and Vietnam but could also
undermine regional security and put other Southeast
Asian nations in a bind. The development of armed
UAVs could also lead to a UAV arms race in
Southeast Asia. Thus by maintaining a defensive ISR
posture with its UAVs, Vietnam is more effectively
responding to China’s activities in the South China
Seas and surveilling China’s navy without causing
concern among its Southeast neighbors. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“UAV and remote sensing satellite programs in Vietnam are

often focused on their advantages in agriculture, disaster
management and fisheries management. But clearly the use of
satellites could be used for defense purposes.”

Fleets of Chinese fishing vessels shown in the adjacent image, which are supported by the
Chinese navy, have added to Vietnam’s motivation to deploy UAVs to monitor its coastline.
Source: http://www.rfa.org/english/news/vietnam/vietnam-china-01082016152748.html

Source: “Việt Nam làm mới kho vũ khí, tăng năng lực “chống tiếp cận” Biển
Đông,” [Vietnam refreshes its arsenal, strengthens “anti-access” capacity in
the East Sea], Viettimes, 28 July 2016. http://viettimes.vn/quoc-phong/vu-khicong-nghe/viet-nam-lam-moi-kho-vu-khi-tang-nang-luc-chong-tiep-can-biendong-69179.html
Vietnam is gradually purchasing more weapons to “refresh” its arsenal,
largely from Russia, but also increasingly from other sources. Vietnam plans
to develop the capacity of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
(ISR). For the military to be effective it obviously depends not only on hot
weapons; but also on the ability to detect, track, and guide weapons, which
are the other important factors. With this in mind, in addition to continuing to
buy more weapons, Hanoi has taken initial important steps in establishing a
comprehensive ISR network. In this context, one can explain the tremendous
military potential of the agreement between Vietnam and India to establish a
satellite tracking station in [Ho Chi Minh] City, and an earlier report on UAVs
that will patrol the South China Sea.
UAV and remote sensing satellite programs in Vietnam are often focused
on their advantages in agriculture, disaster management and fisheries
management. But clearly the use of satellites could be used for defense purposes.
Civilian satellites may not possess equivalent capacity as military variants, but
they can still accomplish some low-intensity military tasks in peacetime and in
wartime. With a coastline of 3,444km (not counting the islands) and vast sea
areas where there are claims on the South China Sea, Vietnam clearly needs a
comprehensive strategy to enhance ISR.
OE Watch | September 2016

35

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Weapons over Ideology:
Vietnam Diversifies Partners in Missile Upgrade
OE Watch Commentary: According to the
excerpted Vietnamese language article in the
Vietnamese language daily Viettimes on 5 August,
Vietnam has acquired mobile rocket launchers
from Israel. Although they are not reported to be
armed, the article states
that they are capable
of being armed and
installed on several
islands in the South
China Sea. Given their
range, they would be
able to hit Chinese
targets from longer
distances than before
and provide a greater
deterrent to Chinese
assertiveness over
island claims.
The article also notes
that Vietnam made the
deal with Israel despite
Israel being a capitalist
country. The strategic
value of the weapons
system is therefore
more important than
Vietnam’s relations with
a country that formerly would have been considered
an ideological enemy. It was only in 2009 that the
first Vietnamese ambassador was posted to Israel
and in 2011 that military relations were established
and attaches exchanged.
As Vietnam increasingly opens up economically,
albeit not as much politically, the country is leaving
behind ideological constraints on military deals and
partnerships with formerly enemy countries. The
deal with Israel is occurring at the same time the
US is ending an arms embargo on Vietnam; Japan
is being allowed to make port calls at Vietnam’s
Cam Ranh Bay; and India is selling cruise missiles
to Vietnam. Russia is still Vietnam’s largest arms
supplier, however, and Vietnam is weary to become
embroiled in US-China competition, but it is clear
that Vietnam is becoming a part of the Southeast
Asian hub-and-spoke alliance structure with new
friends both in the region and further abroad. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“For the first time viewers saw a new missile in the
procurement of the Vietnam People’s Army that has derived
from a capitalist country, Israel.”

China has long accused the US and its allies, such as Israel, of arming China’s South China Sea rivals,
such as Philippines, whose naval vessels are seen an exercise in the adjacent image, and increasingly
also Vietnam.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/content/china-accuses-us-of-militarizing-south-china-sea/2886799.
html

Source: “Việt Nam dùng tên lửa Israel “làm cỏ” địch đổ bộ đảo Biển Đông,” [Vietnam
uses Israeli missiles to “weed out” enemy amphibious plans on East Sea islands]
Viettimes, 5 August 2016. http://viettimes.vn/quoc-phong/chien-luoc-chien-thuat/vietnam-dung-ten-lua-israel-lam-co-dich-do-bo-dao-bien-dong-54654.html
During the parade the day of the 60th anniversary of the Navy in the military port of
Cam Ranh, Khanh Hoa Province, for the first time viewers saw a new missile in the
procurement of the Vietnam People’s Army that has derived from a capitalist country,
Israel. They were the guided ballistic missiles called EXTRA.
EXTRA combat missiles are effective against fixed targets such as command centers,
battlefield solid defenses, communications centers, and military infrastructure. Only
EXTRA ballistic missile have an inertial navigation system and satellite navigation,
compact launchers, and ammunition in containers for long term storage. They can be
installed on multiple islands and camouflaged with the smallest area of the platform
or to meet defense requirements and effectively fight an enemy’s attack.
Marine Forces island military defense can create a strong fire grid, capable of
repelling the surprise invasion from the sea on the island of Vietnam’s sovereignty.

OE Watch | September 2016

36

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Japan Researching Removal of Space Debris
OE Watch Commentary: The
Japanese Aerospace Exploration
Agency (JAXA) is moving forward
with plans to test space debris
removal technology this fall. The
accompanying excerpts discuss
the technology, vision and motives
behind this. Embracing a role
as a responsible space leader
is also a powerful diplomatic
gesture, as it sends a message to
China in particular, which has
been condemned worldwide for
deliberately creating space debris
while testing anti-satellite kinetic
weapons.

“… it may be necessary to develop a new framework of international

space law concerning the provision of funds for debris removal, and the
release of ownership of removed satellites, etc. …”
Source: Unattributed author(s), “Japanese Space Agency To Trial Electric Cable For Space Junk
Removal,” Japan Times, 30 June 2016, http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/06/30/national/
japanese-space-agency-trial-electric-cable-space-junk-removal.
The space agency is planning an experiment to remove simulated space junk as part of
efforts to develop a simple and inexpensive disposal system for objects that might puncture
the International Space Station or destroy satellites … scientists will try to slow a cylindrical
object and steer it toward the atmosphere, where debris typically burns up … The experiment is
expected to take place this fall … The debris disposal method relies on how objects move when
an electric current is applied in a magnetic field. The agency will test whether the object can be
shunted toward the atmosphere by applying a force against its direction of travel.

According to the first excerpted
article, the conceptual technology
will involve using magnetism to
slow debris enough to degrade its
orbit. The second piece dicusses
that research into space cleanup
technology is part of JAXA’s
operational vision. Space debris
removal has been a Japanese priority
for several years, and their motives
are not entirely selfless – their own
astronauts have been threatened by
space debris, as discussed in the third
excerpted article.
If the Japanese experiment is
successful, there will be several
hurdles to cross above and beyond the
technological capability. International
Space Law, in particular, will have to
be amended, because there currently
are no legal authorities or protections
for anyone removing debris from
a country other than their own, as
discussed in the third passage.
In the long term, there is also the
question of how such technology
would affect international opinions
on space warfare. If the technology
works, it could actually remove
internal restraints and decrease
external pressure against potential
space combatants, since creation
of debris would no longer be as
much of a problem. End OE Watch
Commentary (Freese)

Comparison of the orbits of Fengyun-1C debris with the orbit of the International Space Station.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fengyun-1C_debris.jpg.

Source: Naoki Okumura, “Issuance of the Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency,” Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency, June 2015, http://global.jaxa.jp/activity/pr/brochure/files/
general06.pdf.
Several thousand tons of space debris (space junks) is floating around Earth, posing a risk of
collision for the International Space Station and satellites that has become a major international
problem. In order for safe use of space in future, JAXA is conducting research on technologies
to assess the actual situation of space debris, to recover and remove it, to prevent it from
increasing, as well as to protect spacecraft from it. [sic]

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

37

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Continued: Japan Researching Removal of Space Debris
“… scientists will try to slow a cylindrical object and steer it toward the atmosphere, where debris
typically burns up …”
Source: Yasuaki Hashimoto, “Briefing Memo: Space Debris and
Security,” The National Institute for Defense Studies News, 01
February 2013, http://www.nids.go.jp/english/publication/briefing/
pdf/2013/briefing_e173.pdf.
… ISS altered its trajectory nearly 10 times since the start of its
operation to avoid space debris, and in June, 2011 the entire crew
including Dr. Satoshi Furukawa, a Japanese astronaut,

Result of space debris impact upon US Space Shuttle Endeavor.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:STS-118_debris_entry.jpg

evacuated to the Soyuz spacecraft for an emergency escape in
preparation of unexpected problems … In Japan, the Japan Space
Forum (JSF) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)
are monitoring debris in outer space. The JSF observes space debris
by radar and optical telescope installed in Okayama Prefecture
and sends observation data to JAXA for analysis. … At present, the
observation of space debris is not part of the tasks of the Ministry
of Defense or Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) … Japan is in the
process of considering the development of a system that can observe
the situation of space, including space debris, with a high degree
of accuracy … The next necessary step is the removal of debris,
but at the moment the removal technology is no more than just an
idea. Still, it is noteworthy that Japan has the cutting edge in the
development of debris removal technology. For example, Japan is
one of the world leaders in technology to slow the velocity of defunct
artificial satellites and debris by attaching charged tethers to them
and incinerating them by forcing them to plunge into the atmosphere.
Robotics technology, in which Japan excels, can also be applied in
many areas … In addition, as international space law is interpreted
as giving ownership of malfunctioned satellites to their registered
states, no third state may be able to remove them without prior
consent of such registered states. In consideration of these points, it
may be necessary to develop a new framework of international space
law concerning the provision of funds for debris removal, and the
release of ownership of removed satellites, etc. …

Plot of orbital debris around Earth from the perspective of Highly Elliptical Orbit.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Debris-GEO1280.jpg

OE Watch | September 2016

38

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Japanese Startup Specializes in Small Satellite Lift
OE Watch Commentary:
Small satellites are usually
launched as a secondary
payload to a larger, much
more expensive satellite.
However, the increasing
popularity of microsatellites,
including CubeSATs, is
creating a market for space
lift services specializing
in small payloads. As the
accompanying article
indicates, the Japanese
startup company Interstellar
Technologies is preparing
a test launch with this
market in mind. The
implementation remains a
way off, but if successful, it
will eventually make access
to space faster and cheaper.
This will have
implications across the
world. For traditional space
actors, it will be a matter
of scale, allowing faster
and cheaper deployment of
satellite constellations for
whatever purpose is needed.
For non-state actors and
for nations without robust
space programs, it will
make space more accessible,
putting military space
capabilities within reach
and giving them a greater
voice in international space
dialogue. End OE Watch
Commentary (Freese)

“Our focus is not

to develop highend rockets but
something simple
and affordable, just
like the Super Cub
(Honda Motor’s
popular small
motorbike).”

“Minisatellites can be developed at lower cost and more quickly than large
satellites.”

1U CubeSAT structure without outer skin; CubeSATs are one of the most popular microsatellite
frames because of their standardized configurations.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CubeSat_in_hand.jpg

Source: Junichi Taki interviewing Takahiro Inagawa, “Interview: Hokkaido startup aims high in small
satellite launches,” Nikkei Asian Review, 26 June 2016, http://asia.nikkei.com/Tech-Science/Tech/
Hokkaido-startup-aims-high-in-small-satellite-launches.
… Takahiro Inagawa, CEO of Interstellar Technologies, recently spoke with The Nikkei about the
company’s goal of building cheap booster rockets for small satellites. The startup is preparing to launch
its first sounding rocket for observation as early as this summer … As satellites get smaller, potential
demand for compact satellite-launch rockets is increasing … One study estimates there is annual demand
for 300 launches worldwide. Minisatellites can be developed at lower cost and more quickly than large
satellites … At present, small satellites are often launched together with a larger, main satellite using a
large launch vehicle. This has limited the number of small satellite launches, and often the small satellite
fails to reach the anticipated orbit. In addition, when a small satellite is loaded onto a launch vehicle
together with a main satellite, the safety criteria tend to be set higher than they should be, which raises
costs. These hurdles prevent the market for small satellites from expanding. Our focus is not to develop
high-end rockets but something simple and affordable, just like the Super Cub (Honda Motor’s popular
small motorbike) … To keep the cost down, we are trying to make the design as simple as possible and
use as many off-the-shelf parts as possible. We won’t be able to make a rocket under budget from the
beginning. But as we launch more vehicles, we should be able to increase cost-efficiency through mass
production. As with other industrial devices, quantity is an important way to cut costs drastically …
OE Watch | September 2016

39

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Military-Civilian Unity:
An Important Part of the China Dream
OE Watch Commentary: Prior to
the 1980s, China’s defense industry was
controlled exclusively by the military,
operating independently from the civilian
industry. Over time and through countless
lessons learned, China’s leadership has
pushed for the integration of the defense
and civilian sectors. Since President Xi
Jinping took office, the consolidation of the
defense and civilian sectors has received
new impetus.
The following excerpts are from a recent
article that offers a glimpse into what China
expects to accomplish by consolidating and
maintaining “military-civilian solidarity,”
as the article puts it. Having both the
military and civilian sectors working closely
together, according to Xi, will help the
country realize the “China Dream” of “the
great rejuvenation…” Emphasis is put on
having both sectors cooperate in research
and manufacturing of military products.
This is clearly an important tool in helping
China to achieve the “China Dream.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The seamless solidarity between the military, government and

public is an important guarantee for China to weather storms and
march from triumph to triumph…”
Source: “Xi Urges Renewed Efforts in Boosting Military Civilian Solidarity,” Xinhua, 29
July 2016, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-07/29/c_135550244.htm.
Calling for relentless efforts to maintain military-civilian solidarity, Xi called on the
military and civilian sectors to be like-minded and work in synergy, which would help the
country realize the great rejuvenation of the nation.
The seamless solidarity between the military, government and public is an important
guarantee for China to weather storms and march from triumph to triumph, Xi said.
Calling the ongoing national defense and military reform “across-the-board” and
“revolutionary,” Xi said it commanded support from all sectors.
Xi called for solid content and diversified forms of work to promote military-civilian unity,
in order to support the Party and state work, as well as the construction of national defense
and armed forces.
He underscored the allocation of priority use of land for military purposes and
construction of roads for national defense needs, while improving support facilities for war
readiness and medical uses, as well as public services.
Enterprises with a competitive edge should be guided to participate in research and
manufacturing of military products, Li said, adding that more should be done to help
officers and soldiers with any difficulties.
Demobilized soldiers who start their own businesses or engage in innovation should be
given support, according to Li.

China-Taliban Relations: How Strong Are They?
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese
authorities have reportedly met with members
of the Taliban at various times throughout
the past years. Most recently, according to
the following excerpted article, a delegation,
led by Abbas Stanakzal, head of the Taliban’s
political office in Qatar, visited Beijing July
18-22.
China tends to remain low keyed in its
dealing with the Taliban, rarely coming out
and admitting meetings between the two.
The article is interesting in that it shows
China’s involvement with, and concern
over Afghanistan. China strives to maintain
contact with all parties related to the Afghan
issue. As the article points out, China has
good reason to be involved with all parties.
The country’s biggest fear clearly is that
instability in Afghanistan might spill over
into Xinjiang, which borders the country.
It could also negatively impact China’s
Belt and Road initiative. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“The visit of the Taliban

delegation is part of a routine level of communication China
maintains with opposition forces in Afghanistan…”
Source: Bai Tiantian, “China Indirectly Confirms Meeting with Taliban,” Global Times, 3
August 2016. http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/998033.shtml.
Analysts said the visit came at a delicate time after a former Taliban leader was killed in
a US drone strike a few months ago, as China is interested in learning the new leader’s
political stance to help facilitate the peace talks.
In a faxed statement to the Global Times on Tuesday, China’s foreign ministry said the
country has always supported the “Afghan-led, Afghan-owned” political reconciliation
process and supports the peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban so
the country can restore stability as soon as possible.
“Therefore, China maintains contact with all parties related to the Afghan issue and
is willing to continue playing a constructive role,” the foreign ministry said without
providing further details on the visit.
“The visit of the Taliban delegation is part of a routine level of communication China
maintains with opposition forces in Afghanistan,” said Yu Guoqing, a research fellow of
West and Central Asian Studies at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
China’s interests in the country have been growing in the past few years, fearing
that instability in Afghanistan might spill over into the bordering Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region or affect China’s global economic strategy - the Belt and Road
initiative.
OE Watch | September 2016

40

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN
China and the Levant
OE Watch Commentary: Shortly before Chinese leader
Xi Jinping visited the Middle East in January 2016, China’s
foreign affairs ministry issued a document titled “China’s
Arab Policy Paper.” As the accompanying excerpts from the
paper note, strategic cooperative relations underpinned by
strong economic ties and pragmatic relationships drive China’s
Middle East policy. Regional fracturing and polarization,
most notably in the Syrian conflict, makes the Chinese-Arab
courtship increasingly difficult. According to the second
accompanying article, when it comes to Syria, the Chinese
government’s foreign ministry seeks to remain neutral for
fear of upsetting economic relationships in the Gulf, while its
defense ministry fears that the desire to offend none may shut
it out of the Levantine battlefield. China’s stated position calls
for a negotiated political solution to the Syrian conflict, and in
March 2016 it appointed a seasoned diplomat as special envoy
to Syria in the hopes of furthering this goal.

Top

“… the Chinese military is more interested than
its foreign ministry in getting involved…”

China’s most immediate military concern in Syria is the
growth of the Turkistan Islamic Party (TIP). The TIP is a
jihadist group seeking independence for “East Turkistan” (in
China’s western province of Xinjiang), home to China’s Muslim
Uyghur ethnic minority. In the summer and fall of 2015 the TIP
emerged as one of the Syrian rebellion’s most capable assault
units, contributing vitally to important rebel victories in Idlib
and Lattakia Provinces (for more information, see: “Turkistan
Islamic Party Makes its Mark on the Syrian Rebellion,” in the
July 2016 issue of OE Watch). In July and August 2016, TIP
shock troops played a key role in the successful rebel offensive
to break the siege of rebel-held territory in Aleppo. Chinese
understanding of the TIP in Syria is likely based on discussions
with Iranian, Russian and Syrian counterparts.
In addition to gathering intelligence on the TIP, China may
be drawn to the Syrian battlefield to test and assess weaponry
and more generally learn about contemporary battlefields.
In mid-August, a high-level Chinese military delegation led
by Rear Adm. Guan Youfei met with Russian and Syrian
military leadership in Damascus and expressed hopes of
deepening cooperation with the Syrian military, as noted in
the third accompanying excerpt. Some level of cooperation
already exists; as the article notes, “there are already Chinese
military advisors in Syria, focusing on personnel training
in weapons.” The fourth excerpt, from a July 2014 article in
Syrian opposition media, claims that Chinese personnel play a
prominent role in Defense Factory 790, a vital Syrian military
production facility around 20 kilometers southeast of Aleppo.
The Syrian government and its Russian and Iranian allies can
be expected to court a more robust Chinese presence in Syria.
There are many ways of doing so, including promising to back
China’s position on the South China Sea territorial disputes
(as Syria recently did) and highlighting the threat posed by
the TIP’s growth in Syria. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

Source: “China’s Arab Policy Paper,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of China, 13 January 2016. http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/
mfa_eng/zxxx_662805/t1331683.shtml
Arab countries as a whole have become China’s biggest supplier of crude
oil… China is willing to have pragmatic cooperation in the principle of
mutual benefit and win-win results with Arab states… We will deepen
China-Arab military cooperation and exchange. We will strengthen
exchange of visits of military officials, expand military personnel
exchange, deepen cooperation on weapons, equipment and various
specialized technologies, and carry out joint military exercises.
Source:
‫قراءة في خلفيّات رغبة الصين بتطوير عالقاتها العسكرية مع سوريا‬
“Background on China’s Desire to Develop Military Relations with Syria,”
al-Mayadeen, 18 August 2016. http://goo.gl/kOp5r1
… the Chinese delegation sought information on Uyghur combatants of
the Turkistan Islamic Party, ISIS, and the Nusra Front in Syria. … Chinese
strategy seeks to contain the growing threat from Uyghur separatists.
China, according to Syrian researcher Dr. Aqil Said Mahfoudh, may have
become more interested in the topic after receiving advice from Russia and
Iran. Deepening military relations with Syria could involve intelligence
sharing and coordination… the Chinese military is more interested than
its foreign ministry in getting involved, as the latter fears the repercussion
of doing so on relations with Arabian Gulf countries, especially Saudi
Arabia… In an audio recording from 30 May, TIP leader Abdel Haq called
ISIS deviant and said his group was in Syria to train Muslim fighters and
encourage them to help their brothers in the Levant and join the jihad
against the enemies of Islam. He added that his group is ready to return
to “East Turkistan” (Xinjiang) to fight the Chinese infidel government and
liberate the Muslim territory… China does not wish to anger Saudi Arabia
and other Gulf countries to protect its investments and interests there.
Furthermore, it fears that military intervention in Syria would lead to an
escalation in tensions with Muslims in Xinjiang.
Source: “China Boosts Syria Support,” Global Times, 18 August 2016.
http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1001150.shtml
Rear Admiral Guan Youfei, director of the Office for International
Military Cooperation of China’s Central Military Commission, met Fahad
Jassim al-Freij, Syrian Defense Minister, in Damascus. Both sides agreed
to further cooperate on personnel training and humanitarian aid from
the Chinese military… Guan also met with a Russian general heading
its Syrian reconciliation center in Damascus on Monday on “issues of
common interests”… China can learn from Russian’s military actions
and tactics in Syria and Crimea… “Many contracts were signed before
the Syrian civil war, but due to the unstable situation, many couldn’t
be fulfilled in the past few years”… There are already Chinese military
advisors in Syria, focusing on personnel training in weapons, since the
Syrian government forces are buyers of Chinese weapons, including sniper
rifles, rocket launchers and machine guns.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

41

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Continued: China and the Levant
Source:
‫أسرار وتفاصيل أضخم معامل قوات األسد لتصنيع السالح في سوريا‬
“Secrets and Details on the Largest Weapons Factory in Syria,” al-An, 17 July 2014. http://www.akhbaralaan.net/news/exclusive/2014/7/17/
secrets-and-details-largest-coefficient-assads-forces-manufacture-weapons-syria 1
According to the engineer,
there are over 2000 workers
at the factory. The highest
authority are the Chinese
experts, who are responsible
for the furnaces that produce
barrel bombs, surface-tosurface missiles, heavy
artillery shells, mortars, and
23-mm rounds. The Chinese
forbid anyone from entering
the Chinese furnaces… He
noted that four different
authorities operate
administratively independent
from one another, with
Iranians considered the
second most influential after
the Chinese…

Ancient Silk Road (red) and spice trade routes (blue).
Source: Whole_world_-_land_and_oceans_12000.jpg: NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center derivative work:Splette
derivative work:Bongan NASA - Visible Earth, images combined and scaled down by HighInBC (20 megabyte upload
limit) NASA VIsible Earth [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons

Keeping NBC Relevant

Flame Weapons in the Russian Armed Forces
By Charles Bartles
The Russian Nuclear, Biological, And Chemical (NBC) Defense Troops are tasked with identifying NBC threats in the environment, performing decontamination of troops and equipment, and most interestingly, employing aerosols and flame weapons to engage the enemy. In
most militaries, flame weapons have traditionally belonged to the NBC Troops. The popularity of such weapons has waned significantly throughout the world, but not so in the Russian
Armed Forces. While the utility of NBC Troops in today’s asymmetric warfare is questioned
in other armies, Russian NBC Troops firm grasp of flame weapons keeps them relevant, engaged, and makes them an important asset in the Russian maneuver commander’s toolbox.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Flame_2015.pdf
OE Watch | September 2016

42

CENTRAL ASIA

Top

A Pakistani Government Helicopter Crashes in Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 August,
a Mi-17 transport helicopter belonging to
the government of Pakistan crashed in the
Logar Province of Afghanistan. While there
were only minor injuries reported, the crew
was quickly taken hostage by the Taliban
(or affiliated group) that controls the local
district. The accompanying excerpted article
reports on the incident and points out that it
comes at a difficult time in relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The author
also discusses how the situation in various
districts in Afghanistan contributed to the
incident. While the author mentions that the
circumstances of the crash are mysterious,
there have been no reports that the helicopter
was shot down.
The author’s reference to mysterious
circumstances could be related to the crew,
which included three retired officers from
Pakistan’s military and a Russian navigator.
Multiple reports noted that the helicopter had
been en route to Uzbekistan for maintenance
with the company “Russian Helicopters” as
part of a contract, but this did not prevent
media in the region from speculating that the
presence of retired Pakistani officers indicated
that the crew had been involved in an effort to
destabilize Afghanistan. The statement from
the Afghan government suggests that officials
knew about the flight and its purpose, but the
crash may result in closer scrutiny of future
flights.
Pakistan recovered the helicopter and a
photograph posted on social media a day
after the crash showed it (minus the rotor
blades and tail) being hauled on a trailer in
Kabul, where it would eventually make its
way to the border. The author notes that the
government of Afghanistan has lost control
over a large number of districts across the
country and that multiple groups claimed to
have the crew. The article also included an
update the day after it was published online,
reporting that negotiations resulted in the
release of the hostages. This is worth noting
because hostage situations in Afghanistan
are not typically resolved this quickly.
Ultimately, despite tensions between Pakistan
and Afghanistan and the situation in various
districts across the latter, the incident does
not appear to have caused any significant
problems. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“A spokesperson for the Punjab government said
that the carrier belonged to Punjab and that it [had]
six people on board, including three retired Pakistan
army officials along with a Russian navigator...”

The Pakistani government helicopter that crashed in Afghanistan on 4 August was recovered
quickly, but it did sustain damage as can be seen from this photo as it traveled through Kabul..
Source: https://khabarial.com/archives/167441

Source: Muhammad, Irfan. “Flight risk,” The Friday Times, 12 August 2016.
http://www.thefridaytimes.com/tft/flight-risk/
Just as tensions between Kabul and Islamabad were at an all-time high over the
construction of a border gate on the Pakistani side, a Pakistani helicopter made what was
described as a crash landing in Logar province of eastern Afghanistan under ‘mysterious’
circumstances on August 5. All six crew members, including a Russian citizen, have been
in captivity of insurgents since then…there has been no clarity on who is actually holding
them as one party’s claims have been contradicted by another and their positions are
further contradicted by the ground reality of who controls the turf.
What is known, however, is that the village of Mati in the Azra district, where the
landing took place, is part of one of the 400 districts that the Afghan government has lost
control of to the Afghan Taliban…A spokesperson for the Punjab government said that
the carrier belonged to Punjab and that its six people on board, including three retired
Pakistan army officials along with a Russian navigator…The statement from the (Afghan)
president’s office made it clear that the helicopter had formal approval for travelling
over the country’s airspace but it added that, “a delegation was assigned to look into
the different aspects of the case” and whether “the specifics of the Mi-17 match the ones
rendered in the request letter and permission documents”. The statement also asked for a
review of the policy to use Afghanistan’s air space.
A security official told TFT that the helicopter had flown from Peshawar and was bound
to Uzbekistan for overhauling… a day after the crash the wrecked tail and rotors along
with the body was put on a trailer and taken to Kabul where it was placed near the Kabul
airport.
UPDATE August 13: AFP reported on Saturday that the hostages were released… they
were “released in an inter-tribe exchange on the Pakistan-Afghan border (and) arrived in
Islamabad today”…
OE Watch | September 2016

43

CENTRAL ASIA

Top

Protecting the Port of Aktau, Kazakhstan
OE Watch Commentary: The
government of Kazakhstan has made a
number of upgrades to its Caspian Sea
fleet with the construction or purchase of
ships for the Navy and the Border Guards
Service over the past several years. While
additions to the fleet have improved
the capabilities of both services, the
accompanying excerpted article reports
on one area of the Navy that has been
lacking and the effort to resolve it: a pier
for the country’s naval forces.

“Kazakhstan’s fleet is currently deployed in a leased pier in
Bautino located at a distance of 140 km from the naval base which
causes problems for service members living in the city of Aktau.”

As the author discusses, the
construction of a naval pier on the
Caspian is taking place largely because
of logistics. As the author notes,
Kazakhstan’s fleet is currently deployed
in a leased pier located 80 miles from
the naval base, which causes problems
for service members living in the city of
Aktau. While eliminating this problem is
a good reason for construction of the pier,
the security aspect of the pier might be
just as important.
The author also points out that the pier
will allow the Kazakh Navy to better
respond to threats. The Zenit shipyard
recently launched a small ship with the
purpose of better protecting Caspian
ports from sabotage and this is in contrast
to the larger rocket-artillery ships that
have been put into service in recent
years. Construction of the pier started
in February and it is worth noting that
authorities conducted a counterterrorism
exercise in the port in May 2015 (the
National Security Committee led the
exercise and units from the Ministry
of Defense participated). Not much
appeared in the media on the exercise
outside of government public relations
channels, but it may have prompted
officials to provide better security for the
port. Ultimately, while the construction
of the pier will certainly help cut down
on costs, it may play a more important
role in securing the port of Aktau. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
For more information, see “The public
relations value of counterterrorism exercises
in Kazakhstan” in the September 2015 issue
of OE Watch.

“The port of Aktau is one of the busiest and most important ports for Kazakhstan, but it is only recently that
the government started construction on the first pier for country’s Naval forces.”
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Aktau#/media/File:Port_Aktau.jpg

Source: Kutsai, Stanislava. “В октябре планируют завершить строительство в Актау
первого военного пирса (Construction of the first naval pier in Aktau is expected to
be completed in October),” Lada, 13 August 2016. https://www.lada.kz/aktau_news/
society/41189-v-oktyabre-planiruyut-zavershit-stroitelstvo-pervogo-v-aktau-voennogo-pirsa.
html
According to the press service of the Ministry of Defense, the pier in the port of Aktau will be
the first pier of military designation in the history of the Navy of Kazakhstan…Kazakhstan’s
fleet is currently deployed in a leased pier in Bautino located at a distance of 140 km from the
naval base which causes problems for service members living in the city of Aktau.
…the Naval Forces of Kazakhstan in Aktau will be able to quickly and effectively respond
to possible threats and better organize logistics. This will save on the service life of weapons
and equipment and reduce the cost of fuel…Construction of the pier began in February…It
will be located on a dedicated port area of 1.2 hectares…
OE Watch | September 2016

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia’s Current, and Possibly Future,
Western Military Dispositions
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
article from the popular, pro-regime news source,
Gazeta.ru discusses military dispositions on
Russia’s western border, and speculates about
future capabilities. The map provided in the
article lays out these dispositions (red for current
units, green for proposed units). Although the
writer depicts current units well, there is little
chance that Russia would field the author’s
proposed future units and dispositions.
The creation of new combined arms armies
(army groups) and associated maneuver and
support units would involve a massive increase
in the size of the Russian Armed Forces. The
Russian Ground Forces currently have an
estimated 220,000 soldiers. Considering the units
depicted and necessary associated support units,
the proposed force structure would likely involve
a major gutting of the other operational strategic
commands/military districts or increasing
the Ground Forces’ personnel level by at least
100,000 soldiers. Aside from the personnel
and cost issues from such an expansion, it also
seems contrary to current trends in the Russian
Armed Forces. In general, the Russian Armed
Forces have been downsizing, and eliminating
superfluous commands and leadership. The 2008
“New Look” reforms eliminated or downgraded
many officer positions, including general officer
positions. Even after adjustment for the relative
numbers of personnel, three and four star generals
are fairly rare in the Russian Armed Forces
in comparison to the US military, especially
considering the Russian Defense Minister and
deputy ministers are general officers. It seems
unlikely that Russia would increase the number
of army group and corps-level commands when it
has just gone through great lengths to “lean” the
force. If Russia does add more military capacity,
it will most likely add new maneuver units such
as brigades and divisions or support units, and
not new higher command elements such as army
groups and corps.
An interesting aspect of the map is the legend,
which depicts different echelons (operational
strategic commands/military districts, army
groups, corps, brigades, etc.) of units. It also
shows how Russians view them in terms of
the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of
military activity. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “They Want Changes on the Western Front: How One
Can Strengthen the Troop Grouping in Russia’s West,” Gazeta.ru Online, 27 July
2016, <https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2016/07/25/9701081.shtml>, accessed 15 August
2015.
Gazeta.ru has assessed the troop grouping that exists in Russia’s west today and has
speculated how one can strengthen it over the next 15 years to guarantee national
security while the NATO Bloc expands to the East. The attached map is hypothetical
and is not an actual document.
In 1991, after the disintegration of the USSR, the Moscow, Leningrad, and North
Caucasus military districts suddenly became border military districts. Prior to
the disintegration of the Soviet Union, they were in the deep rear and practically
did not have deployed and combat ready formations and combined formations in
their composition and amounted to a certain combination of cadre units, military
educational institutions, units, and rear services institutions. The operational
preparation of the territories of the regions, which suddenly became border regions,
had practically not been conducted in support of the country’s defense. There were
fundamentally no troops on the new western border. In particular, in Moscow
Military District there were just two not fully-manned divisions, which were primarily
designated for the conduct of parades on Red Square…
It has only very recently been ascertained that there are no troops at all, which are
adequate to guarantee the country’s national security on the western border and
the infrastructure practically completely does not correspond to the new threats and
challenges. In this situation, the leadership of the country and the Armed Forces
made a decision at the end of 2015 on the deployment of three combined-arms
divisions on the western borders at Yelnya (144th Motorized Rifle Division, Smolensk
Oblast), Boguchar (10th Tank Division, Voronezh Oblast), and Novocherkassk (150th
Motorized Rifle Division, Rostov Oblast).
Today Russia lags behind NATO by nearly twofold in personnel, by approximately
three times in armored combat vehicles, by two times in combat aircraft, and by three
times in attack helicopters…
…At the present time, 6th Combined-Arms Army is deployed in St. Petersburg in the
composition of two motorized rifle brigades and weapons and military equipment
storage bases. Based upon its combat and numerical strength, this operational
combined formation is less than a standard army corps. Therefore, we urgently need
to augment the Ground Troops grouping in the region, at least up to the minimally
needed level. In particular, deploy an army corps in the composition of three
motorized rifle brigades in Luga. We need to form a combined-arms army in the
composition of three motorized rifle divisions in Velikiye Luki. Deploy a combined
arms army in the composition of three divisions (two motorized rifle and one tank) in
Smolensk…
…At the present time, this military district is the most powerful based upon combat
and numerical strength. However, the troops on the border with Ukraine are clearly
inadequate today. We need to deploy a combined arms army in the composition of
two motorized rifle and one tank division in Belgorod. We need to form an army corps
in the composition of three motorized rifle brigades in Rostov-na-Donu…
We need to deploy a fighter aviation division in the composition of two regiments of
Su-30SM aircraft at Rostov-na-Donu and Krymsk airfields to cover from enemy air
strikes from the southwestern strategic axis…
…With respect to the Long Range Aviation grouping on the territory

(continued)

OE Watch | September 2016

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russia’s Current, and Possibly Future, Western
Military Dispositions
of Russia’s European portion,
it appears to be advisable to
additionally form at least two
more strategic bomber divisions
in this region. Deploy one of
these heavy bomber aviation
divisions with Tu-160M2 aircraft
at Kipelovo (Vologda) and
Tunoshna (Yaroslavl) airfields.
Deploy the division command
element at Kipelovo Airfield.
Deploy the second Tu-160M2
heavy bomber division at Soltsy
(Novgorod) and Shaykovka
(Kaluga Oblast) airfields. Deploy
the division command element at
Soltsy Airfield.
After the conduct of these more
than large-scale organizationalstaff measures, one will be
able to consider that Russia’s
western border has been
covered at least at a solid
satisfactory rating. Today, one
can consider these plans to be a
variety of operational-strategic
fantasies under conditions of the
extremely tough resource and
financial limitations. However,
we will have to return to the
issue of augmenting the troops
on the western border sooner
or later. Today the combat and
numerical strength is clearly
inadequate and does not meet
the changed conditions of the
geopolitical situation.

OE Watch | September 2016

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Evolving Combined Arms Maneuver:
The Company Tactical Group?
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article
from the pro-regime news site, Gazeta.ru features an
interview with Vyacheslav Khalitov, the Deputy General
Director for Special Vehicles for Uralvagonzavod—the
corporation that produces the T-72 and new Armata
series tanks and combat vehicles. Khalitov discusses how
the troop structure will change with the introduction of
advanced equipment on the Armada platform.
Interestingly, Khalitov proposes that the future of
combined arms maneuver could involve “combat modules”
of approximately ten vehicles. These combat modules
could have 1-2 tanks, 2-3 heavy BMPs (infantry fighting
vehicles), a fire support vehicle with an automated turret
with a 57 millimeter gun, a combat strike vehicle with an
automated turret with a 152 millimeter gun, a command
and control vehicle, and a support vehicle. In the Russian
system, brigades and regiments are the lowest echelons
that practice combined arms maneuver, the term “battalion
tactical group” is used to annotate that this lower echelon
unit now is a combined arms formation, on a temporary
basis, by way of attachments. These combat modules could
in a sense be considered as “Company Tactical Groups”
because they involve a (small) combined arms formation
approximately the size of a Russian motorized rifle or tank
company (ten vehicles). End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

T-14 on Armata Chassis.
Source: http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/

“Effective armor protection, which is comparable with the
equivalent armor that tanks have, is the main criterion of an
armored infantry vehicle’s success on the battlefield today.”
— Vyacheslav Khalitov, Uralvagonzavod Deputy
General Director for Special Vehicles
Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “The Ideology of the Future Combat System:
How the Troop Structure Will Change with the Introduction of Advanced
Equipment on the ‘Armata’ Platform,” 21 July 2016, <https://www.gazeta.
ru/army/2016/07/21/9701087.shtml>, accessed 15 August 2016.
The Armata heavy universal tracked platform will result in the rejection
of classic companies and battalions and the transition to modular type
subunits. Uralvagonzavod Corporation Deputy Director for Special
Equipment Vyacheslav Khalitov told Gazeta.Ru about the ideology of the
Future Combat System…
Armored infantry vehicles have given a good account of themselves in local
wars and armed conflicts as infantry support weapon systems, the conduct of
reconnaissance and the escort of troop columns. However, the armor of the
majority of BMPs [infantry fighting vehicles] and BTRs [armored personnel
carriers] remains bullet-proof and it does not appear to be possible to use
these vehicles as tank support weapons in an engagement.
…only tanks at best have reached the enemy’s last defensive line, and all of
the rest were easily destroyed and disabled by enemy fire during the course
of an attack. If the
infantry still managed
to attack on foot
behind the tanks, then
this method of attack
most often resulted
in the separation of
the riflemen from
the armored vehicles
using submachine
gun and machinegun
fire, after which the
armored vehicles
themselves were
destroyed. It is obvious
that, while attacking
in the same combat
formations with the
tanks, there is no need
to make heightened
requirements of
BMPs based upon
their firepower and
amphibious capability.
Effective armor
protection, which is

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Evolving Combined Arms Maneuver: The
Company Tactical Group?
comparable with the equivalent armor that tanks have,
is the main criterion of an armored infantry vehicle’s
success on the battlefield today.
“We have an ideology of the future combat system based
upon the Armata heavy universal tracked platform - we
are proposing to move away from such standard subunits
as the motorized and tank company and to transition to
combat modules, in other words, a certain combination of
combat and support vehicles,” told Gazeta.Ru.
He explained that, for example, the composition of the
minimal tactical module could look like this: 1-2 T-14
Armata tanks, 2-3 T-15 heavy BMPs,
a fire support vehicle with a combat
module, which is equipped with a
57 millimeter gun, a combat strike
vehicle with a combat module, which is
equipped with a 152 millimeter gun, a
combat command and control vehicle,
and a support vehicle. {These vehicles
are all produced by Uralvagonzavod}

“We have an ideology of the future combat system based
upon the Armata heavy universal tracked platform - we
are proposing to move away from such standard subunits
as the motorized and tank company and to transition to
combat modules, in other words, a certain combination of
combat and support vehicles,”
— Vyacheslav Khalitov, Uralvagonzavod Deputy
General Director for Special Vehicles

“This subunit will possess a higher
potential as compared to the standard
motorized rifle and tank subunits, and
the main thing – have equal mobility
and equal protection on the battlefield,”
Khalitov thinks.
The conduct of an engagement under
conditions of dense urban development,
mountainous-desolate or marshy and
forested terrain – is totally not one and
the same and therefore it is impossible
to require identical approaches to the
organizational staff structure of the
subunits, which are accomplishing
combat missions under totally different
conditions and with an enemy, which has
a different level of equipment.

T-15 on Armata Chassis.
Source: http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/

“A combination of several modules is needed to accomplish different combat missions. By way of illustration, if there is a need, then add air
defense missile and artillery modules, an engineer counter-obstacle vehicle, a bridge laying vehicle, a mine-laying vehicle, and an armored
mine-clearing vehicle to the composition of a tactical subunit (combat team). In other words, adapt the structure of the subunit (combat
team) to specific combat operations, which will have to be conducted at this specific moment of time, similar to how, as it were, a commander
assembles an organic unit from a designer’s details, which will be required in an impending engagement. In short, we must possess a flexible
platform. I am convinced that the future is with this approach,” the expert thinks.
The formation of these modules has occurred during the course of past armed conflicts. By way of illustration, they created a team in
the composition of 1-2 tanks, up to three BMPs, 1-2 ZSU-23-4 self-propelled antiaircraft artillery mounts for firing at the upper stories of
buildings, combat engineer subunits, and flamethrower operators. But these were improvised detachments, which were enlisted from various
subunits, where the combat crews practically didn’t know each other. And if everything would be worked out during the course of combat and
operational training in peacetime in a single authorized staff structure, the effectiveness of such subunits was an order of magnitude higher in
an engagement, Khalitov clarifies.
…the concept of a heavy universal tracked platform and a modular approach to the formation of subunits and units based upon it in a
contemporary engagement appears to be more appropriate, extremely advanced, and of great promise today. The experts think that we will
mandatorily arrive at the modular principle and the sooner, the better.
OE Watch | September 2016

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia Opening Underground Warfare Center
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article
discusses Russian plans to establish an underground
warfare center at the Ryazan Higher Airborne Command
School. Apparently, Russian experiences in Syria, where
tunneling and the underground aspects of warfare are
commonplace, have required Russia to start formalized
training to master the necessary skillsets for these
endeavors. Russia’s interest in underground warfare
and tunneling is another example of how Russian
lessons learned in Syria are being brought home and
incorporated into mainstream Russian doctrine, training,
and tactics. Other areas of Russian development due to
the Syrian campaign include: urban warfare, artillery
direct tactics, refining combined arms maneuver, and
the combat testing of a host of a new technologies and
equipment. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The last time the Airborne Troops and Main
Intelligence Directorate (GRU) Spetsnaz operated
underground was during the Afghan campaign. Today we
have the opportunity to encounter this, for example, in
Syria, where not even detached homes, but entire quarters
of cities are connected by a network of underground
communications. For a Spetsnaz soldier, the ability to
operate unnoticed in underground communications – is
the foundation of contemporary warfare…”
— Ivan Konovalov, Director of
the Center for the Strategic
Awareness Center

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “They Are Teaching the Airborne Troops to Fight Underground,” Izvestiya Online, 12 August 2016, <http://izvestia.
ru/news/626745#ixzz4HAEKryty>, accessed 17 August 2016.
Total darkness, a labyrinth of rooms, corridors, and stairs, and only one exit to the light. This will become
the first underground range in the country near Ryazan to hone the skills of the conduct of combat
operations in closed spaces and underground for the Ministry of Defense Airborne Troops
and Special Operations Forces. A Ministry of Defense spokesman told Izvestiya that
a unique training complex for special operations subunits under various conditions
of the conduct of combat operations, including underground, will be built based at
Ryazan Higher Airborne Command School. (RVVDKU)…
“They hone the skills for the conduct of an underwater engagement in a special
swimming pool, a morale-psychological training course is being created – this
is a labyrinth with a large number of rooms and a single exit. The facility has
been designated to teach the skills of rapid decision-making and orientation
under conditions of being in closed spaces during the accomplishment of a combat
operation”.
Izvestiya’s source pointed out that the role of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief’s
operational reserve is assigned to the VDV forces in the contemporary structure of the
Armed Forces. In other words, these are rapid reaction subunits, which can be redeployed
on short notice to any theater of the conduct of combat operations for immediate employment.
While proceeding form this concept, all of the plans of recent military exercises have been
structured when Airborne Troops subunits from the country’s interior are deployed to previously
unknown theaters: to the Far East, the Caucasus, and to the Arctic. At one recent exercise, an
assault force landed on a drift ice floe near the North Pole without preliminary training plus the
landing site had not been prepared beforehand.

Insignia of the Ryazan Higher Airborne
Command School
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Рязанское_высшее_воздушно-десантное_
командное_училище#/media/File:Mo_
narznaki102_1.png

Skill training for the conduct of combat operations underwater and underground – these are new
elements in the training program both of the RVVDKU cadets and also of the servicemen of VDV subunits. Izvestiya’s source pointed out that
it is important to develop not only the skills but also morale and psychological qualities during work in total darkness and in a closed space.
They are also developing the ability to use state-of-the-art thermal-imaging equipment.
“The last time the Airborne Troops and Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) Spetsnaz operated underground was during the Afghan
campaign,” Ivan Konovalov, Director of the Center for the Strategic Awareness Center, told Izvestiya. “Today we have the opportunity to
encounter this, for example, in Syria, where not even detached homes, but entire quarters of cities are connected by a network of underground
communications. For a Spetsnaz soldier, the ability to operate unnoticed in underground communications – is the foundation of contemporary
warfare. An underground training complex must provide the training of people, who are capable of working in a very restricted area of a
destroyed urban structure – there, where any other serviceman would pull back.
OE Watch | September 2016

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The “Killer Satellites” Threat to US Space Based Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The
Russian Armed Forces are keenly
aware of the US military’s reliance
on space based capabilities for the
purposes of communication; intelligence,
reconnaissance, and surveillance (ISR);
navigation; and timing. Russian military
theorists have posited that destroying or
disabling the US’s space based capabilities
is one of the best ways to defeat US high
precision fires, which Russia believes are
essential for US military success, such as
in the 1991 Gulf War. The accompanying
article discusses the capabilities of the
Naryad (code-named IS-MU) “killer
satellites” that the Soviets experimented
with in the early 1980s operated by the
Strategic Rocket Forces (RVSN). Given the
Soviet Union’s capability to successfully
field an antisatellite weapon in the early
1980s, one can imagine the capabilities of
any current Russian antisatellite program,
if one has been embarked upon. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“It is not possible to learn more details about the subsequent fate of
this fantastic weapon [antisatellite weapon]…But the conclusion can
be drawn from everything existing in open access that science fiction
has become reality. Russia possesses a system of protection against
space weapons and is capable of neutralizing any threat no matter
from whence it comes.”

Source: “Bon Voyage: The Russian
Federation’s “Naryad” for US Military
Satellites: Analysts Are Confident
That the Threat to American Satellites
Results from US Weakness,” NewInform
Online, 24 July 2016, <http://newinform.
com/19501-iz-rossii-s-lyubovyu-Narodprotiv-voennyh-sputnikov-ssha>,
accessed 15 August 2016.
…Space is interesting not only as a field of scientific research, but also as a military component. Satellite navigation permits not only
determining the coordinates of one’s own position, but also correcting the position of guidance heads of various weapons. Television and
radio broadcasting signals are transmitted and space radio communications and surveillance are accomplished with the help of spacecraft.
Orbital craft are capable of carrying weapons and destroying enemy ground and airborne targets. In this connection the desire appeared to
create a weapon capable of destroying military and dual-purpose spacecraft…
The first launch of Kosmos-1379 satellite took place in June 1982. The Soviet media reported that the launch was being made for scientific
purposes to study the Earth. Despite the first successful test of the complex, the USSR leadership decided in August 1983 to halt work on
the antisatellite weapon program, but scientists renewed work in this direction a year after the death of CPSU General Secretary Yuriy
Andropov…But test work did not cease. It probably took place without actual interceptor missile launches against virtual or real targets.
Practice launches probably were carried out along a ballistic trajectory for fractional-orbit intercept of the satellites. The fact that the
complex was made operational in 1991 speaks in favor of such suppositions.
With the introduction of the IS-MU to the Strategic Rocket Forces order of battle, Russia got the capability of monitoring and destroying
several kinds of satellites:
-targets that had not managed to make even one revolution around the Earth (“ fractional-orbit intercept”)
-intercept of satellites which had made several revolutions
-multiple approaches to a target in the course of several revolutions. The complex included four interceptor missiles to achieve that capability
-head-on intercept of a space target.
-In connection with classification of the more complete name for the IS-MD complex, its various names of Narod and

(continued)

OE Watch | September 2016

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The “Killer Satellites”
Threat to US Space Based Capabilities
Narod-V figure in different sources. Most likely this name difference involved
the program under which it was being created.
The enemy naturally has a developed ground-based system for monitoring
objects on our country’s territory, and he is capable of intersecting a missile
launch, intercepting control commands, and issuing warning commands
to his satellites. To preclude that possibility, engineers created a combined
control system of the 14F10 satellite. A ground control station would issue
control commands to a combined homing head having a radar system and
an infrared system. The complex would receive each signal from separate
ground stations. The radar signal came from the Krona complex and the
electro-optical signal from the Okno complex. Both stations were located in
different corners of the country.
Specifications and performance characteristics of the complex.
Weight of interceptor satellite: at least 1,400 kg
Orbital altitude of target satellite: up to 500 km
Warhead types: fragmentation-high explosive
Subsequently the missile interceptor complex went through several
modernizations and allowed engaging spacecraft in a geostationary orbit. It
represented a self-contained antisatellite complex.
It is not possible to learn more details about the subsequent fate of this
fantastic weapon, inasmuch as all information has a secret classification.
This is justified by state security. But the conclusion can be drawn from
everything existing in open access that science fiction has become reality.
Russia possesses a system of protection against space weapons and is capable
of neutralizing any threat no matter from whence it comes.

Tim Thomas’s Recasting the Red Star
describes Russia’s culture of military
thought through its modernization
effort. Adding to his robust library
of work on the subject, Tim Thomas
illuminates Russia’s Defense Ministry
reform efforts, the Russian national
security strategy take on the
operational environment, and a relevant
review of the Russian military doctrine.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Recasting%20the%20red%20Star.pdf
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b5/Black_Knight_Satellite.jpg

OE Watch | September 2016

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

A Kremlin Message on Syria in Russian Media
OE Watch Commentary: On 11 July 2016, the
traditionally liberal Nezavisimaya Gazeta (Independent
Newspaper) published an article by Vladimir Mukhin about
the coming confrontation between the US and Russia in
Syria. The article is a typical example of how Kremlincontrolled media in Russia presents the Syria crisis to the
public.

Source: Vladimir Mukhin,“Противостояние США и РФ в Сирии
только начинается.” Ми-25 с российским экипажем сбили ракетой
из тех, которые боевики получают по каналам ЦРУ.” [US and Russia
Opposition in Syria has only just begun, Mi-25 with Russian crew was
shot down by a missile among those militants received through CIA
channels] Nezavisimaya Gazeta (Independent Newspaper), 11 July 2016.
http://www.ng.ru/politics/2016-07-11/1_siria.html

According to the article, the recent ceasefire in Syria
is failing to hold because of the US. According to the
author, fighting only intensified in Syria since the ceasefire
began, and the “distinctive feature” of the situation is that
US-made weapons are being supplied to the “militants”
through Turkey, Jordan, and other Arab countries. Mukhin
sees this situation as evidence that the US is planning to
eliminate Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad. He writes, “The
destruction of the Syrian Mi-25 with Russian combat crew
on 8 July from an American heavy anti-tank missile system
(ATGM) TOW in the sky over Palmyra—is one piece of
the evidence of this conclusion.” Mukhin then proceeds to
observe that the US-trained and armed Free Syrian Army
(FSA) and New Syrian Army, “‘lent’ some of its weapons to
the militants ‘Islamic State.’” Lastly, Mukhin cites an expert
who concludes that the US is moving new weaponry into
Syria, which the expert claims is proof that the US is soon
about to confront Assad—and therefore Russia.

The announced truce did not bring any effect in Syria. The fighting only
intensified. A distinctive feature of the situation is – the supply capacity to
militants of effective weapons, mainly US-made, from Turkey and Jordan
and other Arab countries. It is not out of the question that this is due to the
realization of US plans to eliminate Bashar al-Assad’s regime, what more
than 50 employees of the State Department last month called on President
Barack Obama to do.

Nowhere does the article discuss the ratio of Russia’s
operations against the Islamic State and others, the failure
to achieve a ceasefire, or allegations of ethnic cleansing.
Instead, it is propagating the Kremlin-created message that
everyone who opposes Assad is a terrorist, often supported
by the US, while Russia leads a lone fight for stability and
security. This is the typical message Russian citizens hear
when it comes to Syria. End OE Watch Commentary
(Borshchevskaya)

The destruction of the Syrian Mi-25 with Russian combat crew on July 8
from an American heavy anti-tank missile system (ATGM) TOW in the sky
over Palmyra—is one piece of the evidence of this conclusion…
After the Russian Federation began its operation in Syria, believes
Netkachev, in Arab social networks the number of images that show
the use of anti-tank missiles BGM-71 TOW in operations of government
troops, increased significantly. The Telegraph wrote that after the
beginning of the Russian campaign in Syria, the use of anti-tank missile
systems grew 800% ...
The Free Syrian Army (FSA) and the NSA [New Syrian Army], trained
by the CIA and armed in accordance with the Pentagon’s program in
the amount of $500 million, “lent” some of its weapons to the militants
“Islamic State” (IS – is a terrorist organization banned in Russia)…
“I won’t be mistaken if I say that the USA, following its traditions,
moved to Syria not some second-hand, but new types of weapons to be
used against Assad’s army, which also means against Russian military
equipment and aircraft,” said a member -correspondent of the Academy of
Military Sciences Edward Rodyukov....

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further,
he has taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian
territory that was taken, from his perspective, illegally.
This book describes Putin and the military’s use of
various strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s
new equipment and reform initiatives, and Putin’s
geopolitical quest for influence in the Arctic and
Ukraine. Included in the discussion are some of the
unintended consequences of his actions (negative
world opinion, sanctions, NATO responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | September 2016

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Fomin: Parity between Armenia and Azerbaijan; Middle
East Needs Russian Weapons

“Russia aims to maintain parity in supply of military

OE Watch Commentary: On 19 July 2016, Russia’s
weekly Voyenno-Promyshlenny Kurier (MilitaryIndustrial Courier) published an article citing several
noteworthy announcements by the head of Federal
Service for Military-Technical Cooperation Service
(FSMTC) Alexander Fomin. The article references
Fomin’s interview with Russia’s Izvestiya, a major
newspaper that began as the Soviet Union’s official
newspaper of record. The article discussed Russia’s
positions on Armenia and Azerbaijan, and several
Middle Eastern countries.
According to the accompanying excerpts, Fomin
says Russia intends to maintain “parity” in weapons
deliveries to Armenia and Azerbaijan. His statement
came after an escalation between the two countries in
early April over Nagorno-Karabakh, which the article
references briefly but provides little context. The
fighting that erupted was among the worst since war
over this region between Armenia and Azerbaijan ended
in 1944. According to Western sources, at least 30
people died, including a child.
Fomin stresses that the Russian arms sales is to
maintain stability, wherever weapons are sold. “The
system of military-technical cooperation in Russia is
such that it implies to do no harm. This includes this
particular region [the South Caucasus]. All decisions on
deliveries to one country or another inherently take into
account such acute situations in the region,” says Fomin.
In the past, regional analysts had described Russia’s
arms sales in the South Caucasus as geostrategic rather
than economic. In this sense maintaining parity, as
Fomin says, is accurate, but is likely more out of a
desire to ensure a continued stalemate and the need for
Russia’s involvement in the region; as opposed to his
stated Russian goal of ‘maintaining stability’.
In addition, other regional analysts had argued that
Russia’s policy in the Caucasus is connected to its
Middle East policy. In this context it is not entirely
surprising that Fomin’s comments turn to the Middle
East after Armenia and Azerbaijan. Fomin says that
Syria and Iraq need Russian weapons, while Libya
sends requests for military-technical cooperation
with Russia. Syria and Iraq have difficulties financing
weapons purchases while sanctions and lack of
government unity hinder Libya according to the Russian
official. Fomin’s comments confirm the point about
the connection between Russia’s Caucasus and Middle
East policy through weaponry and technology sales,
and broader geo-strategic interests. End OE Watch
Commentary (Borshchevskaya)

equipment to Armenia and Azerbaijan in a situation
where conflict has intensified between the two countries
over Nagorno-Karabakh.”

Flag of Federal service
on military - technical
cooperation of the
Russian Federation.
Source: https://
commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Russia,_Flag_of_
Federal_service_on_
military_-_technical_
cooperation,_2005.svg

Source: “Россия сохраняет паритет в поставках вооружений Армении и
Азербайджану” (Russia maintains parity in the supply of armament to Armenia
and Azerbaijan) Voyenno-Promyshlenny Kurier (Military-Industrial Courier), 19
July 2016. http://vpk.name/news.ru/159603_glava_fsvts_rossiya_sohranyaet_
paritet_v_postavkah_vooruzhenii_armenii_i_azerbaidzhanu.html
Russia aims to maintain parity in supply of military equipment to Armenia
and Azerbaijan in a situation where conflict has intensified between the two
countries over Nagorno-Karabakh. Head of Federal Service for MilitaryTechnical Cooperation Service (FSMTC) Alexander Fomin announced this in an
interview with “Izvestiya” newspaper…
Fomin also underscored that the main purpose of military-technical
cooperation is to maintain peace and stability in a particular country, the region
and the world at large. “The system of military-technical cooperation in Russia
is such that it implies to do no harm. This particular region [South Caucasus]
included. All decisions on deliveries to one country or another inherently take
into account such acute situations in the region,” he added.
In Nagorno-Karabakh on the night of April 2 the situation sharply escalated on
the contact line between the conflicting parties: fierce military clashes began,
after which the parties to the conflict have accused each other of violating the
truce...
Earlier, deputy prime minister Dmitry Rogozin said Russia will continue to
supply weapons to Azerbaijan and Armenia in accordance with contracts as a
strategic partners...
Syria and Iraq are in need of Russian weapons supplies, but are experiencing
difficulties with financing, Fomin said.
“These countries have needs, especially among supplies, which are
ammunition, weaponry - light armored vehicles, armored vehicles, anti-tank
weapons,” Fomin said, “On the other hand, it is clear that in these countries
there are difficulties associated with financing. They have a need for deliveries.
But there are no new contracts.”
In addition Fomin noted that Russia also receives requests for militarytechnical cooperation from Libya, but because of the sanctions imposed on the
Middle Eastern country and the lack of a unified government, cooperation with
it so far is difficult.
OE Watch | September 2016

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Columnist on Putin’s Meeting with
Iranian, Azeri, and Turkish presidents
OE Watch Commentary: On 8 August 2016, the Presidents of
Russia, Iran, and Azerbaijan met in Baku, for a first ever trilateral
summit. Azeri President Ilham Aliyev initiated the meeting. The
next day, Russian President Vladimir Putin met with Turkish
President Erdogan in St. Petersburg and the two leaders mended
ties, after relations between the two countries were severely strained
following Turkey’s downing of a Russian jet in November 2015.
The accompanying excerpt is from an article about the two
meetings by the Russian language business daily Vedomosti
columnist Pavel Aptekar, who argues that Putin intended for both
events to signal to the West the rise of Russia’s influence in the
Middle East. “The Kremlin clearly seeks to take advantage of
growing uncertainty in the region and show (especially the West)
its influence in the Middle East,” writes Aptekar. The author also
highlights a persistent theme in Putin’s involvement in the Syrian
conflict—that it is a source of international authority, a desire to
appear important.
On the political side, Russian, Iranian, and Azeri presidents
discussed military cooperation in the Caspian Sea and the
resolution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, according to the article. With regard to economic
issues in Baku, Aptekar writes, the leaders made “loud but vague
statements.” In Russia-Iran relations this is usually indeed the
case, but when it comes at least to Russian-Turkish relations,
economic pronouncements tend to follow through. Soon after the
meeting between Putin and Erdogan, the two leaders announced
the resumption of the Turkish Stream gas pipeline, abandoned in
December 2015 when Russia-Turkish relations deteriorated. Putin
had first announced the pipeline in December 2014. If constructed, it
would bypass Ukraine.
Aptekar’s column came before the official announcement about
resumption of Turkish Stream. He writes, “It would be excellent if
it becomes possible to also remind Europeans of their fears about
the ‘Turkish stream.’ Many high-level pronouncements—they
exacerbate the already existing uncertainty. And uncertainty –is the
trademark of the Russian president.”
With regard to Iran and Turkey, Aptekar argues that Putin
is trying to create a bloc that would enable him to confront
Western influence in the Middle East. He writes, “But Putin,
whose participation in the settlement of the Syrian conflict - the
most important evidence of his international authority, will take
advantage of the coincidence of a common position of the three
countries on Syria, which could be presented to the West.” Turkey’s
position on Syria historically had been the opposite of Putin’s.
Erdogan always maintained that Assad must go while Putin was
Assad’s top supporter. Yet indeed after the meeting Erdogan
appeared to soften on Assad. While Erdogan is unlikely to reverse
his position entirely, Aptekar’s worrisome suggestion that Putin is
trying to create a bloc with which to confront the West in the Middle
East has merit. End OE Watch Commentary (Borshchevskaya)

“Many high-level pronouncements—they

exacerbate the already existing uncertainty.
And uncertainty –is the trademark of the
Russian president.”
Source: Pavel Aptekar,”Ближневосточный экспресс. Владимир
Путин играет в усиление влияния в регионе” (“Middle East
Express. Vladimir Putin plays in growing influence in the region)
Vedomosti, 9 August 2016. https://www.vedomosti.ru/opinion/
articles/2016/08/09/652210-vostok-blizhe
... The Kremlin clearly seeks to take advantage of growing
uncertainty in the region and show (especially the West) its
influence in the Middle East.
The presidents of Russia, Iran and Azerbaijan have discussed
political issues, in particular military cooperation in the Caspian
Sea and the settlement of the Karabakh conflict. As for the
economy, loud, but vague statements were voiced about the
possibility of joint use of pipeline infrastructure to transport
Caspian hydrocarbons and about creation of an energy corridor
between the three countries.
Meeting with presidents of Iran and Turkey conveniently coincided
in time. But Putin, whose participation in the settlement of the
Syrian conflict - the most important evidence of his international
authority, will take advantage of the coincidence of a common
position of the three countries on Syria, which could be presented
to the West. Tehran and Ankara, with significant divergence in
views have a common interest - to prevent the creation of Kurdish
autonomy, says Vladimir Frolov, an expert on international
relations.
Moscow has its own goal: to inflict maximum damage to ISIS and
“Jabhat al-Nusra” (banned in Russia) and to prevent an escalation
near Damascus and the military base in Latakia, to extend the
transitional period when Assad will remain Syria’s leader. The
parties may agree on the division of responsibilities in Syria,
where Turkey will retain influence in the north in exchange for the
ceasing to supply of rebel groups, Russia will reduce support for
the Kurdish parties and militias, Iran will continue to support its
traditional allies, including Assad.
... But Putin and Erdogan now needed strong statements
addressed to the West. Erdogan is dissatisfied with the Western
reaction to his suppression of the coup in the country. And for
Putin it is important to show that he reached new agreements with
key players in the region and has a greater effect on the situation
in Syria (even if it is not so).
It would be excellent if it becomes possible to also remind
Europeans of their fears about the “Turkish stream.” Many highlevel pronouncements—they exacerbate the already existing
uncertainty. And uncertainty –is the trademark of the Russian
president.
OE Watch | September 2016

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Military Spending Remains Robust and Opaque
OE Watch Commentary: Reduced fossil fuel revenues
combined with Western sanctions have weakened Russia’s overall
economy. Yet despite these constraints, the Kremlin leadership
continues to place the highest priority on defense expenditures. The
first excerpt from the moderate Russian newspaper Nezavisimoye
Voyennoye Obozreniye-NVO (Independent Military Observer)
spells out the Kremlin rationale for funding defense over other
social priorities. The second excerpt, from the mildly opposition
news source, RBK Online, describes the difficulty in ascertaining
just how much the Kremlin is actually spending on defense.
The NVO article provides recent comments made by Russian
Prime Minister, Dmitry Medvedev regarding how the government
will likely have to reduce spending in non-defense areas through
2019 in order to fully provide for defense requirements. The article
maintains that the Kremlin leadership believes that conflict is
on the horizon, pointing out that “additional defense-industrial
complex funding came about because of nothing other than
emergency circumstances,” which can “be interpreted as the
reinforcement of mobilization reserves in the event of war.” As an
example, it quotes a military official who claims that Russia will
finish “the construction of 450 new munitions dumps by year’s
end.” This excerpt goes on to claim that “Russia does not intend
to go to war with NATO,” but that the need to maintain robust
defense spending is predicated upon “the exacerbation of the
economic, political, and moral crisis in Ukraine.” According to this
article, the Ukrainian military has grown much stronger and Russia
must do more to defend against “possible military provocations on
the part of Ukraine.”
The second excerpt comes from a longer article which analyzed
a voluntary report that the Kremlin submitted to the UN, which
purportedly spells out how much Russia spent on defense in 2015.
While the report contains interesting data (e.g. the Kremlin claims
to have spent 2.9 trillion rubles [about $48 billion] on defense in
2015), the authors conclude that “it is impossible to say precisely…
how much the state actually spends on defense; the budget figures
and reports Russia presented to the UN are not transparent.”
The UN report does not require detailed information and the
excerpt points out that “Russia has not disclosed to the UN its
expenditures on military research and development,” which the
authors suggest “have grown rapidly in recent years” and continue
to grow. Nor is there any indication in the UN report regarding
Russian expenditures associated with defense in non-military
areas (e.g. healthcare, housing, education etc…). The figures in this
report only contain defense information from the federal budget,
and the authors point out that “some [defense spending] is included
in regional and municipal budgets.” According to one Russian
source quoted in this article, “this information is useless.”
Transparency, with regard to defense spending, has never been
a Kremlin strongpoint. Evidence indicates, however, that though
confronted with significant economic constraints, the current
Russian leadership appears determined to continue strengthening
its military prowess. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Obviously Russia does not intend to go to

war with NATO….But the exacerbation of the
economic, political, and moral crisis in Ukraine
is causing concern among the country’s politicomilitary leadership.”

Russian Rubles.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Russian_rubles.jpg

Source: “Денег нет, но для оборонных предприятий найдутся,”
[There is No Money, But They Will Find Some for Defense
Enterprises] Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye Online, 5 August
2016. http://nvo.ng.ru/concepts/2016-08-05/2_red.html
Last week, Premier Dmitriy Medvedev held a conference on
federal budget spending for 2017-2019, as regards development of
the defense-industrial Complex (OPK)…. “The budget truly is, as in
previous years, quite complex,” said Medvedev. “In order to balance
it, we need to make balanced, calibrated decisions.” And so, they
discussed the partial redistribution of financial resources, or as
Medvedev put it, the partial correction of previous decisions….
…Against this backdrop, Medvedev’s agreement to additional
defense-industrial complex funding came about because of nothing
other than emergency circumstances. “Priority measures” can be
interpreted as the reinforcement of mobilization reserves in the event
of war. The corresponding decision, obviously, has already been
made. At the very least, Deputy Minister of Defense, General of the
Army Dmitriy Bulgakov has reported that plans call for finishing the
construction of 450 new munitions dumps by year’s end…
…Moreover, the parameters of mobilization measures dovetail
with the international situation. Obviously Russia does not intend
to go to war with NATO….But the exacerbation of the economic,
political, and moral crisis in Ukraine is causing concern among the
country’s politico-military leadership. The processes underway in
this neighboring country are laying the groundwork for the most
reckless military adventures, about which Kyiv has announced its
intentions repeatedly…. This is not nearly as many as some would
have liked to send in, but it is sufficient to head off possible military
provocations on the part of Ukraine. That is why additional defenseindustrial complex funding is necessary. It is meant for the creation
of mobilization reserves for the first few months of war.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian Military Spending Remains Robust
and Opaque
Source: Ivan Tkachev, Svetlana Bocharova, and Oleg Makarov, “Засекреченные триллионы: сколько
Россия на самом деле тратит на армию,” [Secret Trillions: How Much Russia is Really Spending on the
Military] RBK Online, 27 July 2016. http://www.rbc.ru/conomics/27/07/2016/5797ed069a79475ab72f84bb
Russia has given an account of its 2015 military spending to the United Nations. It reached R2.9 trillion. It
revealed its spending on the different branches of the armed forces; the Navy was the most expensive, but
the Aerospace Forces posted the biggest growth.
…It is impossible to say precisely what the explanation for these expenditures is or how much the
state actually spends on defense; the budget figures and reports Russia presented to the UN are not
transparent…. Zatsepin states categorically, “This information is useless.”
Nearly R1 trillion fell under the “Other” category (other branches of the armed forces), meaning onethird of all declared military expenditures went to other, unspecified structures….. Last year, 67 percent of
appropriations under the “National Defense” section, and 69 percent under the “Armed Forces” section
were classified (described in secret addenda), …
…In the last two years, Russia has not disclosed to the UN its expenditures on military research and
development, even though they are reflected in the federal budget under “National Defense-related Applied
Scientific Research.” Expenditures under this article have grown rapidly in recent years; in 2015, they
increased by 30 percent relative to the previous year…
Russia’s actual military expenditures have always been higher than declared, believes the Gaidar
Institute’s Zatsepin. By no means are all military expenditures to be found in the designated “National
Defense” budget section -significant resources for military needs fall under “peaceful” articles, the expert’s
observations show…Moreover, the federal budget does not contain all defense spending; some of it is
included in regional and municipal budgets…

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from
the tactical perspective and from the guerrilla’s
perspective. Fangs of the Lone Wolf: is an exception.
These are the stories of low-level guerrilla combat
as told by the survivors. They cover fighting from the
cities of Grozny and Argun to the villages of Bamut
and Serzhen-yurt, and finally the hills, river valleys
and mountains that make up so much of Chechnya.
Dodge Billingsley, the primary author was embedded
with Chechen guerrilla forces after the first war, so
he knows the country, the culture, the key actors and
the conflict. Yet, as a Western outsider, he is able
to maintain perspective and objectivity. Fangs of
the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is
becoming modern and future war.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf

OE Watch | September 2016

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Laser-Info Weapons
OE Watch Commentary: In early August,
Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov caused
quite a stir when he announced that the Russian
military had gone beyond research and development
and had already “put certain types of laser
weapons into service.” Borisov did not elaborate
as to the exact laser weapons he was referring
and it was up to the Russian expert community
to explain. In the accompanying excerpt from
the pro-government source RIA Novosti, three
of Russia’s more prominent (and anti-Western)
military commentators provide their thoughts on the
capabilities of Russia’s new laser weapons.
According to Igor Korotchenko, Deputy Defense
Minister Borisov was probably referring to an
“airborne laser…mounted on the base of an Il-76
military transport aircraft” capable “of destroying
with radiation the optical-electronic systems and
various kinds of weapon control sensors on combat
aircraft, military satellites, and land-based and
marine equipment of a potential enemy.” While
Korotchenko provides no hard evidence for this
assertion, he goes on to claim that the Russian
prototype “has proven its ability to successfully
address the challenges it is set.”
The next expert quoted, Konstantin Sivkov,
suggests that the Russian military “could already
have adopted lasers to forcibly suppress tank
weapon control systems.” Again, without any proof,
he goes on to posit that Russia may have already
fielded “laser weapons for antimissile defense of
ships in the near zone and systems to suppress
optical-electronic surveillance and guidance
equipment.” The next quoted expert, retired General
Leonid Ivashov, posits that the “laser weapons
adopted by the Russian Army will be used in the
Ground Troops to blind enemy optical-electronic
equipment,” and also “disrupt some command and
control and communication systems.”
According to these Russian military experts, the
Russian military has already fielded a wide array
of laser weapons for air, sea and ground forces. Not
surprisingly, some of their claims mimic actual
laser developments announced by its chief geopolitical rival. While the Russian military has likely
fielded some aspects of laser technology (e.g. rangefinding), the extent of these developments remains
unclear. Nevertheless, these Russian military
commentators have once again demonstrated
the ability to direct, amplify and employ their
information arsenal. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)
For additional information on this topic, see: “SovietRussian Laser Weapons,” OE Watch, July 2015

Beriev A-60 Airborne Laser thought to be back in testing.
Source: http://bastion-karpenko.ru/a-60-lazer/

Source: Sergey Pyatakov, “Будущее наступило: эксперты рассказали об
использовании лазерного оружия,” [The Future Has Arrived: Experts Speak
about Use of Laser Weapons] RIA Novosti, 3 August 2016. http://ria.ru/defense_
safety/20160803/1473506442.html
Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov announced that elements of laser weapons
were supplied to the Armed Forces; and military experts polled by RIA Novosti
claimed that these can be placed on aircraft, wheeled and tracked on combat
vehicles, and ships.
Speaking at a solemn event dedicated to the 70th anniversary of the Russian
federal nuclear center , the All-Russian Research Institute of Experimental Physics
(RFYaTs-VNIIEF, Sarov), Borisov noted that weapons based on new physical
principles have now become a reality . According to him, “they are not exotic,
not experimental, or prototypes; we have put certain types of laser weapons into
service.”…
…Weapons based on new physical principles, including the airborne laser being
developed in Russia, will reliably ensure the country’s security, RIA Novosti was
told by Igor Korotchenko, member of the Russian Defense Ministry Public Council
and chief editor of the journal Natsionalnaya oborona [National Defense].
“With regard to the statement by the deputy defense minister, this probably refers
to an airborne laser, of which a prototype is currently being tested,” the military
analyst said. He explained that a powerful laser mounted on the base of an Il-76
military transport aircraft makes it possible to ensure the destruction of the opticalelectronic systems and various kinds of weapon control sensors on combat aircraft,
military satellites, and land-based and marine equipment of a potential enemy,
using radiation ….
…Another of the agency’s sources, Doctor of Military Sciences Konstantin Sivkov,
president of the Academy of Geopolitical Problems, suggested that the Russian
Federation Armed Forces could already have adopted lasers to forcibly suppress
tank weapon control systems. “They could also be types of laser weapons for
antimissile defense of ships in the near zone and systems to suppress opticalelectronic surveillance and guidance equipment,” Sivkov said.
…Laser weapons adopted by the Russian Army will be used in the Ground Troops
to blind enemy optical-electronic equipment, Colonel-General Leonid Ivashov,
president of the Academy of Geopolitical Problems, believes. “These models will
currently be used primarily in the Army as a blinding weapon. Lasers can illuminate
optical reconnaissance and sighting equipment. Their emissions can also disrupt
some command and control and communication systems,” Ivashov said….
OE Watch | September 2016

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Grozny-August 1996 Revisited
OE Watch Commentary: For those who followed the RussianChechen conflict of the mid-1990s, it is hard to believe it has
been twenty years since the dramatic events of August 1996.
Recall that despite Kremlin claims that a ceasefire was in place,
Chechen fighters were able to wrest control and “seize” the capital
city of Grozny. From a Russian military perspective, this bloody
conflict, the shameful loss of Grozny to Chechen separatists, and
the subsequent fragile peace treaty are often regarded as the nadir
of their post-Soviet history. In the accompanying excerpt from
the respected military journal, Voyenno-Promyshlenny Kurier
[Military-Industrial Courier] a Russian veteran of the August 1996
battle in Grozny recounts some of the painful details of this phase.

Top

“…Treachery may be the keyword for
understanding this war, the script for which
seems to have been written in advance in the
silence of the high government positions….”

The author begins by describing the general atmosphere of that
time period. President Yeltsin had just been re-elected, partially
upon his promise to end the fighting in Chechnya. While the
Russian military and security forces had withdrawn much of their
heavy equipment from in and around Grozny by August 1996, the
fighting against separatist forces (especially at night) had hardly
ceased. As the excerpt points out, the overall Russian military
commander at that time, General Konstantine Pulikovskiy
suggested that the question regarding the disposition of Russian
forces in Grozny had been a political and not a military decision.
The author describes his initial reception at the Severny
airport outside of Grozny, when upon seeing the dead bodies
of Russian soldiers, it became clear the rhetoric regarding
“peaceful” Chechnya did not conform to reality. Although a
reported ceasefire was in effect, Russian soldiers were engaged
in major battles with Chechen separatists who were attempting to
regain control of Grozny. The author heaps special blame on the
Russian media, who reported that “the situation in the Chechen
capital is normalized and is under control.” The author claims that
such false reporting sapped the morale of those Russian soldiers
literally fighting for their lives.
Russian soldiers were not the only ones who felt a sense of
betrayal. The author describes the sense of treachery felt among
those pro-Russian Chechen security officials once it became
clear that Russian forces were going to withdraw under separatist
terms. He includes the late General Alexander Lebed in the
ranks of traitors, claiming that Lebed hoped to use the Chechen
peace agreement (which he helped to write) as a springboard to
the presidency. The author maintains that Lebed’s ambitions led
not only to the “Russian Army’s retreat from Chechnya, but to
the country’s loss of international prestige after the shameful
Khasavyurt Accords….” He concludes the article by praising the
current Russian leader who realized that it was “impossible to
solve the ‘Chechen question’ without taking Chechen ideas into
consideration.”
Russia, its military, and the region of Chechnya have come a
long way since the dramatic events of August 1996. While much
has been rebuilt and restored since then, this article suggests that
many painful memories remain. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

A Chechen fighter during the battle for Grozny.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Urban_warfare#/media/File:Evstafievchecnnya-soldier-fire.jpg

Source: Roman Ilyushchenko, “В августе 96-го: Сценарий войны
был написан заранее в тиши высоких кабинетов,” [In August
96: The Script for the War was Written in Advance in High Quiet
Offices] Voyenno-Promyshlenny Kurier, 10 August 2016. http://www.
vpk-news.ru/articles/31765
…In Grozny, it all started in the early morning of 6 August 1996,
when gunmen suddenly attacked the railway station, the military
headquarters of the city, the central government offices, the
building of the Federal Security Service of the Republic, Ministry of
Internal Affairs’ Coordination Center, and almost all of the cityentrance checkpoints. At the same time, by successfully bypassing
the checkpoints, hundreds of armed men, reaching a level of
6000 fighters, travelled from suburban villages to the city for the
independence of Ichkeria….
…It is difficult to give a chronology of those tragic days. Events
moved with incredible speed. Today much about them is known,
however, there is still much unclear, and shedding light on the dark
spots remains…
…In Alexander Sladkov’s film “Shooting in August,” the commander
of the Joint Group that time, Lieutenant-General
(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Grozny-August 1996 Revisited
Konstantin Pulikovsky admitted that he had neither the time nor energy to figure out the decision on the disposition of forces – as this
disposition was approved at the top….
…The beginning of the last operation of the first Chechen campaign caught me in Rostov-on-Don, where I had arrived a few days before
on TDY from a more ‘peaceful’ Chechnya. When I returned a couple days later, it had become a battle. The first thing I saw on landing at
Severny airport were a number of vehicles carrying corpses wrapped in foil. There were many. I admit, it was scary ...
…In addition, the radio channels were filled with outright disinformation, with successive appeals by Maskhadov to the Chechen police
federal forces demanding surrender. For example, they claimed that the Chechen police had fled or completely sided with the militants, which
was a lie. There were traitors and cowards, but the majority remained faithful to their oath….
The Russian soldiers defending two strongholds near Minutka Square and Romanovsky Bridge [in Grozny] fought two weeks completely
surrounded with a shortage of ammunition, medical supplies, food and water. Ten of their soldiers were killed in battle or died of wounds. The
insurgents repeatedly asked them to surrender and promised their safety, but they continued to fight, hoping that they had not been forgotten,
that the situation would change, and that their sacrifices had not been in vain. And when they heard on a TV (run off a tank battery) the
country’s main news of the day regarding the inauguration of the president, and that “the situation in the Chechen capital is normalized and
is under control,” the defenders began to doubt their cause. As a participant later put it “something snapped inside of us then”…
…The soldiers’ morale was further weakened by the country’s indifference to their fate, the unconcealed confusion of the command, the lack
of will among senior political leaders and the treacherous position of much of the domestic media….
…Another deep memory from that period were the eyes of Chechen policemen who had remained faithful to Russia…. We had betrayed them.
But we had also been betrayed….
…Treachery may be the keyword for understanding this war, the script for which seems to have been written in advance in the silence of the
high government positions….
…The late Alexander Lebed stars in the role of one of the chief traitors of our country’s interests. Though I believe he was sincerely trying
to bring peace to our tired country. Alexander Ivanovich’s tragedy was that he didn’t want to share the laurels of peacemaker, because, it
appeared to him, this was his path to the presidency. And to achieve this goal, he was ready to do much. And as time has shown – very much…
…The ambition of the Secretary of the Security Council [Lebed] not only led to the Russian Army’s retreat from Chechnya, but to the
country’s loss of international prestige after the shameful Khasavyurt Accords…
…The new leader of Russia, after coming to power, quickly realized, … that it was impossible to solve the ‘Chechen question’ without taking
Chechen ideas into consideration...

A Chechen fighter near the burned-out ruins of the Presidential Palace in Grozny. .
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Urban_warfare#/media/File:Evstafiev-chechnya-palace-gunman.jpg

OE Watch | September 2016

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Islamic State Declares War against Russia
OE Watch Commentary: This month
marks the one year anniversary of Russia’s
military intervention into Syria to combat
Islamic State (IS) forces. Concerns that IS
radicalism could spread into Central Asia
and Russia served as part of the justification
for Russian military involvement. At the
end of July 2016, IS released a video which
proclaimed that the “Islamic State has declared
jihad against Russia.” The accompanying
excerpt from a moderately pro-Kremlin
source, Lenta.ru, describes Russian expert
opinion regarding the gravity of this threat.
The article begins by trying to ascertain
the validity of this video. It points out that
“the statement is the private opinion of
an individual militant who in terms of his
position in the ISIL structure is scarcely
empowered to make addresses of this kind.”
Regardless of the credibility of the warning,
the authors suggest that the Russian authorities
have established “a structured system for
collecting information and monitoring radical
groups.” However, one of the experts quoted
in the article maintains that these measures
are insufficient given that Russia has “83
muftiates and Muslim centers” recommending
that “it is time to integrate them so that there
is more state control.”
The statistics quoted in the article would
support additional security measures. Russian
officials now claim that there are about 10,000
militants from the post-Soviet space fighting
in Syria and Iraq. There are growing concerns
among Russian experts that these militants
may “return to Russia to disseminate their
ideas.” In 2013, “the MVD [Internal Affairs
Ministry] and the National Antiterrorist
Committee” registered 218 terrorist crimes
in Russia; by “2015 the figure was already
1,560.”
Since intervening militarily to defeat IS
in Syria, Kremlin authorities have been
successful in preventing a large scale IS
terrorist attack on Russian soil. However,
the statistics provided in this article indicate
that terrorism remains a serious challenge
for Russian security officials. While the data
in the article does not specify the source or
the nature of these attacks, there could be a
correlation between Russian military pressure
against terrorist targets in Syria and domestic
acts of terrorism within Russia. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…But nevertheless there are still several thousand Russian

citizens fighting in Syria on ISIL’s side, experts urge us to
remember. It is essential to ensure that they cannot return to
Russia to disseminate their ideas...”

Russian Su-34, Latakia Airbase, Syria.
Source: By Mil.ru, CC BY 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=44061050

Source: Seyfulla Shishanin, Konstantin Bogdanov, and Sergey Postnikov, “Накрыло
войной: Действительно ли исламисты объявили России джихад,” [Hit by War: Have
the Islamists Truly Declared Jihad against Russia] Lenta.ru, 1 August 2016.
https://lenta.ru/articles/2016/08/01/jihad/
“Islamic State has declared jihad against Russia,” the world’s leading media wrote on
Monday [1 August]. What is actually happening on the video everyone is talking about?
Lenta.ru has found out who may be behind the high-profile statements and how we should
respond to them….
On the evening of 31 July international publications, followed by the Russian media,
disseminated the statement that “Islamic State” (an organization banned in Russia)
had called for jihad against our country. …The remaining 30 seconds at the end are a
hysterical “video appeal” from a Russian-speaking ISIL [the self-proclaimed Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant] militant at the wheel of a “ jihadmobile” threatening to
travel to Russia for a “bloodbath.”
It should be noted that the statement is the private opinion of an individual militant who
in terms of his position in the ISIL structure is scarcely empowered to make addresses of
this kind….
…Russia is ready to respond to serious challenges, Yuriy Pochta, head of the Russian
Friendship of Peoples University department of comparative political studies, says:
“There is in existence a structured system for collecting information and monitoring
radical groups.”…
…Specific actions are needed directed against unregistered mosques of every kind,
Semen Bagdasarov, director of the Center for the Study of the Countries of the Middle
East and Central Asia, believes. “We have 83 muftiates and Muslim centers—it is time to
integrate them so that there is more state control,” the expert believes.
…Finally, in June 2016 Collective Security Treaty Organization General Secretary
Nikolay Bordyuzha assessed that the number of citizens of countries belonging to that
organization fighting in Syria and Iraq on the extremists’ side was at 10,000….
…The activation of the Islamist underground and of the Russian special services’
preventive work is indirectly confirmed by the dynamic of registered crimes of a terrorist
nature. According to the MVD [Internal Affairs Ministry] and the National Antiterrorist
Committee, in 2008-2013 the number of these crimes declined consistently from 642
to 218. In 2014 we can see the first change to the trend, with over 700 instances being
registered. In 2015 the figure was already 1,560….
…But nevertheless there are still several thousand Russian citizens fighting in Syria on
ISIL’s side, experts urge us to remember. It is essential to ensure that they cannot return
to Russia to disseminate their ideas, Semen Bagdasarov, director of the Center for the
Study of the Countries of the Middle East and Central Asia, is convinced….
OE Watch | September 2016

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia’s Victorious Military Games
OE Watch Commentary: As expected,
Russian military teams blew away the
competition in the 2016 Army Games conducted
last month on various training grounds in Russia
and Kazakhstan. This was the third iteration
of this competition, with a greatly expanded
field of events and participating countries (for
more details, see the July 2016 OE Watch,
“International Military Games”). The brief
excerpt from the government news source,
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, provides an extensive set of
details from this latest competition.
Russian military crews took first place in 20
of the 23 competitive events, coming in second
in the remaining three. The excerpt points out
that 121 different crews from 19 countries (more
than 3,500 military personnel) participated in
the games, including teams from Angola, Iran,
Serbia, Venezuela and Zimbabwe. The top
contenders were Russia, China, Belarus and
Kazakhstan with “Russian crews taking part in
all 23 different events, Kazakhstan and China in
21 events, Venezuela (9) Belarus (8) and Iran (7).”
15 countries took part in the tank biathlon, with
Russia, Belarus, China and Kazakhstan as the
four finalists. While tank crews were provided
with a modified version of the T-72, the Chinese
elected to use their own tanks (Type 96A Main
Battle Tank). As the brief excerpt points out, the
Chinese apparently had some problems engaging
the target with their tank, and the Russian crew
ended up winning this event.
According to the article, the games were visited
by about half a million spectators and covered
by “more than 1,000 media representatives from
20 countries, including 51 foreign media.” The
Russian military invested considerable resources
into this competition (e.g. more than 70,000
troops took part, including 7,000 mechanics and
drivers, 150 flight crews, more than 150,000
rounds of ammunition, 11 modernized training
facilities, 2,500 meals prepared per day, etc…).
The competition was given significant
coverage by the Russian media (readers can
get a sample of the events at the following
two links: https://youtu.be/qEaqQpQ_ulE and
http://bastion-karpenko.ru/world-militarygames-2016/). Russian defense officials claim
that such competition is not only a great training
opportunity, but also helps to build trust and
cooperation between the competing countries
End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Our country has initiated the first in the history of
international war games, comparable to inflame passions
and entertainment with the Olympics. They can even be
called the joust of the XXI century. …”

Logo-Army Games 2016. Source: mil.ru

Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “Международные армейские игры завершились победой
России,” [International Military Games End in Victory for Russia], Rossiyskaya
Gazeta, 13 August 2016. https://rg.ru/2016/08/13/mezhdunarodnye-armejskie-igryzavershilis-pobedoj-rossii.html
Russia’s victory in all the major competitions ended the International military games.
On Saturday, 13 August, the final competitions of the “ARMY-2016” at the Alabino
range took place and the winners were awarded.
Our country has initiated the first in the history of international war games,
comparable to inflame passions and entertainment with the Olympics. They can even
be called the joust of the XXI century. …
The first such event at the initiative of the Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu took
place in 2013. Apart from Russia, teams from Armenia, Belarus and Kazakhstan
participated. The idea was so wonderful and attractive, that after three years, ARMY2016 was attended by 121 crew from 19 countries, a total of more than 3.5 thousand
participants… Teams came from as far away as Angola, Iran, Serbia, Venezuela and
Zimbabwe…
…Russian crews took part in all 23 different events, Kazakhstan and China in 21
events, Venezuela (9) Belarus (8) and Iran (7)….
In the most spectacular competition, the “tank biathlon,” 17 teams from 15 countries
took part. Even distant Zimbabwe sent soldiers…. The Chinese brought their own
tanks. They had much more powerful engines than the T-72B3. And, the experts say,
[they were] fitted with the best sights and computing systems. Initially, the Chinese
team was leading, but they had problems engaging the targets and were penalized,
nullifying the speed characteristics of the tank….
…“Army International Game 2016” took place from 30 July to 13 August at the same
time at 20 separate training areas. 19 of them are located within the boundaries of
the three military districts - Western, Southern and Central, while the other - in the
Republic of Kazakhstan. Naval competitions [were] held in the waters of the Baltic,
Black and Caspian Seas.
In total, half a million spectators visited the game competitions… and was reported
by the work of more than 1,000 media representatives from 20 countries, including
51 foreign media.
…More than 70 thousand Russian Armed Forces personnel were involved in the
games…, with about 7000 mechanics-drivers…
OE Watch | September 2016

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Controlling the Arctic Ocean
OE Watch Commentary: In February
2016, at the United Nations, Sergei Donskoy,
the Russian Minister of Natural Resources,
formally presented Russia’s claim to a large
section of Arctic Ocean seabed including
the area under the North Pole. This is a
continuation of Russia’s efforts to secure the
territory and mineral rights underneath the
polar ice cap. The United Nations rejected
an earlier Russian claim in 2002. This
current Russian claim cites their scientific
evidence that the continental shelf extends
north from the Eurasian land mass under the
North Pole. Russia is claiming “the seabed
beyond the 200 nautical mile zone along
the entire Russian polar sector including the
zone under the North Pole.”
Under the 1982 United Nations Law of
the Sea, a nation may claim an exclusive
economic zone over the continental shelf
abutting its shores. If the geological shelf
extends far out to sea, the nation can claim
mineral resources in the seabed beyond
that zone. If the United Nations committee
accepts Russia’s claim, the seabed under the
North Pole would be subject to Moscow’s
oversight. This would include some 460,000
square miles of Arctic territory (about half
of the Arctic Ocean) and ownership of the
Northeast Passage shipping route above
Russia’s northern coastline.
Should the bulk of the Arctic Ocean
become Russian internal waters, it
may become difficult for non-Russian
commercial, military and scientific
vessels to transit their waters. Norwegian
scientists have already encountered this
(see “Polar Bears without Borders” in the
October 2015 OE Watch). The integrated
transport information and control system for
operation in the Arctic zone can compound
this difficulty. On the positive side, it can
prove a boon for disaster relief, sea rescue
and maritime communications. How the
aviation tracking fits into this is a bit of a
mystery. Don’t Russia’s air defense systems
already do this? Clearly the Russian
military will be a major player in this effort.
The accompanying passage discusses
Russian efforts to establish sovereign
control over this zone, by designing an
integrated information and control system.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Russia’s Transport Ministry has drawn up a concept design

for an integrated transport information and control system for
operation in the Arctic zone. The secure system - known by
the Russian acronym EZIS-TKA - is envisaged as consisting
of satellites, cable and tropospheric communications systems
operated by Russian companies.”
Source: Ivan Cheberko, “Над Арктикой развернут Единую информационную систему,”
[They are Deploying a Unified Information System above the Arctic] Izvestia Online, 7
August 2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/625830

Sovereign control for Russia
The plan has been drawn up by the Transport Ministry’s development department with
the aim of “provision of conditions for intensive, expanded use of the Russian Federation
Arctic Zone transport system in the national interest, by means of provision of integrated
information from various users and the achievement for Russia of sovereign control of
transport provision in this region.”
“This system will integrate all the ministries’ resources,” said Alexei Semenov, the
head of the Transport Ministry’s development department. “We’re creating an integrated
information sphere for the transport system. We have to provide national sovereignty over
the flow of information. This is very ambitious, but is achievable.”

Satellite and cable network
In order to create such a system, the Transport Ministry says it needs a system of Gonets
low-orbital communications satellites and the Luch re-broadcasting system based on
geostationary satellites, the Inmarsat communications system with Russian ground-based
infrastructure, and the Sever communications system based on tropospheric radio-relay
(which was used by the military in the Soviet era). It is also planning the Arktika space
system (the first element of which is planned to be launched at the end of 2017), as well as
the Polarnet fibre-optic net (this project envisages construction of communications lines
which will be put on the sea bed in the Arctic Ocean along the route Bude [Seacoast town
in the southwest tip of England near Cornwall], Murmansk, Anadyr, Vladivostok, Tokyo).
Implementation of the project was due to start in the first half of 2016 with Defense Ministry
communications systems in the Arctic and the Russian GLONASS satellite navigation
system.
EZIS-TKA is intended to be linked to an automated transport network control system,
the integrated state transport security system, and also the MO-RE ship monitoring
system. According to the plan, it will consist of centers for storage and processing of
navigation, technical and meteorological data and specialized infrastructure for collecting
and transmitting it. The EZIS-TKA telecoms infrastructure will have ancillary satellite
communications points and a ground-based network of microwave and ultra-short wave
stations interconnected with radio-relay lines, tropospheric communications channels and
fibre-optic networks.

Arctic UAV testing
“A decision to set up EZIS-TKA has already been taken by the state commission on the
Arctic”, Semenov said. “It’s there that creation of an Arctic proving ground is envisaged for
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). The extreme conditions, sparse population density and
great expanses of the area mean we can test UAVs at an adequate level.”
One of the key parts of EZIS-TKA is a system of automated monitoring of airliners
and general aviation planes by use of Russian technology, the report said. The system’s
infrastructure will also include deployment of a command system for movement of
unmanned transport vehicles in the Arctic.
OE Watch | September 2016

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Far Northern Dirigibles
OE Watch Commentary: Dream
big-spend big-using someone else’s
money. Russia is trying to develop
its transportation infrastructure
and there are some fairly dramatic
proposals being floated. The proposal
discussed in the accompanying
article is long on promise and part
of it involves the movement of cargo
from the Northern Sea route of the
Arctic Ocean to the Trans-Siberian
railroad using dirigibles. The cost
savings is based on the cost of
moving an equal amount of cargo on
transport helicopters-a very expensive
option indeed. Not discussed is the
cost versus barge traffic on the Ob,
Yenisei and Lena rivers. Barges and
steamships operate normally on these
waters and, although some parts of
the rivers require attention to improve
the load-carrying capacity, they are
most likely cheaper than dirigibles.
Another option would be an additional
north-south railroad line-like the
Murmansk line to St. Petersburg and
beyond. That would be expensive, but
far more reliable than flying a dirigible
in an Arctic gale. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

Source: Yelizaveta Kuznetsova, “Дирижабли поднимут $200 млрд,” [They will Raise 200
billion with Dirigibles] Kommersant Online, 12 August 2016. http://kommersant.ru/doc/3060944

They will Raise $200 billion with Dirigibles; Security Council Puts Forward New
Megaproject
The Russian Federation Security Council has ordered Vice Premier Arkadiy Dvorkovich to
examine the proposal of Academician Aleksandr Nekipelov of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Director of the Moscow State University School of Economics, for “the creation of extensive
transport and logistical corridors” that would unite the EU and the Asia-Pacific region “while
taking into account the interests and security of the Russian Federation.”
He proposes creating two transport and logistical corridors with a length of 9,600 kilometers
backed by the Northern Sea Route; a new high-speed trunk railroad based on the Eastern
Polygon of the Russian Railroads Open Joint-Stock Company (the Trans-Siberian Railroad and
the Baykal-Amur Railroad); and a network of transport and shipment hubs. Thus, a transport
and logistical infrastructure would appear in Siberia, the Far East, and the Arctic that would
use water routes, aviation hubs, a network of takeoff and landing strips for small aircraft, and
even dirigibles with a large carrying capacity and a long flight range. All this, the authors of
the project believe, would make it possible to develop the territories, create high-tech production
processes, develop labor migration and tourism, and to “nail down” the population via 7 million
jobs.
The project is divided into three phases. The initiators hope to plan and to decide on the
participants by 2018. The construction of the main logistical and infrastructure facilities is
scheduled for 2018-2025, and the creation of the corridors is to be fully completed by 2035. The
proposal hopes to attract China, the United States and the countries of Europe to the project;
in exchange, the latter might be able to lift sanctions. The authors regard the project as “highly
safe from the geopolitical point of view,” giving assurances that the new, mutually advantageous
partnership of the EU and the United States “would have a firmer foundation.” The developers
suggest that the scale of the project and the recoupment period (15-20 years) would interest
business and make it possible to “carry out the repatriation of Russian capital from offshore
accounts.”

So far, of all the components of the project, only transport dirigibles of the ATLANT (“aerostatic flying transport vehicle of a new type”)
type have been described in detail. The dirigibles would convey cargo between the Northern Sea Route and the Trans-Siberian Railroad.
The developer is the Avgur Aeronautical Center, the carrying capacity of the dirigibles is up to 16 tons, and their flight range is 2000-5000
kilometers. The approximate cost of the project is 3.2 billion rubles [$500 million dollars], allowing for research and development. The project
seeks investors to provide 2016 subsidies of 800 million rubles [12.5 million dollars]. The construction of a plant for the serial production of
ATLANT is estimated at 8-10 billion rubles [125- 157 million dollars]; it could be built within two to two-and-a-half years and produce from
two to 10 dirigibles per year. The project has received the support of the Skolkovo Foundation’s grant committee.
“Despite the economic crisis and the problems with the budget, the Russian Federation government is examining yet more futuristic
megaprojects. Russian Federation Security Council and Academician Aleksandr Nekipelov of the Russian Academy of Sciences have proposed
for discussion “United Eurasia”—a system of transport and logistical corridors uniting the Trans-Siberian Railroad Road, the Baykal-Amur
Railroad, and the Northern Sea Route. The idea is that the project, which would cost $220 billion-240 billion, would stimulate the development
of Siberia, the Far East, and the Arctic, and the United States and the countries of the West would lift sanctions in exchange for participation.
But so far, the only component of the project that is described in detail involves transport dirigibles by the name of ATLANT. To this day, all
attempts to commercialize vehicles lighter than air have failed.”
Kirill Lyats, president of the Lokomoskay company, says that in the use of dirigibles the delivery of a heavy load to a hard-to-access region,
rather than speed, is paramount. “The advantage of a dirigible over the railroad is its greater carrying capacity—up to 600 tonnes as
opposed to 60 tonnes per wagon.” But Vladimir Karnozob, an expert with the Aviation Explorer portal, stresses that, although people have
dreamed of using dirigibles and other flying vehicles that are lighter than air for commercial purposes since the moment of their invention,
so far, no one has managed to realize such an idea with a positive financial result. It is difficult to build a permanently operating transport
system from such vehicles; problems arise with the loading of the vehicles during movement in either direction, and for lengthy routes like
Europe to Asia, the situation is complicated by the prevailing winds. In the upshot, Mr. Karnozov sums up, in reality, it is almost impossible
for a dirigible to compete with the railroads.
OE Watch | September 2016

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Ministry of Defense Company in
Charge of Arctic Logistics
OE Watch Commentary: In Russia
there is little separation between
the Ministry of Defense (MOD)
and the nation’s defense industries.
According to the accompanying article,
Oboronlogistka, a defense logisitics
company owned by the Russian MOD,
is apparently going to be handling most
Russian government logistics shipping in
the Arctic. Not bad for a company that
was accredited as a shipping company
in March of this year. According to
the second source, “Russia’s Defense
Ministry has integrated the resources of
95 civilian vessels with a total capacity
exceeding one million tons and six
seaports for logistic support in the Arctic.
Oboronlogistika and other transport
companies are working on a unified tariff
policy for transport services.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Company
Oboronlogistika gets
status as united logistics
operator for Russian
Arctic shipments.
Oboronlogistika was
established in 2011 and
is 100 percent owned
by the Russian Ministry
of Defense. Now, the
company is given a key
role in state shipping
operations in the Arctic.”

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Ministry of Defense takes charge of Arctic shipping,” The Barents
Independent Observer, 7 July 2016. http://www.thebarentsobserver.com/security/2016/07/
ministry-defense-takes-charge-arctic-shipping
In a meeting in the Russian Arctic Commission in mid-May this year, the Ministry of Defense
and Ministry of Transport were requested to present proposals on the establishment of a joint
logistics operator for the Arctic. That soon led to a deal with Oboronlogistika.
In June, the company signed agreements with several federal ministries, among them the
Ministry of Defense, as well as with Arkhangelsk Oblast about the establishment of “a simple,
understandable and economically efficient system for delivery of goods in the Arctic.” Head of
Oboronlogistika, Anton Filatov, stated in a meeting with Arkhangelsk Governor Igor Orlov that
“The Ministry has decided to coordinate the efforts of all involved ministries in order to
facilitate a joint tariff policy and work schemes for the Northern Sea Route, as well as in [the
general] Arctic Zone”.
Company Oboronlogistika gets status as united logistics operator for Russian Arctic
shipments. Oboronlogistika was established in 2011 and is 100 percent owned by the Russian
Ministry of Defense. Now, the company is given a key role in state shipping operations in the
Arctic.
Industrial & military shipments are increasing to the Russian Arctic. The governor of
Arkhangelsk is pleased about the role of the new company. “Currently, there are four
different companies which deliver industrial, military and municipal goods to the far northern
territories, and each of the companies operate independently and with their separate solutions
and technology”. Orlov added “This fragmentation is inconvenient and inefficient especially
when considering the strategic tasks on the development and management of this territory”.
The company website states “In March of this year, Oboronlogistika received official status
as a shipping company, and in April it received a state license for sea transportation of
dangerous goods. The new role of the company comes as both industrial and military Russian
Arctic shipments are picking up apace. Ship traffic to Yamal is growing in connection with
the development of new oil and gas activities, and the Ministry of Defense is building new and
upgraded bases along the coast and on the Arctic archipelagos.”
Source: ”Russia Builds Arctic Logistics Capacity,” The Maritime Executive, 27 July 2016.
http://www.maritime-executive.com/article/russia-builds-arctic-logistics-capacity
“Russia’s Defense Ministry has integrated the resources of 95 civilian vessels with a total
capacity exceeding one million tons and six seaports for logistic support in the Arctic.
Oboronlogistika and other transport companies are working on a unified tariff policy for
transport services.”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | September 2016

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Turkey-Russia Ties: It’s Complicated
OE Watch Commentary: On 9 August, Russian President Putin and Turkish
The main criteria in bilateral relations
President Erdoğan met in St. Petersburg to restore the relationship between
Turkey and Russia. Their growing friendship had come to an abrupt end when
will be Ankara’s Syria policy.
Turkey shot down a Russian fighter jet in November
2015. The accompanying passages from the Turkish
Source: Kadri Gürsel, “Rusya’yla Uçak Krizi Öncesine Dönülemez (It is not Possible to
press discuss the significance of this visit, and what
Return the Pre-Jet Crisis [Period] with Russia),” Cumhuriyet.com, 12 August 2016.
it may mean for Turkey and its regional policy going http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/koseyazisi/583192/Rusya_yla_ucak_krizi_oncesine_
forward. While the visit may help to normalize
donulemez.html
trade and economic ties, most analysts agree that
it will not lead to a quick thawing of the complex
“A lot of meaning has been attributed to... Erdoğan’s meeting [with Putin] in St.
relationship. They note that this is because the key
Petersburg. Exaggerated commentaries were made saying that Erdoğan’s Turkey
issue between them is Syria—an issue where the
is detaching from the West and leaning towards Eurasia, in search of a strategic
two countries have been on opposite sides.
partnership with Russia. [But] it takes two to tango. In St. Petersburg, Putin did not
appear interested in a ‘Eurasian tango’ with Erdoğan...
As award-winning journalist Kadri Gürsel points
out in the first passage, a lot of meaning has been
What brought Turkish-Russian relations into crisis is [Turkey’s] Syria policy... The
attributed to the Putin-Erdoğan meeting. He points
main criteria in bilateral relations will be Ankara’s Syria policy.”
out that many ‘exaggerated commentaries’ have
claimed that Turkey is detaching from the West
and leaning towards Eurasia in search of a strategic
partnership with Russia. However, Gürsel disagrees
with this assessment. He also notes that the main
Russian President
Vladimir Putin and
criteria in bilateral relations will be Turkey’s Syria
Turkish President
policy, which he claims is the main reason for the
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
crisis in relations.

“

Similarly, as respected journalist and academic
Soli Özel points out in the second passage, the
current rapprochement is based more on necessities
and interests, rather than any kind of strategic
alignment. He notes that it does not make sense
to conclude that a new alternative power block is
emerging as a result of this meeting. Özel also notes
that Turkey is trying to find ways to ensure that
it gets included in the game in Syria; and claims
that the only way to achieve this is to get closer to
Russia’s positions on Syria.
The two leaders agreed to improve economic
relations and restart some projects that had been
frozen after November 2015. However, as the third
passage claims, the future of the Turkey-Russia
rapprochement is based more on agreeing on Syria
than on trade issues. Thus, the author notes that, if
Turkey wants to get closer to Russia, it will have to
abandon its old Syria policy. As the final passage
notes, another notable result of the meeting was
the creation of a bilateral working group on Syria,
composed of representatives from the respective
foreign, defense and intelligence services. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

For more information see, “Russia-Turkey
Tensions Peak in Syria,” in the March 2016
issue; “Russia’s Expanding Presence in the
Mediterranean,” in the January 2016 issue; and
“Realpolitik Drives Turkey-Russia Relations,” in
the January 2015 issue of OE Watch.

”

Source: http://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Putin_and_Erdoğan.
jpeg

Source: Soli Özel, “Rusya ziyaretinden sonra (After the Russia visit),” Haberturk.com,
14 August 2016. www.haberturk.com/yazarlar/soli-ozel/1281581-rusya-ziyaretindensonra
“It does not make sense to conclude that alternative power blocks will emerge in the
world system based on a rapprochement that is... based on necessities and mutual
interests. ... Under the current circumstances, it seems that Turkey will stay within the
Atlantic alliance. But there is no doubt that it is trying to open up a larger area of
maneuver for itself. To achieve this, it must ensure that it gets included in the game in
Syria... The only way for this is to get closer to Russia’s positions [on Syria] by limiting
the support it gives to opposition groups and playing a more active role in the campaign
against ISIS.”
Source: Nuray Mert, “Rusya ve dış politikada değişim (Russia and change in foreign
policy),” Cumhuriyet.com, 12 August 2016. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/
koseyazisi/583196/Rusya_ve_dis_politikada_degisim.html
“The future of the Turkey-Russia rapprochement is based more on agreeing on Syria,
than on trade issues... To the extent that Turkey gets closer to Russia..., it will have to
abandon its old Syria policy.”
Source: Fehim Taştekin, “Rusya ile ikinci baharın diyeti: Suriye (The cost to a second
spring with Russia: Syria),” Al Monitor.com, 11 August 2016. http://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/tr/originals/2016/08/turkey-russia-second-spring-what-will-be-the-toll.
html#ixzz4I1z6RLhh
“According to... [the Foreign Minister] Çavuşoğlu, a mechanism will be established
with the participation of the military, foreign service and intelligence units.”
OE Watch | September 2016

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Russian Take on Russian-Turkish Reconciliation:
Avoiding Another Incident in the Air
OE Watch Commentary:
According to Russian media, the
meeting between Russian President
Vladimir Putin and Turkish
President Recep Erdogan that took
place on 9 August resulted in some
reconciliation after several months
of poor relations. The excerpted
article from popluar press reports
on a Russian proposal to establish
mechanism to avoid another
incident like the downing of the
Su-24 bomber last November. The
proposal appears to have been
accepted alongside economic
agreements. Also the author notes
what he descibes as an earlier
“apology” from Erdogan and the
arrest of both the Turkish pilot who
shot down the Su-24 aircraft and
the man who allegedly shot the
surviving Russian pilot. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

“[The agreement] includes channels for exchanging information as
well as protocols for engagement in the air...”
Source: Surkov, Nikolay. “Турецких пилотов научат взаимодействовать с российскими (Turkish
pilots will learn to interact with Russian counterparts),” Izvestiya, 8 August 2016. http://izvestia.ru/
news/625665
Russia is offering to establish a special mechanism with Turkey to prevent incidents like the one that
that took place last fall with the shooting down of the Su-24 bomber. According to a source in the
Russian Defense Ministry, a set of documents has been put together and if agreed upon in the August
9th negotiations with the Russian and Turkish Presidents, the proposal will be forwarded to the
Ministry of Defense of Turkey…(the agreement) includes channels for exchanging information as well
as protocols for engagement in the air…
Russia already has agreements with Israel and the United States on preventing incidents
in the skies over Syria. According to observers, it has helped avoid casualties and damage to
equipment several times…Even before the coup (attempt) the military disagreed with the politics
of Erdogan, and now that most of the generals and senior officers have been dismissed, the Army
lacks command…this means that the Turkish Army has basically stopped being an independent force
and will completely carry out the government’s orders, but it is not clear who to speak with on the
Turkish General Staff on certain issues…In June Erdogan wrote a letter to Vladimir Putin, which
apologized for the downed Su-24 and Turkish [authorities] later arrested the alleged murderer of the
Russian pilot on a weapons possession charge. According to Turkish officials, the pilot who made the
final decision to shoot down the Russian bomber was arrested.

“A Russian Su-24 bomber sits at Khmeimim Air Base near Latakia, Syria. The recent reconciliation between Russia and Turkey includes an effort to
coordinate Russian air operations with Turkish Armed Forces in order to avoid another incident like the downing of the Su-24 in November 2015.”
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Будни_ВКС_РФ_на_авиабазе_Химеймим_в_Сирии_(2016)_(10).jpg

OE Watch | September 2016

66

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Michael Rubin

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Sri Lanka: Iran’s New Strategic Partner?
On 25 July 2011 Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei visited Bandar
Abbas, Iran’s chief Persian Gulf port, to promote the role of both the
Iranian Navy and its Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
corollary. “Both the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy and the Revolutionary Guards’ Navy are the symbols of the might of the Iranian nation
in defending the interests of the country in the Persian Gulf and the
Sea of Oman,” he declared.1 His comments might have seemed to be
normal political rhetoric—politicians and even political ayatollahs
often butter-up their audiences—but in this case there was something
more. With the IRGC increasingly looking inward to defend against
internal threats, Khamenei was emphasizing a new mission by which
Iran’s regular and IRGC Navies would become a chief mechanism for
Iran to project power.
Indeed, five months earlier Iranian warships made their first transit of the Suez Canal since the Islamic Revolution.2 The Suez transit
became a repeating occurrence, and Iranian ships also began making
regular port calls at Port Sudan, Sudan’s main Red Sea port.3 Both an
Iranian warship’s passage through
the Suez Canal and into the Mediterranean on 22 February 2011
and Iranian warships paying port
calls in Sudan a year later have
reinforced the fact that the Iranian
Navy has expanded its operational
reach.
Western officials have charted Iran’s increasing involvement
eastward with alarm, especially as
the IRGC has grown increasingly involved in Syria and Yemen.
However, that is only half the story
of Iran’s growing operational reach.
In February 2013 Iran deployed
its first naval flotilla to the Pacific
Ocean since the tenth century.4
While the Iranian press focused
on the ships’ arrival in the Chinese
port of Zhangjiagang, near Shanghai, of equal importance was its
port call in Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Why Sri Lanka?

es fought a brutal civil war against the Tamil Tigers, who sought to
create an independent Tamil state in the north and east of the island.
The conflict resulted in the deaths of perhaps 100,000 fighters and
civilians both, according to the United Nations.8 Throughout the years
of civil war the United Nations, India, and various countries sought
to facilitate peace talks. These largely broke down upon Tamil Tiger
insincerity.9 Finally, after 26 years of fighting the Sri Lankan Army did
what hundreds of diplomats and UN officials had tried but failed to
do: end the conflict. Sri Lankan forces overran Ananthapuram and the
Jaffna Peninsula and killed Velupillai Prabhakaran, leader of the Tamil
Tigers. The final battles were bloody, however. Accusations of human
rights abuses and summary executions swirled.10 The UN Human
Rights Council sought an investigation, a move supported by the US
State Department.11 The European Union followed suit.12
As Sri Lanka felt embattled, if not betrayed by many Western countries, it was perhaps ripe for cultivation by Iran. After United Nations
Secretary General Ban Ki-moon agreed to appoint a special panel to

Ebrahim Rohani, Iranian Defense Attaché to Sri Lanka, visiting Vice Admiral Ravindra Wijegunaratne, commander of the
Sri Lankan Navy, on July 29, 2015.
Source: http://www.navy.lk/eventnews/2015/07/29/201507291235/

The island nation of Sri Lanka is
strategically located in the Indian
Ocean, approximately 2,500 miles as the crow flies from both Iran
and China. At first glance, Sri Lanka might not seem a natural ally for
the Islamic Republic. Its Muslim population numbers only 10 percent
of its more than 22 million people, slightly fewer than the number of
Hindus and far fewer than the 15.4 million Buddhists.5
The Islamic Republic, though, has never had any qualms about
cultivating close strategic ties to non-Muslim countries. It has reached
out to African countries serving as either nonpermanent members of
the United Nations Security Council or members of the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s board of governors, as well as countries with
exploitable uranium reserves or port facilities which Iranian shipping might use.6 Iran also cultivates countries—even those like Russia
which repress local Muslim populations—if Tehran can derive military
benefit from the relationship.7
Iranian outreach to Sri Lanka also takes advantage of Sri Lankan
frustration with the West. Between 1983 and 2009 Sri Lankan forc-

investigate human rights violations by Sri Lanka during its final military drive to eradicate the Tamil Tigers, Iranian Minister of Transportation and Housing Ali Nikzad lambasted the UN panel, describing it
as a “paper tiger” and a “pet of the Western nations.” He added that “if
any organization or country takes action that will harm Sri Lanka, we
[Iran] will always very strongly oppose such a move.”13 Iranian Foreign
Minister Manouchehr Mottaki called his Sri Lankan counterpart to
congratulate him and remind him that Iran had always supported Sri
Lanka’s unity, implying that Western countries which sought a negotiated peace were willing to sacrifice Sri Lanka’s territorial integrity.14
More recently, Iranian Attorney General Ebrahim Raeesi visited Sri
Lanka for consultations with his counterpart. According to his office’s
website, during the meeting “he praised Sri Lanka’s recent efforts to
block imperialist countries’ efforts to interfere in their affairs,”15 a state-

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

67

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Michael Rubin

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Sri Lanka: Iran’s New Strategic Partner?
Consider military ties: as Iran began to project naval power more
widely, it grew increasingly in need of logistical support. The Red Sea
and Mediterranean are relatively narrow; no ship is ever more than a
few hours from land and, regardless, Iran had long-term allies in the
region, like Sudan and Syria. The Indian Ocean, however, is huge, and
logistical options more limited. Iran and Pakistan may be neighbors,
Military Ties and More
but, despite having more than 250 million people between the two
countries, bilateral trade is little more than a quarter billion dollars.19
Perhaps one of the reasons why Iranian-Sri Lankan relations have
seemingly accelerated so quickly has been the groundwork laid in
India might be a trading partner, but, with China looming, while India
the first decade of the millennium. Both countries issued numerous
has welcomed an occasional Iranian port call in Mumbai in exchange
joint statements supporting nuclear nonproliferation, a boon to Iran’s
for similar services for the Indian Navy in Bandar Abbas, India is
diplomatic position, as it was depicting itself as a victim of cynical
loathe to antagonize the West by offering much more.20
and predatory nuclear powers rather than a country in violation of its
The first Iranian flotilla docked in Colombo in February 2013.
16
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty safeguards agreement. “Ours is a
Then, on 20 December Iran’s 28th Naval Flotilla, comprising two warships, a submarine, and a combat helicopter, arrived in Colombo.21 The
friendship based on mutual trust and understanding,” then-Foreign
Minister Manouchehr Mottakki said, adding, “Iran is sincerely comSri Lankan naval commander subsequently visited the Iranian submamitted to the development of Sri Lanka, whom we consider to be a
rine.22 Rear Admiral Siavash Jareh explained that a goal of the deploytrue friend.” In April 2008 Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad
ment was “to show the Islamic Republic’s power and wave its flag in
visited Colombo and declared that Iran and Sri Lanka both sought
the southern hemisphere and to prepare for forthcoming operations to
17
“justice and fair play in the world,” and pledged further cooperation.
secure sea lanes in critical regions, especially the Strait of Malacca and
Bay of Bengal.”23
Over subsequent months and years similar discussions occurred
among other officials: Iranian Parliament Speaker Ali Larijani and his
In 2015 Iran sent a destroyer and an auxiliary ship to Sri Lanka.24
Sri Lankan equivalent Wijesinghe Jayaweera Mudiyanselage Lokuban“The presence of the flotilla of warships in Colombo port shows our
dara and Mottaki and Sri Lankan Foreign Minister Rohitha Bogollaggood relations with Sri Lanka,” Colonel Ebrahim Rouhani, Iran’s de18
ama, among others. Certainly, such declarations of cooperation and
fense attaché to Sri Lanka, said.25 During the meeting Ahmadi Kerstrong ties are a staple of diplomatic rhetoric but, in the case of Tehran
manshahi, the visiting Iranian commodore, offered to take the relaand Colombo’s developing friendship, there seems real substance to
tionship to a new level by training Sri Lankan cadets in Iran.26 Iranian
back the statements of Iranian leaders.
commanders and students also visited the Sri Lankan Naval College.
Jayantha Perera, the Commander of Sri Lanka’s Navy, reportedly said that Sri Lanka’s relationship with Iran “is not just
military but also political,” and
said that the Iranian port visit at
Colombo would strengthen the
bilateral partnership.27
Iranian officials, however, are
seeking to expand the relationship beyond simply the military.
When Ahmadinejad became
president in 2005, Sri Lanka was
the first stop in his inaugural
Asian tour.28
There have always been
low-level economic ties. Iran
and Sri Lanka signed (but never
implemented) a preferential
trade accord in 2004. In 2007 Sri
Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa visited Iran and signed
more than $1.5 billion worth
of development projects. The
following year Ahmadinejad visited Sri Lanka and inaugurated
a $750 million project to upgrade Sri Lanka’s Sapugaskanda
Petroleum Refinery,29 the important of which lies in the fact
Iranian Energy Minister Hamid Chitchian meeting Sri Lankan Minister of Industry and Commerce Rishad Bathiudeen in
that Iranian refinery servicing
Colombo, February 25, 2016.
ment meant to capitalize on Sri Lankan frustration about the United
States, Europe, and the United Nation’s continued pursuit of human
rights investigations into the conclusion of Sri Lanka’s multidecade
terrorist conflict.

Source: http://nation.lk/online/2016/02/25/sri-lanka-vying-for-mou-on-tea-with-iran-to-boost-exports.html

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2016

68

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Sri Lanka: Iran’s New Strategic Partner?
companies not only were dominated by the IRGC’s economic wing,
but they were also, from a quality perspective, far behind European,
American, and East Asian companies. That same year, the State Department expressed concern about the growing economic relationship
between Colombo and Tehran.30
Outreach has been consistent. In November 2013, Sri Lankan Oil
Minister Anura Priyadarshana told the island-nation’s Hiru News
portal that “Sri Lanka will have a huge advantage as a result of relaxing Iran sanctions.”31 In 2014 Iranian Finance Minister Ali Taieb
Nia met Sarath Amunugama, his Sri Lankan counterpart on the
sidelines of World Bank and International Monetary Fund meetings
to discuss accelerating growth of commercial ties.32 In the wake of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the lifting of
sanctions, trade—especially in the energy sector—has taken off. Susil
Premajayantha, a member of the Sri Lankan parliament (mistakenly
referenced in the Iranian press as minister of oil), said that Sri Lanka
favored Iran’s oil to that of Saudi Arabia. Iran’s Deputy Oil Minister
Roknoddin Javadi suggested that Iran is prepared to provide 40,00045,000 barrels per day, enough oil to supply Sri Lanka’s main oil refinery.33 Both countries seem ready to update and reinvigorate a preferential trade agreement signed in 2004 but never ratified.34
In recent months economic relations have moved from the theoretical to the real. Sri Lankan tea exporters applauded the lifting of
currency sanctions and hope Iran will return to its pre-sanctions status
as Ceylon tea’s largest overseas market.35 In February 2016, for example, Iranian Energy Minister Hamid Chitchian visited Sri Lanka with

1

2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11
12
13

“Dawlat-e Mostaqal va Mellat-e Bidar-e Iran Har Ghodrate ra Majbur beh
‘Oghab Nashini Khahad Kard,” [The Independent and Vigilant Nation of Iran
Will Force the Power’s Retreat], FardaNews, July 23, 2011. http://www.fardanews.com
“Iran Warships Passing through Suez,” PressTV, 24 February 2011, http://edition.presstv.ir/detail.fa/167955.html
“Iranian Fleet of Warships Dock in Sudanese Port,” Fars News Agency, October 29, 2012, http://english.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=9107115704;
“Iranian Warships Dock in Sudan’s Port,” Fars News Agency, December 8,
2012, http://english.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=9107125136
“Navhaye Artesh Farda Varud Aqiyanus-e Aram Meshavand” [Tomorrow Navy
Ships Will Enter Pacific],” Fars News Agency, 25 February 2013. http://www.
farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13911207000046
“Sri Lanka,” CIA World Fact Book, 17 June 2016, https://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ce.html
Michael Rubin, “Africa: Iran’s Final Frontier,” Foreign Military Studies Office,
Operational Environment Watch, April 2013, http://fmso.leavenworth.army.
mil/OEWatch/201304/Special_Essay_01.html
Michael Rubin, “Iran-Russia Relations,” Foreign Military Studies Office, Operational Environment Watch, July 2016, http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/
current.pdf
“Up to 100,000 Killed in Sri Lanka’s Civil War: UN,” ABC Australia. 20 May
2009, http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/05/20/2576543.htm
See, for example, “Tamil Tigers ‘Violated Ceasefire’,” BBC News, 19 November
2004, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/4024827.stm
“UN Report Highlights Human Rights Violations in Sri Lanka and Urges Creation of Hybrid Court,” International Justice Resource Center, 22 September
2015, http://www.ijrcenter.org/2015/09/22/un-report-highlights-humanrights-violations-in-sri-lanka-and-urges-creation-of-hybrid-court/
Maria Otero, Undersecretary for Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human
Rights, “Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission in Sri Lanka,” U.S.
Department of State, 13 February 2012, http://www.state.gov/j/184137.htm
See, for example, “Joint Press Release Following the 20th Meeting of the European Union - Sri Lanka Joint Commission,” European Union External Action,
19 July 2016, http://eeas.europa.eu/top_stories/2016/160719_07_en.htm
“’UNO, a Paper Tiger’ – Iranian Minister,” The Nation (Colombo, Sri Lanka), 27
June 2010, http://www.nation.lk/2010/06/27/news10.htm

an Iranian delegation to discuss not only partnerships with regard to
electricity and water, but also greater cooperation among Iranian and
Sri Lankan banks.36 In 2016 Iran used some of its post-JCPOA hard
currency windfall to lease Sri Lankan Airlines airplanes, effectively
helping Sri Lanka’s national carrier to reduce its $1 billion debt.37
Iran also remains very cognizant of soft-power. An Iranian cultural
delegation visiting Sri Lanka met with Ravi Jayawardena, Chairman of
Sri Lanka’s Rupavahini Corporation, the country’s national television
network, to discuss airing Iranian films and television shows on Sri
Lankan media because of “similar cultural values.”38 Sayyid Hassan
Khomeini, the grandson of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, visited
Sri Lanka in July 2016 to meet both political and religious officials.
During his meeting with Cardinal Malcolm Ranjith, the head of the
Sri Lankan Catholic church reportedly praised Khomeini for “promoting human values.”39
It is natural that with many international sanctions lifted, Iran
would seek to expand its relations globally. While Iran continues to
explore new commercial opportunities in Russia, China, Europe and—
at least when it comes to Boeing—with the United States, Sri Lanka
appears to be the subject of special focus inside Tehran. While international concern focuses on Iran’s activities in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen,
the growing Iranian outreach toward Sri Lanka appears to remain
largely under the diplomatic radar. However, as Sri Lanka continues
to feel unjustly criticized, if not besieged by Western diplomats, Iran
appears willing to solidify its ties and, with it, Iran’s operational reach
into the Indian Ocean basin.

14 “Iran, Sir Lanka Vow To Deepen All-out Cooperation,” Iranian Students News
Agency, 11 May 2009; “Iran Congratulates Sri Lanka On Defeat Of Tamil Tigers- Defense Website,” Sri Lanka Ministry of Defense, 20 May 2009, https://
web.archive.org/web/20090523161801/http://www.defence.lk/new.asp?fname=20090519_11
15 “Safar-e Dadestani Kal Keshevar Jomhuri Islami Iran beh Sri Lanka” [Islamic
Republic of Iran’s Attorney General’s Trip to Sri Lanka], Dadsetani.ir (Office
of the Attorney General). 18 January 2015, http://www.dadsetani.ir/Default.
aspx?tabid=3989&articleType=ArticleView&articleId=92312
16 “Iran Willing to Share Nuclear Technology with Sri Lanka,” Fars News Agency,
7 August 2008, http://english.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=8705170640
17 “Sri Lanka and Iran Seek Justice and Fair Play,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Sri Lanka, 29 April 2008, http://www.mfa.gov.lk/index.php/media/news-archive/1241-sri-lanka-and-iran-seek-justice-and-fair-play iranian-president
18 “Iran, Sir Lanka Vow To Deepen All-out Cooperation,” Iranian Students News
Agency, 11 May 2009; “Iran Congratulates Sri Lanka On Defeat Of Tamil Tigers- Defense Website,” Sri Lanka Ministry of Defense, 20 May 2009, https://
web.archive.org/web/20090523161801/http://www.defence.lk/new.asp?fname=20090519_11
19 Mehreen Zahra-Malik, “Pakistan, Iran Aim to Boost Trade to $5 Billion,” Reuters, 26 March 2016, http://www.reuters.com/article/us-pakistan-iran-idUSKCN0WS0F5; Saad Khalid, “A Statistical Look into Pakistan’s
Foreign Friendships,” Express Tribune (Karachi, Pakistan), 3 May 2015, http://
tribune.com.pk/story/880267/a-statistical-look-into-pakistans-foreign-friendships/
20 “Sri Lankan Navy Commander Visits Iran’s ‘Younus’ Submarine,” Fars News
Agency, 25 December 2013, http://en.farsnews.com/newstext.aspx?nn=13921004000902
21 “Navgurieh-e Niru-ye Darya-ye Artesh dar Sri Lanka Pehlaw Gereft” [Artesh’s
Navy’s Flotilla Docked in [Coast of] Sri Lanka], Iranian Students’ News Agency.
20 December 2013, http://www.isna.ir/news/92092919934/-‫نیروی‬-‫ناوگروه‬
‫گرفت‬-‫پهلو‬-‫سریالنکا‬-‫در‬-‫ارتش‬-‫دریایی‬.
22 “Sri Lankan Navy Commander Visits Iran’s ‘Younus’ Submarine.”
23 “Artesh’s Navy’s Flotilla Docked in [Coast of] Sri Lanka.”
24 “Iran Naval Flotilla Docks at Port of Colombo in Sri Lanka,” PressTV, 9 February 2015, http://www.presstv.com/Detail/2015/02/09/396835/Iran-naval-flotilla-docks-at-Sri-Lanka-port

(continued)

OE Watch | September 2016

69

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Sri Lanka: Iran’s New Strategic Partner?
25 “Iranian Flotilla of Warships Cross Equator,” Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, 19 February 2015, http://english.irib.ir/subcontinent/top-stories/
item/205016-iranian-flotilla-of-warships-cross-equator
26 “Commander: Iran’s Navy Ready to Train Sri Lankan Cadets,” [an incomplete
citation]
27 “Maruri bar 3 Rooz Khazur Se o Someen Navgarueh-e Iran dar Sri Lanka” [A
Review on Iranian Navy’s Three Day Presence in Sri Lanka], Marine News. 15
February 2015. http://marinenews.ir/fa/news/20814/-‫حضور‬-‫روز‬--3‫بر‬-‫مروری‬
‫سریالنکا‬-‫در‬-‫ایرانی‬-‫ناوگروه‬-‫سومین‬-‫و‬-‫سی‬
28 S.D. Bhagya Sewwandi Dissanayake, “Evolution of Iran-Sri Lanka Relations and
Its Impact on Sri Lanka,” University of Kelaniya, no date, http://www.academia.
edu/15804847/EVOLUTION_OF_IRAN-_SRI_LANKA_RELATIONS_AND_ITS_IMPACT_ON_SRI_LANK
29 Ibid.
30 Lydia Walker, “Sri Lanka and Iran: The 2030 Nuclear Power Plant and Iranian
Support,” Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, 11 February 2011.
31 “Sri Lanka also to Reap Benefits from Relaxing Iran Sanctions,” Hiru News
(Colombo), 25 November 2013, http://www.hirunews.lk/72079/sri-lanka-alsoto-reap-benefits-from-relaxing-iran-sanctions
32 “Amadgi Iran baraye Ara’eh Khodemat Feni va Mohandesi be Sri Lanka” [Iran Is
Prepared to Provide Technical and Engineering Services to Sri Lanka], Iranian
Labour News Agency. 11 April 2014, http://www.ilna.ir/-4/158757-‫اقتصادی‬-‫بخش‬
‫سریالنکا‬-‫به‬-‫مهندسی‬-‫فنی‬-‫خدمات‬-‫ارائه‬-‫برای‬-‫ایران‬-‫آمادگی‬.

33 “Taiwan va Sri Lanka Mostari Naft-e Iran Shodand” [Taiwan and Sri Lanka Became Iran’s Oil Customers], Alef. 11 March 2016, http://alef.ir/vdcaauneu49nme1.k5k4.html?352382
34 “Post-sanctions Iran Calls for Unprecedented Engagement with Sri Lanka,” Daily
News (Colombo), 28 February 2016, http://www.dailynews.lk/?q=2016/02/28/
business/post-sanctions-iran-calls-unprecedented-engagement-sri-lanka
35 “Sri Lanka Cheers End of Sanctions on Iran,” Colombo Gazette, 15 July 2015,
http://colombogazette.com/2015/07/15/sri-lanka-cheers-end-of-sanctions-oniran/
36 “Tawse’ah Hamkari Mian Iran va Sri Lanka dar Zamineh Ab va Bargh” [Developments Cooperation Between Iran and Sri Lanka on Water and Electricity],
Fars News Agency, 22 February 2016. http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.
php?nn=13941203000946.
37 “Debt-hit Sri Lanka Carrier to Lease Planes to Pakistan, Iran” Newsweek Pakistan, 22 July 2016, http://newsweekpakistan.com/debt-hit-sri-lanka-carrier-tolease-planes-to-pakistan-iran/
38 “Sri Lanka Khvastar Bakhesh Saryalha-ye Irani Shod” [Sri Lanka Requested to
Play Iranian TV Shows], Asr-e Iran. 2 October 2015. http://www.asre-iranian.ir/
fa/news/8745/‫شد‬-‫ایرانی‬-‫سلایر‌های‬-‫پخش‬-‫خواستار‬-‫سریالنکا‬
39 “’I Praise Imam Khomeini (RA)’: Sri Lankan Cardinal,” International Quran News
Agency (Tehran), 20 July, 2016, http://iqna.ir/en/news/3460355/%E2%80%9Cipraise-imam-khomeini-ra%E2%80%9D-sri-lankan-cardinal

OE Watch | September 2016

70

