fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 6
Issue #11
November 2016

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

The Mobilization of
Russian Society

MIDDLE EAST
3
4
5
6
7

Jordan and Kenya Hold Joint Military Exercise
Who Wants What in Mosul?
Crisis in Turkey-Iraq Relations
Turkey-EU Refugee Deal on the Rocks
Iran: New Heavy Engines on the Drawing
Board
8 Iran: Russia Desperate for Our UAV Technology
9 Iran: Launch of New Zulfiqar Ballistic Missile
10 The Return of Yemen’s Republican Guard
11 Aistenok 1L271: Little Storks in Aleppo
12 Egypt: Rumors Fuel Rift with Saudi,
Rapprochement with Russia

AFRICA
13
14
15
16

African Union’s Plans to Fund Peacekeeping
Ethiopia’s State of Emergency
Refugee Camp Attack in Niger
Does Boko Haram’s Alliance with ISIS Rely on
Taxing Migrant Traffickers?

LATIN AMERICA
17
17
18
18
19
19
21
22
23

Ignoring the ‘No’ in Colombia?
FARC Leader Comments on the Peace Process
A Spaniard Opines about Colombia
Venezuela Referendum to Revoke
Narco Genetics, Marijuana, and the New
Generation Cartel of Jalisco in Mexico
Organized Crime Violence in Mexico and Mass
Displacement of Communities
Trends in Mexico’s Drug Cartel Landscape
El Salvador Sees a Rise in Gangs’ Use of
Automatic Weapons
Aerial Fumigation of Cocaine No Longer an
Option in Colombia

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

24 Abu Sayyaf Growing Power Through Ransom
Money: Can It Be Stopped?
24 ISIS Infiltration in the Malaysian Military?
25 Thai Military to Use UAVs to Patrol Southern
Thailand
26 Indonesia’s Arrest of Chinese Uighurs Reveals
New Terrorism Trends in Asia

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN
27
28
29
30

Disrupting the DPRK’s Illicit Trade Activity
China Places Sensors in the South China Sea
China’s Strategic Support Force Must Innovate
Russia and Chinese Naval Exercises Show
Convergence of Interests

Special
Essay

p.63

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

31 Armenia’s Acquisition of the Iskander Ballistic
Missile System
32 Investigating the Bombing at the Chinese
Embassy in Bishkek
33 The Afghan Government’s Peace Agreement
with Gulbiddin Hekmatyar

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
35
37
40
42
46
48
49
50
52
53
54
56
57
59
60
61
62

How Russia Perceives and Responds to Threats
The Two Faces of Russia’s Operational Reserve
Russian Personnel Developments
Possible Force Structure Changes for Russia’s
Combined Arms Armies
The Material Technical Support Brigade’s Role
in Logistical Support
Russian Logistic Vehicle Modernization
Russian Military Success in Syria?
Russia’s Fitter Fighting Force
Housing for Those Who Chose Russia
Russia’s Fall 2016 Draft
Are Russian Naval Pilots Ready?
Russian-Chinese Naval Training
Details from Northern Fleet Summer Training
Exercise
Largest Arctic Exercise in History
Yet Another Specialized Weapon in the Russian
Arsenal
Improving Russian Camouflage
Russian Forecasting Methodology: In Need of
Improvement

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, and Deliver
the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil

ON THE COVER: The Kremlin and the Russian Coat of Arms.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 6 | Issue 11

November | 2016

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East

Tara Beeny
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Jason Warner
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

Indo-Pacific Asia

Cindy Hurst
Jacob Zenn

China, Korea, Japan

Steven Galluzzi
Tim Thomas
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Tyler Gartner
Les Grau
Joseph McConnell
Tim Thomas

				
Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editors

Ray Finch
Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Keith French

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Jordan and Kenya Hold Joint Military Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: In late September, the
Jordanian Armed Forces conducted a joint training
exercise with the Kenyan Defense Forces at Embakasi
Garrison in Nairobi, Kenya. The exercise occurred
alongside meetings between Jordanian and Kenyan
officials aimed at strengthening diplomatic, economic,
and military ties between the two countries. The
accompanying excerpted article from Jordanian
government-owned Petra News Agency discusses
Jordan’s outreach to Kenya. It notes that this outreach
aims to build on the “Aqaba meetings,” a series of highlevel diplomatic meetings held in Aqaba, Jordan in spring
of 2015 and early 2016 which focused on consolidating
international efforts against terrorism.
The “Swift Eagle” exercise focused on counterterrorism
and improving military interoperability. Jordan’s Quick
Reaction Force, an element of the Jordanian Special
Forces, along with elements of the Kenyan Special Forces
took part in the exercise. Jordan’s Quick Reaction Force
was established to provide a rapid-response capability
to confront emerging crises, particularly along Jordan’s
vulnerable desert borders. The Kenyan military’s interest
in training with this force reflects the similarity between
the challenges Jordan faces in securing itself against the
Islamic State and Al Qaeda, and those that Kenya faces
with confronting Al Shabaab along its northern border.
The exercise received broad coverage by the Jordanian
media. Al-Ghad and state-run JRTV carried video of
portions of the exercise, including footage of an MD-530F
multi-role helicopter, one of half a dozen in service with
the Jordanian Special Forces. Jordan’s King Abdullah II
and Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta both attended the
joint military training exercise.
As mentioned in the excerpted article, Swift Eagle
marks the first exercise implemented by the Quick
Reaction Force outside of Jordan, depending entirely
upon its own resources, capabilities, weapons, and
equipment. These developments indicate the growing
capabilities of Jordan’s military, and Jordan’s growing
influence outside the Arab world. End OE Watch
Commentary (Beeny)

“...this exercise is the first military exercise implemented
by the Quick Reaction Force outside the kingdom,
depending entirely upon its own resources, capabilities, as
well as its own weapons and equipment.”

King Abdullah II of Jordan and President Uhuru Kenyatta of Kenya watch Exercise Swift Eagle at
the Embakasi Garrison, Kenya.
Source: Jordan Armed Forces, http://www.jaf.mil.jo/NewsView.aspx?NewsId=2359#.WAZZ8HowCI5

Source:
‫الملك يجري مباحثات مع الرئيس الكيني في نيروبي‬
“King holds talks with Kenyan president in Nairobi.” Petra News Agency, 27
September 2016. http://www.petra.gov.jo/Public_News/Nws_NewsDetails.
aspx?lang=1&site_id=2&NewsID=270263&Type=P

Quick Reaction Force implements first self-sufficient exercise
outside Jordan
With regard to the regional situation, His Majesty stressed enhancing joint
coordination, cooperation, and continuing consultation on priority issues,
especially to address the threat of terrorism and terrorist groups, which threaten
the security and stability of the Middle East, the countries of the Horn of Africa,
and the world.
Also discussed were efforts to enhance security and stability for the peoples
of the Middle East and Africa and cooperation between their countries to face
common challenges, and to emphasize the importance of building on the results
of last year’s Aqaba meetings, where His Majesty the King gathered a number
of heads of state and dignitaries, including President of Kenya and the heads of
several African countries, as part of a comprehensive participatory approach to
coordinate international efforts in the war on terrorism.
His Majesty the King and President Kenyatta attended a joint military exercise
carried out by the Quick Reaction Force of the Jordanian Armed Forces-Arab
Army and Kenyan military Special Forces.

Jordan and Kenya hold joint-military training exercises.
Source: Al-Ghad TV, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lijrKic7wTM

It is noteworthy that this exercise is the first military exercise implemented
by the Quick Reaction Force outside the kingdom, depending entirely upon its
own resources, capabilities, as well as its own weapons and equipment, as this
force was formed to be a flexible and self-sufficient force, able to carry out tasks
assigned to it in various circumstances.
OE Watch | November 2016

3

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Who Wants What in Mosul?
OE Watch Commentary: The battle for Mosul, the
last ISIS stronghold in Iraq, has begun. On 17 October,
Iraqi forces and Kurdish forces (peshmerga), backed by
coalition air-power, launched what is expected to be a long
and complex operation to re-take the city. However, there
are various other groups with competing interests who also
want to take part in the operation, with hopes of having a
role in the future of Mosul. The accompanying passages
help decipher each of these groups and their interests in this
critical operation.

“[An] Iraqi military, which should be a national actor,
does not really exist. There are Shia militia forces, Sunni
Arab tribes, and Kurdish forces in Iraq.”

The question of who would take part in the effort
to liberate Mosul has been a complicated one. As the
accompanying passages show, there are six competing
forces, with competing interests for the future of the city:
• The Iraqi security forces of the central Iraqi government
in Baghdad; whose goal is to ensure Iraqi unity and
territorial integrity;
• The Kurdish peshmerga-- the forces controlled by
Masoud Barzani, President of the Iraqi Kurdistan
Region; who would like to expand their autonomous
region to include disputed lands in Ninevah province;
• The Shia Popular Mobilization Units (“Hashd al-Shaabi”an umbrella military organization composed of some
40 predominantly Shia militia groups); whose goal is to
push the Kurdish peshmerga from disputed areas inside
Ninevah province;
• The Sunni militia (2000-3000 militias, formerly known
as “Hashd al-Watani”; and who recently changed their
name to the “Nineveh Guard”); most of whom are trained
by Turkey and located around Bashiqa-- 13 miles east of
Mosul; and want a future role in Mosul as a police force;
• The Turkish Army; whose goal is to ensure that the PKK
does not take part in the operation; to contain Kurdish
expansion and to protect Turkish interests post-IS;
• The PKK, who are based in Sinjar and Qandil, and want
to play a role in Mosul in order to link up with Syrian
Kurds, across the border.
As the country’s second largest city, Mosul has high
symbolic and strategic value for ISIS. It was here that
the group’s chief Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi proclaimed a
caliphate two years ago. The operation entails many
tactical challenges including booby-trapped buildings,
human shields, and the prospect of a huge refugee crisis.
Further complicating the issue is Iraq’s internal divisions,
as discussed. Thus, the battle for Mosul is exposing
fractures that will threaten Iraq even after IS is cleared.
(For more information, see: “Iraq: The Tactical and Political
Challenges of the Mosul Offensive,” OE Watch, Sept 2016).
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

The Tigris River as it flows through Mosul, Iraq, as seen from a UH-60 Blackhawk from the
101st Airborne Division (Air Assault), 9th Aviation Battalion, A Company, June 16, 2003
during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Source: US Army photo by Sgt. Michael Bracken. https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/c/ca/Tigris_river_Mosul.jpg

Source: Ceyda Karan, “‘Türkiye’nin stratejisinin bumeranga dönme riski
var’” Sputnik News in Turkish, 5 October 2016, https://tr.sputniknews.com/
ceyda_karan_eksen/201610051025156676-turkiye-irak-musul-operasyonu/
“As far as we can see, an Iraqi military, which should be a national actor,
does not really exist. There are Shiite militia forces, Sunni Arab tribes, and
Kurdish forces in Iraq. All of these armed actors are sub-national actors.”
Source: ”Musul PKK için ‘meşruiyet’ kapısı mı? (Is Mosul a door to
Legitimacy for the PKK?),” Al Monitor, 12 April 2016, http://www.almonitor.com/pulse/tr/originals/2016/04/turkey-iraq-syria-pkk-interest-inmosul.html
“Why is [the PKK]... an whose main area of interest is Turkey’s Kurdish
regions, so interested in Mosul? ....by creating an area it can control in
Mosul, the PKK will be protecting both Sinjar and the Kurdish region in
Syria.”
Source: Tolga Tanış, “Musul Parametreleri (Mosul Parameters),” Hurriyet.
com.tr, 9 October 2016, http://sosyal.hurriyet.com.tr/yazar/tolga-tanis_322/
musul-parametreleri_40243557
“[For Turkey] there is the PKK issue. There is a PKK presence in Sinjar-100 miles east of Mosul, and in Mahmur--60 miles south of Mosul.... They
are a force of about 1500-2000... Their participation in the Mosul operation
is a red-line for Turkey.... “
Source: Amberin Zaman, “Iraqi Kurds step into Ankara-Baghdad row,” Al
Monitor, 6 October 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2016/10/turkey-iraq-row-deepens-mosul-krg-kurds-isis.html
“The Iraqi Kurds view the Turkish presence as insurance against the
predominantly Shiite Popular Mobilization Units possibly trying to seize
upon the Mosul campaign to push KRG peshmerga from disputed areas
inside Ninevah province that had been abandoned by the Iraqi army when
IS struck in summer 2014.”
OE Watch | November 2016

4

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Crisis in Turkey-Iraq Relations
OE Watch Commentary: On
1 October, the Turkish parliament
extended the mandate for military
operations in Iraq and Syria
by one year. Iraq’s parliament
responded by branding Turkish
troops in Iraq (in the Bashiqa
training camp near Mosul) as
“occupiers” and demanded their
withdrawal. The situation has
raised tensions between Ankara
and Baghdad, amid the important
operation to retake Mosul from
ISIS. The accompanying passages
from the Turkish press discusses
Turkey’s perspective on the
situation and why it insists on
having a role to play in the Mosul
offensive.

“Whatever the Iraqi government in Baghdad says, the Turkish presence

will continue to be there to fight ISIS and to prevent the demographic
structure from being changed by force. Saying such things about Turkey,
who has been present in the region with its historical depth, when a number
of countries who are not local [to the region] are present there, is not up to
the Iraqi government.”
— Turkish Prime Minister

The first passage highlights
comments by Turkish Prime
Minister Binali Yıldırım on 7 October, summarizing
Turkey’s stance. Yıldırım notes that Turkish troops will
stay in Bashiqa to train local forces to fight ISIS, and
to prevent Mosul from losing its [Sunni] identity. As
the second passage explains, Turkey considers Mosul to
be a Sunni city and sees a plot aimed at ridding it of its
Sunni population in favor of Shias. The passage notes
Turkish President Erdoğan’s comments that Turkey
will prevent an effort to alter Mosul’s demographic
composition. Mainly, Turkey does not want Iraqi Shia
militia who Turkey believes are under Iranian influence,
to enter Mosul during the operation.
The third passage notes that Ankara wants to
prevent the outlawed terrorist group PKK from
taking advantage of the Mosul operation to expand
its influence in the region. To this end, Turkey trained
3,000 Sunni Muslim and allied Kurdish peshmerga
units at the Bashiqa camp near Mosul, and has secured a
role for around half of them to take part in the operation.
Turkish troops have been present at a number
of bases in northern Iraq, since the early 1990’s to
respond to terrorist threats from the PKK. However,
tensions between Turkey and Iraq arose in late 2015,
when Ankara augmented its forces in the Bashiqa
training camp. In December 2015, Ankara sent a
battalion-size force from the 3rd Commando Brigade,
supported by some twenty-five M-60A3 tanks fighters
to train Sunni forces and Kurds to fight ISIS during
the Mosul operation. Iraq views Turkey’s military
presence there as an open violation of its sovereignty,
and wants Turkish troops to withdraw. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya).

Binali Yıldırım

Turkish Altay tank.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turkish_Altay_tank.png

Source: “Türk askeri Başika’da kalacak! (Turkish troops will stay in
Bashiqa!),” Gazetevatan.com, 7 October 2016, http://www.gazetevatan.com/
turk-askeri-basika-da-kalacak--992883-gundem/
“Prime Minister Binali Yıldırım made harsh statements about the Bashiqa
crisis. Yildirim responded to the Baghdad government, who called the Turkish
troops in Bashiqa ‘invaders’ and who asked them to withdraw, as follows:
“Whatever the Iraqi government in Baghdad says, the Turkish presence will
continue to be there to fight ISIS and to prevent the demographic structure
from being changed by force. Saying such things about Turkey, who has been
present in the region with its historical depth, when a number of countries
who are not local [to the region] are present there, is not up to the Iraqi
government.”
Source: Semih Idiz, “Turks blame US, Iran for encouraging Baghdad against
Ankara,” Al Monitor, 11 October 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2016/10/turkey-iraq-bashiqa-ankara-blame-united-states-and-iran.
html#ixzz4NIhRi5UN
Islamist Turks... consider Mosul to be a Sunni city and see a plot aimed at
ridding it of its Sunni population in favor of Shias. In his address to parliament
recently, Erdoğan referred to an effort to alter Mosul’s demographic
composition and said Turkey would do its utmost to prevent this...
During an interview with the Saudi Rotana TV two days later, Erdoğan
spelled it out more clearly and said Mosul should remain a Sunni city after
being cleared of the Islamic State (IS)...
Source: Tolga Tanış, “Musul Parametreleri (Mosul Parameters),” Hurriyet.
com.tr, 9 October 2016, http://sosyal.hurriyet.com.tr/yazar/tolga-tanis_322/
musul-parametreleri_40243557
“There is the PKK issue. There is a PKK presence in Sinjar-- 100 miles east
of Mosul, and ...60 miles south of Mosul.... Their participation in the Mosul
operation is a red-line for Turkey.... “
OE Watch | November 2016

5

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Turkey-EU Refugee Deal on the Rocks
OE Watch Commentary: In March
2016, Turkey and the European Union (EU)
signed a complicated agreement aimed to
curb the flood of refugees into Europe. The
accompanying passages discuss that this deal
now appears to be on the verge of collapse.
As the first passage discusses, according
to the agreement, Turkey would reaccept all
illegal migrants (including Syrian refugees)
who entered Greece from Turkey as of 20
March 2016. In exchange, Turkey would
get visa-free travel for its citizens to the
Schengen zone of Europe as of June 2016;
and financial support of three billion euros to
improve the lives of the three million Syrians
living in Turkey. The sides had also agreed
to renew negotiations for Turkey to join the
EU.
While there are many problematic issues
surrounding the agreement, with both
sides claiming that the other has not met its
obligations, one of the key sticking points
is the status of legal and political conditions
in Turkey, particularly after July 2016. This
is key because European law stipulates
that migrants can only be returned to ‘safe
countries’. The second passage notes Greece’s
refusal to comply with the agreement
due to their refusal to accept Turkey as a
‘safe country of origin’. The third passage
highlights Italian concerns on the same issue.
The final passage includes comments by
Gerald Knaus, the head of the European
Stability Initiative, that if the deal with
Turkey collapses, hundreds of thousands of
refugees would reach the shores of Greece
from the sea and its northern land borders,
turning the Balkans into “a war zone for
refugees, traffickers, border guards and
troops.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya).

“...if the deal with Turkey collapses, hundreds of thousands of
refugees would reach the shores of Greece from the sea and its
northern land borders, turning the Balkans into “a war zone for
refugees, traffickers, border guards and troops.”
Source: “Türkiye ile AB arasında kriz artık sadece zaman meselesi (A crisis between Turkey
and the EU is just a matter of time),” Al Monitor, 15 August 2016, http://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/tr/originals/2016/08/turkey-european-union-crisis-matter-of-time.html
“The refugee deal [between Turkey and the EU] entailed Turkey’s reacceptance of all illegal
migrants who entered Greece from Turkey as of 20 March 2016; in exchange for visa-free
travel for Turkish citizens to Europe as of June 2016. This has not happened. All signs are
pointing to the reality that visa-free travel will not happen in 2016.”
Source: “EU-Turkey Refugee Deal Dying in the Greek Islands,” Der Spiegel, 18 October
2016. http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/refugee-situation-in-greece-a-threat-toturkey-eu-deal-a-1117013.html
“According to the agreement, migrants should actually be held in the Greek island camps,
registered and then sent back to Turkey after accelerated proceedings. Greek authorities,
however, have not acceded to Brussels’ demand to recognize Turkey as a “safe country of
origin.” Instead, they are examining each case individually to determine if the applicant has
the right to protection in Europe.”
Source: “İtalya’da ‘AB-Türkiye mülteci anlaşması durdurulsun’ çağrısı (Italians call for
‘stopping the EU-Turkey refugee deal’),” BBC in Turkish, 21 July 2016, http://www.bbc.com/
turkce/haberler-turkiye-36855355
Following the events in Turkey after the coup attempt, there are calls from Italy to end the
refugee deal between Turkey and the EU... The Head of the [Italian] House of Representatives
Laura Boldrini said that Turkey does not meet the legal and political standards that the
agreement requires and thus cannot be considered a safe country, calling for the EU to halt
the agreement. Boldrini argued that the management of refugees should be done directly by
the EU, and that otherwise ‘the EU would lose its authority’.
Source: “Türkiye ile mülteci anlaşması çökerse kaos yaşanacak (If the refugee deal with
Turkey collapses, there will be chaos),” Sabah, 19 October 2016, http://www.sabah.com.tr/
dunya/2016/10/19/turkiye-ile-multeci-anlasmasi-cokerse-kaos-yasanacak
Gerald Knaus [the head of the European Stability Initiative], said that if the deal with Turkey
collapses, hundreds of thousands of refugees would reach the shores of Greece from the sea
and its northern land borders, turning the Balkans into “a war zone for refugees, traffickers,
border guards and troops.”

Tim Thomas’s Recasting the Red Star describes Russia’s
culture of military thought through its modernization
effort. Adding to his robust library of work on the
subject, Tim Thomas illuminates Russia’s Defense
Ministry reform efforts, the Russian national security
strategy take on the operational environment, and a
relevant review of the Russian military doctrine.
OE Watch | November 2016

6

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: New Heavy Engines on the Drawing Board
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian government appears to be
doubling down on its indigenous military aircraft industry. This
is interesting given that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(and corollary UN Security Council Resolution 2231) enables it to
import defensive weaponry immediately, and offensive weaponry
in seven years. The latest announcement of military advances—
excerpted from an article from Fars News but which appeared in
similar forms in many other Iranian defense outlets—notes that the
Iranian government has unveiled a new jet engine manufacturing
capability.
According to the piece, the first Iranian national turbojet aircraft
will be a spring board for the development of heavy turbojet
and turbofan engines. While jet engines may be standard for
aircraft, the turbofan enables greater thrust. However, in terms
of aerodynamics, it can obstruct the supersonic flight needed for
military jet fighters. The turbojet, meanwhile, could potentially
enable Iran to build military craft that exceed the speed of sound;
the Concorde used turbojet engines to reach speeds of Mach 2.0.
Photos indicate a similarity to the General Electric J85.
The Iranian indigenous military industry appears to be reverse
engineering jet airplane parts. This may complicate issues relating
to the potential sale of 100 Boeing aircraft to Iran, especially since
the seating capacity for such a sale exceeds the current total of
Iranian civilian air traffic by a factor of at least three. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The next step in heavy engine design is expected
within two years.”
Source: “Tarahi va Sakht-e Motorha-ye Sangin-e Turbojet va Turbofan
Zarif 2 Ayandeh, (Design and Construction of Heavy Turbojet and
Turbofan Engines within Two Years),” Fars News, 13 September 2016,
http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13950623000873

New Jet Engines to be Constructed within Two Years
Gen. Hossein Dehghan, minister of Defense and Armed Force
Logistics, celebrating those who designed and built the first national
turbojet aircraft, dubbed the ‘Owj,’ and speaking about the design
and construction of the engine, talked about national pride and the
development as a spring board for the development of heavy turbojet
and turbofan engines. Dehghan said these outstanding achievements
are the result of a collective effort, jihad, and the sincere cooperation
of all sectors of the aviation agency toward a common goal, and he
added, “This is for the honor, value, and pleasure of all the nation of
Iran.” He said that the Owj motor was the result of the cooperation
and collaboration of the Islamic Republic of Iran Army Air Force, 30
specialist companies, and ten universities with the Defense Ministry’s
Aviation Industries Organization and he said the next step in this heavy
engine turbojet and turbofan design and construction is expected to be
concluded within the next two years.

President Rouhani unveils the Owj (“Zenith”) turbojet, August 2016.
Source: Tasnim News, goo.gl/QliVdF

OE Watch | November 2016

7

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Russia Desperate for Our UAV Technology
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) program may have its origins in the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq War,
but it has become perhaps the most rapidly expanding element of Iran’s
indigenous military industry. In recent months, the Iranian government
has announced breakthroughs in GPS-guidance for UAVs as well
as new models of long-range surveillance, attack, and even a line of
supposedly stealth drones modeled after the captured US RQ-170
Sentinel.
While the Iranian government has, in the past, exaggerated its
military industrial accomplishments, its willingness to export UAV
technology is plausible. It appears to have sold its Mohajer-2 drone
to Venezuela, and the Ababil-3 to Sudan. It has also reportedly
provided drones to Armenia. Iranian officials have acknowledged
manufacturing drones abroad and bragged not only about sending
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to operate drones in Syria
and Iraq, but also proliferating directly to Shi’ite militias in Iraq and
Lebanese Hezbollah.
It is against this backdrop that the excerpted article from a news
portal close to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in interesting.
The piece notes the Iranian Chief of Staff’s statement that Russia
has sought Iranian help on the science of long-range drones. On the
sidelines of the 2015 Maks Air Show, the Head of Iran’s Aviation
Industries Organization Manouchehr Manteghi had said that Russia
had sought out Iranian drone technology. While at the time that
appeared to be an exaggeration, the fact that the chief-of-staff for
the Iranian armed forces is repeating the technology-sharing claim
suggests that the relationship between the Iranian UAV industry
and Russia may be deeper. Part of this may relate to the RQ-170, the
exploitation of whose technology Iranian officials reportedly allowed
Russian and Chinese engineers to participate.
Also interesting is the open acknowledgment that Iranian military
industries are using the conflicts in Syria and Iraq as laboratories
to test new platforms and weaponry. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

“The Russians have sought our help on the
science of long-range drones”
Source: “Rusiya Shadidan Donbal Komak-e Iran baraye Dastyabe
beh ‘Ilm-e Pehpadha-ye Durbarad Ast (Russia Strongly Seeking
Iran’s Help on Achieving Long-Range Drone Technology),”
Tasnim News, 25 September 2016. www.tasnimnews.com/fa/
news/1395/07/04/1195227/-‫به‬-‫دستیابی‬-‫برای‬-‫ایران‬-‫کمک‬-‫دنبال‬-ً‫شدیدا‬-‫روسیه‬
‫است‬-‫دوربرد‬-‫پهپادهای‬-‫علم‬

Iran Says Russia Desperate for Iranian UAV
Technology
Major General Mohammad Bagheri, chief of staff for the Armed
Forces, this morning at a ceremony at the Supreme National
Defense University, said the Holy Defense can be studied from
different aspects, and one aspect of that was knowledge and the
creation of knowledge for the future. The Sacred Defense can
be viewed from this heroic aspect, but it can also be examined
from the scientific aspect. After the Sacred Defense, I entered a
geography program and I studied and I realized the depth that we
achieved with Operation Valfajr-8, and about 15 battalions crossed
the river which until now has not been experienced anywhere in the
world, and knowledge of that doesn’t exist.
The chief of staff of the armed forces said that so much knowledge
came out of wars, and pointed out that knowledge can come from
such basic things, and even today with Syria and Iraq in combat
against terrorists, can also be a competition for the production of
knowledge.
Gen. Bagheri said, today long-range drones are able to identify
and target a base of one square meter, and the knowledge of these
are at the disposal of one of two countries. He stated, the Russians
have sought our help on the science of long-range drones. The
Americans have this knowledge and, certainly because of them, the
Israelis do too.

Iran’s New “Saegheh” (Thunderbolt) UAV
Source: Alalam.ir, http://goo.gl/ck9IcB

OE Watch | November 2016

8

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Launch of New Zulfiqar Ballistic Missile
OE Watch Commentary: Many claim that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, the so-called nuclear deal, does not lift sanctions on Iran’s ballistic missile
program. In March 2016, several UN ambassadors sent a letter to U.N. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon saying that Iran’s multiple ballistic tests involving nuclearwarhead capable missiles were “inconsistent with” and “in defiance of” UN Security
Council Resolution 2231.
Nevertheless, Iran’s ballistic missile program remains increasingly public. While
some are most concerned with the potential for long-range ballistic missiles (the
development of which the Iranian government conducts under the guise of a satellite
launch program), the Iranians conduct significantly more work in shorter-range
missiles. In the article excerpted here from an Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
portal, the minister of defense discusses the successful launch of a new Zulfiqar
missile with a range of 435-miles. (The missile is named for the sword which the
Prophet Muhammad gave to the Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib ahead of the 625 AD Battle
of Uhud). The new missile was included in a military parade in Bandar Abbas, Iran’s
main Persian Gulf port.
While Israel remains outside the range of the new Zulfiqar missile, other potential
targets—Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Manama, Bahraini; Ankara, Turkey; and Karachi,
Pakistan—are well within its range. This represents a significant upgrade from the
SCUD-C’s which Iran acquired from North Korea. Thus, Iran’s ballistic missile
advancements will spark greater regional concern and potentially catalyze a missile
race between Gulf Cooperation Council states and Iran.
Minister of Defense Hossein Dehghan has also suggested that the Zulfiqar may only
be the first of several new announcements relating to Iran’s ballistic missile arsenal.
He stated that Iran would unveil the “Ghadir solid-fuel missile,” the “Sejjil precisionguided missile,” and the “Khoramshahr” missile before the end of the Persian year in
March 2017. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The rocket has significantly increased
the strength of the armed forces.”
Source: “Avalin Tasavir az Lahzeh-e Shalik-e
Mushak-e Balistik Zulfiqar (The First Images from
the Moment the Zulfiqar Ballistic Missile was
Launched),” Mashregh News, 25 September 2016,
www.mashreghnews.ir/fa/news/635137/-‫تصویر‬-‫اولین‬
‫ذوالفقار‬-‫بالستیک‬-‫موشک‬-‫شلیک‬-‫لحظه‬-‫از‬

The Zulfiqar Ballistic Missile Unveiled
The first images from the moment of firing the
Zulfiqar ballistic missiles have been published.
The production line of this missile was opened
to coincide with Sacred Defense week and in the
presence of Gen. Dehghan, Minister of Defense
and Armed Forces Logistics. The Zulfiqar missile
is a ground-to-ground, single-stage solid fuel
missile which is able to hit and destroy targets at
a range of 700 kilometers [435 miles]. Its mobile
and self-propelled launch pad, stealth, precision,
and tactical style, are other special features of the
Zulfiqar. With its incorporation into the armed
forces, the rocket has significantly increased their
strength and combat power. The Zulfiqar missile
was unveiled for the first time in the military parade
in Bandar Abbas.

Zulfiqar missile on display, unveiled for the first time
in a Bandar Abbas, September 26, 2016.
Source: Mashregh News, http://goo.gl/3UuJZ3

OE Watch | November 2016

9

MIDDLE EAST

Top

The Return of Yemen’s Republican Guard
OE Watch Commentary: When Ali
Abdullah Saleh resigned from Yemen’s
presidency in late 2011, he did not relinquish
control over the country’s best-equipped
forces, most importantly the Yemeni
Republican Guard (YRG). Nearly five
turbulent years later and after attempts by both
the transitional government and the Huthis
to bring the YRG into their own chain of
command, Saleh loyalists continue to hold the
most sway in the YRG.
The post-Saleh transitional period (20122014) sought to tame the YRG by dismissing
Saleh family members from top YRG
command posts and replacing them with
career officers from the conventional forces.
The YRG was merged with other units and
became the “Reserve Forces.” Major General
Ali al-Jaifi, a veteran of North Yemen’s Army,
was nominally put in charge of the Reserve
Forces.
The restructuring was successful on paper,
but its limits were laid bare when in September
2014 the Huthis overran Sana’a and expelled
the Saudi-backed interim government, with
little to no resistance from the Reserve Forces.
In the ensuing months, the Huthi Movement
sought to bring the Reserve Forces into its
own chain of command by courting al-Jaifi,
appointing Huthi loyalists to key military
positions, and incorporating hundreds of their
followers into Reserve Forces ranks.
As the first accompanying excerpt notes,
in August 2016 the Reserve Forces went
back to being called the Republican Guard.
A few weeks later, rumors emerged that
Saleh’s nephew Tariq, former commander
of an elite YRG brigade, would replace alJaifi. He later denied this in a Tweet, which
is translated alongside this commentary. Ali
al-Jaifi was killed in the Saudi coalition’s 8
October bombing of a funeral ceremony in
Sana’a. The following day, Ali Abdullah Saleh
called on military units to head to fronts on
the border with Saudi Arabia, in particular
addressing units that had been restructured
during the transitional period. According to
the fourth accompanying article, al-Jaifi will
be replaced by Lt. Gen. Murad al-Awbali, a
staunch loyalist from Saleh’s Sanhan tribe.
Al-Awbali has been in charge of the YRG 62d
Brigade in Arhab since 2012. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“… I call…on the armed and security forces that were included in
the restructuring… to head to the fighting fronts on the border to
— Ali Abdullah Saleh
exact revenge …”

Ali Abdullah Saleh
Source: Helene C. Stikkel [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAli_Abdullah_Saleh_2004.jpg

Source:
‫الحوثي يوجه بإعادة تسمية قوات االحتياط الموالية لصالح إلى قوات الحرس الجمهوري‬
“Al-Huthi Calls for pro-Saleh Reserve Forces to be Called Republican Guard Again.”
Yemen Press. 3 August 2016. http://yemen-press.com/news78904.html
The head of the Supreme Revolutionary Council Mohammed Ali al-Huthi, called on
Wednesday for the Reserve Forces loyal to former president Ali Abdullah Saleh to once
again be called the Republican Guard, which is the name they used before restructuring.
Source: Tariq Mohammed Saleh @tarikyemen, Twitter Feed (Arabic). 26 August 2016.
https://twitter.com/tarikyemen/status/769293237165187072
“There has been no change in the leadership of the Republican Guard. Brig. Gen. Ali alJaifi remains in his position. The political leadership will find no one better suited to lead
the Republican Guard.”
Source:
‫نص كلمة الزعيم علي عبدهللا صالح عن جريمة القاعة الكبرى‬
“Text from the Speech by Leader Ali Abdullah Saleh on the Great Hall Crime.” alMotamar. 9 October 2016. http://www.almotamar.net/news/132653.htm
The time has come and I call on all members of the armed forces, security service and
popular committees, and in particular on the armed and security forces that were included
in the restructuring by the fugitive Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi, to head to the fighting fronts
on the border to exact revenge…
Source:
‫أنباء عن تكليف العوبلي قائد للحرس الجمهوري خلفا اللجائفي‬
“Report that al-Awbali Replaces al-Jaifi as Republican Guard Leader,” Yemen Press. 11
October 2016. http://yemen-press.com/news83024.html
A military source claimed that the pro-coup defense ministry appointed Lt. Gen. Murad
al-Awbali, commander of the Republican Guard’s 62d Brigade, as the Republican Guard’s
new commander in place of the martyred Brig. Gen. Ali bin Ali al-Jaifi, who was killed in
the Great Hall in Sana’a.
OE Watch | November 2016

10

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Aistenok 1L271: Little Storks in Aleppo
OE Watch Commentary: On
12 September, the Russian Defense
Ministry hosted a press briefing
to mark the start of the USRussia backed ceasefire in Syria.
At the briefing and speaking via
videoconference from Aleppo, Syrian
Brig. Gen. Nizar Mohammed Sayid
requested that the Russians provide
his forces with artillery monitoring
systems to help identify ceasefire
violations. Russian Lt. Gen. Sergei
Rudskoy responded that the request
would be considered. Three days later,
the Syrian military officially thanked
the Russians for providing them with
the Russian Aistenok 1L271 Portable
Artillery Reconnaissance Radar
System, as the first accompanying
article notes.

Syrian Commander (upper left corner) thanking Russian military for providing Aistenok radar system (9/15/16).
Source: https://twitter.com/C_Military1/status/776480650148900864

The Aistenok 1L271 (Little Stork) system can be used to monitor artillery fire,
as the second accompanying excerpt explains. In the context of a truce, Syrian
forces would use it to pinpoint the location of violations so as to inform the
ceasefire monitoring body. More importantly, the system can be used to convey
targeting information for quick and precise counter-battery fire. With the collapse
of the ceasefire, Syrian units will presumably begin employing the Aistenok
system in this manner.
Improvised rocket-assisted munitions fired from rebel-held areas have been an
ongoing concern in government-held parts of both Aleppo and Damascus. The
1L271 radar system, combined with advanced Russian artillery systems, would
greatly boost the Syrian military’s ability to suppress rebel shelling. Though the
Aistenok has a fairly limited range, it is mobile and can be quickly deployed by
small teams, making it ideal for contested urban environments with static fronts
like Aleppo, Syria or Donetsk, Ukraine. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… The Russian

armed forces have
more powerful
reconnaissance radar
systems in service, but
it is “Aistenok” that
is most mobile and
significantly increases
the firepower of
artillery…”
Aistenok Portable Reconnaissance
Radar System
Source: By Allocer (Own work) [CC
BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://
www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], via
Wikimedia Commons

Source:
‫دمشق تتوجه بالشكر لوزارة الدفاع الروسية‬
“Damascus Thanks the Russian Defense Ministry,”
Sputnik News. 15 September 2016. https://arabic.
sputniknews.com/arab_world/20160915/1020155895.
html
Over a videoconference with the Russian Defense
Ministry’s National Center for Coordinating Operations,
the Syrian government’s spokesman said: “Allow me to
thank you for providing us with the Aistenok Artillery
Monitoring System, which has made the ability to
monitoring the ceasefire regime much more effective.”
Source: “New Portable Radar to Help Reduce Battlefield
‘Accidents’,” Russia & India Report. 31 March 2015.
https://in.rbth.com/economics/2015/03/31/new_portable_
radar_to_help_reduce_battlefield_accidents_42295
The system weighs 135 kg and is modular. This enables
reconnaissance units to relocate “Aistenok” by car and
even manually, with 3-4 people… At very short distances
it can track mortar rounds from 81 to 120 mm during
flight. Additionally, the system calculates the mortar
flight parameters and determines its launching or landing
point. Calculating the launching point allows accurate
retaliatory strikes against enemy mortar, calculating and
adjusting the landing point… It is effective to control the
firing of artillery from 122 to 152 mm caliber. The radar
pinpoints explosions of projectiles and calculates their
location at a distance of 10 km, accordingly adjusting
the fire… The Russian armed forces have more powerful
reconnaissance radar systems in service, but it is
“Aistenok” that is most mobile and significantly increases
the firepower of artillery.
OE Watch | November 2016

11

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Egypt: Rumors Fuel Rift with Saudi,
Rapprochement with Russia
“… Egypt is changing, playing all of its cards
OE Watch Commentary: There has been an uptick in speculation
that Egypt is realigning its regional policies away from Saudi Arabia
and toward Russia. The latest development backing this claim was
a joint Russian-Egyptian military exercise called “Defenders of
Friendship 2016,” announced in early October and held two weeks
later. According to the first accompanying excerpt, this was the first
time that Russian paratroopers trained on African territory with their
own weapons and equipment. Citing the Russian Defense Ministry,
the excerpt adds that the drills aim to give Russian paratroopers
experience in the desert, and test new uniforms and parachutes in
a hot environment. Further evidence for those noticing a CairoMoscow rapprochement came a few days after the exercises were
announced, when the Russian newspaper Izvestia claimed that Russia
was negotiating to rehabilitate and lease a former Soviet naval base
in Sidi Barrani, on Egypt’s Mediterranean coast near the border with
Libya. Egyptian authorities denied the rumor the following day.
Growing cooperation with Russia is straining Egypt’s relations
with Saudi Arabia. In late August, for instance, hundreds of Sunni
Muslim scholars met in Grozny to discuss Sunni identity. Egypt sent
a high-level delegation that included the country’s Mufti and the head
of al-Azhar, Egypt’s main center of Islamic teaching. Saudi Arabia’s
religious authorities were absent, and the final communiqué excluded
Saudi Arabia’s Salafi-Wahhabism from its definition of conventional
Sunni practice.
In October, Egypt voted in favor of a Russian-sponsored United
Nations Security Council Resolution regarding Syria. Egypt also
voted for a competing French- and Spanish-sponsored resolution that
was backed by Saudi Arabia. The pro-Russian vote, though, was seen
as an affront given the massive Saudi transfers of cash and fuel to
Egypt over the past three years. Shortly after the vote, Saudi Arabia
threatened to halt monthly fuel subsidies to the Egyptian government.
Although the Saudi and Egyptian governments have been keen
to minimize the alleged rift, there are limits to their control over
the rumor mill. As noted in the second accompanying article from
the news website al-Rai al-Youm, President Sisi of Egypt recently
instructed Egypt’s main dailies to tone down their rhetoric toward
Saudi Arabia. At the same time, he acknowledged the limits of state
control over privately owned outlets and social media exchanges,
which are where the rift is being enflamed and risks reverberating out
of control.
One of the Egyptian government’s most strident and influential
media opponents is the independent daily al-Araby al-Jadid, which
recently published an article claiming that Egyptian navy officers
have supported the anti-Saudi forces in Yemen for several months,
even providing them with “a dozen advanced military boats.” At the
time of writing, a rumor that Egypt had dropped out of the Saudi
coalition in Yemen was making the rounds in social media. Relations
between Egypt and Saudi Arabia may be “clear as a cloudless sky”
beneath the surface, as President Sisi claims, but they are looking
increasingly stormy from above. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

and exerting pressure however it can…”

Source: “New Uniforms & Parachutes: Russian Forces in Egypt
Decked Out With Latest Gear,” Sputnik. 8 October 2016. https://
sputniknews.com/military/201610081046134583-russian-equipmentegypt-drills/
The drills, meant to simulate the destruction of terrorist groups in
a desert environment, will be the first-ever deployment of Russian
Airborne Troops stocked with their own weapons and equipment on
the African continent. Late last week, the Defense Ministry said that
Russian Airborne Forces’ troops would be equipped with brand new
uniforms, developed specifically for hot climates and featuring high
capacity thermoregulation and humidity resistance. On Saturday,
the Defense Ministry said that Russian forces will also be using
the latest parachutes – the Arbalet (‘Crossbow’) series of steerable
parachutes… The Arbalet series of parachutes is used by special
forces and reconnaissance units of the Russian Airborne Forces, and
was successfully tested in the Artic earlier this year…
Source:
‫السيسي يستخدم االعالم نفسه الذي اجج االزمة مع السعودية للتهدئة‬
“Sisi Uses the Same Media Outlets that Inflamed the Crisis with
Saudi Arabia to Calm it,” al-Rai al-Youm. 16 October 2016. http://
www.raialyoum.com/?p=543330
… This became clear after President Sisi’s meeting with Egypt’s
three main newspapers, in which he said “media treatment and
social media discussions are what have created this picture (of a
crisis); relations between Saudi and Egypt, however, are clear as
a cloudless sky”… Egypt has decided to return to Russian tutelage
by rehabilitating the Russian Naval Base in Sidi Barrani and
participating in major exercises with Russian forces… it has not to
this date publicly condemned the missile shot from Yemeni territory
controlled by the Huthis which struck and destroyed a UAE ship…
Egypt is changing, playing all of its cards and exerting pressure
however it can. The problem is Saudi leadership has not understood
these and other changes in the region…
Source:
‫أسلحة مصرية للحوثيين وقنوات اتصال مع االستخبارات‬
“Egyptian Weapons for the Huthis and Communications Channels
with Intelligence Agencies,” al-Araby al-Jadid. 15 October 2016.
https://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/news/2016/10/16/yemens-houthirebels-receiving-egyptian-military-hardware
Houthi rebels have received a dozen advanced military boats and
other supplies from Egypt, a senior Yemeni official has told The
New Arab. The official who works directly with the Houthis and
their allies on Yemen’s western coast alleges that the Egyptian navy
delivered the hardware to the rebels in the past two months. The
anonymous official said that the boats were supplied by the Egyptian
navy… despite Egypt’s government having close ties with Saudi
Arabia, Cairo also established good relations with the Yemeni rebels
after the start of the Saudi-led military intervention in the country.
OE Watch | November 2016

12

AFRICA

Top

African Union’s Plans to Fund Peacekeeping
OE Watch Commentary: Proposed in July
2016, the African Union’s (AU) plan to fund
its peace support operations more robustly
is getting increased scrutiny, and could have
profound impacts on the peace and security of the
continent. Yet, as the below interview with one of
the African Union’s most prominent insiders, Dr.
Mehari Maru, articulates, the plan itself might
be worthwhile, but member states’ willingness to
implement it could be its downfall.
Called the “Kaberuka Plan” after its
proposer, Dr. Donald Kaberuka, the AU’s High
Representative for its Peace Fund, the new plan is
meant to encourage African states to take greater
ownership over AU peace support operations
by contributing a greater portion of the costs.
Currently, outside funders - especially the UN
and the European Union - fund about 98% of the
AU’s peace support operations, which means that
African states have little ownership or latitude.
In contrast, the Kaberuka plan envisages the
AU contributing 25% for all AU peace support
operations, a total of around $1.2 billion, with
the UN contributing the remaining 75%. The
AU’s jump from 2% to 25% of AU peacekeeping
contributions would be facilitated by a 0.2% tax
on all eligible imports to AU member countries.
If the plan actually materializes, it could have
profound impacts on the way that African states
undertake peacekeeping efforts. Due to the AU’s
current inability to self-fund, missions that begin
under the auspices of the AU almost always
become UN missions, which are deemed largely
ineffective due to the nature of UN peacekeeping
mandates. These mandates demand that
peacekeepers cannot fire unless fired upon; that
they will only be deployed if there is actually a
peace to keep; and that conflicting parties consent
to their presence. In contrast, the AU, and its
African Peace and Security Architecture do allow
for an offensive stance towards fighting sources
of instability: namely, using force in an offensive
manner to fight terrorism, and do not necessarily
demand that parties consent to their presence.
Yet, as described in the interview with Maru,
questions still remain as to how states will collect
the 0.2% tax, and whether they will actually
render that money to the AU. In short, the
Kaberuka plan may well have tangible impacts on
the peace and security of the African continent,
but whether or not states will successfully
institute the 0.2% tax required for it to work, and
then transfer that money to the AU, is yet to be
seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Warner)

“[The most problematic assumption with the Kaberuka plan
is] that member states will effectively collect the money; that
they have the capability to collect, the willingness to collect,
and the determination to transfer the money that they collect
from importers to the AU.”

The so-called “Kaberuka Plan” to finance the African Union’s peacekeeping operations could improve
the AU’s efficacy and ownership in ensuring peace and security on the continent. However, some
experts are skeptical that states will follow through as the plan demands.
Source: http://www.afribar.org/2016/01/14/au-executive-council-concerned-about-illegal-occupation-ofwestern-sahara/

Source: Kwibuka, Eugena and Mukamurenzi, Ritah. “Political Will to Determine Success
of New African Union Funding Model, Says Expert.” The New Times (Kigali, Rwanda).
12 September 2016. http://allafrica.com/stories/201609120024.html
What’s your overall view about the new funding model for the AU?
That [is] an assumption. That member states will effectively collect the money; that they
have the capability to collect, the willingness to collect, and the determination to transfer
the money that they collect from importers to the AU. This is the biggest assumption that
this formula has.
The second assumption is that indeed member states know how much they import and
have the system and the database to determine how much they get and that means if they
know they have to inform how much they are importing and then at the same time they
have to transfer what they collect…
Its economic merits and advantages are to take this contribution as also encouraging
import substitution by increasing the taxation but it doesn’t take serious consideration
on what I call the fundamental flaws of the AU contribution system, [which is] that is
dependent on member states.
So, you don’t think it’s feasible?
The biggest and key question I have is: “what is different in this proposal than the
others on the issue of member states’ determination to contribute?” Previously, it’s not
because of the lack of money that member states were not contributing but the lack
of determination, capability, propensity, willingness, energy and commitment of the
leadership to contribute to the African Union so that it can stand on its own feet. So, that
is lacking.
Do you think some countries collect this money and not hand it to AU?
Even in the discussions and decisions of AU, it is indicated that some member states
default as they used to do before.
OE Watch | November 2016

13

AFRICA
Ethiopia’s State of Emergency
OE Watch Commentary: Protests in the city of Bishoftu,
some 50 km from Addis Ababa, turned deadly on 2 October
as protestors fled from riot police, with a stampede ensuing.
52 were killed. As a result, protests against the government
resumed. In response,
the ruling EPDRF party
of Ethiopia - in power
since 1991 - announced
on 9 October that the
country would henceforth
be under a six-month
state of emergency. The
accompanying article
describes from an Ethiopian
perspective, the causes
and political logic of the
declaration of the state of
emergency.

Top

“The state of emergency was needed to

repulse… ‘the danger posed by anti-peace elements and
foreign enemies on the peace, security and stability of the
nation.’”

To recall, the early
October protests that
preceded the state
of emergency were
precipitated by the
announcement in 2015
of plans to expand the
federal capital territory
of Addis Ababa further
south, taking up farm lands
The ruling government of Ethiopia has declared a state of emergency after ethnic protests against
owned by ethnic Oromos.
it have broken out around the country. Various military and security implications will likely follow.
Despite comprising around
Source: http://ethsat.com/ethiopian-declares-state-emergency/
40% of the total Ethiopian population, ethnic Oromos
Source: “Destabilized regime declares state of emergency in
have been largely excluded from powerful seats in the government and
Ethiopia.” EthioSatelliteNews (Ethiopian Diaspora), 9 October
military. Instead, the domination of Ethiopian government by members
2016. http://ethsat.com/ethiopian-declares-state-emergency/
of the Tigray ethnic group (comprising only about 4% of the country’s
total population) is a well-worn complaint of citizens. Indeed, there is
The [Tigray]-led government, shaken by widespread protests,
an extremely disproportionate percentage of Tigray, especially in the
declared Sunday a six-month long state of emergency.
country’s military. (For more information, see: “The Ethno-Military
The titular Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn said in a
Dimensions of Current Ethiopian Instability,” OE Watch, October 2016).
televised address to the nation that the state of emergency was
The Amharas, the second-largest ethnic group in the country, have
needed to repulse what he called “the danger posed by anti-peace
joined the Oromo in the protests. Since the protests began in November
elements and foreign enemies on the peace, security and stability of
2015, hundreds of dissidents have been killed, and tens of thousands
the nation.”…
have been jailed.
Protests were reignited this week after the death of hundreds
What are the implications of the new state of emergency? First, it puts
of festival goers the Oromos celebrated Ireecha, an annual
the world on watch that the government of Ethiopia might be on the
thanksgiving and a festival to welcome spring. Security forces were
brink of wider violence. Second, observers should expect communication
accused of causing the mayhem by shooting into the massive crowd
both within and outside the country to be heavily monitored. The
and throwing gas canisters. The actions taken by security forces
author’s private communications have revealed that Facebook Messenger
triggered a stampede which reportedly caused the death of nearly
has been shut down in the country, as has Ethiopia’s 3G cellular network.
700 people.
Third, with new trepidations at home, Ethiopia will likely divert some
The Prime Minister said the state of emergency “would not
of its resources devoted to fighting terrorism in the Horn of Africa infringe human rights enshrined in the Ethiopian constitution and
especially in the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) - back
home to deal with domestic insecurity. Thus, how the state of emergency diplomatic rights listed in the Vienna Convention.” But the minority
plays out domestically could have wider-ranging impacts internationally. regime has been widely accused of committing gross human rights
violations since it came to power in 1991.
End OE Watch Commentary (Warner)
OE Watch | November 2016

14

AFRICA

Top

Refugee Camp Attack in Niger
OE Watch Commentary: Militants in the remote
Tahoma region of central-west Niger have attacked
the Tazalit refugee camp in Niger, in what was
largely considered to be an off-limit attack. The
accompanying article from the Nigerien media
describes the nature and
purposes of the attack, and
suggests the involvement of
criminals or terrorists engaged
in drug and arms trafficing.
The camp that was attacked
was harboring refugees from
neighboring Mali, which
has been thrown into chaos
since the 2012 collapse of the
Malian government. As of
this writing, the affiliations of
the assailants have yet to be
determined. However, many
observers, including the author
the accompanying article,
believe that the militants are
likely from the Kidal region of
Mali. Indeed, many of those
in the camp had been fleeing
a number of often overlapping
extremist groups in Mali, and especially Kidal,
including elements of al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb (AQIM) and Ansar Dine.
Niger also hosts another substantial refugee camp
in the southeastern town of Bosso, for Nigerian
refugees fleeing Boko Haram. It also worries about
the infiltration of ISIS fighters from its northern
borders with Libya. In addition to the political
turmoil engulfing its western neighbor, Niger is also
beset, like the rest of the Swahilian west African
countries, with rampant arms, drug, and human
trafficking markets, exacerbated by the region’s
harsh desert geography and vast size. While the
French counter-terrorism efforts ‘la Barkhane’
have slowed down such illicit activity, the attacks
on refugee camps like that of Tazalit show that
substantial work is yet to be done. End OE Watch
Commentary (Warner)

“The inflow of arms from Libya [after the fall of Qaddafi in 2011]
has declined with the intervention of the French anti-terrorist
force. Therefore, ‘Today, everyone needs arms and ammo.’”

Source: http://www.actuniger.com/societe/12144-l%E2%80%99attaque-detazalit-men%C3%A9e-par-des-%C2%ABgroupes-de-narcoterroristes%C2%BB.html

Source: “L’attaque de Tazalit men par des ‘groups de narcoterrorists’ (Tazalit attack
led by ‘narcoterrorist group’),” ActuNiger (Niamey, Niger), 7 October 2016. http://
www.actuniger.com/societe/12144-l%E2%80%99attaque-de-tazalit-men%C3%A9epar-des-%C2%ABgroupes-de-narcoterroristes%C2%BB.html
Having arrived from the Malian border by the grand valley of Azawad, the
assailants, who seemingly prepared their attacks, chose the lunch hour to launch their
deadly attack.
22 Nigerien soldiers were gunned down with little resistance. “A band of nonidentified criminals” was how the minister of defense described them…
The assailants lingered at the site for several hours after the attacks, giving them
time to loot empty stores, take pharmaceutical supplies from the refugee camp,
the arms of the fallen soldiers, as well as an army vehicle and one from the UN’s
Commissioner for Refugees. They also burned the refugee camp’s only ambulance.
“It’s a transit point,” confirmed an African diplomat based in Niamey…He explained
that the inflow of arms from Libya [after the fall of Qaddafi in 2011] has declined with
the intervention of the French anti-terrorist force. Therefore, “Today, everyone needs
arms and ammo.”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | November 2016

15

AFRICA

Top

Does Boko Haram’s Alliance with ISIS Rely on
Taxing Migrant Traffickers?
“Although home to some of the continent’s
OE Watch Commentary: The adjacent article from Africanews dated
13 September provides an overview of the ongoing and increasing migrant
traffic from sub-Saharan Africa to Libya, where migrants take boats to get
to Europe. While the number of migrants passing the Niger-Libya route was
120,000 in 2015, it is set to top 300,000 in 2016. Each migrant pays traffickers
at least $500 to make the trip, with success anything but a guarantee and death
a possibility.
One key issue from a security perspective is whether terrorist groups are
profiting from migrant trafficking. Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM),
for example, has infiltrated local communities in the Sahel and either taxed
or extorted clan and village leaders who run the migrant trafficking and
smuggling routes. The Islamic State (ISIS) is likely also playing, or trying
to play, a similar role in taxing or extorting the Toubou and Tuareg clans
in southern Libya who run the trade, since having transferred sub-Saharan
African fighters from Sirte in northern Libya to southern Libya in the wake of
a government offensive in Sirte.
ISIS’s recent appointment of Abu Musab al-Barnawi—the son of Boko
Haram’s founder and an operative with close ties to AQIM and a strong base
of support in Niger—as the leader of its West Africa Province could also be
tied to migration trafficking. If ISIS can control both the southern Libya and
the southern Niger routes, it could generate key funds at a time when it is
losing territory and resources. An economic arrangement binding ISIS and alBarnawi seems more plausible in light of the ideological differences between
the two. Al-Barnawi had condemned the excessive brutality that characterizes
ISIS and the former West Africa Province leader, Abubakr Shekau, who ISIS
dropped from that position in favor of al-Barnawi. Thus economics more than
ideology may be the driving factor in al-Barnawi’s relationship with ISIS1
The article rightly points out that European countries are attempting to
curb migrant trafficking, while African nations should do more to open up
economic opportunities at home so migrants do not feel a need to leave. Yet,
concerns about the relationship between migrant trafficking and terrorism
financing are likely to become prominent, in which case the migration issue
will evolve from one about development and economic policy to one of
security policy, if not already also domestic politics of European nations. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
1

fastest growing economies, with the collapse
of foreign tourism due to the rise of armed
Islamist groups in the Sahara, West Africa
is struggling to generate enough jobs for its
mushrooming young population.”
Source: “Agadez town is meeting point for Europe-bound
West African migrants,” Africanews.com, 13 September 2016.
http://www.africanews.com/2016/09/13/niger-agadez-townis-meeting-point-for-europe-bound-west-african-migrants/
Thousands pay smugglers to make the dangerous journey
across the Sahara to Libya. From there, they take their
chances with smugglers across the Mediterranean. You have
to survive the security situation in Libya, which is clearly not
easy, not even for the Libyans themselves. And then, you have
to cross the Mediterranean, so it’s a very dangerous journey.
There is an established path by bus through countries like
Mali and Burkina Faso to Agadez, where migrants buy
passage from people-smugglers towards Algeria or across
the Sahara to Libya. From there, they take their chances with
smugglers across the Mediterranean. Smugglers who ferry
migrants across the Sahara take up to $500 a time.
Although home to some of the continent’s fastest growing
economies, with the collapse of foreign tourism due to the
rise of armed Islamist groups in the Sahara, West Africa
is struggling to generate enough jobs for its mushrooming
young population. Today, Libya, still lawless, remains the
only viable route to Europe after Algeria, Morocco and
the Canary Islands successfully blocked the way. Europe
is searching for new ways to close the route. Africa should
work on developing more work opportunities for its citizens
to encourage them to build themselves at home instead of
making the perilous crossing.

An article on Abu Musab al-Barnawi’s activities in Niger can be
found at https://jamestown.
org/program/boko-haramabu-musab-al-barnawis-leadershipcoup-and-offensive-in-niger/#!

Thousands of migrants from sub-Saharan African are being trafficked from Niger to ports in Libya,
with various terrorist groups and traffickers trying to profit from this industry along the way.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/iom-18migrants-found-dead-in-niger-desert/2825771.html

OE Watch | November 2016

16

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Ignoring the ‘No’ in Colombia?
“What we are into now, is....facing the non-recognition of the popular will.”
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 October, Colombians held a plebiscite in which
they could vote YES or NO to the accords at which the administration of Colombian
President Juan Manuel Santos and leaders of the FARC had arrived. Details of the
proposed accord were published in a 297-page document. Much debate revolved
around what the consequences might be of a NO vote, were that improbable result to
occur. The Santos administration insisted that a NO vote would require an entirely
new effort, that the peace process and the accord would be nullified and wasted. It
was, in effect, an argument for YES on the basis of sunken costs and lost opportunity.
In their argumentation and publicity, the Santos administration, as well as the FARC
and an array of national and international institutions, paired a YES vote with peace
and a NO vote with continued violent conflict. The NO won. As the referenced
editorial exemplifies, many of the NO persuasion are highly dismayed at the attitude
of the YES proponents, who claim that the vote was an aberration, perhaps caused
by bad weather, and should be ignored. The YES people, according to the NO
people, are stepping into the dangerous ground of ignoring the value of a democratic
electoral process, in this case a process the YES people themselves designed. To the
NO people, the YES people are not only trying to discredit and ignore the plebiscite,
they are endangering all future Colombian votes. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: Javier Contreras, “Desconocer el
‘No’” (Ignoring the ‘No’), Libreta de Apuntes,
12 October 2016, http://libretadeapuntes.
com/2016/10/desconocer-el-no/.
“What we are into now, is, nothing more or less,
facing the non-recognition of the popular will.
The victory of the ‘NO’ that received 6,431,376
votes is being ignored. Many are speaking of
a Pyrrhic victory because the difference was
‘merely’ 53,534 votes (the YES obtained 6,377, 482.
But had it been by only one single vote, the results
would have been the same, NO beat the YES….
A Pandora’s box has been opened that we do not
know where ignoring some electoral results will
lead. We are left exposed to having participatory
democracy treated as no more than a statement,
and that the popular will is not truly reflected in
the ballot box.”

FARC Leader Comments on the Peace Process

“…it seemed to us impossible that the citizens would contemplate the option of rejecting
what we had been constructing…”

OE Watch Commentary: The aftermath of the plebiscite, in
which voters rejected the heralded FARC-Government accords,
is an odd time politically in Colombia. The outcome was very
unexpected by the accords’ proponents, including the leaders of the
FARC. Now the whole population is wondering what the next steps
are going to be. Will the government try to tinker with the accords
and set up a re-vote? Will the FARC or the government go back on
a military offensive?
The accords were perceived to
give the FARC leaders near total
impunity, and that may have been a
salient objection. In the interview
referenced here, FARC leader Pablo
Catatumbo asserts that any notion
they should be punished (at least with
anything substantive such as jail time)
is total nonsense. At the same time,
he notes that FARC leaders thought
that the accords enjoyed popular will.
The juxtaposition of categorizing any
punishment against them as non-sensical on
the one hand, and their thinking that the accords
enjoyed popular will on the other, suggests that perhaps
their assessment was not an objective one. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Olga Lucía Criollo, “Pretender que la dirigencia de las Farc
vaya a la cárcel es un despropósito”: ‘Pablo Catatumbo’ (Expecting
[hoping, suggesting, supposing?] that the leadership of the FARC is
going to jail is a piece of nonsense), El Pais, 16 October 2016, http://
www.elpais.com.co/elpais/colombia/proceso-paz/noticias/pretenderdirigencia-farc-vaya-carcel-desproposito-pablo-catatumbo
“What we have laid out, the Government
as much as the FARC-EP, is that we want
to listen to the voices of the NO and those
of the YES, but we require concrete,
realistic proposals, not impossibilities.
Expecting that an organization sign an
agreement so that the senior leadership
go to jail is the greatest of nonsense: no
guerrilla in the world would do it. …

FARC
Emblem.
Source: Wikimedia
Commons

We moved in such a positive a context
for the construction of peace, surrounded
by the whole International community,
building face-to-face reconciliation with
the victims, that it seemed to us impossible
that the citizens would contemplate the
option of rejecting what we had been
constructing.”
OE Watch | November 2016

17

LATIN AMERICA

Top

A Spaniard Opines about Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: The huge news this month
out of Latin America continues to be the NO result of
the Colombian plebiscite that on 2 October rejected the
accords written by the FARC and the administration of
Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos. The result
has left pundits, analysts, diplomats and politicians
wondering how it came about, what the consequences
will be, and how to proceed. Many are making claims
and explanations to suit, so OE Watch went back to
the week before the plebiscite to look at the arguments
and propaganda at that moment. We found a huge
array of disparate observations and assertions. The
editorial cited here stands out as perhaps curiously but
impressively representative.
The editorial comes from Spain, and it is written by
a Spaniard, not a Colombian. However, it gives us an
insight into or a feel for the international connections
of the Colombian’s drama. It also tells us something of
how that drama was perceived from within a portion
of a foreign population with great intellectual and
interpersonal influence in Colombia. The essay was
a forward-looking lament of what was feared about to
happen. Federico Jiménez’ presentation of a horrible
future was a powerful way of framing what many
among the Colombian NO vote apparently felt. The
essay is as good a representative as any among the
many concerns about the accords, reported here in
OE Watch, concerns that seemed to carry the day on 2
October. The extracts presented here from the 1,700word article do not do it full justice, and analysts are
encouraged to go back to the original. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…Seven thousand guerrillas have put forty-six
million Colombians to their knees…”
Source: Federico Jiménez Losantos, “Nace Narcolombia, capital Tarifa
(Narcocolombia is born, capital Tarifa), Libertad Digital, Madrid, 25 September
2016, http://www.libertaddigital.com/opinion/federico-jimenez-losantos/nacenarcolombia-capital-tarifa-80098/
“The inevitable war among cartels and the dirty war of the paramilitaries will
provoke the social decomposition [in Colombia] that suffers Venezuela and
that the FARC seeks…This Sunday [meaning October 2]…will see the assisted
birth of the first narco-state in history, whose cradle will be the sepulcher of
that formerly known as the Republic of Colombia. The mother will die in labor,
because there is no republic able to survive a constitution that cannot even be
reformed…and that establishes a judicial power that is not Colombian that can
absolve narcoguerrillas and condemn, without right to appeal, military officers
and police against whom they have so long combated. ….
It is true that [Pablo] Escobar killed many people, but far fewer than the FARC.
Nevertheless, unlike the visionary of Medellín…the current chief of the FARC,
Timochenko, can aspire, narco-constitution in hand, to have the staggering
gilded jail in the [TV] series Narcos be the very same Casa de Nariño [the
Colombian White House]. Seven thousand guerrillas have put forty-six
million Colombians to their knees, due to the infinite cowardliness of their
government, without doubt, but also because of the collaboration that the birth
of Narcocolombia has in Havana, Caracas, Washington, The Vatican, Brussels,
and, yes, Madrid….
With the fortune that Narcocolombia will bring in daily, I doubt that a country
like Spain can resist. It is the natural place for entering Europe, by land and
by sea, by air and on mule. It will come in at all points, but logically Tarifa
and Vigo will be the principal ports of the narco-colombian penetration in
Europe. The narcotrafficking will assault Europe through Spain, from the top
down and bottom up. And Narcocolombia, capital Tarifa, will end up moving its
headquarters to Madrid….”

Venezuela Referendum to Revoke
OE Watch Commentary: In Venezuela,
the constitutional process for removing a
president ahead of scheduled elections requires,
as one of its steps, the formal collection and
presentation of a petition signed by 20% of
the electorate requesting a determinative vote
on removal. The 20% threshold signature
collection will be conducted 27, 28, 29 October,
against a number of obstacles that have been
erected by the current administration to include
a greatly reduced number of polling places
and voting machines being made available
for the vote. Nevertheless, opponents of the
Bolivarian government seem confident that
the 20% threshold will be greatly surpassed, if
the government actually allows the signature
collection to proceed. If so, the National
Election Commission would then, supposedly,
be obliged to set a date for a final revocation
vote. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the number of citizens who will actually

participate to put their finger print in order to require the
RR could find itself between 9 and 11 million…”
Source: Editors, “MUD: Estamos a diez días de lo que será una amplia y contundente
victoria popular (MUD: We are ten days away from what will be an ample and
overwhelming popular victory),” El Nacional Web, 16 October 2016, http://www.elnacional.com/politica/MUD-amplia-contundente-victoria-popular_0_940705954.html
“The Table of Democratic Unity published a communique a few days before the
beginning of the collecting of the 20%, the phase [of the revocation process] that allows
the activation of the revocation referendum….’
All of the polls (those conducted by the Unity [opposition to the government], those
ordered done by the government and those carried out independently) reveal that the
quantity of Venezuelans inclined to participate in the events of 26, 27, 28 October sets
between 12 and 14 million people, depending on the pollster and the methodology used.
Since it is not the same to ‘want to participate’ and actually doing so, on the basis of
these surveys all of the experts coincide in indicating that the number of citizens who will
actually participate to put their finger print in order to require the RR [Referendum for
Revocation] could find itself between 9 and 11 million’, it detailed.
OE Watch | November 2016

18

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Narco Genetics, Marijuana, and the New Generation
Cartel of Jalisco in Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: Marijuana production in Mexico has been a steady
income generator for many groups for decades. However, in the last year, the
New Generation Cartel of Jalisco (CJNG) began producing the first of its kind
genetically modified marijuana in greenhouses. The accompanying excerpts
discuss why this should raise red flags.

“Genetically modified marijuana
produced by the CJNG is a sign that this
group is becoming more sophisticated.”

As the passages note, what is truly interesting about the genetically modified
marijuana (apart from the fact that it has never been produced in Mexico before)
is that it signals that the CJNG may be attempting to compete at the global level
and with legal producers. Legally produced marijuana is often times of higher
quality and potency than the kind produced in open fields. Furthermore, it is
typically grown in greenhouses under the care of skilled caretakers to provide a
superior product and far surpasses the “brick weed” Mexico is famous for. The
production of genetically modified marijuana may also signal that the CJNG is
looking to get ahead of other cartels in Mexico by cornering a new market which
perhaps suggests a new level of sophistication in the group. Whatever the reasons,
it is likely that production of this nature will continue as the global demand for
genetically superior marijuana remains high.

Source: “Narco-genética (Narco Genetics),” Reporte
Indigo, 28 September 2016. Accessed from http://
www.reporteindigo.com/reporte/guadalajara/narcogenetica

As the passages also note, marijuana greenhouses are a rarity with only seven
seized in Mexico since 2010. In contrast, authorities have destroyed more
than 13,341 hectares of marijuana fields since the start of 2013, indicating the
prevalence of this production method. The greenhouses used to grow the new
genetically modified marijuana were seized in July 2015 by Federal Police in
Guadalajara, Jalisco. Until now, authorities had not released details regarding the
affiliation of the detained group members which have been identified as CJNG
operators. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

It is possible that the CJNG is producing genetically
modified marijuana in order to compete with legal
producers at the global level”

“Marijuana greenhouses are a rarity in Mexico with
only 7 seized since 2010. In fact, almost all marijuana
produced in the country is grown in open fields as
evidenced by eradication statistics. Rarer still is the fact
that a Mexican cartel is producing genetically modified
marijuana.
...

...
Genetically modified marijuana produced by the
CJNG is a sign that this group is becoming more
sophisticated.”

Organized Crime Violence in Mexico
and Mass Displacement of Communities
OE Watch Commentary: Violence, extortion, forced recruitment and misappropriation
of property are all factors associated with organized crime activity in Mexico. It seems
almost surreal, as laws would prohibit these activities in most places, but in organized-crimecontrolled regions of Mexico, impunity reigns and is a driving force behind massive numbers
of internally displaced persons (IDP). Entire families flee their hometowns in search of
safety each year. It is so common, in fact, that the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center
reported more than 281,000 IDP cases since 2006. This source further cited that internal
displacement continues to affect families in at least 12 Mexican states, with the highest
prevalence in drug cartel-controlled states, including Chihuahua, Nuevo Leon, Tamaulipas,
Sinaloa, Durango, Michoacán, Guerrero, Mexico State, and Veracruz.
As the accompanying passages discuss, more interesting still is how IDP movement has
changed in the last decade. Prior to 2007, almost all internal displacement could be attributed
to land disputes, communal conflict, guerilla conflict (think Zapatistas) and economic
opportunity. Today, in addition to these reasons, open source channels are suggesting a strong
correlation between IDPs and cartel armed conflict in the form of violence, extortion, forced
recruitment, and misappropriation of land. Specifically the first passage focuses on violence
which has created virtual ghost towns in certain geographic areas of the country. The second
passage focuses on the misappropriation of land as control of territory is central to successful
drug cartel operations in Mexico. The final piece discusses forced recruitment which is
directly related to rapid cartel expansion. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...gunmen came to our
property one day and started
demanding a percentage
of our earnings. Later, the
earnings were not enough
and they threatened to kill
my entire family if we did
not hand over the ranch.
To demonstrate their
seriousness, they killed two
of our employees and shortly
after my family abandoned
the ranch in fear of their
safety.”
(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

19

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Continued: Organized Crime Violence in Mexico and
Mass Displacement of Communities
Source: “Pueblos fantasmas en Tierra Caliente: escapan por la
delincuencia (Ghost Towns in Tierra Caliente: Families Flee from
Excessive Violence),” Quadratin, 5 September 2016. Accessed from
https://guerrero.quadratin.com.mx/Pueblos-fantasmas-en-TierraCaliente-escapan-por-la-delincuencia/
“The Tierra Caliente Region of Mexico lies along the Central Pacific
Coast and comprises ten municipalities in Michoacán, Guerrero,
and Mexico State. This region is known for high levels of organized
crime presence and violence, as three criminal groups—La Familia
Michoacana, Los Caballeros Templarios, and the New Generation
Cartel of Jalisco—continue to fight for control of it. Communities
throughout these municipalities have fallen victim to organized
crime-related injustices, and in some areas entire families have
simply abandoned their homes, as was the case in Tlanipoatlan de
las Limas, Guerrero, where an estimated 386 of the community’s 400
residents have fled since May 2015. Valladares Salgado, the Municipal
President of Limas, cited organized crime factors, including excessive
violence, fear of kidnapping, and widespread theft, as driving factors
behind the mass migration of this particular community.”
Source: “La ley de crimen organizado en zonas rurals (Organized
Crime Law in Rural Areas),” Jornada, 18 August 2014. http://www.
jornada.unam.mx/2014/08/18/politica/008n1pol
“My family has owned a 60-hectare ranch in Ciudad Cuauhtemoc,
Chihuahua, for generations. We initially started an apple orchard
as a hobby, but the hobby evolved into a family business over time
as our product improved. That all changed when gunmen came to
our property one day and started demanding a percentage of our
earnings. Later, the earnings were not enough and they threatened to
kill my entire family if we did not hand over the ranch. To demonstrate
their seriousness, they killed two of our employees and shortly after
my family abandoned the ranch in fear of their safety. Some of us
relocated to Quintana Roo to restart the business, while others
decided to restart their lives in the United States. We may be one of the
only families willing to talk about what happened to us, but we are not
alone.”
Source: “Los reclutados por el crimen, una realidad (Organized Crime
Recruitment is a Reality),” Televisa, 13 April 2015. http://noticieros.
televisa.com/mexico/1504/reclutados-crimen-realidad-parte-1/
“Juan was kidnapped in broad daylight at a bus station in Tampico,
Tamaulipas, in September 2011. He was seen entering the station at
12:17 PM, at which time he got into line with his luggage to purchase
a ticket to Veracruz. With ticket in hand, he walked towards the stop
and waited for the bus. At 12:48 PM two men pulled up outside the
terminal in a black SUV, parked, and entered the boarding area
without tickets. They then grabbed Juan and virtually dragged him
out of the station. Outside security footage shows him being pushed
into the SUV, never to be heard from again. Follow-on investigations
into this incident confirmed that he had indeed been kidnapped by an
organized crime group in Tamaulipas. This is one isolated case, but,
unfortunately, it represents just one of many forced recruitment cases
in Mexico, as reported by Mexican news source Televisa.”

China’s cyber policy has
become partly visible to
foreign nations through
observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy
appears to have three
vectors. These three
aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and
attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some
are always hidden from
view while others are
demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon
is divided into sections
that coincide with these
vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/
Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf
OE Watch | November 2016

20

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Trends in Mexico’s Drug Cartel Landscape
OE Watch Commentary: The last two years
have been significant for major Mexican drug
cartels. Some of the biggest organizations have
virtually disappeared from the map while others
have evolved and/or maintained dominance.
Organizations such as the Sinaloa Cartel and
the New Generation Cartel of Jalisco (CJNG)
have evolved or at least maintained all national
territories; while organizations such as Los Zetas
and Los Caballeros Templarios have been so
severely compromised that each is now operational
only one Mexican state. The accompanying
passages discuss this changing landscape.
As the first excerpt notes, the Attorney General
of Mexico (PGR) claims that organizations such
as the Sinaloa Cartel have consolidated and
gained territory while others have lost nearly all
operational bases in the last two years. The Sinaloa
Cartel arguably remains the most stable and even
continues to grow despite the fact that its key
leader, Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman was arrested
in February 2014. As the second excerpt notes, the
organization remains strong for multiple reasons
such as strong decentralized leadership that has
allowed it to withstand arrests of key leaders and
alliances with major cocaine distributors. Within
Mexico, this organization is fully operational in
seven states including Coahuila, Durango, Sinaloa,
Chihuahua, Baja California, Baja California Sur,
and Sonora.
Usually the success of one group means the
demise of others and this is the case with the rise
of both Sinaloa and CJNG. In expanding territorial
control within Coahuila, the Sinaloa Cartel played
a key role in further debilitating Los Zetas although
other factors have played into their downward spiral
(war with Gulf Cartel, internal fragmentation).
Finally, the fall of Los Caballeros Templarios
was not really a surprise to the drug trafficking
world and has been in the works since 2012. The
CJNG rose from the ashes of Los Caballeros
after it facilitated the emergence of self-defense
organizations and made pacts with powerful groups
such as the Sinaloa Cartel to ensure their success.
Based on the updated PGR report from Mexico,
it becomes clear that Los Zetas and Los Caballeros
Templarios will soon vanish and that the frontrunners in Mexico’s drug war with be the Sinaloa
Cartel and the CJNG. However, as evidenced by the
last 24 months, major shifts can occur in very short
time periods. What seems to remain true is that
the most established organizations have the best
chances of surviving in Mexico’s tumultuous cartel
landscape. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...organizations such as the Sinaloa Cartel have consolidated
and gained territory while others have lost nearly all
operational bases in the last 24 months.”

Source: “Radiografía del narco: cárteles del Pacífico y Jalisco, dominan; Templarios y Zetas se repliegan
“Taking a Closer Look: Pacific and Jalisco Cartels Dominate; Templars and Zetas Losing Territory).” Animal
Politico. Accessed from http://www.animalpolitico.com/2016/07/asi-se-reparten-carteles-de-la-droga-enmexico/

Source: “Radiografía del narco: cárteles del Pacífico y Jalisco, dominan; Templarios
y Zetas se repliegan (Taking a Closer Look: Pacific and Jalisco Cartels Dominate;
Templars and Zetas Losing Territory),” Animal Politico, 12 July 2016. http://www.
animalpolitico.com/2016/07/asi-se-reparten-carteles-de-la-droga-en-mexico/
According to a report released by the Attorney General of Mexico (PGR), organized
crime groups are present in approximately 60% of all national territory. When
compared with statistics and analysis gathered in 2014, it can be concluded that the
nine cartels present at that time are still operational but individual operating cells
reduced from 45 to 37. When talking about individual criminal organizations, there
have been significant changes within them. For example, organizations such as the
Sinaloa Cartel have consolidated and gained territory while others have lost nearly
all operational bases in the last 24 months.
Source: El cartel de Sinaloa sigue poderoso, con las FARC como aliado (The Sinaloa
Cartel Remains Strong with the FARC as an Ally),” La Vanguardia, 22 January 2016.
http://www.vanguardia.com.mx/articulo/el-cartel-de-sinaloa-sigue-poderoso-con-lasfarc-como-aliado
Despite the arrest of Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman, the Sinaloa Cartel has
maintained its power base in Mexico and around the world. Proof of this is that the
organization currently has presence in at least 54 countries and has established
strong alliances with different criminal organizations such as the FARC to procure
and move large-scale cocaine shipments around the world.
OE Watch | November 2016

21

LATIN AMERICA

Top

El Salvador Sees a Rise in Gangs’ Use of
Automatic Weapons
OE Watch Commentary: Statistics indicate that the use of
automatic weapons by gangs in El Salvador is on the rise. This raises
two questions: How do gangs have so many weapons of war and from
where are they acquiring them? The accompanying excerpts provide
some answers to these questions, and suggest that many of the weapons
currently utilized by gangs date back to El Salvador’s Civil War.
National Civil Police confiscated an average of one automatic weapon
per week between 2011 and 2014. In the first five months of 2016,
authorities began seizing one automatic weapon every three days, and
these are just official figures which do not include unreported weapons
that security forces confiscated from criminals. This information
confirms that seizure of automatic weapons is on the rise, but why?
El Salvador’s FMLN (Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front)
government passed a zero tolerance policy against gangs and more
specifically, the Mara Salvatrucha, in January 2015. Before this policy
passed, MS-13 and Barrio 18 factions were primarily using knives and
handguns to defend their territories against rival gangs as these weapons
were small and easily portable/concealable. What has changed since the
implementation of the zero tolerance policy is that gangs are now using
what the government classifies as “weapons of war” with increased
frequency. Gangs are now using what the government classifies as
“weapons of war” with increased frequency as they are now defending
themselves against state security forces; which requires them to possess
similar or identical firepower for survival. El Salvador is classifying
weapons of war as automatic weapons including the AK-47 and M-16 as
they are strictly prohibited for use outside the law enforcement sector.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)
Source: “Las maras se arman con fusiles de la guerra civil (Maras Use
Weapons from Civil War in El Salvador),” El Faro, 7 September 2016.
https://www.elfaro.net/es/201609/salanegra/19208/Las-maras-searman-con-fusiles-de-la-guerra-civil.htm
There are four reasons why the gangs have so many weapons of war.
For one, the FMLN hid some of its weapons in case the peace process
did not pan out, and those guns eventually made their way onto
the black market. Another reason is that middle- and high-ranking
commanders of both the armed forces and the guerrillas kept their
guns to make money off of them. A third reason is the underground
weapons caches that were kept secret from all but a few individuals.
And lastly, there were ex-combatants who held on to a weapon or two
as souvenirs of the war.
...
Gang members get weapons left over from the armed conflict in a
number of ways: conventional arms traffickers with ready inventories;
a former guerrilla fighter who was put in charge of guarding a
weapons cache during the war and decides it is time to sell them
to the highest bidder; members of the police and military who steal
confiscated weapons during the different links in the chain of custody,
selling them back into the black market; or the gang member who is
the son of a former combatant and brings the family weapon to the
gang.

“Gang members get
weapons left over from
the armed conflict in a
number of ways...”

AK-47.
Source: https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:AK-47_type_II_Part_DMST-89-01131.jpg

OE Watch | November 2016

22

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Aerial Fumigation of Cocaine No Longer an
Option in Colombia
“... spraying is inefficient and counterproductive...”
OE Watch Commentary: Colombian President Juan Manuel
Santos recently announced that aerial fumigation of coca plants
will not resume in the country even though this method has been
used consistently since the early 90s. The government initially
halted aerial spraying back in May 2015 due to claims that the
herbicide used to kill coca plants may cause cancer. During a
conference held in Bogota in September 2015, Santos reiterated
his resolve on this decision by stating that aerial fumigation has
never really been successful and that despite its use, Colombia
continues to be the world’s top cocaine producer. In response
to his decision, open source channels began reporting on
supporting/opposing views. The accompanying passages provide
insight into this debate.
As the first passage discusses, supporters claim that other
methods including arresting major drug lords, attacking the
supply chain, and targeting the actual labs where drugs are
processed are considerably more effective than fumigation
efforts. On the other hand, the second passage indicates an
opposition to halting spraying. This is because some believe
that stopping the spraying may actually empower traffickers
to grow their coca fields without concern of it being sprayed.
There is also concern regarding the welfare of those tasked to
manually spray or pull plants from the ground one by one as it
would require them to enter into dangerous territories and would
further expose them to chemicals. Regardless of the pros and
cons, Colombia seems to have taken a strong stance and will not
likely reinstate their fumigation policy anytime soon. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “El glifosato es ‘probablemente cancerígeno (Glyphosate
is Likely Carcinogenic),” El Espectador, 2 May 2015. http://www.
elespectador.com/noticias/nacional/el-glifosato-probablementecancerigeno-articulo-558264
Daniel Mejía, the director of the Center for Security and Drug
Studies, a research group in Bogotá, claims that spraying is inefficient
and counterproductive. As an alternative, he recommends attacking
the links in the chain of drug trafficking, the labs where cocaine
is processed, and the large shipments of chemicals. These areas
encompass where hard drug trafficking and organized crime is. He
further stated that evidence proves that attacking the farmers doesn’t
work.
Source: “Pros y contras de la fumigación aérea para frenar los
narcocultivos (Pros and Cons to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields),” El
Tiempo, 6 September 2016. http://www.eltiempo.com/politica/justicia/
fumigacion-aerea-contra-cultivos-ilicitos/16693172
Rafael Nieto, a former vice-minister of justice, questioned the
rationale behind halting spraying, saying that more eradication
workers would be put at risk. He also claimed that if spraying is
stopped, the income of the drug traffickers, the criminal gangs and
the guerrillas will go up substantially as will actual coca and cocaine
production.

“... if spraying is stopped, the income of the drug
traffickers, the criminal gangs and the guerrillas will
go up substantially as will actual coca and cocaine
production.”

Cessna 188 AGwagon spraying.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Cessna188AGWagonZKCSE.jpg

OE Watch | November 2016

23

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Abu Sayyaf Growing Power Through Ransom Money:
Can It Be Stopped?
OE Watch Commentary: Abu Sayyaf is a
small, yet extremely violent, jihadist group in the
southern Philippines. The group splintered off
from the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF)
in 1991 after it disagreed with the MNLF’s push
to pursue autonomy, as opposed to establishing
an outright independent Islamic State in southern
Philippines. It has received millions of dollars
through the kidnapping and ransoming of
civilians. The following article discusses some of
the repercussions of their funding efforts.
According to the article, Abu Sayyaf poses
a security threat to the Philippines as well as
neighbors Malaysia, Indonesia, and Australia
because it is using the ransom funds to acquire
more arms, hire new recruits, and offer bribes
to ensure community leaders turn a blind eye to
their actions. The group has made $10 million
from its kidnapping and extortion activities since
2012. They also have been using their financial
resources to mislead the Philippine military.
Finally, because they have mastered the terrain
and are paying residents to keep quiet, it is easier
to remain more elusive. In an interesting twist,
however, the Philippine military is turning to the
MNLF to help in its fight against Abu Sayyaf.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Duterte’s policy to eradicate the ASG [Abu Sayyaf Group]

in their hometown is not an easy task despite the deployment
of 10,000 trained soldiers as the group has been using their
financial resources to mislead the military in their counter
intelligence measures.”
Source: Noel Tarrazona, “Abu Sayyaf’s Kidnapping Enterprise Poses Bigger
Threat to Philippines’ Neighbors,” Asia Times, 25 September 2016, http://atimes.
com/2016/09/abu-sayyafs-kidnapping-enterprise-poses-bigger-threat-to-philippinesneighbors/#disqus_thread.
Since 2012, the group [Abu Sayyaf] has made $10 million from kidnapping and
extortion activities. This is more than enough to ensure a luxurious life for the 400-odd
armed members of the group operating in the island provinces of Basilan and Sulu.
Mindanao residents believe kidnappings have made ASG members instant millionaires.
Duterte’s policy to eradicate the ASG in their hometown is not an easy task despite
the deployment of 10,000 trained soldiers as the group has been using their financial
resources to mislead the military in their counter intelligence measures.
Analyst Rommel Banloi, executive director of Terrorism and Violence think tank
agency in Manila, says ransom payments are used by the group to buy arms, pay off
members, hire new recruits and bribe community elders to make them keep quiet.
Philippines military has finally found a new ally, the Moro National Liberation
Front (MNLF), in their fight against ASG. The MNLF, through the sub leadership of
Commander Abraham Joel, is collaborating with the military with which it had signed a
peace agreement in September 1996.

ISIS Infiltration in the Malaysian Military?
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has been pushing its influence
worldwide. The group is of increasing concern to
Southeast Asia. The following article claims that,
according to a special investigation, less than one
percent of the “Malaysian Armed Forces personnel
are found to be involved in the Daesh (another
name for ISIS) militant group.” This is not likely
accurate. A later report by International Business
Times, offered some different types of statistics.
According to the second article, “Malaysia’s
Defense Ministry has admitted that about 1% of
the total number of people in the country currently
under investigation by the police for suspected
links to militant Islamist groups are from the
armed forces.” This paints a less grim picture and
the numbers are likely far lower. However, any
infiltration of ISIS influence in the armed forces
can be devastating. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

Source: “Less than One Percent of Military Personnel Involved in Daesh –
Hishammuddin,” The Borneo Post, 27 September 2016, http://www.theborneopost.
com/2016/09/27/less-than-one-per-cent-of-military-personnel-involved-in-daeshhishammuddin/.
Bukit Aman Special Branch Investigation has revealed that less than one per cent
of the Malaysian Armed Forces personnel are found to be involved in the Daesh
militant group.
Without disclosing the number of military personnel involved in the militant group,
Defence Minister Datuk Seri Hishammuddin Tun Hussein said the ministry would
not protect any officers … in the armed forces involved in such activities because
the Daesh threat was a global threat.
Source: Rachel Middleton, “Malaysia Says Only 1% Under Police Probe for Links
to Militant Groups are from the Armed Forces,” International Business Times, 27
September 2016, http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/malaysia-defence-ministry-says-1under-police-probe-links-militant-groups-armed-forces-1583444.
The Ministry earlier clarified a news report quoting Hishammuddin as saying
that 1% of the national armed forces are involved with Daesh. In a statement,
the Ministry said: “One per cent of all the suspects’ and ‘one percent of all ATM
(Malaysian Armed Forces) members’ are two different things.”
OE Watch | November 2016

24

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Thai Military to Use UAVs to Patrol Southern Thailand
OE Watch Commentary: In July 2016
rebels detonated a bomb in southern Thailand,
severely damaging a rail track between
Rueso station in Narathiwat and Balo station
in the province of Yala. Then, in early
September a railway track in Pattani, another
province in southern Thailand, was bombed.
Following the September bombing, Thailand’s
Deputy Prime Minister Prawit Wongsuwon
announced the military’s intention to begin
using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to
patrol railway tracks in the far south of the
country. The accompanying articles discuss
this development.
In late September, the Defense Technology
Institute, the Thai Ministry of Defense’s
research and development agency, began
delivering Siam UAV drones to the Thai
army, the Royal Thai Police, the Department
of Special Investigation, and the Department
of Corrections. These drones, which cost
500,000 baht (Approximately $14,000) per
unit, can reportedly fly 500 feet in the air for
up to 40 minutes and be controlled from two
kilometers away. They are equipped with
an automatic flight system, a conventional
camera, and a thermal imaging camera.
The drones are just another step that the
government of Thailand is taking to control
some of the violence plaguing the country’s
southern region, such as the railways. End
OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“They [drones] can be applied for warfare and non-warfare
missions including intelligence, patrols, surveillance and situation
monitoring to reduce the risk to personnel… They suit security,
commercial and environmental operations.”
Source: Wassana Nanuam, “B500,000 Drone Available from Defense Institute,” Bangkok
Post, 23 September 2016, http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/general/1093244/thai-madedrones-available-for-b500-000.
“They [drones] can be applied for warfare and non-warfare missions including
intelligence, patrols, surveillance and situation monitoring to reduce the risk to personnel…
They suit security, commercial and environmental operations.”
Source: “Drones to be Used in Restive South,” Pattaya Mail, 25 September 2016, http://
www.pattayamail.com/thailandnews/drones-used-restive-south-149854.
The Defense Technology Institute has given the military drone prototypes to be used in the
violence-torn southern region of the kingdom.
Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister Gen Prawit Wongsuwan, on behalf of the
Defense Technology Institute, handed out unmanned aerial vehicles to the Thai army, the
Royal Thai Police, the Department of Special Investigation (DSI) and the Department of
Corrections.
Source: Wassana Nanuam and Amornrat Mahitthirook, “Drones to Help Protect Southern
Railway Tracks,” Bangkok Post, 5 September 2016, http://www.bangkokpost.com/
print/1078945/.
Drones will be used to patrol railway tracks in the far South after Saturday’s bombing in
Pattani, Deputy Prime Minister Prawit Wongsuwon said on Monday.
The unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) would be deployed while soldiers, police and railway
staff would work together more closely to ensure safety of train services between Hat Yai
and Sungai Kolok train stations, said Gen Prawit, who is also the defence minister.

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the
tactical perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective.
Fangs of the Lone Wolf: is an exception. These are the
stories of low-level guerrilla combat as told by the
survivors. They cover fighting from the cities of Grozny
and Argun to the villages of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and
finally the hills, river valleys and mountains that make
up so much of Chechnya. Dodge Billingsley, the primary
author was embedded with Chechen guerrilla forces after
the first war, so he knows the country, the culture, the key
actors and the conflict. Yet, as a Western outsider, he is
able to maintain perspective and objectivity. Fangs of the
Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is becoming
modern and future war.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf

OE Watch | November 2016

25

INDO-PACIFIC ASIA

Top

Indonesia’s Arrest of Chinese Uighurs Reveals New
Terrorism Trends in Asia
OE Watch Commentary: Despite having one of the most unusual
names for a jihadist group, Katibah Gonggong Rebus (KGR), meaning
Boiled Snails Brigade (after Batam Island’s famous seafood), has gained
notoriety in Indonesia for hosting Uighur militants from China. The
KGR is based in Batam, an Indonesian island close to Singapore. Its
leader was arrested in August 2016 for planning a rocket attack on
Singapore’s Marina Bay from Batam and for receiving funding for
facilitating Indonesians—and Uighur migrants— to
fight with the Islamic State (ISIS) in Syria. Despite
originally being associated with Indonesian and
Syrian ISIS networks, now KGR appears to be
interacting with al-Qaeda networks. This may be
because KGR is at the end of the day committed to
opportunity more than ideology and ISIS’s loss of
territory and resources in recent months has made it
less appealing to KGR.

“Police thought [an Indonesian militant] has
facilitated two foreign nationals into Batam
of Uighur origin. He and his group received
funding from the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement (ETIM) to finance the needs of the
Uighurs living in Batam.”

According to the adjacent Indonesian language
article from Sindonews, Indonesian security forces
broke up a cell of KGR in Batam in August and
arrested two Uighurs. The Uighurs had received
funding from the al-Qaeda-affiliated Turkistan
Islamic Party (TIP) in Syria (in the article the
TIP is referred to as the East Turkistan Islamic
Movement). These funds were not intended to
support the militants’ travel to Syria but only their
As seen in the adjacent image, Indonesian forces arrested a cell linked to al-Qaeda
needs while in Batam. This suggests that al-Qaeda
that was hosting Uighur militants from China
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/is-presence-in-indonesia-growing/3146369.html
may be interested in using Uighurs to attack
Chinese or other targets in Southeast Asia rather than using them to
support the struggle in Aleppo, Syria, where the TIP and other al-Qaeda Source: ”Tersangka Teroris Katibah Gonggong Rebus Ditangkap di
affiliates are engaged. A targeting strategy in or close to China would
Batam(Suspected Terrorists of Katibah Gonggong Rebus Arrested
be consistent with recent calls from al-Qaeda ideologues in Syria for
in Batam),” Sindonews.com, 3 September 2016. https://nasional.
tempo.co/read/news/2016/09/03/058801403/tersangka-terorisUighurs to stay in Central Asia or Southeast Asia and not fight in Syria.
katibah-gonggong-rebus-ditangkap-di-batam
It would also be consistent with a TIP-planned attack on the Chinese
embassy in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan in August 2016. Thus, the idea of
Public Information Bureau Chief of Indonesian National Police...
Uighur militants targeting China regionally—as opposed to fighting
said
police arrested a suspect who allegedly helped members of the
foreign governments abroad—could be a new trend.
terrorist group Katibah Gonggong Rebus. The arrests occurred in
These arrests in Batam come at a time when China is in an
Batam.
increasingly adversarial position vis-à-vis Southeast Asian countries,
According to police, the suspect known as LH, is 24-years old,
including Indonesia, because of its territorial claims in the South China
and did not have a job. When arrested, police seized a cell phone,
Sea. In contrast to the South China Sea issues, counter-terrorism remains
a motorcycle, and a wallet. LH also allegedly came to facilitate the
an area of cooperation between China and its neighbors. The case in
departure of Indonesian citizens to Syria, Middle East.
the adjacent article provides the perfect example of this. Indonesia does
Police thought LH has facilitated two foreign nationals into Batam
not want to be the base for a terrorist attack on Singapore by Uighur
of Uighur origin. He and his group received funding from the
militants from China, who likely arrived in Indonesia through Thailand
East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) to finance the needs of
and Malaysia and other Southeast Asian countries. As there are no
the Uighurs living in Batam. Together with a group from Katibah
regional initiatives to deal with Uighur militancy at the source—in
Gonggong Rebus, LH was plotting an attack on Marina Bay
China—regional cooperation on Uighur militants will likely be the
(Singapore).
most viable alternative for Southeast Asia and China. In turn, China
The name [Katibah Gonggong Rebus] was inspired by the seafood
and Southeast Asian neighbors will share intelligence, coordinate
in Batam. According to police, they are connected to the network of
expatriations and hold joint exercises to deal with both Uighur militants
Santoso alias Abu Wardah [a pro-ISIS Indonesian militant] and the
and other larger terrorist groups as well. End OE Watch Commentary
network of Bahrun Naim [an Indonesian ISIS member in Syria].
(Zenn)
OE Watch | November 2016

26

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Disrupting the DPRK’s Illicit Trade Activity
OE Watch Commentary: In the wake of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) fifth nuclear test, many
questioned the efficacy of UN Security Council Resolution 2270.
Passed in March 2016, the resolution failed to prevent the DPRK’s
9 September nuclear test despite its strong rhetoric, additional trade
and financial sanctions, and many other new measures. How has
the DPRK been able to circumvent these measures and what can
be done about it? After six months of analysis, the Seoul-based
Asan Institute for Policy Studies and the Washington D.C.-based
Center for Advanced Defense Studies identified the structure and
methods that the DPRK may be using to evade sanctions imposed
by resolutions like UNSCR 2270.

Source: Woo Jung-Yeop and Go Myong-Hyun “In China’s Shadow:
Exposing North Korean Overseas Networks.” Center for Advanced
Defense Studies and The Asan Institute for Policy Studies, August
2016. http://en.asaninst.org/contents/in-chinas-shadow/

The report claims that the DPRK’s consistent structural trade
deficit of over one billion dollars, coupled with limited access
to foreign debt markets, suggests a large volume of illicit trade
activities. The accompanying passage from the report discusses
that DPRK agents and businesses depend on overseas networks
and third-party facilitators to conduct their business operations.
The passage notes that this dependence can be leveraged to disrupt
their methods.

“Overseas networks are vital conduits of hard currency for
the North Korean regime that remain exposed and vulnerable.
Overseas North Korean agents and entities depend on a range of
third-party facilitators for core business operations. We assess that
this dependence can be leveraged and disrupted if more detailed
information on the size, personnel, and modus operandi of such
networks, especially the methods employed to circumvent sanctions
can be generated.

A more thorough understanding of the DPRK’s trade patterns
and methods for evading sanctions makes the development of
more efficient multilateral sanctions possible. End OE Watch
Commentary (Galluzzi)

“As the DPRK grows increasingly dependent on its
overseas networks, it creates an opportunity for the
international community to leverage their financial
intelligence tools to squeeze the regime’s illicit
activity.”

...
As the DPRK grows increasingly dependent on its overseas networks,
it creates an opportunity for the international community to leverage
their financial intelligence tools to squeeze the regime’s illicit activity.”

The discovery of containers full of military equipment to include missile parts and Mig-21
fighter planes aboard a DPRK cargo vessel headed through the Panama Canal.
Source: http://avelana.ru/en/un-blacklists-operator-of-north-korean-ship/

OE Watch | November 2016

27

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

China Places Sensors in the South China Sea
OE Watch Commentary: In
the contested South China Sea,
where relations are strained
between China and many of the
nations in the vicinity, China
continues to expand its support
structure in the region. As
reported in the accompanying
passage on 13 October 2016,
China has deployed eight
floating sensors as part of
“an international observation
network,” and plans to have
20 sensors operating by early
next year. The sensors enable
China to monitor the “marine
environment up to a depth of 2
km using China’s own satellite
system.” The sensors are part of
an international project known
as Argo, a global observation
project involving more than
30 countries, according to
the article. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

Source: Viola Zhou, “China Deploys South China Sea Sensors to Boost Scientific Data in Disputed
Waters,” South China Morning Post Online (in English), 13 October 2016. http://www.scmp.com/
news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2027687/china-deploys-south-china-sea-sensors-boostscientific
All of China’s sensors, including the eight it deployed in September, form part of Argo, a global
observation project involving more than 30 different countries, which are managing more than 3,800
real-time sensors dotted across the world’s oceans. The information is shared by all countries involved
in the project. “Compared with other [Chinese] coastal seas, we do not have as much knowledge about
the South China Sea because it is relatively deeper,” said Xu Jianping, chief scientist of China’s Argo
project.
Every five days, the Argo sensors would automatically dive to a depth of 2 km to collect ocean data,
which was relayed to China’s Beidou navigation satellites once they had returned to the surface, Xu
said.
The first six domestically made sensors were put into the western Pacific just east of the Philippines in
2015. Data collected from the domestically made sensors was first sent to a Beidou receiving center in
Hangzhou for processing and then shared with an international database, which was accessible to all,
Xu said. At the moment, Chinese government and military did not have privileged access to the data,
he said. About 140 of the 3,800 floats currently in operation globally are owned by China, Argo’s latest
release shows. About 10 of the 2,000 floats that have been deployed by the US are also collecting data
in the South China Sea.
In August, Vice-Premier Zhang Gaoli endorsed the team’s suggestions to replace all imported sensors
with ones supported by Beidou and to make the data center in Hangzhou Argo’s third global data
center, after the two located in France and the US. Xu said Chinese scientists were also developing
technologies to probe sea waters down to depths of 4km to 6km.

The Maritime Silk Road will link China’s east coast to ports, including Colombo in Sri Lanka, Gwadar
in Pakistan, across the Indian Ocean, through the Red Sea to Greece’s Piraeus, ending in Venice.
After the completion of the South China Sea observation network next year, the team planned to deploy about 10 new sensors across
the area every year to replace those that had depleted batteries. Antony Wong Dong, Macau-based military analyst, said these sensors
could benefit China’s People’s Liberation Army and Navy indirectly as the operation of submarines required a large amount of data about
water temperatures, pressure and currents. ‘The South China Sea is very big and China still has a lot of blind spots,’ Wong said. “The sea
environment changes fast. It will be really dangerous to deploy submersibles if they don’t monitor the waters closely.”

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further,
he has taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian
territory that was taken, from his perspective, illegally.
This book describes Putin and the military’s use of
various strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s
new equipment and reform initiatives, and Putin’s
geopolitical quest for influence in the Arctic and
Ukraine. Included in the discussion are some of the
unintended consequences of his actions (negative
world opinion, sanctions, NATO responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | November 2016

28

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

China’s Strategic Support Force Must Innovate
OE Watch Commentary: On 29
August 2016 President Xi Jinping
inspected the Strategic Support
Force (SSF). As the accompanying
passage from a Chinese news
source discusses, he underscored
the importance of developing
such an organization, stressing its
responsibility for innovating and
helping to build a modern military.
The SSF is China’s response to the
development of new initiatives in
the military domain, such as the
predominance, in the Chinese view,
of “system of system” operations
under informatized conditions. It
is a new-type operational force
that specializes in safeguarding
national security. The force will
be in charge of information and
intelligence collection, surveillance,
electronic warfare, cyber-attacks
and defense technology, and space
management. It will be of interest
to follow how the force “innovates”
in the coming months. End OE
Watch Commentary (Thomas)

Source: Li Xuanliang and Li Guoli, “Xi Jinping Inspects the Strategic Support Force and its Organs,
Emphasizes Undertaking Important Historical Responsibilities, Aiming at World’s First Rate,
Courageously Making Innovations and Leaping Forward and Striving to Build a Powerful Modern
Strategic Support Force,” Xinhua Domestic Service, 29 August 2016. http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2016-08/29/c_135643139.htm
It is necessary to firmly seize preparation against war and preparation to fight, take the needs in
fighting as the pulling force, formulate the development strategy and the construction programs and
plans for the Strategic Support Force, speed up the building of a new type of training system and
comprehensively increase the deterrent and real combat capabilities. It is necessary to firmly seize
the work to deepen reform, establish ideas and concepts that are in keeping with the requirements
of building a new type of fighting force and of joint operations, establish scientific and highly
efficient operation mechanisms, optimize the scale, structure and formation of the troops and raise
the scientific level and improve the standard of all work. It is necessary to firmly regard innovation
as the driving force, speed up the innovation of military theories, seize the ox nose of science
and technology innovation to develop advanced technology and equipment, properly grasp the
cultivation of a new type of fighting force and the training of high-level capable personnel for science
and technology innovation, improve the management system and increase the accuracy and the
benefit-cost ratio of army building.
“What is most needed in the construction of the Strategic Support Force is innovation and its
fundamental way out lies in innovation. It is necessary to bravely innovate thinking, innovate modes
and innovate development on the basis of mastering the objective laws, implement the strategic
guidelines of paying greater attention to focusing on real combat, paying greater attention to using
innovation as a driving force, paying greater attention to system construction, paying greater
attention to intensiveness and high efficiency and paying greater attention to military-civilian
blending, push forward all items of construction with a high standard and at a high starting point
and strive to open up a path for building a new type of combat force with Chinese characteristics.”

Keeping NBC Relevant

Flame Weapons in the Russian Armed Forces
By Charles Bartles
The Russian Nuclear, Biological, And Chemical (NBC) Defense Troops are tasked with
identifying NBC threats in the environment, performing decontamination of troops and
equipment, and most interestingly, employing aerosols and flame weapons to engage
the enemy. In most militaries, flame weapons have traditionally belonged to the NBC
Troops. The popularity of such weapons has waned significantly throughout the world,
but not so in the Russian Armed Forces. While the utility of NBC Troops in today’s
asymmetric warfare is questioned in other armies, Russian NBC Troops firm grasp of
flame weapons keeps them relevant, engaged, and makes them an important asset in the
Russian maneuver commander’s toolbox.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Flame_2015.pdf
OE Watch | November 2016

29

CHINA, KOREA, JAPAN

Top

Russia and Chinese Naval Exercises Show
Convergence of Interests
OE Watch Commentary: As the adjacent
article in the Times of India discusses, in
September 2016 China and Russia held
eight-days of exercises known as “Joint-Sea
2016” in the South China Sea. Although
these exercises have taken place annually
since 2012, this was the first time they have
been held in the South China Sea, although
they were not near disputed areas between
China and its neighbors. The timing was also
significant, according to the article, because
the exercises were announced after an
arbitration court in The Hague struck down
China’s claims on its “nine-dash line” in the
South China Sea.

“Together, Chinese and Russian participants undertake
defence, rescue, and anti-submarine operations, in addition
to joint island seizing and other activities.”

In terms of scale, the Russians contributed
90 marines to the exercise, amphibious
landing craft, and two helicopters. The
Chinese brought 11 fixed-wing aircraft, eight
helicopters and 160 marines. The Chinese
forces appeared to train to invade Taiwan or
the Japanese Senkaku Islands. Russia, for its
part, may be training for future attempts to
regain hegemony in the Black Sea.
But more than anything, the exercises
serve a political purpose in showing ChineseRussian political consensus on keeping
the US out of East Asia, where Russia and
China both have territorial disputes with
US-ally Japan, and preventing the US from
“meddling” in Ukraine and Syria, where
Russia and China have similar foreign policy
positions.1 The article points out that President
Putin backed China’s position on the South
China Sea at the G20 Summit in Hangzhou,
China on September 4-5, 2016, a week before
the exercises took place.
Given the converging interests of Russia
and China in both Syria, Ukraine and East
Asia and opposition to a strong US presence
in these regions, more such exercises can be
expected between the two countries. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)
1

For two articles alleging US “meddling” in Ukraine
and Syria from the Russian perspective, please see:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/07/world/europe/ukraine.html?_r=0 and https://www.rt.com/
usa/335618-syria-anniversary-obama-meddling/

Chinese and Russian leaders, Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin, as seen in the adjacent
image, are likely to approve of future joint naval exercises between their countries.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/3443685.html

Source: “Russia-China to hold joint naval exercise in South China Sea,” Times of India.
com, 11 September 2016. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/china/Russia-China-tohold-joint-naval-exercise-in-South-China-Sea/articleshow/54276495.cms
The naval drills, the first by Russia and China in the South China Sea, held off southern
China’s Guangdong Province, are reportedly not close to Beijing’s nine-dash line which
was struck down by the arbitration court in The Hague in July in a case brought by the
Philippines over Beijing’s maritime claims there.
President Vladimir Putin expressed his backing to Beijing’s stand [on the South China
Sea] this month while attending the G20 summit in Hangzhou. “We stand in solidarity and
support of China’s position on this issue - not to recognize the decision of this court.’ He,
however, said the dispute should be resolved peacefully by the parties concerned.
The naval drill features navy surface ships, submarines, fixed-wing aircraft, ship-borne
helicopters, and marine corps and amphibious armoured equipment from both navies.
Most of the Chinese participants will come from the Nanhai (South China Sea) Fleet under
the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN). Together, Chinese and Russian participants
will undertake defence, rescue, and anti-submarine operations, in addition to joint island
seizing and other activities.

OE Watch | November 2016

30

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Armenia’s Acquisition of the Iskander
Ballistic Missile System
OE Watch Commentary: Armenia’s
Independence Day parade on 21 September
in Yerevan included a number of the
country’s weapon systems and equipment,
but as the accompanying excerpted articles
show, the appearance of the Iskander ballistic
missile system received significant attention.
The missile systems were first noticed during
a rehearsal for the parade and initial reports
questioned if they came from the Russian
102nd Military Base in Gyumri, Armenia
instead of being a part of the Armenian
Armed Forces’ inventory. However, the
parade confirmed Armenia’s acquisition
of the system, causing a lot of concern in
Azerbaijan. The accompanying passages
from Armenian and Azerbaijani sources
discuss this development, suggesting that
it will likely prompt an arms race between
the countries. Ultimately, the only winner
of that race may be Russia’s arms market, as
discussed.
While Armenia is the first recipient of the
missile system, Russian military analyst
Pavel Felgenhauer notes in the article from
Azerbaijani Haqqin, that it is likely an export
version of the Iskander and that its firing
range is considerably less than the version
Russia possesses. Regardless, both the
Azerbaijani and Armenian sources claim that
this will force the government of Azerbaijan
into purchasing the Iskander E system or an
expensive air defense system.
The article from the Azerbaijani Musavat
states that Russia sold the Iskander systems to
Armenia in order to ultimately maintain sales
of weapons and equipment to Azerbaijan.
While the government of Azerbaijan in
recent years bought unmanned aerial vehicles
from Israel and maintains military ties with
Turkey, it has also acquired Russian S-300
surface-to-air systems and in a substantial
contract with Russia, bought T-90S
tanks, BMP-3 armored infantry fighting
vehicles and several of the TOS-1 multiple
rocket launcher systems. Outside of these
acquisitions, the inventory of Azerbaijan’s
Armed Forces is mostly Russian made
equipment. If the appearance of Iskander
systems in Armenia causes Azerbaijan to
make a large acquisition in kind, who it
comes from will be worth watching. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“It is most likely that

Russia did sell it to
Armenia, but perhaps,
Azerbaijan will be
prompted to acquire the
system...”

Armenian Armed Forces displayed its Iskander ballistic missile
system for the first time at the country’s Independence Day parade
in Yerevan on 21 September 2016.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/20/
Armenian_Army_OTRK_Iskander.jpg

Source: Павел Фельгенгауэр: «Россия может продать «Искандеры» и Азербайджану»
(Pavel Felgenhauer: “Russia can also sell “Iskanders” to Azerbaijan”),” Haqqin, 23
September 2016. http://haqqin.az/news/80753
…Most likely the system sold to Armenia is “Iskander E”…The firing range of it is less
than the “Iskander M” at 200 km. “Iskander M” has a range of 500 km….Russia cannot
sell “Iskander M” to Armenia because it would be a violation of Moscow’s international
obligations. The sale of a missile system with a range of over 300 km to a state that is a
belligerent in a conflict is a violation of international obligations.” – Felgenhauer…
…the Russian Defense Ministry has not denied or confirmed that the “Iskander” missile
system was sold to Armenia…This increases the suspicion that the “Iskander” at the military
parade in Armenia is from the arsenal of the Russian military base. It is most likely that
Russia did sell it to Armenia, but perhaps, Azerbaijan will be prompted to acquire the
system…Armenia will not be able to use this weapon for short-term military operations in
Nagorno-Karabakh. However, if a large-scale war between Azerbaijan and Armenia starts,
the use of “Iskander” is likely…Felgenhauer believes that Russia’s main goal is to maintain a
balance between Azerbaijan and Armenia…
Source: “Expert: Armenian Iskanders will make Azerbaijan dip into its purse,” News.am, 25
September 2016. http://news.am/eng/news/348207.html
“…Since the demonstration of Iskander systems at the military parade in Yerevan, the
Azerbaijani press began disseminating news on the purchase of weaponry from Turkey and
Israel, including purchase of Iron Dome missile defense system…. there is one problem,
which the Azerbaijani media keeps silent on: Iron Dome is not designed for counteracting
weaponry like Iskander,” the expert noted. In his words, in this case the issue might concern
a more developed Israeli system ARROW 2, or Hetz, if, of course, Israel agrees to sell it to
Azerbaijan. “Such a system is incredibly expensive, not guaranteeing full security…”
Source: “Rusiyanın “İsgəndər” təxribatının arxasındakı qorxunc motiv - Azərbaycanı təsir
altında saxlamaq! (The scary motive behind Russia’s “Iskander” provocation – to keep
Azerbaijan under its influence!),” Musavat, 24 September 2016. http://musavat.com/news/
siyaset/rusiyanin-isgender-texribatinin-arxasindaki-qorxunc-motiv-azerbaycani-tesir-altindasaxlamaq_380068.html
A new phase of subversive politics of the Kremlin; Why does Baku’s military cooperation
with Turkey, Israel, and other countries bother the Kremlin?...It is still unknown if the
“Iskander” missile systems demonstrated in Yerevan belong to Armenia or Russia…It turns
out that Armenia only has “Iskander E” systems and so the same weapons can be sold to
Azerbaijan…
…This draws attention to an important nuance. In recent years Baku has been increasingly
supplied with weapons from Turkey, Israel, and China. This is an automatic reduction in
weapons and equipment from Russia, which means Russia’s importance for Azerbaijan is
decreased. The motive behind the “Iskander” provocation is for Russia to maintain its arms
market…
OE Watch | November 2016

31

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Investigating the Bombing at the Chinese
Embassy in Bishkek
OE Watch Commentary: The 30 August suicide
bombing attack that struck the Chinese Embassy in
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan came as a major surprise to
many in the country and in the region, particularly
since the motive and the people responsible for the
bombing have not been fully established. While
Kyrgyzstan’s National Security Committee (GKNB)
blamed a Uyghur terrorist group for the attack,
the accompanying excerpted articles discuss that
important parts of the case remain unclear.
The article from the Kyrgyz Kloop provides a
summary of what happened. It reports that the
GKNB believes the bomber, Zoir Khalilov, was
a Uyghur traveling on a Tajikistani passport and
belonging to the East Turkestan Islamic Movement
(ETIM, aka the Turkestan Islamic Party). The GKNB
believe that the ETIM also has a connection with
Jabhat al-Nusra in Syria.
Coming a few weeks after the attack, the article
from the Central Asian Fergana News reported more
information revealed from the GKNB’s investigation.
The article notes that a few of the suspects identified
by the GKNB said that they were surprised at
having been accused of involvement in the attack.
The article also mentions that they have not been
hiding from authorities and that two of them have
even been in contact with the Kyrgyz Consulate in
Istanbul, where they have worked for several years.
The investigation named a couple of suspects who
apparently helped the bomber, but it is worth noting
that only the bomber has been identified as an ethnic
Uyghur, while the other suspects have not. While the
GKNB investigation pointed to a Uyghur terrorist
group, the article from the Chinese Xinhua points
out an important aspect of the incident: no terrorist
group has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Regardless of who carried out the bombing, this
marked the most violent incident against a Chinese
target in Kyrgyzstan in over ten years. Two shootings
of Chinese government officials have taken place
in Bishkek, one in May 2000 when two Chinese
officials visiting from the Xinjiang Province were
killed and another in June 2002 when a Chinese
diplomat was killed. Both incidents allegedly
involved a member of a Uyghur terrorist group.
Following the 2002 incident, Chinese officials
reportedly worked with Kyrgyzstan’s security
services on the investigation, but there has been
no indication that this is taking place following the
bombing at the embassy. The Kyrgyz government
will likely continue to investigate the bombing and
take various security measures to prevent another
incident, but it remains to be seen what impact
the incident will have for China. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

Source: Titova, Aleksandra. “ГКНБ: Теракт в посольстве Китая совершен по
заказу «уйгурских террористических группировок» (GKNB: The attack in the
Chinese Embassy was carried out on the order of “Uyghur terrorist groups”),”
Kloop, 6 September 2016. http://kloop.kg/blog/2016/09/06/gknb-terakt-v-posolstvekitaya-sovershen-po-zakazu-sirijskih-terroristov/
The State Committee of National Security reported that the identity of the suicide
bomber who committed a terrorist attack in the Chinese Embassy in Bishkek on
30 August…Zoir Khalilov, born in 1983 and a citizen of Tajikistan, is a member of
the “East Turkestan Islamic Movement” terrorist organization…The investigation
also established that those who ordered the attack are Uyghurs operating in Syria
associated with the terrorist organization “Jabhat al-Nusra”…
The explosion took place after the suicide bomber rammed the gate of the Chinese
Embassy in a “Mitsubishi Delica” and detonated a “powerful” improvised
explosive device…The explosion injured three people, two ... were hospitalized with
severe injuries…
Source: Saipov, Shohrukh. “Взрыв в посольстве Китая в Бишкеке: Как
нежданно-негаданно стать террористом (The explosion at the Chinese Embassy
in Bishkek: How one quite unexpectedly became a terrorist),” Fergana News, 19
September 2016. http://www.fergananews.com/articles/9101
…Five people were arrested in the framework of the case, another four are wanted.
Three of the wanted people have declared their innocence in the attack…Abu Saloh
was born Sirozhiddin in the village Kashkar-Kyshtak, Kara-Suu District (Osh
Oblast) of Kyrgyzstan – Abu Ahmad is a native of the Suzak District, Jalal-Abad
Oblast (born) Burhaniddin Zhantoraev. Both were born in 1971 and are wanted
internationally…Izzotillo Sattybaev, a native of Osh, is also wanted…According to
the investigation, Sattybaev entered Kyrgyzstan 16 June 2016 on a Tajik passport…
He assisted the suicide bomber in the manufacture of the IED and flew to Istanbul a
few hours before the attack…
Investigators believe that two Kyrgyz citizens living in Istanbul were involved –
Mubarak Turgenbaev, a tour agent for “Adal Tour” who (is accused) of coordinating
the financing, and Ilyas Sabirov, allegedly involved in transferring militants to
Syria…Turganbaev wrote on his Facebook page of his innocence...He pointed out he
was in touch with the Kyrgyz Consulate in Turkey…Ilyas said he was surprised by
news that he is suspected of involvement in the attack in Bishkek…“I already gave
testimony in the Kyrgyz Consulate.”…Three of the four wanted by authorities in this
case – Zhantoraev, Sabirov and Turganbaev – are not hiding and intend to prove
their innocence…
Source: “Kyrgyzstan’s intelligence agency initiates investigation into attack
on Chinese Embassy,” Xinhua, 31 August 2016. http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2016-08/31/c_135646334.htm
China’s Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying also confirmed at a press
conference that three people of the Chinese embassy were injured in the attack…
The explosion also caused damage to the Chinese embassy’s east door and walls, as
well as buildings next to the Chinese embassy…
The Chinese Foreign Ministry immediately expressed shock at the attack. It
strongly condemned the car bombing, and required Kyrgyzstan to “take immediate
and necessary measures to ensure the safety of Chinese people and institutions,”
Hua said… So far, no one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
OE Watch | November 2016

32

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

The Afghan Government’s Peace Agreement with
Gulbiddin Hekmatyar
OE Watch Commentary: The draft peace agreement
signed by the government of Afghanistan and the head
of the Hezb-i-Islami party, Gulbiddin Hekmatyar, on 22
September has been noted as a major step in resolving
the conflict in Afghanistan. The accompanying
excerpted articles from Afghani news sources report on
the impact of the agreement and point out that there are
several issues that have yet to be resolved.
The first article provides an overview of the
agreement’s provisions for Hekmatyar and members
of Hezb-i-Islami. The author notes that Hekmatyar has
been granted amnesty for past crimes; that the Afghan
government will work to have his name removed
from international terrorist blacklists, and that he will
eventually be allowed to take part in political activities.
The author also notes that there is concern about the
peace agreement not stipulating members of Hezb-iIslami to disarm; regardless of the fact that the current
operational capabilities of Hezb-i-Islami have been
questioned and the organization has not been involved
in significant attacks over the past several years.
The second article points out that removing
Hekmatyar’s name from blacklists will take time. It
also notes a suggestion from the spokesman of the High
Peace Council regarding what to do with armed Hezbi-Islami members: issue them a license to help provide
security in Afghanistan. It is not known if Hezb-iIslami members will fulfill this role or how they will be
integrated back into Afghanistan.
One of the provisions of the peace agreement is
that the Afghan government will provide Hekmatyar
security. Some in Afghanistan view the agreement with
skepticism and question why Hekmatyar should be
forgiven for what they saw as crimes committed against
the Afghan people during the Civil War in the 1990s.
In addition to issues with Hekmatyar’s reconciliation,
the government of Afghanistan hoped the peace
agreement would pave the way for a similar agreement
with the Taliban, but the third and fourth articles
discuss that only the splinter Taliban group led
by Mullah Rasool support the deal. As one of the
articles note, earlier this year the Taliban responded
to the peace agreement with an announcement of its
spring offensive. The Afghan government reached
the agreement with Hezb-i-Islami after on and
off negotiations that lasted over six years. While
negotiations with the Taliban will have a different
dynamic, the peace agreement’s provisions and the
perception of Hekmatyar coming back into Afghanistan
show how difficult it could be. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“The comeback of Hekmatyar may also produce security
problems as the agreement does not say anything about
the disarmament of the HIA [Hezb-i-Islami Afghanistan]
fighter...”
Source: Ahmad Hasib Farhan, “The Implications of Peace Deal with Hekmatyar,”
Khaama Press, 1 October 2016. http://www.khaama.com/the-implications-ofpeace-deal-with-hekmatyar-01986
The peace deal between the Government of Afghanistan and Gulbadin
Hekmatyar is the first noteworthy success of the National Unity Government
(NUG) in peace efforts…Based on the agreement, the NUG committed to grant
Hekmatyar amnesty for all his past offenses and release certain Hezb-i-Islami
(HIA) prisoners. The Afghan government also agreed to press for the lifting of
American and UN sanctions on Hekmatyar. The deal also includes provisions for
his security at government expense. HIA will agree to cease all military antigovernment activity…In addition, the government will officially announce the right
of HIA to be active both in the political and the social arenas and participate in
all elections…
The peace deal, which unequivocally gives privileges and honor, seems a
political compromise rather than an actual peace agreement. Hekmatyar will
return to Kabul not to live an isolated life but rejoin politics once again…the
comeback of Hekmatyar may also produce security problems as the agreement
does not say anything about the disarmament of the HIA fighter… What will be the
fate of those armed men, who under the leadership of Hekmatyar fought against
the government and people of Afghanistan for the last 15 years?...The deal doesn’t
specify any measures…
Although HIA announced a ceasefire and ordered its fighters to stop any kind of
attacks on Afghan security forces, the Afghan government must remain vigilant…
The government must produce a proper strategy for the implementation of the
peace agreement with Hekmatyar. Successful implementation of the agreement is
as crucial as the signing.
Source: Majidi, Tariq. “Removal of Hekmatyar’s Name From UN Blacklist Will
‘Take Time’,” Tolo News, 23 September 2016. http://www.tolonews.com/en/
afghanistan/27422-removal-of-hekmatyars-name-from-un-blacklist-will-take-time
Legal experts said on Friday that removing the name of the Hizb-e-Islami’s
leader from the UN’s blacklist following the signing of the peace agreement will
take some time… legal experts have said that in the event of Hizb-e-Islami not
upholding their side of the deal, they would again be blacklisted…
Following the al-Qaeda attack on the World Trade Center buildings in the U.S
in 2001, the United Nations Security Council announced that the world body
would blacklist a number of individuals and organizations for their involvement in
terrorism…If the refugees who live in Shamshato camp and they belong to Hizb-eIslami, if they are armed, the government should issue them licenses so that they
can contribute to the security of the country,” said Shahzada Shahid, spokesman
to HPC.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

33

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Continued: The Afghan Government’s Peace
Agreement with Gulbiddin Hekmatyar
Source: “Hekmatyar committed a major crime by signing peace
deal: Taliban,” Khaama Press, 27 September 2016. http://www.
khaama.com/hekmatyar-committed-a-major-crime-by-signingpeace-deal-taliban-01954

Source: “Taliban splinter group welcomes signing of peace deal by
Hezb-e-Islami,” Khaama Press, 27 September 2016. http://www.
khaama.com/taliban-splinter-group-welcomes-signing-of-peace-dealby-hezb-e-islami-01959

The Taliban militants group in Afghanistan has slammed Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar for allowing his party to sign a draft peace agreement
with the Afghan government, saying Hekmatyar has committed ‘a
major crime’… The Taliban group however rejected the plea and
announced its spring offensive in April this year forcing the Afghan
government to give up peace efforts and respond to Taliban’s
insurgency with military option.

A splinter group of the Taliban led by Mullah Rasool welcomed the
signing of a draft peace agreement between the Afghan government
and Hezb-e-Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar… The sources
further added that the endorsement by Mullah Rasool faction of
the Taliban is based on the stance of Hezb-e-Islami to work for the
withdrawal of the foreign forces from the country.

Junior officers in the Afghan Public Protection Force (APPF) undergo training in Kabul as the unit replaced nondiplomatic, private security companies in Afghanistan over the past several years. The government of Afghanistan
will provide security for Gulbiddin Hekmatyar as a provision of the peace agreement signed in September.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:120306-F-TA961-040_%286833323600%29.jpg

OE Watch | November 2016

34

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

How Russia Perceives and Responds to Threats
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages contain
noteworthy comments by Colonel (ret.) Igor Korotchenko, the chief
editor of the National Defense journal, and former managing editor
of Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer (Military-Industrial Courier).
Korotchenko describes many of Russia’s security concerns; and
discusses Russia’s “fortress” mentality and the causes for some of
Russia’s recent defense reforms.

Source: Yevgeniya Artamonova, “Airborne Brotherhood: Airborne
Troops General on The Modern-Day Paratrooper’s Military
Training,” transcript of the “General Staff” program, 4 September
2016, <https://life.ru/t/%D0%B7%D0%B2%D1%83%D0%
BA/899257/vozdushnoie_bratstvo_ghienieral_vdv_nil_o_voiennoi_
podghotovkie_sovriemiennogho_diesantnika>, accessed 20 October
2016.

In the first passage, a transcript from the “General Staff”
program, Korotchenko points out that geography is a prime concern
for Russia, as it sees hostility and instability on all sides: From the
West, a hostile NATO; to the north, a growing militarization of
the Arctic; to the South, many unstable states and militant Islam;
to the East, China, a country which Russia believes will be a great
military power in 10-15 years, and an unstable North Korea.

[Artamonova] We are beginning the “General Staff” program…
Our guests are the military expert Igor Korotchenko, chief editor of
the journal “National Defense”…

Korotchenko’s comments about Russian air defense capabilities
highlight the Russian fear of US precision guided munitions,
along with other programs such as the Ballistic Missile Defense
System and the threat they pose to Russian strategic deterrent
capabilities. Korotchenko also discusses the establishment of the
National Guard as an effective means for battling “US-backed
political forces” which the Russian leadership has often stated
that the US is funding in Russia. This belief echoes other Russian
pronouncements that the US is responsible for color revolutions, the
Arab Spring, and the Maidan movement by way of US government
funded NGOs and social media.
The second accompanying article from Vzglyad (Newspaper)
includes commentary from Korotchenko about the role of the
Airborne Troops (VDV) in the future. On 4 October 2016, Colonel
General Andrey Serdyukov was appointed as the new Commanderin-Chief of the VDV. Previously, Colonel Serdyukov was a deputy
of the Southern Operational Strategic Command (OSK) during
the annexation of Crimea in 2014. Russian media has reported he
had a major role in the operation, possibly serving as the senior
operational level commander. By most accounts, the operation
was a great success, and so it is not surprising that Serdyukov was
appointed to this important position, as the Airborne Troops are the
General Staff’s Strategic Reserve, that perform many missions that
the US would only conduct with special operations forces.
Korotchenko’s comments point out that the VDV will remain
as the “go to” organization in the Russian Armed Forces when
decisive action is needed expediently. The heavily mechanized
VDV will not only be expected to perform the typical “behind
enemy lines” missions expected of airborne forces throughout
the world, but also as a rapid reaction force to quickly deploy
anywhere along Russia’s massive border to repel or delay any
would-be invader. Korotchenko believes that the VDV will need
to be technically sophisticated to face these threats, but the VDV
will also need to be flexible to combat the “hybrid threat,” Russian
parlance for Western funded NGOs and social media that induce
political opposition, discontent, and protests. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

[Korotchenko]… Present-day wars are becoming mobile, fastmoving, and it is often necessary to resolve the question of reaching
a particular geographical point rapidly…We see today that the
situation is unfortunately unstable everywhere. This applies to the
entire perimeter of the Russian border. Let us go around the main
sectors of our borders. The Arctic: An arms race is under way
today and the NATO countries are actively interfering in the region.
British submarines turn up in the Arctic Ocean on a fairly regular
basis. These are multirole submarines and they are rehearsing these
tasks together with the Americans. Of course they are not busy
with geographical discoveries, they are preparing for operations
in Arctic conditions, including potential strikes by cruise missiles
against targets in the territory of the Russian Federation. Plus,
we are observing very vigorous activity by American submarine
forces. All of this obliges us to keep our powder dry. If we look
at the western borders -- energetic activity by the North Atlantic
Alliance. In Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia troop groupings are
being deployed today, and in the future new bases and airfields will
appear -- a factor that is really forcing us to strengthen our combat
readiness.
The Black Sea, Russia’s southern borders: We see active
penetration of the Black Sea by NATO naval forces, despite the
Montreux Convention, which limits to 21 days the presence of
warships from countries that do not have direct access to the
Black Sea. Nonetheless American NATO multirole warships are
periodically in the Black Sea and spy planes are active there, and so
we are forced to monitor the threats and counter them if necessary.
The southern borders: The death of President of Uzbekistan Islam
Karimov could be the prologue to large-scale destabilization
throughout the southern region. Here militants from and other
terrorist organizations are active, so the Central Asia salient could
become explosive. We are obliged to take account of this probability.
The Far East, China: Our relations with China are shaping up
well. It is an economic superpower. In somewhere around 10-15
years’ time it will become a military superpower. Although we are
bound by friendly relations, we must carefully monitor everything
that happens on our Far Eastern borders, especially since an arms
race is under way there. This affects practically all the countries
without exception, beginning with Singapore and ending with states
like North Korea and Japan. The situation on the Korean peninsula
remains permanently explosive. The DPRK possesses nuclear
weapons. Considering that the Americans and the South Koreans
are constantly carrying out combat exercises that are provocative
to P’yongyang, everywhere on the perimeter of the Russian border
is unquiet, and the guarantee of our present
(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

35

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: How Russia Perceives and Responds to Threats
status, that 22 June [the date Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941] will never be
repeated in our century, is powerful and effective Russian Armed Forces.
[Unidentified listener] Nina Vasilyevna here…At the moment there is war in the air, everyone
is saber-rattling. Anyway, capitalism always gets out of a crisis by means of a war. Tell me,
what is being done for the people, to protect them? Previously we had bomb shelters, as
children we sheltered in our apartment building -- back then, they provided them -- but now
the Army might not even fight. Remember Yugoslavia -- it was mainly civilians who suffered
there. What is in store for us? The Army is one thing, but nothing is being done -- that is my
impression.
[Korotchenko] Today no bomb shelter can save you from a precision, penetrating munition.
Whereas previously they used to build bomb shelters to protect the population from
high-explosive bombs, today penetrating munitions, including concrete-piercing bombs,
are capable of overcoming any protection, and therefore an entirely different approach
is employed for the protection of the civilian population. By a decision of the president
of Russia, an aerospace defense system is being created in the country. This means the
echeloned deployment of various systems and means of air and missile defense and of course
the information contour for acquisition and tracking. The objective is as follows: No hostile
aircraft can operate over the territory of the Russian Federation, it will immediately be shot
down at the moment of crossing the state border. This, today, is also the new concept of
protection of the civilian population during wars and military conflicts. Our military simply
will not let them, the way the Germans broke through to Moscow and bombed us before…

Colonel (ret) Igor Korotchenko.
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Коротченко,_
Игорь_Юрьевич#/media/File:Igor_Korotchenko-1.jpg

[Unidentified listener] …A rather sensitive question about the National Guard. This is of course a large, very costly force. There will be
300,000 guys sitting in barracks. This is not rational. Why was it not possible to create a skeleton National Guard, on the Swiss model…
[Korotchenko] Russia, if we look at the map, is very different in size and space from Switzerland. What is good for Switzerland is absolutely
not suitable for Russia. The point of the idea of creating the National Guard is first and foremost to combat terrorism and organized crime as
well as possible attempts by a number of Western countries to initiate events of the type that happened in Ukraine. They bring out militants
who subsequently act like a battering ram, rocking the state power hierarchy. Today we can see that certain US-backed political forces are
already declaring their readiness to bring several thousand so-called activists into Moscow on election day, people who in actual fact are
trained for possible violent operations. I suggest that activity of this kind -- if it takes place -- should be instantly cut short by the organs of
law and order, the law enforcement agencies…
Sources have named the new commander of Russian Airborne
Troops who is coming to replace Colonel-General Vladimir
Shamanov. The VDV is not as yet confirming the information.
Experts, though, are certain that Colonel-General Andrey Serdyukov,
who provided security at the time of the referendum in Crimea in 2014, will be handling the elements of the winged infantry also…
Source: Ruslan Davletshin, “The Mission Is Adaptation of the VDV
to New Wars,” Vzglyad Online, 30 September 2016, <http://vz.ru//
society/2016/9/30/835495.html>, accessed 20 October 2016.

Colonel of the Reserve Igor Korotchenko, chief editor of the journal National Defense and member of the Defense Ministry Public Council,
believes that the change of commander is a natural occurrence, considering both the fact that Colonel-General Shamanov could head up the
Defense Committee in the new State Duma and the necessary personnel rotation. In addition, the former military officer evaluated the key in
which the Airborne Troops would develop….
…”Clearly, so mobile a component of our country’s armed forces as the Airborne Troops will have to be employed not only in its traditional
operations but also in operations of an all-purpose nature under the conditions of modern hybrid high-tech war. It is preparation for
managing such combat operations which will be a task of the new commander,” Igor Korotchenko believes.
“Today everything is changing since the nature of a modern future war is influencing the development of the armed forces and combat
arms. The formations are becoming more all-purpose. The aims and objectives of the structural changes which will occur in the VDV mean
adaptation to the new wars in which Russia will, possibly, have to participate,” the analyst added.
The analyst remarked in response to the question: “Is the mass insertion of units in the enemy rear front and center at this time,” that the
VDV cannot itself take off and that everything here comes down to the possibilities of Military Transport Aviation.
“There is a number of limitations here. But I believe that the VDV has to be ready for any employment scenario. Insertion in the enemy rear
included,” Igor Korotchenko summed up.
OE Watch | November 2016

36

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Two Faces of Russia’s Operational Reserve
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s Ministry of Defense
has been considering wide-scale reforms of the military
reserve system for several years. The current reserve
system was inherited from the Soviet Union, and was
designed for a doctrine that required maintaining a large
strategic reserve of troops that could be mobilized in the
event of large-scale warfare. In recent years, there has
been some debate about whether Russia needs to maintain
such a large strategic reserve or switch to more of an
operational reserve. Opinions vary between two major
camps. Reformers say that an operational reserve would
better enhance security
because it would be smaller,
better trained, more able to
quickly become combat ready
in a national emergency, and
more likely to called in an
emergency. In contrast, the
older, retired senior officers
believe that the capability
to mass mobilize should be
maintained at all costs. The
accompanying passages from
Russian sources provide
insight into this debate,
and suggest that Russia is
currently experimenting with
the two models.
The first article, from the
service newspaper Flag
Rodiny discusses the US style
of an operational reserve,
with reserves reporting for
duty and serving alongside
active service members or
serving in reserve units
that support the active component. Similar to the US
reserve system, this system consists of an active reserve
component and inactive reserve component (Individual
Ready Reserve), with the operational reserve conducting
annual training requirements, receiving monthly stipends,
and being completely voluntary. The intent is to maintain
a cadre of officers and enlisted soldiers who regularly
train with particular active units; in the event of their
unit’s mobilization, the reservist would be called to duty to
provide support or backfill as needed.
The second article from the Russian Defense Ministry
and the third piece from Izvestiya discuss a new way to
use reservists, as stand-alone units calls territorial-defense
battalions (BTO). Russia experimented with these in the
Vostok-2014 military exercise. Territorial defense units
have appeared elsewhere in Eastern Europe and usually
consist of relatively lightly armed infantry who are assigned
to secure critical infrastructure in the
(continued)

“The 47th Territorial Defense Division numbers several
thousand personnel. It seems, on the one hand, that such
a number of fighting men is clearly excessive…but one
should take into account that they will have to provide 24hour protection not only for military facilities, but also for
bridges, tunnels, roads, electric power stations, and other
equally important infrastructure facilities…”

Source: http://eng.mil.ru/images/kavkaz-2016-900-EN.jpg

Source: Vladimir Pasyakin, “Reservists: on the Line,” Flag Rodiny Online, 13
September 2016, <http://sc.mil.ru/files/morf/military/archive/FR_2016-09-12.
pdf>, accessed 20 October 2016.
The Kavkaz-2016 strategic command staff training exercise has concluded
successfully. It was so extensive that it embraced not only troops of the
Southern Military District and the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla
belonging to it but also several regions of Russia from which reservists were
called up. Sevastopol’ reservists among them, incidentally.
Russia’s Ministry of Defense constituted territorial defense subunits from
servicemen of the reserve, Captain 1st Rank Vyacheslav Trukhachev, chief of
the Black Sea Fleet’s Information Support Section, announced.
Over 600 citizens in the reserve were assigned to training assemblies
organized at the base of the Black Sea Fleet’s Separate Naval Infantry
Brigade…They all took part in the military assemblies in military positions
corresponding to their occupational specialties in subunits of

(continued)

OE Watch | November 2016

37

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Two Faces of Russia’s Operational Reserve
rear. These forces are not intended
to serve in high-intensity combat
operations abroad. The intent of this
form of an operational reserve is to
unburden the active duty force of
these duties, allowing the latter greater
freedom of movement to conduct
combat operations. The Izvestiya
article also discusses the establishment
of a territorial-defense division in the
Crimea, an unsurprising development
if recent Russian comments about
saboteur infiltration into Crimea from
Ukraine are believed.
The current reserve system, which
was inherited from the Soviet Union,
was composed of conscripts and
officers who had completed their
mandatory service and had been
discharged from active service, with
rare call-ups to test mobilization
capabilities. A consequence of the
Soviet Union’s mass mobilization
doctrine was the necessity to maintain
units and equipment for these mobilized
reservists. These units were/are
manned by small full-time cadres that
would keep the equipment serviceable
and maintain enough institutional
knowledge to bring the mobilized
reserve up to some level of combat
readiness before deployment. Many of
these “skeleton units” were disbanded
after the 2009 “New Look” reforms, as
there was a belief that resources were
being wasted on maintaining a mass
mobilization capability to the detriment
of bringing active units up to full levels
of operational readiness.
The first talk of an operational
reserve was in 2009, when the Defense
Ministry announced that 60,000
junior officers were to be dismissed
from active service, but would be
afforded the opportunity to contract
into a reserve status that would pay
on average 20,600 rubles ($870) per
month. This idea has gained some
traction. All of the accompanying
passages discuss that the Kavkaz-2016
exercise has used both types of
operational reserve, suggesting that
Russia is testing both models. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

the Black Sea Fleet’s Naval Infantry and Coastal Defense Troops…
The instruction process was a thorough one. It involved all categories of participants in the
assemblies, from private to colonel and captain 1st rank. It dealt with all types of training -- drill,
weapon, engineer, physical, tactical, specialized, WMD protection, medical, and others. The
reservists were taught to place and to clear mines of different models and functions, they fired
small arms of all types, they drove vehicles and armor… In short, the training was both serious and
comprehensive. The reservists recalled their knowledge of military affairs, they revived the skills
they acquired during their service, they upgraded their professional military proficiency…There
were also representatives of the fairer sex, mainly medical personnel, among the more than 600
residents…
Source: “Four Territorial Defense Subunits Manned by Reservists Taking Part in Kavkaz-2016 in
the Southern Military District,” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation Online, 6 September
2016, <http://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12094815@egNews>, accessed 7
October 2016.
Four territorial defense subunits manned by reservists -- citizens in the reserve and forming
part of the mobilization reserve -- are taking part for the first time in the practical operations of
mobilization training during the Kavkaz-2016 strategic command staff training exercise (SKShU).
A motorized infantry battalion, two companies, and a reconnaissance platoon have been
constituted from military units of the Southern and Central Military Districts and the Northern
Fleet. In all over 700 reservists from Rostovskaya, Novosibirskaya, Arkhangel’skaya, and
Murmanskaya Oblasts have been drafted into the subunits.
During the Kavkaz-2016 exercise the territorial defense subunits will perform missions to
reinforce the security and defense of military installations in the south of Russia. The reservists will
participate in missions to detect and destroy a notional adversary’s sabotage and reconnaissance
groups and illegal armed elements in designated areas. Just prior to the exercise all the reservists
underwent individual basic training and combat teamwork training as elements of subunits.
The new manning system stipulates the enlistment for combat training missions of citizens
(reservists) in the reserve who, in line with the prescribed procedure, have concluded a contract on
remaining in the reserve in a particular military unit in a particular military position for purposes
of guaranteeing the Armed Forces’ prescribed strength levels both in a period of mobilization and
for the resolution of crisis situations.
On completion of the military training assemblies all those involved will receive pay and
allowances commensurate with their military rank and the military position held, and will also be
given monetary remuneration in the amount of their average salary.
Source: Aleksey Ramm, “A Division Has Been Created in Crimea to Combat Saboteurs,” Izvestiya
Online, 15 September 2016, <http://izvestia.ru/news/632465>, accessed 20 October 2016
Several thousand reserve servicemen from various regions of Russia will provide security for the
peninsula’s military and social facilities. The 47th Territorial Defense Division (DTO) has been
formed in Sevastopol’, the members of which will be able to help the law-enforcement agencies
fight against terrorists and saboteurs, to protect strategic facilities, and, when necessary, to
clear up the consequences of natural disasters and catastrophes. The basis of the unique military
formation are not regular soldiers and officers, but reservists whom the military department
summons to training camps several times each year.
“The division’s formation was completed at the end of August this year. During the ‘Kavkaz-2016’
exercises, one of the division’s battalions was placed on alert and began performing combat tasks,”
a Defense Ministry representative familiar with the situation told Izvestiya. “The soldiers provided
security for military and civilian facilities not only in Sevastopol’ itself, but also throughout
Crimea. They also conducted exercises in intercepting and eliminating enemy
(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Two Faces of Russia’s Operational Reserve
“In peacetime, a territorial defense

saboteurs.”
According to Viktor Murakhovskiy, the Arsenal Otechestva military magazine’s
editor-in-chief, territorial defense tasks (protecting military and civilian facilities,
combating reconnaissance and sabotage groups, and preventing acts of sabotage)
were, until recently, shared among the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), MVD
Internal Troops (now the National Guard), the Federal Security Service (FSB),
the Ministry for Affairs of Civil Defense, Emergency Situations, and Elimination
of Natural Disasters (MChS), and other security structures. But now, a decision
has been made not to disperse the functions among departments, but to transfer
the bulk of them to the Defense Ministry…
“The formation of the first territorial defense units and subunits in the Russian
Army began back in 2014-2015. The recent ‘Kavkaz-2016’ exercises became a
test of the work accomplished. Although there were indeed certain difficulties,
the Defense Ministry leadership was, on the whole, satisfied with the result
obtained,” Viktor Murakhovskiy said. “In peacetime, a territorial defense division
is an ‘empty’ military unit in which only a few regular soldiers perform service.
But, in the event of combat operations or natural disasters arising, the required
number of reservists is drafted into the division.”

division is an ‘empty’ military unit
in which only a few regular soldiers
perform service. But, in the event
of combat operations or natural
disasters arising, the required number
of reservists is drafted into the
division.”

The division’s exact organizational and manning structure is unknown but,
notionally, it comprises several territorial defense battalions, whose personnel
drive around in trucks and are armed with small-arms weapons and several
mortars.
It is noteworthy that, in the event of an alert, not only reservists from the
Republic of Crimea report for service with the 47th Territorial Defense Division,
but also from other regions of Russia. A Black Sea Fleet spokesman explained
to Izvestiya that reserve servicemen had been moved to Sevastopol’ for the
“Kavkaz-2016” exercises by military-transport aviation…
The 47th Territorial Defense Division numbers several thousand personnel. It
seems, on the one hand, that such a number of fighting men is clearly excessive,”
Dmitriy Boltenkov said. “But one should take it into account that they will have
to provide 24-hour protection not only for military facilities, but also for bridges,
tunnels, roads, electric power stations, and other equally important infrastructure
facilities. The territorial defense division’s creation in Crimea is, therefore,
completely justified.”

Source: http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo.htm?id=9561@
egClassification&ra=cmsPhotoGallery

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked concepts
related to modern conflict in a provocative
manner designed to stir up debate and critical
thinking. As Geoff Demarest puts it: “I hope
that some of the ideas in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf

OE Watch | November 2016

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Personnel Developments
OE Watch Commentary: Since the collapse of the
Soviet Union, the Russian Federation has made many
reforms, but some of these reforms have tied the hands of
the military, especially in regard to personnel practices.
Most conscripts now serve one year terms, half the term
served by conscripts in Soviet times. Furthermore,
conscripts are prohibited from being sent to certain areas
in the Southern Military District (Chechnya, Dagestan,
Ingushetia) and from being deployed abroad and to
combat zones. As a result, the Russian military has had
to reevaluate the role of conscripts. The accompanying
passages from Russian sources discuss the Russian
military’s personnel needs and a reform that is being
considered to address some of them.
In general, the Russian military is attempting to
transition most conscripts to combat service support
positions which require few skills; providing them
militarily useful skills through pre-conscription training
programs; and deferring conscription until the conscript
has been credentialed through a vocational training
program. Despite these efforts, some problems remain.
Conscripts are difficult to field in combat operations,
and retaining them past the one-year period requires
legislative change or national emergency. Considering that
most Russian units are manned at 70-80% staffing level,
retaining conscripts past the one-year conscription period
is likely essential to fully staff most units, and put the
country on a war footing.
The accompanying article from Gazeta.ru discusses
a new personnel reform that would allow the Russian
military to offer short-term contracts. These contracts
would be available to conscripts whose term is nearing
completion, and would enable them to perform military
service for up to an additional year. This reform would give
the Russian Federation several advantages. The change
in the legal status of conscripts would allow extended
service durations and more possibilities for deployment.
Thus, it would enable the military to avoid the prohibitions
involving conscripts, allowing it to flesh out fighting
units when needed. If increasing the staffing level of the
military is part of Russia’s mobilization plan, these shortterm contracts would provide a more scalable and discreet
way of accomplishing this without the high profile actions
of legislative change or declaring a national emergency.
This reform would also be used to legalize volunteers
fighting in Syria, and presumably other hot spots, if
needed. The Russian Federation has struggled with the
issue of private military companies and armed volunteers
serving outside of Russia’s borders. On one hand, these
elements can be desirable, as their actions cannot be
directly attributed to the Russian Federation. On the other
hand, there is concern about armed formations that are not
directly controlled by the state, and the consequences when
(continued)
these formations decide to return home.

“At present it is forbidden to send service members
performing military service under the draft to hotspots,
especially those abroad, and formations and units of the
Armed Forces are experiencing difficulties in ensuring
the full complement of personnel with the required
qualifications...”
— Colonel General Sergey Kizyun
Source: Maksim Solopov, Mikhail Khodarenok, and Inna Sidorkova,
“Speedy Service: The Idea of Short-Term Contracts for Participants in
Military Operations Abroad Approved,” Gazeta.ru Online, 5 October 2016,
https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2016/10/05/10231943.shtml
The government has approved a Defense Ministry draft law on shortterm contracts for members of composite and nonorganic subunits for the
duration of antiterrorist operations abroad. The amendments will make it
possible to conclude a contract solely for the duration of specific combat
tasks, and this will make it possible, among other things, to legalize the
volunteer formations that are already operating in Syria, military experts
explained to Gazeta.ru.
The Russian government commission on legislative activity has approved
amendments concerning short-term contracts with service members for
participation in operations abroad to combat international terrorism. The
Defense Ministry’s proposals consist in the possibility of recruiting soldiers
and officers for service for a period of less than a year, solely for the
duration of the performance of specific tasks during antiterrorist operations
outside Russia and also on long-distance voyages by Navy ships.
“The need has arisen to increase the mobility of troops (forces) and to set
up composite and nonorganic subunits and man them in a short space of
time with service members performing military service under contract for
the purpose of the prompt performance of short-term but important tasks
connected with their participation in operations to suppress the activities of
terrorist and extremist organizations,” the government website says.
Under existing legislation the first contract to perform military service
for soldiers, seamen, and NCOs is concluded for two or three years, and
for officers and warrant officers for five years, the announcement says.
The conclusion of contracts for a shorter term (from six months to a year)
is envisaged solely during a period of exceptional circumstances -- the
elimination of the consequences of natural disasters, a state of emergency,
or the restoration of constitutional order, or else for the purpose of
participation in peacekeeping operations.
The change in the legislation was required “in connection with the
increased activity of international terrorist and extremist organizations.”
…The amendments envisage offering citizens who are in the reserve and
those whose term of service under the draft is nearing completion (not
more than one month before the expiry of their term of military service)
the opportunity to participate in an operation to suppress international
terrorist activities outside Russian territory and also in voyages by ships by
concluding a contract to perform military service for a time lasting until the
ending of the circumstances that gave rise to the necessity but for not more
(continued)
than one year…
OE Watch | November 2016

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian Personnel Developments
The accompanying article from Nezavisimaya Gazeta discusses
officer shortages in the Eastern Military District. Although most
units may be manned at a 70-80% staffing level, the officer positions
are filled at a higher rate due to the officer corps being the backbone
and sole repository for institutional knowledge in the Russian Armed
Forces. According to the article, the officer positions in the Eastern
Military District are currently manned at a 92% level. This situation
was caused by several factors including: reforms of the previous defense
minister, pay and allowances, demographic issues, and living conditions
for serviceman and their families in the Eastern Military District.
Although not mentioned, it is possible that some of the district’s
personnel problems may be related to Russia’s centrally managed officer
personnel system. The Western and Southern Military Districts are
currently undergoing many changes, and substantially increasing their
capabilities. Since these districts are presumably the highest priority
due to current tensions with the US and NATO, and are gaining new
units, it is likely that personnel management officials are prioritizing
manning these districts, to the detriment of the Eastern Military District.
In order to fill some of these vacancies, the Russian Armed Forces are
instituting policies to more easily allow reserve officers to assess into
the active component. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Legalization of Formations in Syria
“This will make it possible to recruit soldiers and commanding
officers to perform strictly specific tasks. Apart from that,
this draft law will give the Defense Ministry the opportunity
to legalize volunteer formations performing combat tasks in
hotspots, including Syria,” the independent military expert
Anton Lavrov, one of the authors of the book The Syrian
Frontier, explained to Gazeta.ru.
Previously Gazeta.ru wrote in detail about soldiers from a
private military company training at the Mol’kino training
ground in Krasnoyarskiy Kray who took part in combat
operations in the territory of Syria and Ukraine.
Colonel General Sergey Kizyun, ex-chief of staff of the
Leningrad Military District, also regards the Defense
Ministry’s draft law as a correct initiative. “At present it is
forbidden to send service members performing military service
under the draft to hotspots, especially those abroad, and
formations and units of the Armed Forces are experiencing
difficulties in ensuring the full complement of personnel with
the required qualifications,” the general explains…

Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “The Troops in the East Are Awaiting Officers of the Reserve,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 9 September 2016,
http://www.ng.ru/politics/2016-09-09/3_kartblansh.html
Some elements of the Eastern Military District are experiencing a significant officer shortfall, and the personnel arms of the Defense
Ministry are evidently not as yet capable of rapidly resolving this problem. Such a conclusion suggests itself from the action taken by ColonelGeneral Sergey Surovikin, commander of the Eastern MD, who has ordered his subordinates to go to the country’s central regions and to
recruit officers from the reserve for the district’s units and formations there.
It was reported earlier that the Defense Ministry is fielding an entire division on Chukotka. New units and formations are being organized
in the Arctic and on the Kurils. Infrastructure and garrisons for them are being built pro-actively, but there are problems, evidently, with the
recruitment for the new subunits of skilled military specialists.
In order to tackle them, “field teams organized in the Eastern MD will work in the enlistment and recruitment offices of 26 components of
the Russian Federation.” This was announced yesterday by Colonel Aleksandr Gordeyev, acting chief of the press service of the Eastern MD.
He says that representatives of the Eastern MD will exercise promotional activity in many cities of the Russian Federation. “This is being
done to enlist for military service officers of the reserve earlier discharged owing to staffing measures.” This action of the command is taking
place in the contemporary history of the Far East and the Eastern MD for the first time. It is known that this region is experiencing a shortage
of skilled labor, including an absence of young officers in the reserve. This is why reservists are being recruited for Eastern MD subunits
throughout Russia. But, as a rule, this effort is being organized in centralized fashion by the Defense Ministry Main Personnel Directorate
(GUK). It follows from official Eastern MD information that the GUK performed such work earlier. And, as a result, 564 officers of the
reserve from 50 components of the Russian Federation were recruited for the Eastern MD. “They have all been appointed to positions in more
than 130 military units of the Eastern MD, including combined-arms formations, the Pacific Fleet, and the Air and Air Defense Formation,”
Gordeyev observed.
But Nezavisimaya Gazeta sources in Eastern MD headquarters inform us that the centralized activities involving recruitment for the field
from officers of the reserve organized earlier have not resolved the district’s career-officer problem. A considerable number of official
appointments are under strength, particularly in the newly formed units and formations. At the start of 2016 Nikolay Pankov, state secretarydeputy defense minister, announced that manning of the army and navy with officers in 2015 constituted 92 percent. “This is an unprecedented
manning level. We have now set the task of reaching 93 percent in 2016,” he said. This will be achieved through “the call-up for military
service of officers discharged in preceding years.”
This is what is now happening, evidently, but with problems. A rough estimate shows that the Russian army is short of approximately 17,000
officers. An 8 percent shortfall is not noticeable in outfits in the field…
OE Watch | November 2016

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Possible Force Structure Changes for Russia’s
Combined Arms Armies
OE Watch Commentary: Russia appears to be developing a scalable
and affordable mobilization capability that balances light and mobile rapid
reaction forces, combat ready elements (BTGs) in all maneuver units,
lower readiness brigades and divisions, and an operational and strategic
reserve. The accompanying articles from Russian sources discuss these
plans and how they are driven by Russia’s perception of the changing
nature of threats it faces.
The accompanying article from Izvestiya discusses recent plans to
transition three Ground Forces’ motorized rifle brigades in the Southern
Military District into a singular motorized rifle division, the 42nd
Motorized Rifle Division. This development is in addition to Russian
plans to place three divisions near the Ukrainian and Belarusian borders.
The article points to the changing nature of threat that Russia is now
facing as the reason for this transition, mainly that antiterrorist operations
are less of a concern (which the brigade is better suited for), while the
possibilities of peer-to-peer conflict are on the rise concern (which the
division is better suited for). Interestingly, the transition from three
brigades to one division will likely result in an overall reduction in net
manpower, as motorized rifle brigades typically have 4,500 soldiers
per brigade, while a motorized rifle division has approximately 8,500
personnel. These new divisions appear to be smaller than the motorized
rifle divisions in Soviet times that were manned with approximately
13,000 soldiers.

42nd Motorized Rifle Division Patch “If not us, then who”
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/42-я_гвардейская_мотострелковая_
дивизия#/media/File:%D0%A8%D0%B5%D0%B2%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%
BD_42-%D1%8F_%D0%B3%D0%B2.%D0%BC%D1%81%D0%B4_.jpg

The accompanying article from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer
(Military Industrial Complex) also discusses the changing nature of
threat as the reason for transitioning some brigades to divisions, but also
presents another reason that Russia may be doing so. In current Russian
Force structure, most combined arms armies consist of a several maneuver
brigades and support units. The article points out that in the early 1990s,
Russia considered a combined arms army structure that consisted of
maneuver divisions, maneuver brigades, and support units. This force
structure was intended to provide more options for the scalable projection
of combat power. The article suggests that developing this combined arms
army force structure may be the path that Russia is now on. Currently,
there is no uniform set of capabilities that each combined arms army
processes, but there have been several Russian media reports that this is
the desired end state. If this system is implemented, the combined arms
army (or tank army) could consist of several motorized rifle and tank
divisions and brigades; headquarters, artillery, air defense, reconnaissance,
and MTO (logistics) brigades; and two regiments, an engineering regiment
and a NBC defense regiment.
The accompanying article from RIA Novosti discusses Russian plans to
have each maneuver regiment and brigade capable of fielding two battalion
tactical groups (BTGs) fully staffed with contract serviceman, with each
BTG having approximately 700-900 personnel. Russia intends to be able
to field 96 BTGs by the end of 2016, 115 BTGs by 2017, and 125 BTGs
by 2018. Although the Battalion Tactical Group (BTG) is the instrument
of choice for Russian force projection in Eastern Ukraine, the articles
from Izvestiya and Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer make it very clear
that Russia views a combination of divisions and brigades as essential for
technologically advanced peer-to-peer combat.

(continued)

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Possible Force Structure Changes for
Russia’s Combined Arms Armies
Given Russian views, policies and
laws on rapid reaction forces, personnel
staffing levels, prohibitions on the use
conscripts, and past performance, a
general idea of a Russian mobilization
and deployment to counter a hostile
force can be described. During premobilization, conscription tours would
be extended to help flesh out units
with lower levels of readiness. The
first units to deploy would be the rapid
reaction forces, the Russian Airborne,
Naval Infantry, and/or high readiness
conventional units, which would deploy
en masse to deter or slow the enemy.
Individual BTGs from lower level
readiness units may deploy to support
the efforts of the rapid reaction forces, or
they may wait for their parent brigade or
division to come to full strength through
the reserve mobilization, and then deploy
to the front. Meanwhile, the strategic
reserve would be called to replace losses
at the front, and reconstitute units in
the rear. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

Source: Aleksey Ramm, “The Ministry of Defense Reviving Legendary ‘Chechen Division’:
The 42nd Motorized Rifle Division will no Longer Battle Terrorists, but will Protect the State
Border,” Izvestiya Online, 27 September 2016, <http://izvestia.ru/news/634572>, accessed 20
October 2016.
Ministry of Defense of Russia has decided to once more stand up the 42nd Guards Motorized
Rifle Division (42 MRD) in Chechnya. In 2009, the legendary military unit, once considered to
be “the most fighting” division in Russia’s Armed Forces, was disbanded by former Minister
of Defense Anatoliy Serdyukov. To replace the 42 MRD in Chechnya separate motorized rifle
brigades were created, which now will again be united in the division and will be engaged in
protecting the state border.
“The decision has already been made and work to reform the division has now begun,” an
informed source in the military establishment told Izvestiya. “The division will be based on the
three motorized rifle brigades now stationed in the Republic of Chechnya. These brigades will
be reorganized as motorized rifle regiments of the division.” According to Izvestiya’s data the
Russian military establishment plans to complete the formation of the division over the course of
next year…
“Previously the three brigades in the Republic of Chechnya were primarily intended to render
assistance to local law enforcement organizations conducting counter-terrorist operations,”
Izvestiya was told by the chief editor of the trade journal Arsenal of the Fatherland, Viktor
Murakhovskiy. “To a great extent these military units had unique personnel and weapons that
were primarily designed to resolve antiterrorist missions. But today the main mission of the
brigades have changed. They are participating in protecting the state border, and in the event of
war they must stop an enemy offensive and then rout it with a counter-offensive. In contrast to
the brigades, the more heavily armed and bigger divisions are more suitable for such operations.
By virtue of their organic resources they can be more autonomous and can resolve a rather wide
range of both defensive as well as offensive missions.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Possible Force Structure Changes for
Russia’s Combined Arms Armies
Source: Pavel Ivanov, “The Marshal’s Idea: Why Russia’s Ministry of Defense is Restoring
Divisions,” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 5 October 2016, <http://vpk-news.ru/
articles/32744>, accessed 20 October 2016.
At the end of September the decision of the Ministry of Defense to restore the 42nd Guards Motorized Rifle Division (MRD) in the Republic
of Chechnya became known...The restoration decision was to a great extent unexpected even by these separate motorized rifle brigades,
since as recently as last year at an experimental exercise the high command of the Ground Troops reached the conclusion that under present
conditions three brigades were better than one division for the North Caucasus region…Meanwhile, the revival of the 42nd motorized rifle
division again begged the question: what were the latest reforms of the Ministry of Defense seeking to accomplish?
There are More Serious Threats than the Bandit Underground
…Regarding a second combined arms army, which the leadership of the Ministry of Defense announced would be formed in the Southern
Military District, practically nothing is known. It is assumed that the new army would protect the border with Ukraine (which had become
unstable) from the south. In this configuration the 20th Combined Arms Army and this unidentified army would replicate the configuration of
the two groups of Russian forces deployed along the border with Ukraine in the spring of 2014 and which have remained there, in fact, until
the middle of last year.
It can be assumed that the new Southern Military District combined arms army will include the 20th Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade…
Against the background of the appearance of a new army, the restoration of the 42nd Motorized Rifle Division also becomes wholly obvious.
Over recent years Chechnya has been transformed from a source of instability into a relatively peaceful and quiet region…In point of fact,
the war against terrorism has been assumed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Federal Security Service and the newly created Russian
National Guard. During the past five years the three motorized rifle brigades in Chechnya have very rarely engaged in fighting bandit
underground units and they have done so with rather small forces. For the most part operations have been limited to the provision of spetsnaz
reconnaissance companies from the reconnaissance battalions. Yes, the brigades are well suited for antiterrorist missions, but the priorities of
the military establishment have changed…
Therefore the missions of the newly created 42nd Guards Motorized Rifle Division have changed. It will no longer be hunting terrorists, but
will be transformed into a reserve force designed to fight a high-technology enemy in the region of the Ukrainian border. In fact, the formation
will become a strategic reserve in the southern sector. In addition to defending the Ukrainian sector, the 42nd MRD will protect the state
border with Georgia and support the 4th Military Base situated in South Ossetia.
The “Tulpans” as a Sign of Completed Work
Let us see what the modern Russian combined arms (tank) army looks like and what kind of units and formations comprise it. After several
years of experiments by the leadership of the Ministry of Defense, the optimal organization and staffing structure of the combined arms
armies has finally been defined.
The main strike force of the combined arms army will be the motorized rifle and tank divisions. But the armies will retain tank and motorized
rifle brigades (two or three). In point of fact, the idea of Marshal Nikolay Ogarkov, which he proposed to Russia’s first Minister of Defense
Pavel Grachev, has been implemented… Ogarkov proposed having one or two motorized rifle (tank) brigades in each combined arms army,
which would act as operational maneuver groups of the combined arms army, attacking the enemy’s main defenses and destroying his
logistics support, and in the event of a breakthrough of our own army’s defensive positions, act as a mobile and rapid “plug.”…The combined
arms armies will also consist of: command and control, artillery, air defense, reconnaissance, and logistics brigades, and two regiments, an
engineering regiment and a radiation, chemical and biologic defense regiment.
Currently, the 20th and the 58th combined arms armies have practically the entire complement of subordinate units and subunits at their
disposal. It is noteworthy that, in addition to the conventional artillery brigades, the southern flank of the Russian group of forces on the
border with Ukraine will be reinforced by artillery subunits armed with the super-heavy 2S4 ‘Tulpan’ [240mm self-propelled] mortars, which
are the most effective assets for destroying enemy permanent firing positions and fortifications.
In point of fact, over the course of two years the Russian military establishment has rather covertly conducted a unique reform, countering
both the NATO threat as well as that of a destabilized Ukraine. Of course, many nuances still remain classified from broad public view and
the mass media, but nonetheless the volume of work that has been done to create new units, formations and armies is impressive. And the
main thing is that the features of the super “new look” of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation have been thought through and tested.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Possible Force Structure Changes for
Russia’s Combined Arms Armies
Source: “The Armed Forces Will Increase by Twofold the Number of Battalion Tactical Groups
with Contract Servicemen,” RIA Novosti Online, 14 September 2016. <https://ria.ru/defense_
safety/20160914/1476912391.html>, accessed 20 October 2016.
Next year the Russian Armed Forces will increase twofold the number of battalion tactical
teams, which are completely manned by contract servicemen, Chief of the General Staff General
of the Army Valeriy Gerasimov told journalists on Wednesday.
In his words, a battalion tactical group (BTG) is a reinforced battalion, which consists of from
700 to 900 servicemen. As a rule, there are two of these battalion tactical groups in each brigade
or regiment, the general pointed out.
“We have created battalion tactical groups, which are completely manned by contract
servicemen, in the military districts, including in Southern Military District. Right now there are
66 of those battalion tactical groups, there will be 96 by the end of 2016, 115 – next year, and 125
the year after next,” Gerasimov said, while summing up the results of the Kavkaz-2016 Strategic
Maneuvers.
Based upon his assessment, the presence of contract servicemen, both in combat subunits and
also in the troops logistics support structures, imparts a “totally different quality to combat
service.”

2S4 ‘Tulpan’ 240-mm self-propelled mortar.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2S4_Tyulpan#/media/File:240-mm_self-propelled_mortar_2B8_%28SAC-2S4%29.JPG

OE Watch | November 2016

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Material Technical Support Brigade’s
Role in Logistical Support
OE Watch Commentary:
Perhaps one of the most
controversial of the “New
Look” reforms was the
reform of the Russian
logistics system. In the last
month, four major articles
were published on various
aspects of the work of
Russian logisticians. The
accompanying passages
from two of these articles
discuss the operations and
capabilities of the Material
Technical Support (MTO)
brigade in logistical support.
Russia inherited its
military logistics and combat
service support system
from the Soviets. The
Soviet system was based
upon the idea of mobilizing
the whole societal and
economic potentials of
the Soviet Union for
the conduct of war. In
practice, this meant that
all civilian resources could
and would be used in the
event of war. In particular, civil manufacturing
and transportation/infrastructure were designed to
also facilitate the conduct of war. In recent years,
the Russian Federation has come to the conclusion
that mass mobilization, and its required logistics
requirements, is no longer desired nor sustainable.
Organizationally, the Soviet logistic system
was based upon several “Rear Services,” material
support organizations, and a separate armaments
branch to sustain the force in war and peace.
In order to streamline or right size some this
massive logistics capability, the “New Look”
reforms merged these various organizations into
the Material Technical Support (MTO) structure.
Despite the different naming, MTOs have the same
function as their Western counterparts, essentially
provisioning and maintaining the force to help
ensure constant readiness.
The capability of the Russian Federation to project
and sustain combat power has long been questioned,
especially after the difficulties experienced by
the Russian military in the 2008 Russo-Georgian
War. But Russia’s recent exploits in the Ukraine
and Syria have proved that Russia can successfully
project and sustain combat power.
(continued)
Despite the recent MTO successes

Source: ppt-online.org

Source: Timur Lambayev, “Cohesiveness Was the Basis of Success,” Suvorovskiy
Natisk, 26 September 2016, accessed 20 October 2016.
A special tactical exercise under the direction of Buryat Combined-Arms Combined
Formation Deputy Commander for MTO Colonel Pavel Barinov was held in the
separate logistic support brigade commanded by Colonel Andrey Antonov. The
exercise objective was to inspect combat readiness units and their ability to execute
missions for their intended purpose within prescribed time periods. Special attention
was given to an improvement in knowledge and skills of commanders at all levels in
exercising command and control of subunits and military units under near-combat
conditions.
A field bulk distribution pipeline was deployed in a timely manner and POL was
supplied to combat vehicles by personnel of manual installation teams and of the
TUM-150V pipelaying vehicle of the separate pipeline battalion…Maintenance
battalion personnel were faced with the task of deploying a disabled vehicle
collection point with evacuation and restoration of unserviceable armament and
military equipment disabled during the exercise…Personnel of the route traffic
control battalion…successfully performed tasks of preparation; operation; route and
facility repair, security, and defense; and restoration of military motor roads, and
the provision of traffic control and regulating service during the exercise…Using
mobile bakery equipment…they baked bread in support of units participating in the
exercise…

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Material Technical Support Brigade’s
Role in Logistical Support
Source: Captain (ret.) Vladimir Pasyakin and Lieutenant Colonel Ivan
of the Russians, there are still significant problems
regarding maintenance issues. Russia briefly attempted
“outsourcing” the maintenance component of its logistics
system, an effort that was unsuccessful. Commanders
complained about the level of service and feasibility
of contractor-provided maintenance services on the
battlefield.
In current practice, operator, unit, and organizational
maintenance is provided by uniformed servicemen,
while depot-level maintenance is provided by contract
labor (usually by way of a state owned company) at a
maintenance depot or by the equipment manufacturer.
Other logistic problems related to the “New Look”
reforms, have not been the result of the logistic system
itself, but of the personnel system. In general, most
contract NCOs fill “trigger puller” positions, and
positions requiring advanced skills and training. This
means that combat support and service support roles
have a lower percentage of contract NCOs. This is
occurring at the same time the Russian Armed Forces
are procuring more technologically advanced equipment,
which subsequently require more maintenance
support. This situation has resulted in maintenance
issues being one of the top complaints of Russian
maneuver commanders. In order to meet some of these
maintenance challenges, the Russian Federation is now
standing maintenance regiments at the military district
level to support maintenance operations. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

Mishunin, “Battlefield Toilers,” Sevastopol Flag Rodiny Online, 2 September
2016, <http://sc.mil.ru/files/morf/military/archive/FR_2016-09-02.pdf>,
accessed 20 October 2016.

In accordance with the Russian Federation Armed Forces training plan for
the 2016 training year and as part of an integrated special exercise in kinds of
comprehensive support, a special exercise was held in the latter half of August
under the direction of Russian Federation (RF) Deputy Defense Minister
Hero of Russia General of the Army D. Bulgakov where logistic support was
provided to operations of forces with a buildup of the threat of aggression on
the Southwestern Strategic Axis.
An entire set of practical activities was implemented during the exercise,
logistic support entities demonstrated capabilities in using state-of-the-art
models of arms and military equipment, and command posts coordinated along
the entire vertical chain of command and control using all state-of-the-art
information exchange channels operating in the RF Armed Forces. Such a
large-scale event was the final phase of preparation by MTO entities for the
year’s main test -- strategic command and staff exercise Kavkaz-2016.
The high evaluation given by Deputy Defense Minister General of the Army
Dmitriy Bulgakov of the practical employment in the exercise of Fleet logistic
support forces and assets in the interests of a troop grouping being established
conditionally on the Southwestern Strategic Axis attests to subsequent
readiness to apply all achieved know-how for practical execution of missions
in support of troops both during as well as at the conclusion of Kavkaz-2016…

Right on the range, subunits of the separate MTO brigade’s separate
maintenance battalion showed their proficiency in organizing and conducting
technical reconnaissance during the battle to land an amphibious assault force,
and actions of repair and recovery teams to evacuate damaged equipment
to a disabled vehicle collecting point…Personnel of a logistic support platoon
of a naval infantry brigade assault landing battalion unloaded supplies from Mi-8 helicopters and loaded them on a supply transport. After
supplies had been unloaded, the “seriously wounded” were loaded into the helicopter for evacuation.
Actions of the crew of a Mi-26T helicopter with refueling equipment were among vivid exercise episodes. It landed in the vicinity of the
mass equipment fueling sector. Helicopters of this type are designed for operational delivery of POL to aircraft basing areas and to armored
vehicle armament and equipment assembly areas, with their subsequent refueling on the ground by the open as well as closed method. The
helicopter can transport over 16 tons of fuel…a column of five ATs-10.5-53212 tanker trucks with PZP-10A field fueling points is returning to
the field fuel storage depot for replenishing stores of fuel after accomplishing the mission of supporting troops in the mass refueling area…
The leadership’s interest was drawn by the mockup of an overturned BMP-2 which had tipped over from the explosion of a demolition
charge…A BREM-1 and REM-KL were summoned to the site of the explosion to evacuate the BMP to the disabled vehicle collection point
(SPPM). On arriving, the vehicles used regulation winch cables installed on the prime movers to hook up to the BMP-2 from opposite sides
and began tipping the vehicle back over…
A mobile containerized bakery section was situated at a road intersection. It was designed to bake pan bread under field conditions with a
productivity rate of 12 tons a day for units without field bread baking equipment...Next to the mobile bakery is the laboratory of the center
for veterinary-sanitary expertise and laboratory diagnostics for expert appraisal of food to discover a change in food product properties and
establish the presence of harmful impurities, toxic and radioactive substances, and adulterated food…
A bath and laundry combine intended for personnel baths and laundry in military units without their own bath and laundry service
equipment…The combined productivity rate is 1,000 kg of dry laundry and 800 personnel baths in 10 hours of operation…
Fuel is the blood of war, exercises, and the military organism. The PSG-600 field fuel storage depot was deployed at the shoreline beyond
the road intersection with the objective of establishing fuel reserves along the forward movement of troops…The depot deployment site
was chosen for the possibility of receiving fuel in depot storage reservoirs from sea transport under austere beach conditions. The VTN-73
integrated port service vessel transfers fuel to the depot. A unit for refueling a ship without mooring is connected to the field fuel storage
depot to support receipt of fuel from an oceangoing tanker under austere beach conditions…The capacity of the field fuel storage depot tank
farm is over 500 m³…The T/O&E of the fuel storage depot envisages containers, a POL laboratory, and depots of drummed oils, property, and
supplies as well as fuel service equipment and lifting and engineering equipment…
OE Watch | November 2016

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Logistic Vehicle Modernization
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Armed Forces
are incorporating interoperability and modularity not just
into combat vehicles, but also into logistical vehicles. The
accompanying article discusses Russian manufacturer
KamAZ’s new project for a new, air droppable, 4x4 vehicle,
presumably, that will be a member of the Mustang family.
Former Defense Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov decided to
shift course on the logistical vehicle modernization effort
by abandoning the Ural’s Motovoz family in favor of the
KamAZ’s Mustang family. The Mustang family consists
of three chassis, the KamAZ-4350 (4x4), KamAZ-5350
(6x6), and KamAZ-6350 (8x8). This shift was likely due to
KamAZ being part of the State Corporation for Assisting the
Development, Production, and Export of High-Tech Industrial
Products (Rostec). Currently, the Russian Armed Forces have
almost completely retired their Ural-4320s, ZIL-131s, and
GAZ-66s. The Motovoz trucks are still in service, and will
remain in service for the foreseeable future, but are relatively
few in number. The vast majority of logistical vehicles in
service with the Armed Forces are of KamAZ’s Mustang
family, and the KamAZ-4350 is now the standard vehicle
found in the battalion’s logistical support platoons.
In terms of capabilities, the Mustang family has about the
same payload capacities as the Motovoz family of vehicles,
but Russian logisticians point out other differences between the families.
In general, most logisticians are of the opinion that the KamAZ Mustang
family is best suited for over the road hauling at distances of over 500-600
km, while the Ural Motovoz family is best in less austere environments
where off road characteristics are most important. Another difference is
technical complexity, the Mustangs are substantially more complex than the
Motovoz vehicles, preventing operators and organizational level mechanics
from conducting many repairs on the Mustang vehicles that they could
otherwise perform on the Motovoz family of vehicles. Due to this situation,
the brigades’ MTO battalions, and army group and military district MTO
brigades have greatly increased their lift capacities, but are not always capable
of delivering materials directly to the subunits at the forward edge of the
battle area. In general, The Russian Armed Forces and military forces of the
Interior Troops (MVD-VV) appear to be integrating both the Mustang and
Motovoz family of vehicles as they complement each other.
In terms of standardization, reportedly 90-95% of KamAZ’s Mustang
family’s vehicle components (including POL) are now interchangeable. These
vehicles not only have components interchangeable with other KamAZ
vehicles, but also interchangeable with subcomponents and parts of other
manufacturers such as engines produced by the Urals Automotive Plant (Ural)
and cabs produced by the Italian firm Industrial Vehicles Corporation (Iveco).
This line of effort towards interoperability and modularity is paralleled
throughout the Russian defense industry and is most apparent in combat
vehicle development. Although the Mustang family is currently Russia’s
solution for interoperability, Russia has already started its next generation of
logistic vehicles, the Tayfun and Platforma families. These vehicles will take
integration one step farther, by utilizing a common chassis for logistic and
some combat vehicles. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Image Courtesy: Vitaly Kuzmin

Source: “KamAZ Intends To Create New Air-Droppable
Cargo Truck for Airborne Troops,” TASS Online, 9
September 2016, <http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/3609174>,
accessed 11 October 2016.
KamAZ plans to begin work in 2017 on developing new
air-droppable cargo trucks for the Russian Airborne to
replace the outdated GAZ-66 trucks. Viktor Isakov, adviser
to the company’s general director.., announced this on
Friday .
“Given the current situation, we propose setting up in 2017
a united R&D project to create a unified family of special
logistic-support equipment which can be air dropped by
parachute or by airland delivery. Let us give this project
a provisional name, Logist-VDV,” Isakov said at a round
table meeting held during the international militarytechnical forum “Army 2016.”
According to him, the development of a new vehicle
involves the creation of vehicles with a 4x4 wheel
configuration weighing 18.5 tonnes for air dropping and
better protected vehicles with a 6x6 configuration weighing
26.5 tonnes for the airland delivery method. The new
vehicles are expected to replace the outdated GAZ-66
trucks.
“The new vehicles are intended for logistic and landing
support units, and in maintenance and medical formations,”
the adviser to the general director explained.
OE Watch | November 2016

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Military Success in Syria?
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past year, the typical Russian
media consumer has been fed a consistent, and largely optimistic
diet regarding the role which Russian military forces are playing in
Syria. According to this narrative, the Russian military (primarily
air force assets) have helped to both
degrade terrorist elements and strengthen
Syrian security forces. On a daily basis,
Russian military officials highlight
successful operations which purportedly
demonstrate progress in regaining
stability for the “legitimate Assad
government.” However, a recent article
from the pro-Kremlin news source,
Gazeta.ru, suggests that such a sanguine
depiction could be deceptive.

“Russian military advisory staff has been withdrawn
from Syria. The central headquarters of the Syrian
Armed Forces currently have no Russian advisers.”

The article begins by describing how
the Russian military has reduced its
overall military presence in Syria, with
“just one aviation group left at the base in
Hmeimim.” While the author posits that
these reductions may be predicated upon
economic motives, he also describes
many of the challenges in trying to
effectively support the Syrian military.
For instance, he points out that most of
the Soviet and Russian-trained Syrian
officers “have been deliberately dismissed” resulting today with “virtually
no Russian-speaking officers left in the Syrian Army.” Besides problems
with communication, the author claims that the remnants of Syrian
security forces are plagued with “nepotism, corruption, sycophancy,
intrigues, and fraud.” The author further asserts that the “Russian
military advisory staff has been withdrawn from Syria,” resulting in poor
or absent military coordination between the two countries.
After describing the endemic corruption within the higher ranks of
the Syrian military and other security services, the author asserts that
“neither the [Syrian] soldiers nor the officers are motivated to succeed
in combat. The army’s fighting spirit is currently extremely low.” He
points out that on a number of occasions, Syrian military units have
often retreated after meeting minimal resistance. He describes how the
“Russian VKS [Air Force] carry out strikes, but Al-Asad’s soldiers do
not go into battle. They cover 60 meters -- then lie low. Then they retreat.
They say: ‘We would just be killed.’” The author concludes the article on
a pessimistic note, describing how the regime’s heavy-handed methods
“are creating implacable enemies for themselves” among other elements
(e.g. Christian, Turkmen) of Syrian society.
Over the past year the Russian military has expended considerable
resources in propping up and defending the current Syrian government
and its military. Their involvement has largely been portrayed to the
Russian media consumer as an unqualified success, signifying that
the Kremlin has re-established an effective military presence within
Syria and the Middle East. As with many other aspects of the Kremlincontrolled media, this article suggests that there is a wide gap between
such assertions and reality. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Russians offloading supplies at their airbase in Hmeimin, Syria, 2016.
Source: ru.m.wikipedia.org

Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “Россияне наносят удары,
а солдаты Асада в бой не идут,” [Russians Carry Out
Strikes, but Al-Asad’s Soldiers are Not Going into Battle]
Gazeta.ru, 22 September 2016. https://www.gazeta.ru/
army/2016/09/22/10209455.shtml
Almost a year ago, on 30 September 2015, Russia began
military operations in Syria. Despite the external support,
Bashar al-Asad’s army has not achieved any significant
successes: Rebels control 60-70 percent of the country’s
territory, and the population and even military personnel are
forced to pay tribute to the corrupt special services. With
such allies, the war cannot be won without a fundamental
political rethink, believes Gazeta.ru’s military analyst Mikhail
Khodarenok.
A significant proportion of the Russian Armed Forces’ subunits
and units have been withdrawn from Syria. There is, in fact,
just one aviation group left at the base in Hmeimim. There
are reports that the Kremlin has taken a political decision
to reduce spending on maintaining the group of Russian
troops in Syria as far as possible and to carry out military
operations based on the current budget limitations. Forces will
be reduced. Gasoline is being used sparingly. Aviation fuel is
being saved. Bombs and similar items are running low. Rumors
are circulating that there is even discussion under way about
acquiring air-launched weapons from Belarus, where there are
significant stockpiles left from back in Soviet times….

(continued)

OE Watch | November 2016

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian Military Success in Syria?
…Since 2004 officers and generals who received their military education in the USSR and Russia have been being deliberately dismissed.
There are virtually no Russian-speaking officers left in the Syrian Army. Preference has been given to officers who studied in Turkey, Saudi
Arabia, and the West…. Nepotism, corruption, sycophancy, intrigues, and fraud now flourish in the government army….
Russian military advisory staff has been withdrawn from Syria. The central headquarters of the Syrian Armed Forces currently have no
Russian advisers. There are not any in the general staff, or in the Armed Forces of the Syrian Army, or in the main and central directorates.
Thanks to this the Syrian and Russian military are currently not even communicating at the minimum required level. And this is producing
mutual distrust. Actions are not coordinated. Both sides suspect the other not only of leaking information, but at times even of treachery….
…Young Syrians flee abroad to avoid conscription. There is little or no help at all for the families of killed or injured servicemen. They
openly live in poverty.
Neither the soldiers nor the officers are motivated to succeed in combat. The army’s fighting spirit is currently extremely low. During the
battle for Aleppo Syrian troops surrendered the territory of a military college when just a single rebel armored personnel carrier carrying
maybe 8 or 11 men forced its way into this college… This is what happens most frequently: The Russian VKS carry out strikes, but Al-Asad’s
soldiers do not go into battle. They cover 60 meters -- they lie low. Then they retreat. They say: “We would just be killed”….
…Corruption in the Syrian special services is on a simply incredible scale. To one degree or another they extract tributes not just from the
entire civilian population but also from the army as well. …In particular, there is quite a large number of Christians in Syria. According to
some estimates, 2.5 million people. But they do not want to fight for Al-Asad.
No one is working with the Turkmen population…. These are not Turks, but real Turkmen who moved to these areas of Syria during the time
of the Ottoman Empire. They are rightly considered to be very good fighters. The Mukhabarat [Syrian intelligence] are not helping this as
they are kidnapping Turkmen people. People are simply disappearing. In the best case scenario, the relatives are handed back the possessions
with the statement that “your son died in prison”. By doing this, Al-Asad’s men are creating implacable enemies for themselves. …The current
situation in Syria is a stalemate. There is no military solution to the Syrian problem.

Russia’s Fitter Fighting Force
OE Watch Commentary: Sergei Shoygu will
mark his fourth-year anniversary as Russia’s
Minister of Defense next month. Nearly all Russian
military commentators give Shoygu top marks for
his efforts to modernize and strengthen Russia’s
armed forces. While operations in Syria or large
scale snap exercises capture many of today’s
headlines, some of Shoygu’s smaller incentives have
had a substantial impact upon improving the combat
capability of the Russian military. A recent article
in the government newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta
describes how physical fitness training and testing
under Defense Minister Shoygu has improved over
the past few years.
The article begins by pointing out that regardless
of rank, physical fitness training applies to all
members of the Russian military. Today, those
who fail to achieve a passing score on the annual
test “face a severe penalty -- right up to expulsion
from the Army.” The physical fitness test has been
modified to include a variety of exercises (60) to
test the speed, strength, endurance and agility of
military personnel, according to age and gender.
While personnel are measured in each of these four
categories, they are permitted to select specific
exercises for the fitness test. For example, the
(continued)
excerpt describes how “a 48-year-

“Gone are the days when servicemen with big stars on
their shoulder boards would calmly shake their ‘beer’
bellies and flabby muscles.”

Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Генералам приказали худеть,” [Generals Have Been
Ordered to Lose Weight] Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 27 September 2016. https://
rg.ru/2016/09/27/fizpodgotovku-oficerov-priravniali-k-ih-professionalnoj-vyuchke.
html
Officers’ physical fitness has been made as important as their professional skills.
More than 500 Western Military District HQ officers are currently being examined
for physical fitness. For several years now, all military leaders in the Armed Forces
-- right up to Defense Ministry generals -- have been subjected to such checks.
Gone are the days when servicemen with big stars on their shoulder boards would
calmly shake their “beer” bellies and flabby muscles. These are the new realities:
All cadre servicemen who have forgotten about sport (generals and admirals are
no exception) face a severe penalty -- right up to expulsion from the Army. Officers’
physical fitness has gone from being a nominally mandatory discipline in the Armed
Forces to becoming a fully mandatory one, and is now on a par with the criterion of
the serviceman’s professional skills….
…The overall physical fitness assessment is now composed from points obtained
from four or five exercises in separate kinds of physical training. When it concerns,
for example, the strength elements, these are pull-ups, arm flexion and extension in
a lying position, torso bending and straightening, body-raising [onto a crossbar].
As for running, 60-meter, 100-meter, and shuttle sprints. One- and three-kilometer
cross-country runs, swimming, and long-distance marches also provide a measure
of a person’s stamina.
(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russia’s Fitter Fighting Force
old colonel needs to earn a minimum of 16 points
in each exercise. That is, to perform not less than
three chin-ups or five body-lifts onto the crossbar.
Then 20 floor push-ups and a 1-km run within 3.5
minutes.” (For a visual example, see the brief video
of a Spring 2016 physical fitness test: https://youtu.
be/-qvAl0sPob0).
The current physical fitness testing system
provides for both negative and positive incentives.
Those who fail to achieve a minimal passing score
“are given exactly six months to improve their fitness
rating.” If at the end of this period, they are unable
to meet the minimum standard, they are subject
to being removed from the military. “Conversely,
officers who rate as excellent in physical fitness
receive a monthly bonus of up to 100 percent of
their salary for one year.” The article concludes by
describing out the good physical shape of the current
Russian military leadership, pointing out that “they
are trim and energetic, and engage in sport.”
The Russian leadership has worked diligently
over the past several years in reforming and
modernizing its armed forces. The military has
received a considerable amount of new equipment,
modern training facilities and improved housing
facilities. Alongside this focus on better equipment
and facilities has been a renewed stress upon
strengthening the human element of Russia’s armed
forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

According to current requirements, a serviceman must accumulate from 60 to
100 points in order to be rated “Excellent.” Below 60 is “Good,” and at least 35
is “Satisfactory.” In calculating the final score, the examinee’s age is taken into
account.
This is how it looks in practice: In order to, say, pass the fitness test, a 48-year-old
colonel needs to earn a minimum of 16 points in each exercise. That is, to perform
not less than three chin-ups or five body-lifts onto the crossbar. Then 20 floor pushups and a 1-km run within 3.5 minutes.
In all, more than 60 diverse exercises have been defined, and a serviceman has
a right to choose from them. For example, if he is an excellent runner by virtue of
his body “architecture,” but is a little weak on the crossbar, he easily compensates
for his low “strength” score on the cinder track. Hand-to-hand combat, a shortdistance double-time forced march, and cross-country skiing, too, can all be
alternatives. The main thing is that, as a result, the person should exceed the
minimum line on the assessment scale…. The purpose of this work is to prepare the
soldier and the officer to fulfill combat-training performance standards.
By order of the defense minister, servicemen who have scored a “two” [a “ fail”
under the old five-point system] are hit in the pocket. They are given exactly six
months to improve their fitness rating. If, after six months, they do not score at least
a “three” in the performance tests, they may be expelled from the Army with the
endorsement “ for non-compliance with the terms of the contract.”
Conversely, officers who rate as excellent in physical fitness receive a monthly
bonus of up to 100 percent of their salary for one year.
It must be said that their subordinates are set an example of good physical shape
by Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu himself, by his military deputy ministers Valeriy
Gerasimov, Dmitriy Bulgakov, and Yuriy Sadovenko, and by other assistants to the
military department chief. They are trim and energetic, and engage in sport. Shoygu
himself, for example, plays hockey….

Personnel from Russia’s Black Sea Fleet taking physical fitness test.
Source: mil.ru

OE Watch | November 2016

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Housing for Those Who Chose Russia
OE Watch Commentary: When Russia
annexed Crimea in March 2014, Ukrainian
military personnel were confronted with
three options: (1) change allegiance and
serve in the Russian military; (2) remain
in the Ukrainian military-which meant
moving out of Crimea; (3) resign from the
Ukrainian military and become a civilian
resident of Crimea. While exact figures are
hotly debated, of the approximately 18,000
Ukrainian military stationed in Crimea in
early 2014, about half (about 9,000) elected
to change uniforms and join the Russian
military. Of the other half, two thirds (about
6,000) chose to leave the military and the
remaining third (about 3,000) moved off
of Crimea and remained in the Ukrainian
military.

“Russian President Vladimir Putin has issued a decree ordering
that Russian contract servicemen serving in Crimea and
Sevastopol in the units that belonged to Ukraine before March 18,
2014 should be provided with housing in the form of the provision
of residential space or money for its purchase or construction….”

Besides having family ties to Crimea,
quality of life issues (pay, housing, benefits
etc…) were reportedly key incentives for
many of those who decided to transfer to
the Russian military. It is no secret that
prior to Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the
Ukrainian military had been poorly funded,
trained, and equipped. Notwithstanding
the question of loyalty, joining the Russian
military would result in a significant pay
hike, better benefits, greater opportunities,
and a boost in prestige.
Despite economic challenges, over the
past two years, the Kremlin leadership
has invested heavily both in new military
equipment and infrastructure improvements
for the peninsula. The brief accompanying
excerpt from the Russian Interfax website,
describes recent legislation which was
passed in August authorizing housing
benefits for those ex-Ukrainian military
personnel who transferred to the Russian
military after Crimea’s annexation.
According to the excerpt, “Russian
contract servicemen serving in Crimea
and Sevastopol in the units that belonged
to Ukraine before March 18, 2014 should
be provided with housing in the form of
the provision of residential space or money
for its purchase or construction.” Such
a move will likely strengthen the bonds
of allegiance among those who made the
decision to transfer to the Russian military.
End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Vavilova 55/7 - a typical example of the Russian elite housing built in the 1950s under Stalin’s project. This
house was built for the members of the Russian Science Academy.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:1950s_Elite_Housing_Moscow_%28Stalinka%29_RSA.jpg

Source: “Putin orders provision of housing to Crimean contract servicemen who served in
Ukrainian army before March 2014,” Interfax, 24 August 2016.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has issued a decree ordering that Russian contract
servicemen serving in Crimea and Sevastopol in the units that belonged to Ukraine before
March 18, 2014 should be provided with housing in the form of the provision of residential
space or money for its purchase or construction….
…The document was posted on the official legal information portal on Wednesday. In
accordance with the presidential decree, the provision of housing should take place “in
the form of provision of money for purchase or construction of residential space or the
provision of residential space in accordance with the procedures and on the conditions
established by Russian legislation for servicemen who are Russian citizens serving in the
military under a contract.”
OE Watch | November 2016

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia’s Fall 2016 Draft
OE Watch Commentary: 1 October marked
the beginning of the Russian Military’s Fall
draft campaign. Over the next three months,
Russia’s Mobilization Directorate will conscript
some 152,000 young Russian men for a oneyear military service term. The accompanying
passages from Russian sources discuss recent
measures to improve conscripts’ quality of life,
in addition to some persisting problems.
The first excerpt from the governmentsponsored RIA Novosti news source points
out that the results from the Spring 2016
conscription campaign were particularly
positive, with a greater number of recruits
who had already completed pre-induction
(DOSAAF-Voluntary Society for the Promotion
of the Army, Aviation, and Navy) training or
had graduated from college. It announces the
fall target and also asserts that the health of
the draft contingent continues to improve, with
76% of potential new recruits deemed fit for
military duty.
The Kremlin leadership has worked hard
over the past several years to improve both the
quality of life (e.g. better food, facilities, and
equipment) and the overall image of completing
mandatory military service. Legislation which
demands the completion of military service as
a prerequisite for any government employment
has also helped with compliance. The second
excerpt from the popular Komsomolskaya
Pravda website describes additional measures
which have been implemented to ease the entry
of new conscripts into the military. Automated
tracking of new recruits ensures that “draftees
will be provided with food rations for the entire
journey” and “comfortable sleeping conditions”
at their training location.
While the Russian military has made
significant improvement with how it manages
conscript soldiers over the past decade,
problems remain. The third excerpt (from a
pro-Kremlin source, Gazeta.ru) recounts how
those who monitor human rights issues “speak
of persisting problems with medicine, instances
of petty extortion, and everyday difficulties”
for conscripts. According to the excerpt,
chief among conscript grievances include
“violence, beatings, mockery, and corruption
connected with non-regulation relations….”
These complaints echo problems that continue
to fester within the wider Russian society. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“But then, there are no complaints about food; they feed you well
in the Russian Army…”
Source: “В России начинается осенний призыв на военную службу,” RIA Novosti, 1
October 2016. https://ria.ru/defense_safety/20161001/1478273701.html
On 1 October, the autumn conscription of citizens for military service began in Russia.
According to the Ministry of Defense plans, the autumn conscription campaign will
add 152,000 soldiers. …
…During the spring 2016 campaign, 155 thousand conscripts were added to the
ranks…. over 20 thousand new recruits completed training in military occupational
specialties in DOSAAF or in secondary educational institutions….
…The Defense Ministry noted trend towards improvement in the health of new
recruits, where during the Spring 2016 draft it amounted to 76% (Spring 2015 74.4%)….
Source: Viktor Baranets, “Новобранцы, встать в строй!” [New Recruits, Fall
In!] Komsomolskaya Pravda Online, 30 September 2016. http://www.kp.ru/
daily/26588/3603759/
Colonel General Vasiliy Tonkoshkurov, chief of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces General Staff Main Organization and Mobilization Directorate, answers
Komsomolskaya Pravda’s questions….
[Baranets] How does the General Staff rate the readiness of military commissariats for
the draft campaign? What will be new about its “technology”?
[Tonkoshkurov] Today the vast majority of military commissariats are fitted with
equipment of the Passport automated system. This will make it possible to provide all
citizens being sent to perform military service with personal electronic cards directly at
the assembly points….
[Baranets] How will they be fed on the way to the unit? After all, many will have to
spend several days traveling….
[Tonkoshkurov] When proceeding to their place of military service, all draftees will
be provided with food rations for the entire journey. Special points have been deployed
on military airfields where comfortable sleeping conditions have been created and
provision made for the draftees to have three hot meals a day…
Source: Inna Sidorkova and Maksim Solopov, “Кормят в Российской армии
прилично,” [They Feed You Well in the Russian Army] Gazeta.ru, 30 September 2016.
https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2016/09/29/10222181.shtml
…The fall draft campaign is starting in Russia. The Defense Ministry is looking after
draftees’ needs by using of a new type of personal draftee document -- electronic cards
-- and uniforms and food on the journey to the place of service. Almost one out of
every five of the 150,000 draftees is entering the Army already with a higher education.
Human rights campaigners are noticing progress but speak of persisting problems with
medicine, instances of petty extortion, and everyday difficulties, although they highly
commend the food….
…“Around two thirds of the several hundreds of complaints that received on our
‘hotline’ during the year were connected with issues of medicine,” the human rights
campaigner says…. Second on the list, according to the human rights campaigner,
are complaints of violence, beatings, mockery, and corruption connected with nonregulation relations…”
“But then, there are no complaints about food; they feed you well in the Russian
Army…”
OE Watch | November 2016

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Are Russian Naval Pilots Ready?
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin continues to
beef up its military presence in and around Syria. Besides
moving advanced air defense systems to protect Syrian
air space, the first excerpt from Interfax indicates that
the Russian Navy will deploy its one aircraft carrier, the
Admiral Kuznetsov, “a large ASW [anti-submarine warfare]
ship, a large oceangoing tanker, and a rescue tug” into the
Eastern Mediterranean for a period of four to five months.
There is some question, however, if and when Russian
pilots will be conducting actual combat missions from the
flight deck of the Admiral Kuznetsov. As the article points
out, it is “not fully clear as to how many… pilots went
through the full cycle of training for flights from an aircraft
carrier.”
Trained personnel required to conduct effective air
operations from an aircraft carrier cannot be hastily
attained. The second excerpt from Vzglyad Online
describes the challenges that the Russian military
has confronted in developing the necessary training
infrastructure to support naval air operations. Russian
aviator pilots have only had intermittent access to the
Ground-Aviation Test Training Complex (NITKA) in Sika,
Crimea. The Russian military leased the facility from
the Ukrainians after the collapse of the USSR. However,
Ukrainian officials restricted access to this facility after the
Russian-Georgian conflict in 2008. After Russia annexed
Crimea in March 2014, there were questions if Russia was
going to renovate the Sika site in Crimea or continue with
work on a new training facility in the Krasnodarsk Region.
As a result of these restrictions and logistic delays in
completing naval-ground training facilities, combined with
the apparent rush to put this aircraft carrier into action,
some are now doubting if Russian pilots are fully prepared.
According to Aleksandr Sannikov, an expert quoted in the
Vzglyad Online article, “there are entirely substantiated
fears that the pilots of this regiment will not manage to
even complete all of the needed training procedures prior
to the ship’s departure.” This view, however, is challenged
by another expert, Dmitriy Litovkin, who claims that the
Russian “pilots are prepared.” Litovkin points out that the
pilots had three months of range training, supplemented by
using “MiG 3-dimensional simulators.”
The second article ends on a cautious note, pointing
out that “Russia is preparing to employ its only aircraft
carrier and its aviation group based upon its direct combat
designation for the first time in its entire history.” It goes on
to state that “the Ministry of Defense has decided to send
people, who – let’s repeat, based upon open information
– have certainly not completed the needed professional
training – to a combat operations area.” Regardless of these
concerns, the Kremlin appears anxious to demonstrate
that it too can project naval air power to support military
operations in Syria. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Nevertheless, the Ministry of Defense has decided
to send people, who – let’s repeat, based upon open
information – have certainly not completed the needed
professional training – to a combat operations area.”
Source: “Адмирал Кузнецов” отправится в Средиземноморье в середине
октября,” [Aircraft Carrier Admiral Kuznetsov Will Set off on a Long
Deployment to the Eastern Mediterranean in Mid-October] Interfax-AVN
Online, 27 September 2016. http://www.interfax.ru/world/530158
It is expected that the Northern Fleet (SF) heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser
Admiral Kuznetsov will set off on a long deployment to the shores of Syria
in mid-October, a source familiar with the situation informed Interfax-AVN
on Tuesday.
“The carrier battle group will depart on a long deployment in the period
from 15 through 20 October,” the Agency source clarified….
…On 21 September Russian Defense Minister General of the Army Sergey
Shoygu announced Defense Department plans to dispatch the carrier to the
shores of Syria. In previous years Admiral Kuznetsov performed missions in
the Eastern Mediterranean several times.
According to available information, the carrier will be escorted on
the deployment, which will last 4-5 months, by a large ASW ship, large
oceangoing tanker, and rescue tug….
…At the present time it is not fully clear as to how many MiG-29KR/KUBR
aircraft of 100th OKIAP the carrier will receive before the long deployment
and how many pilots went through the full cycle of training for flights from
an aircraft carrier, inasmuch as, according to available information, a large
number of this regiment’s aircraft are at Yeysk (Krasnodarskiy Kray), where
the new NITKA complex has been built.
According to official information, this complex will be technically ready for
training flights no earlier than the end of this year. Meanwhile, the NITKA
complex in Crimea stands idle.
Source: “Готовность «Кузнецова» к операции в Сирии вызывает
сомнения,” [The Kuznetsov’s Readiness for the Operation in Syria
Raises Doubts] Vzglyad Online, 22 September 2016. http://www.vz.ru/
politics/2016/9/22/833905.html
The Defense Minister has officially confirmed that which the experts
had surmised a long, long time ago: The only Russian Aircraft Carrier
the Admiral Kuznetsov will be sent to the shores of Syria. Sources have
already announced that the Kuznetsov aviation group will participate in the
conduct of strikes against the Syrian rebels. However, an entire series of
circumstances indicate that this cruise appears to be not fully prepared….
…We know that the regiment’s pilots have begun training, but then again,
not from the aircraft carrier’s deck, but on the simulator in Yeysk, since the
spring of 2016, and they carried out the first landing on the aircraft carrier
quite recently, in August. We know that in the middle 2000s the pilots of
279th Regiment, who have the skills to at least take off and land from the
Kuznetsov, numbered no more than 10 – and the majority of them were
pre-pension age. We know that Navy Naval Aviation has been attempting
to intensively train an entire group of inexperienced, young pilots for work
from the Kuznetsov over the course of two years. We also know that each
pilot (even high class) must complete the so-called KBP – combat training

(continued)

OE Watch | November 2016

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Are Russian Naval Pilots Ready?
course, which is
unique for each
aircraft, prior to
being declared as
ready to accomplish a
combat mission….
…Crimean Saki
Garrison Veterans
Organization
Spokesman Aleksandr
Sannikov also
expressed fears
with regard to the
training of young
carrier aviation
pilots in the Crimea.
In a conversation
with VoyennoPromyshlennyy
Kuryer, Sannikov
assumed that the
absence of proper
Russian aircraft carrier, Admiral Kuznetsov.
attention by the
Source: Wikimedia commons
command authorities
to NITKA’s problems
(the training aviation complex in the city of Saki, the Crimea) could result in the fact that the Admiral Kuznetsov will depart on the longrange cruise with an aviation wing of a reduced composition. “There are entirely substantiated fears that the pilots of this regiment will not
manage to even complete all of the needed training procedures prior to the ship’s departure,” he warned. While talking about the training at
Saki, Sannikov indicated that they completed a simplified program: the flights were conducted with touching down on the deck but the passes
– without hooking the arresting wire, which did not permit them to fully master the skills. “What is more, the test cycle has not been fully
conducted on the MiG-29KR and MiG-29KUB”, he asserted.
Indeed, there is also another point of view. Military Expert Dmitriy Litovkin thinks that the Russian pilots are entirely ready for the air war
in Syria. “The pilots are prepared. This year, they flew at the ranges from May through July. Furthermore, they trained the pilots on MiG
3-dimensional simulators in Moscow on Leningrad Prospekt. The 3D technologies impart a realistic nature to the training on those simulators
and also the use of hydraulic devices to simulate the aircraft cockpit’s oscillations. They rehearsed landing and takeoff from the aircraft
carrier and aerial refueling. There is a very good team there – rigorous and young,” Litovkin told Vzglyad Newspaper.
…But not only this causes alarm. Russia is preparing to employ its only aircraft carrier and its aviation group based upon its direct combat
designation for the first time in its entire history…. Nevertheless, the Ministry of Defense has decided to send people, who – let’s repeat, based
upon open information – have certainly not completed the needed professional training – to a combat operations area. As a minimum, those
doubts are substantiated. God forbid but the risk of possible losses – even noncombat losses – increases manifold under this approach.

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers
by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since
the state became independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security
cooperation with Russia, the United States and other partners, but there have also been internally
driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past several
years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which
is part of a plan to have contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end 2016.
While the result has yet to be announced, an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed
Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the impact this
could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20-%20Transition%20in%20the%20Armed%20Forces%20of%20Kazakhstan%20-%20From%20Conscripts%20to%20Contract%20Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | November 2016

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian-Chinese Naval Training
OE Watch Commentary: From
12-19 September, elements of the
People’s Liberation Army Navy
(PLAN) of China and ships from the
Russian Federation’s Pacific fleet took
part in Sea Cooperation 2016 east of
Zhanjiang, Guangdong in the South
China Sea. The exercise was designed
to improve interoperability between
the two navies. Participants took
part in search and rescue operations,
artillery and missile strikes on
maritime targets, seizure of a captured
ship, and the defense of an anchored
ship. The exercise culminated in
an amphibious assault on an island
against a defensive force.
According to the first excerpt
from a Chinese source, the exercise
showcased a new ‘common command
information system’ which purportedly
improved communications between
the two nations’ forces. While specifics
of the new information system were
not provided, the new system is able
to incorporate video transmission
systems with satellite navigation and
integrate the operational data coming
from both Chinese and Russian forces,
allowing for a better understanding of
developments for both sides. As the
second excerpt from another Chinese
source indicates, this improved
capability was demonstrated through
the use of mixed units throughout the
island assault exercise. The amphibious
assault on the island involved land, air
and sea forces, and according to the
article, was not scripted.
The third brief excerpt, from the
Russian Ministry of Defense news
service, points out Russian President
Putin’s comments that the exercise
“benefits the security of both Russia
and the People’s Republic of China.”
The Russian Naval Commander,
Alexander Fedotenkov echoes
this, claiming that this exercise is
“not aimed against anyone - our
cooperation is aimed at defense of
our joint interests.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Gartner)

“The exercise in the South

China Sea is ‘not aimed against
anyone - our cooperation is aimed
at defense of our joint interests,’
Russian navy’s commander in chief
Alexander Fedotenkov…”
Russian and Chinese Marines take part in Sea Cooperation 2016.
Source: http://en.people.cn/NMediaFile/2016/0915/FOREIGN201609150912000023836555563.jpg

Source: Zhang Kejin, “Sino-Russian ‘Joint Sea-2016’ Military Exercise Makes a New
Breakthrough in the Command and Control Model; the Two Navies Use a Common Command
Information System for the First Time,” Jiefangjun Bao Online, 18 September 2016.
“This system provides a common platform for the personnel of both sides to jointly thrash
out operation plans, organize force collaboration, exchange concepts of operation command
and methods of force employment.” Tu Jianbin, chief operations officer of the Information and
Communications Bureau of the PLAN Staff Department, gave an explanation to the reporters.
The dedicated command information system is comprised of a video transmission system, a
satellite navigation system, and other relevant systems. It gathers multiple communications
means, such as wireless communications, satellite communications, and program-controlled
communications. It can integrate the operational information data of the Chinese and Russian
naval forces so that postures sharing and information transmission can be realized for all the
exercise forces from the joint direction team and the command posts of the red and blue teams to
all surface, air, underwater combat units.
Source: Guo Yuandan, “Eye-witness Account of Sino-Russian Joint Three-Dimensional Island
Seizing Exercise, With the Chinese Side Dispatching the Most Powerful Landing Ships,”
Huanqiu Shibao Online, 19 September 2016.
At the landing command post of the red team, the reporter saw that communications via the data
link system were effected between the red and blue teams’ command posts and various combat
units, resources sharing was also seamlessly effected among all combat units. Under the unified
information command, the first being dispatched was the special operations sabotage team
comprised of Chinese and Russian marines. They stealthily closed in on the designated zone,
reached the beach by breaking obstacles, and opened up a channel on the beach. Facing the blue
team’s fire interdiction from warplanes and onshore forces, the amphibious armored vehicles of
the red team filed out of the well deck. The Chinese and Russian armored forces collaborated
closely, using strong fire to reinforce the infantry force’s action. Then, helicopters carrying
Chinese and Russian marines rapidly took off, made penetration deep to the rear of the enemy
positions, carried out a three-dimensional action to seize the island occupied by the blue team.
All the actions were accurate, efficient, and speedy. A high degree of integration was effected in
the whole process.
Source: “Russia, China start joint maneuvers in South China Sea,” Zvezda TV, 13 September
2016.
On 5 September, Russia’s President Vladimir Putin said the forthcoming joint Russian-Chinese
naval exercises “do not affect anyone’s interests but benefits the security both of Russia and the
People’s Republic of China”. He made his comments after stating that Moscow fully supported
Beijing’s decision not to recognize the ruling of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague
in favor of the Philippines in its dispute with China over the South China Sea (see BBC report
“Putin answers media questions after G20 summit” of 5 Sep 16).
The exercise in the South China Sea is “not aimed against anyone - our cooperation is aimed
at defense of our joint interests,” the Russian navy’s commander in chief Alexander Fedotenkov
said, Zvezda reported on 13 September.
OE Watch | November 2016

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Details from Northern Fleet Summer Training Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: The 200th Separate Arctic
Motorized Rifle Brigade has had a summer cruise, visiting
the New Siberian Islands Archipelago where they made an
amphibious landing on Kotelny Island. Last year, the 80th
Separate Arctic Motoriized Rifle Brigade had an extended
training deployment (For more information see: “Major Arctic
Exercise,” OE Watch, October 2015). The 200th, which has
long been designated a coastal defense brigade is apparently
now an Arctic brigade. The brigade conducted raiding
exercises and anti-amphibious landing exercises. The exercise
also tested cruise missile live-fire, engaged in surface fire and
conducted integrated air defense drills. The accompanying
passage from the Russian Ministry of Defense website provides
details of the exercise.
The cruise missile firings were two P-15 Termit [termite] antiship missiles. These missiles were first fielded in the 1960s and
are known to NATO as Styx or the SS-N-2. There are ship and
ground launched versions. They have an operational range of
80 kilometers and deliver a conventional 1000-pound warhead.
The air defense portion of the exercise detected and directed
fires against aerial targets using both ground and shipmounted air defense systems. The ground air defense used
the Pantsir-S1 [SA-22 Greyhound] short-to-mid range SAM
and antiaircraft system. It mounts 12 S57E6 missiles with
an engagement range out to 20 kilometers and dual 2A38M
30mm autocannon with a maximum effective range of four
kilometers. The naval air defense employed the SA-15 Tor
[SA-15 Gauntlet, Kinzhal is the naval version] all-weather
low-to-medium altitude, short-range surface-to-air missile
system designed for engaging airplanes, helicopters, cruise
missiles, precision guided munitions, unmanned aerial vehicles
and short-range ballistic threats. The naval air defense also
employed the AK-100 cannon. This armor-turreted system
fires a 100mm [3.9 inch], 26.8 kilogram [59.1 pounds] round
out to 10,000 meters. It fires 60 rounds per minute. The naval
air defense further included the AK630 30mm rotary cannon
[Gatling gun] which has six barrels. It fires HE Frag rounds
out to an effective range of 4,000 meters against aerial targets
and 5,000 meters against surface targets. It is employed against
anti-ship missiles, precision-guided missiles, aircraft, small
craft, shore targets and floating mines.
There is a mystery to the exercise. Last year’s exercise
was a major shakeout of the 80th Separate Arctic Motorized
Rifle Brigade and involved the amphibious landing ship
Kondopoga. As the second passage discusses, this year, the
troops did an amphibious landing from an antisubmarine
warfare vessel. Apparently the Russian effort in Syria has
stripped the Northern Sea Fleet of the Georgiy Pobedonosets
amphibious landing ship. The Ropucha Class Landing ships,
which were built in Poland in the 1970s are in demand and two,
possibly three, are now undergoing major repairs. Where is the
Kondopoga? End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: ”A Northern Fleet Exercise in Protecting Russia’s Island Zone
and Sea Coast Took Place in the Arctic,” Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation, 17 September 2016, http://www.mil.ru
A crew of the “Rubezh” [Frontier] coastal missile complex, which was
deployed at one of the positions on Kotel’nyy Island, fired two “Termit”
cruise missiles which struck an amphibious target within the ice-pack
area.
The crew of a ground-based “Pantsir-1” self-propelled antiaircraft
missile and gun system, which was also deployed on a launch site on
one of the New Siberian Islands’ shores, fired at simulated marine,
coastal, and aerial targets. And the crew of the large ASW ship “Vice
Admiral Kulakov” destroyed simulated marine and aerial targets using
a “Kinzhal” antiaircraft missile system and AK-100 and AK-630 artillery
systems.
During the exercise, subunits of a Northern Fleet Arctic motorized rifle
brigade, which had been delivered to Kotelny Island by the large ASW
ship “Vice Admiral Kulakov,” rehearsed raiding operations and assaultlanding defense (PVO) on the Arctic islands’ austere coast.
In the exercise’s preceding stages, while executing air defense
missions, radar section crews detected and tracked aerial targets, and
subsequently issued target designations to the crews of a ground-based
“Pantsir-1” self-propelled antiaircraft missile and gun system and also
to the air defense crews of the large ASW ship “Vice Admiral Kulakov.”
The targets’ simulated destruction was executed by so-called “electronic
launches.”
Two Tu-95 strategic bombers and two Tu-142 long-range ASW aircraft
participated in this stage.
Commenting on the exercise’s preliminary results, Northern Fleet
Commander Vice Admiral Nikolay Yevmenov stated that “the successful
performance of firing by the tactical group based on the New Siberian
Islands and by the crew of the large ASW ship ‘Vice Admiral Kulakov’
has proved once again that the Northern Fleet is capable of performing
its missions of protecting Russia’s island zone and sea coast in the
Arctic.”
The commander also stressed that “the fleet forces’ activities were
carried out in strict accordance with the principles and norms of
international law within the Russian Arctic sector and are not directed
against third countries whose interests extend to part of the Arctic Ocean
waters.”
Russia’s energetic activities in creating and developing elements of
Arctic infrastructure began in 2012. At that time, Northern Fleet naval
infantrymen, for the first time in the Russian Navy’s history, conducted
an amphibious landing on the Kotel’nyy Island shore. In 2013, a
naval task force headed up by the Northern Fleet flagship, the heavy
nuclear-powered missile cruiser Petr Veliki [Peter the Great], delivered
equipment, accessories, and supplies to the New Siberian Islands to
restore the “Temp” aviation headquarters. The Northern Fleet forces’
Arctic voyage in 2014 culminated in an exercise by protecting the
Russian Federation’s island zone and sea coast and, last year, during a
similar voyage, an inter-service exercise designed to protect important
facilities on the Taymyr peninsula was conducted for the first time
with the participation of Northern Fleet Arctic motorized rifle brigade
subunits.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2016

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Details from Northern Fleet Summer
Training Exercise
Source: Sergey Ishchenko, “War and Armies - The War in
Syria”: “The ‘Syrian Express’ Has Overtaxed Itself: An
Antisubmarine Warfare Ship Is Disembarking an Assault
Force on the Arctic Islands Out of Necessity,” Svobodnaya
Pressa, 21 September 2016, http://www.svpressa.ru

Twelve Northern Fleet naval combatants (including nuclear and diesel
submarines), ten support vessels, the coastal missile-artillery troops, and
45th Air Force and Air Defense Army aircraft are participating in Northern
Fleet maneuvers. The exercise extends from the Kola Peninsula to the East
Siberian Sea.

The main participants of the current exercise are the large Antisubmarine
Warfare Ship Vice-Admiral Kulakov, the Maritime Weapons Transport Academic Kovalev, the Salvage Tug Pamir, and the Buoy Tender
[Crane Ship] KIL-164. These sailed to the Novosibirsk Islands Archipelago from Severomorsk on 30 August.
For five years, Northern Fleet surface combatants and support vessels have exercised along the Northern Maritime Route in SeptemberOctober. Counter-amphibious assault defense of the islands is always one of the most important tactical episodes of the exercises, and large
amphibious landing ships were always included. However, there are none in the Novosibirsk Islands exercise.
Consequently, there are very motorized riflemen in the exercise – there are simply no vacant cabins and berthing spaces to accommodate a
major assault force on the Kulakov. In order to settle a dozen or so infantrymen on that ship, the sailors had to bunk in the Kulakov’s battle
stations. There is no room for their equipment either.
But why wasn’t a single Northern Fleet Large Amphibious Ship (BDK) included in the current detachment? On 22 August, the Landing Ship
Kondopoga, Vice Admiral Kulakov, the Naval Transport Academic Kovalev, and the Salvage Tug Pamir conducted a planned departure to
the Barents Sea. But a week later the detachment sailed to the Novosibirsk Islands without the Kondopoga.
What happened to the Kondopoga? Apparently, we don’t have a single combat-capable landing ship left on the Barents Sea. Already wellworn, they now have been simply driven to exhaustion during the course of the logistics support operation in Syria or are finishing off the
remainder of their engine service life there. The endless scheduled trips along the Novorossiysk-Tartus route have exhausted the forces of the
so-called “Syrian Express”.
There are four Ropucha class large landing ships assigned to the Northern Fleet – the Olenegorskiy Gornyak, Aleksandr Otrakovskiy,
Kondopoga, and Georgiy Pobedonosets.
The first has been waiting for a long time for promised repairs at the 33rd Ship Repair Plant in Baltiysk. According to the information of the
plant’s press service, “a significant volume of hull work, the repair of mechanisms, and also the modernization of the ship’s weaponry, the
certification of all of its mechanisms and components, including the engines, the pipeline systems, and the underwater and surface portions of
the hull are planned”.
The second completed 588 days of continuous operation in the “Syrian Express” in the middle of this summer. During this time, the
Aleksandr Otrakovskiy traveled 65,000 nautical miles, which totals approximately three lengths of the equator. Due to extreme deterioration,
the ship is not prepared either technically or organizationally for a new long-range cruise.
The third is the Kondopoga. The fourth - the Georgiy Pobedonosets – left for the Mediterranean Sea at the end of May and is continuously
transporting cargo through the Black Sea straits to Tartus.
Is this really normal, when even in our very strong Navy there is no proper vessel to support the assault troops in its area of operations?
Is there not even one available to go to the Novosibirsk Islands for a couple of weeks? Where else are large antisubmarine warfare ships
transporting an assault force to its landing location in peacetime?
This is not simply abnormal – it is catastrophic. We have been moving toward this situation for decades, when they thoughtlessly
decommissioned those Ropucha class ships, which could still have performed service, and sold them for scrap in the 1990s.
The only new large amphibious landing ship under Project 11711, the Ivan Gren has been under construction for 12 years now. The Navy
should receive the Ivan Gren next year and the Petr Morgunov in 2018.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment. It is produced by the Threats
Intelligence Support Activity (US Army TRADOC G-2)
and posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377.
OE Watch | November 2016

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Largest Arctic Exercise in History
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passage from Izvestiya
discusses the details of a unique, two-month
exercise conducted by the Russian Ministry of
Defense. This large-scale, expensive exercise
attempted to achieve maximum benefits from
its training conducted from the highest to
the lowest levels. Na Strazhe Zapolyarya
[On Guard in the Polar Regions], the official
weekly newspaper of the Northern Fleet,
discussed how only contract sailors were
on board the large Vice Admiral Kulakov
Antisubmarine Ship for the exercise. The
skills acquired and perfected during a
two-month deployment need to be in a
professional sailor’s kitbag. KA-27 helicopters
conducted air insertions of motorized rifle
reconnaissance troops. Seven land and seabased cruise missile launches were conducted,
including an underwater submarine launch.
Two intercontinental ballistic missiles were
launched. At least one nuclear icebreaker
participated in the exercise. All in all, an
impressive effort in a tough region. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Aleksy Ramm, “«Север» защитил Арктику: Старт «Булавы» был частью
самых масштабных за всю историю учений в Заполярье (“North” protection of the
Arctic: Bulava Launch Was a Portion of the Largest Exercises in All History in the Polar
Region),” Izvestiya, 30 September 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/635049

“The Russian Ministry of

In turn, Russian military personnel defended important facilities and inflicted maximum
damage on the enemy. Su-27, Su-35, and MIG-31 fighter aircraft shot down enemy
aircraft with the support of S-300 and S-400 air defense missile systems and also Pantsir
air defense missile-gun systems. Coastal missile complexes with anti-ship missiles and
submarines destroyed enemy ships, and motorized riflemen and naval infantrymen
blocked an enemy assault force and destroyed the saboteurs.

Defense has successfully
concluded a unique two-month
exercise, during which military
personnel repelled strikes of the
aggressor’s aircraft, unmanned
aerial vehicles, and cruise
missiles from the Barents Sea to
Chukotka and then conducted
a retaliatory strike, including
using Bulava intercontinental
missiles. Ships, submarines,
strategic long-range bombers,
fighter aircraft, S-300, S-400,
and Pantsir air defense [missile]
complexes, and also motorized
riflemen and naval infantrymen
were involved in the large-scale
maneuvers.”

“The verification of the readiness of the Northern Combined Strategic Command’s units
and formations to defend Russia’s northern regions from various threats, began with the
probable enemy’s massive missile-aircraft strikes and ended with the landing of assault
forces and reconnaissance-saboteur teams,” according to a Northern Fleet military
department source. “The entire military infrastructure, which was created recently in
the Arctic, was also inspected. Besides the Strategic Command, men and equipment of
the Russian Aerospace Forces from other regions, including Long Range Aviation, were
involved in the exercises. All of the assigned missions were carried out during the course
of the exercises, and the result was successful”.
“Command and staff exercises were initially conducted, during the course of which the
General Staff and Northern Strategic Command held various map exercises with the
staffs and commanders of the brigades, divisions, and regiments. Actual live firing and
missile launches, including cruise missiles, were also conducted. Ships and submarines
put to sea, aircraft destroyed training targets, and naval infantry and motorized rifle units
and subunits went out to the ranges for live-fire training”.
The large-scale exercises in the north began at the end of July of this year. In the first
phase, the enemy conducted strikes using aircraft, cruise missiles, and unmanned aerial
vehicles from the Barents Sea, Chukotka, and across the North Pole. Next, enemy ships
attempted to breakthrough to the Northern Maritime Route, disembarking assault forces
and reconnaissance-saboteur teams along the way.

In the next phase of the exercise, Northern Strategic Command, with the support of Long
Range Aviation aircraft, conducted a retaliatory strike against enemy facilities. Northern
Fleet ships, led by the Northern Fleet Flagship – the Nuclear Missile Cruiser Petr Velikiy,
put to sea. The flag ship conducted cruise missile launches.
Next, Long Range Aviation Tu-95MS and Tu-160 strategic bombers joined their navy
colleagues in destroying the enemy. Units and subunits of naval infantry and motorized
rifle troops eliminated the remnants of the enemy assault force.
The culmination of the second phase was the launch of Bulava intercontinental
ballistic missiles from onboard the Strategic Missile Submarine Yuriy Dolgorukiy on 27
September. One of the two intercontinental missiles successfully destroyed its target on
the Far East Kura range and the second self-destructed….
Captive iceberg in Resolute Bay, Nunavut.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Iceberg_resolute.jpg

OE Watch | November 2016

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Yet Another Specialized Weapon in the Russian Arsenal
OE Watch Commentary: The APS underwater assault
rifle was the world’s first and only underwater assault rifle.
Designed and fielded, along with the SPP-1 underwater pistol
in the 1970s, it is a smooth-bore weapon that fires from
the open bolt to propel long, thin pointed rods (length-todiameter ratio of approximately 21 to 1). The cartridge length
is 5.9 inches long and the magazine holds 20 rounds. Its
range of 10-30 meters underwater is determined by depth
and its effectiveness above water is under 100 meters. The
only publicized use of the APS was in Malta in November
1989, when a 16-man team of divers protected the vessels of
President George Bush and Soviet Prime Minister Mikhail
Gorbachev.
The accompanying passage from Izvestiya discusses the
new ADS rifle, which appears to be a rifled weapon with a
much shorter cartridge that fires accurately under-and-above
water. The cartridge’s effectiveness above and below water is
a marked improvement over the APS and the bullet weight is
only slightly heavier than the standard 5.45x39mm cartridgeand about a third of the APS rod. It’s becoming more
hazardous to be a hostile frogman or snapping turtle these
days. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Russian Federation Defense Ministry Special

Operations Forces Command [KSSO] has equipped
combat divers with unique ADS rifles (special dualmedium assault rifles). This state-of-the-art weapon
was developed and produced by the Tula Instrument
Design Bureau and is equally effective underwater
and on land. In contrast to foreign and Russian
underwater weapons that shoot needle bullets that are
stable in water but deviate from their trajectory on the
surface, the unique ammunition of the ADS maintains
its accuracy in both environments.”
Source: http://izvestia.ru/news/632826

Source: Aleksey Ramm, “Боевые пловцы получили
двухсредный автомат с уникальными боеприпасами: В
отличие от аналогов новое оружие эффективно не только
в воде, но и на суше (Combat Divers Get Assault Rifle with
Unique Ammunition; Unlike Analogues, the New Weapon
is Effective Not Only in Water but Also on Land),” Izvestia
Online, 19 September 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/632826
A Ministry of Defense spokesman stated that “Tests on the ADS as a combat diver’s weapon are already completed. The product has received
positive reviews and has been adopted by KSSO combatants. The KSSO tested the ADS for a quite long time, even more than previously
planned. The compared it with the standard APS underwater assault rifle under water and also performed tests on land.”
The Vysokotochnyye kompleksy [High-Precision Systems] holding company, which includes the Tula Design Bureau, confirmed that the ADS
is undergoing testing in Defense Ministry units and subunits but declined further comment.
APS underwater assault rifles and SPP-1 pistols are currently in service with Russian combat divers.
According a spokesman for a Russian Navy special unit, “The APS assault rifles and SPP pistols use special 5.6 mm needle bullets several
centimeters long. They are similar in design to the ammunition used in the German P-11 underwater pistol which is the only foreign
equivalent of the APS and SPP. In the water, this bullet behaves like a harpoon from an underwater gun: it flies along a trajectory until it
begins to lose speed due to the effects of resistance. On the surface, after exiting the barrel, the needle bullet flies just a few meters and then
begins to rotate around its axis and, losing lethal power, departs from its trajectory….
…Made to a “bullpup” design (where the trigger is in front of the magazine and firing mechanism) the ADS has a length of slightly more than
60 centimeters [two feet] and weighs only 4.5 kilograms [10 pounds]. The exact specifications of the dual-medium weapon have not yet been
disclosed, but based on reports its effective range on land is about 500 meters.
Underwater, the combat diver armed with an ADS at a depth of five meters will hit the target at a distance of 25 meters and at depths up to 20
meters will hit it at a distance of 18 meters.
But the main feature of ADS is its unique PSP 5.45 mm cartridge. The PSP bullet weighs 16 grams, while its speed in the air is approximately
330 meters per second.
When fired underwater, a cavity forms around the bullet due to a special platform in the nose section (as when an air bubble full of steam
forms around bodies moving in water). This platform permits the projectile to move accurately on its set trajectory at high speed.
It is noteworthy that PSP is completely identical as regards to its weight and size to the standard 5.45 mm caliber ammunition used in the AK74, AK-12, and AK-400 and the Kalashnikov assault rifles from the “100 series.”…
OE Watch | November 2016

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Improving Russian Camouflage
OE Watch Commentary: Camouflage has been
used on the battlefield since the beginning of warfare.
As weaponry has advanced over the years, so too
has camouflage. Russia is currently in the process of
modernizing its military, and this means not only the
weaponry, but also the camouflage that they use to
protect these assets. Russia has invested 660 billion
dollars since 2010 in an effort to modernize their
military, and a small portion of this has been allocated
into the research and development of different forms
of camouflage. The accompanying passage from a
Russian source discusses advancements in the Russian
military’s use of camouflage technology.

“The current purpose of camouflage... is not only to shield
from visual observation but also to protect against special
equipment.”

Russia has a longstanding history of using
camouflage, or maskirovka, in order to protect their
troops, mask their intentions and strength, and deliver
crippling blows, from a sniper shot to heavy artillery
and machinery. Modern Russian snipers utilize
specially designed camouflage cloaks that release heat
externally. This feature allows the sniper to remain
undetected by thermal imaging devices. Russian
camouflage is able to conceal much more than just a
single sniper. A Russian smoke-screen apparatus can
produce a thick enough cloud of smoke to cover up an
entire neighborhood for up to nine hours.
Modern camouflage cover can also protect from
electric warfare by insulating sensitive electronics from
attacks. Threads on the camouflage cover are not fragile
either, with a rated capacity of 30 kilograms. Finally,
Russia has invested in the creation of inflatable tanks,
infantry fighting vehicles, and even MIG-31 fighter jets.
These decoys are equipped with heaters, which serve
to make the fakes look real even when being tracked by
heat detectors. These inflatable decoys can be put up in
five minutes and look real from 300 yards away.
Camouflage and deception have always been integral
to success on the battlefield. With weaponry becoming
increasingly lethal, camouflage is becoming even more
important of a tool for the modern Russian military.
End OE Watch Commentary (McConnell)

A Russian sniper concealed in camouflage.
Source: https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/
originals/8f/88/9a/8f889a55613de35222e8c4c683fedf08.jpg

Source: Dmitriy Sergeyev, “Надувательство от невидимых людей: как напустить
дым и спрятать целую армию (Tricks From Invisible People: How To Produce
Smoke To Hide an Army),” Zvezda TV Online, 21 August, 2016. http://tvzvezda.ru

Russia’s Military Advancing Their Camouflage Technology:
“Today, camouflage is used by all branches and types of troops. Its methods and
means are used by ground troops, sailors, and fliers. As the military themselves
say, the unique developments here are no less than in weaponry. For example, the
capabilities of modern camouflage techniques make it possible to securely hide from
prying eyes not only an aircraft or tank, but also, say, a field headquarters.
... “The current purpose of camouflage... is not only to shield from visual
observation but also to protect against special equipment.”

OE Watch | November 2016

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Forecasting Methodology: In Need of
Improvement
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s
methodological approach for assessing
threats involves the practice of forecasting.
According to a recent article in the journal
Military Thought, Russia believes the
United States uses all types of pressure to
ensure its hegemonic policy of retaining
dominance in world affairs. These include
political, economic, military, and information
pressure. The proper analysis, assessment,
and forecasting of such threats helps
guarantee Russia’s progress and growth.
The author, N. B. Kamalov, discussed the
classification of threats in the first 2016 issue
of the Journal of the Academy of Military
Science. The Military Thought article appears
to complete his discussion of threats. Of
particular importance in the latter article is
Kamalov’s use of the term “war economy
area.” Those threats affecting the defenseindustrial complex are of particular concern.
He writes that this area is becoming more
relevant due to the introduction of economic
sanctions against Russia. As a result,
important forecasts must be performed in
regard to organizational and managerial,
financial, industry-related, functional, and
territorial threats to Russia. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“Unlike assessment, forecasting is performed at a preliminary

stage of decision-making: it facilitates development of a strategy
(plans) for the future. A family of forecasts is treated as a
multivariant view on the prospects of an asset (object of study)
changing in the future under certain conditions and assumptions.”
Source: N. B. Kamalov, “The Methodology of Analysis, Assessments, and Forecasting of
External Threats to the National Security of the Russian Federation,” Military Thought,
No. 6, pp. 52-57.
A qualitative perception of future developments allows for the risks and threats to be
discerned in due time and, therefore, preemptive measures to be adopted accordingly.
For this reason, forecasting is heavily used in the RF national security area.
Unlike assessment, forecasting is performed at a preliminary stage of decision-making:
it facilitates development of a strategy (plans) for the future. A family of forecasts is
treated as a multivariant view on the prospects of an asset (object of study) changing in
the future under certain conditions and assumptions.
Forecasting serves to tackle a dual task: on the one hand, to provide an unbiased and
scientifically sound vision of the future, by relying on current developments (normative
forecast), on the other - to identify direction of present activity, taking account of
predictions (research forecasting). Its main function is conducting scientific analysis of
the processes and trends and foreseeing new situations.
The forecasting also includes investigating objective links of phenomena and processes
in particular circumstances at a certain stage of development, assessing an asset (object
of forecasting), identifying possible alternatives of future developments and making
optimal decisions. The principles of forecasting ensure methodological consistency of
various forecasting methods and models.

Suheil al-Hassan and the Syrian Army’s Tiger Forces
By Lucas Winter

This paper looks at the genesis, evolution and growth of the Syrian Army’s “Tiger Forces” and their leader Suheil al-Hassan. The paper shows how Hassan has
played an important role since conflict began in 2011. It attributes his transformation from special forces commander to leader of military campaigns to an
ability to harness the Syrian Army’s full infantry, artillery and airpower better
than any other loyalist field commander. Given the Syrian Army’s manpower
shortages, rampant corruption and rivalry-laden bureaucracy, this is no small feat.
Al-Hassan has become a key symbol in the Syrian loyalist camp, able to project
more combined arms power than anyone else in Syria. His success on the battlefield comes less from tactical or strategic insights than from his ability to
thrive within the loyalist camp’s opaque and rivalry-laden bureaucracy. For
this he has become a symbol to regime supporters, proof that the war can be
won by working within the system.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Small%20Wars%20Journal%20-%20Suheil%20al-Hassan%20and%20the%20Syrian%20Army%E2%80%99s%20Tiger%20Forces%20-%202016-07-22.pdf
OE Watch | November 2016

62

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Ray Finch

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

The Mobilization of Russian Society
Ever since Vladimir Putin’s decision to return to the presidency
(September 2011), the Kremlin leadership has adopted a more antagonistic approach toward the West in general and the US in particular.
The Russian leadership appears to believe that the West/US presents a
serious threat to the current regime, and in response has been taking
actions to place the country on a partial war-footing.
This brief essay examines how the Kremlin leadership has attempted to mobilize Russian society over the past five years or so. It will
begin by considering their motives and then review some of the more
prominent mobilization tools, particularly the Russian media. It will
consider the primary barriers to mobilization and the Kremlin’s effectiveness to date (May 2016), and conclude with two possible implications stemming from this mobilization attempt.

Mobilization Rationale

The current Kremlin administration wants the Russian people to
believe that their country is besieged by enemies from both without
(primarily from the West and the US) and within (by Western-sponsored opposition forces). According to its narrative, the Western/
US strategy is to weaken Russia using every manner of weapon (e.g.,
information, economic, political, ideological, spiritual, technological,
military, etc.). Kremlin leaders contend that the US is fighting to retain
the unipolar global security model, whereby the US enjoys a global
security mandate. They maintain that the US has worked diligently
since the end of the Cold War to ensure that Russia does not recover
its great power status.
Alongside the stated objective of mobilizing against this foreign
threat lays the rather mundane goal of remaining in power. These two
goals are mutually supporting. As the noted Russian scholar Nikolay
Petrov recently put it:
Today, the regime derives its legitimacy not from the bottom
up, through elections, but from the top down, by placing the country on a permanent war footing. Putin’s role is more like a tsar
than the chair of a board. The regime has moved from a hybrid
system that still maintained the outward trappings of a democracy to a full-scale authoritarian state, while the shifting balance of
power has made the elites more dependent on the president.1

To carry out this bipolar strategy of challenging the US and remaining in power, the Kremlin leadership has mobilized Russian society
to confront what the respected Soviet/Russian military and political
affairs analyst, Dr. Stephen Blank has referred to as “perpetual war.”2
Current Russian strategic theory posits that there is no real divide
between war and peace. The former Chief of the Main Operational
Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, Colonel
General Kartapolov described the essence of modern conflict “as distinct from classical operations in past wars, with a diplomatic note at
its commencement and a peace treaty at its end, new-type war is never
declared and never ends.”3 In the Kremlin’s realpolitik perspective,
countries are always in competition with each other. This is a zero-sum
model: where when one side wins, the other loses.

Purposes of Mobilization

The purpose of any mobilization is to better prepare a country for
armed conflict. As operations in Ukraine and Syria have demonstrated, the Russian military has made significant improvements in combat readiness over the past decade. Having achieved some modicum
of success in Georgia, Ukraine and Syria, Kremlin leaders will likely
continue to place additional emphasis upon strengthening their armed

SPECIAL
ESSAY

forces. Improved military capability could translate into a greater
willingness to employ force where Russian interests are perceived to be
threatened.
According to a recent British study on Russian mobilization
(мобилизация) includes “substantial investments in arms procurement, in improved conditions of service in the armed forces and
defence industry, and in command-and-control systems and enhanced
coordination between ministries. They also entail an intense programme of exercises involving the domestic security services and the
armed forces.”4 But it in addition to that—and critically—it involves
the readiness of society.
A key component of the latest military reform efforts has been the
development of a viable military reserve which could be mobilized
in the event of war. While there are still problems with fully manning
and equipping this reserve force, the concept and structure of these
forces has been established. Besides working out the many military
details involved with mobilizing the military for armed conflict, the
wider Russian society has also adopted a mobilization mentality.
Alongside the rhetoric for greater military preparedness, over the past
few years, Russian society has become tempered to the likelihood of
future conflict. Indeed, as the ongoing conflicts in Ukraine and Syria
have illustrated, many Russians are mentally prepared for war today.
The old Soviet perspective of “as long as there is no war” [лишь бы,
нет войны] has been replaced by a belief that war is now a viable, and
perhaps even an attractive option.
The consequences of this mobilization-mania are readily apparent.
Just a few years ago it would have been impossible to imagine Russia
fighting with its fraternal neighbor in Ukraine. While the Kremlin has
been able to largely mask and camouflage its direct military involvement, recent polls have indicated that almost half of Russians now
view Ukraine as a threat.5
Their ability to mobilize the Russian information space and transform a friendly neighbor into a mortal threat was also apparent after
Turkey shot down a Russian aircraft (which had violated Turkish
airspace) back in November 2015. Almost overnight, the Kremlin-supported Russian media began a full scale information blitz against
Turkey, altering what had once been a decent relationship into one
verging on open hostilities.

Methods of Mobilization

Over the past decade there has been a significant increase in military and patriotic education for Russian youth. From an early age,
Russian children now have the opportunity to learn soldierly fundamentals. The school system has become a powerful platform to deliver
the Kremlin’s message that their country has been besieged by enemies throughout history and that survival depends upon maintaining
strong and robust military forces.6
In addition to formal school instruction, the Kremlin has been
dusting off old Soviet tools to mobilize youth, e.g., resurrecting the
“Ready for Labor and Defense” government program.7 Alongside the
stated goal of improving the physical fitness of young Russians, there is
a not-so subtle message that young people must be prepared to defend
their country.
The Russian Orthodox Church has also been enlisted to help with
the mobilization effort, providing both a spiritual blessing and ideological basis for the Kremlin’s defense efforts against the materialist
and sinful West.8 This is an important aspect of the mobilization
effort. Few young Russians may be prepared to fight and die for the
OE Watch | November 2016

(continued)

63

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Ray Finch

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: The Mobilization of Russian Society

SPECIAL
ESSAY

One indication as to the effectiveness of the Kremlin’s mobilization
Putin regime, but many more may be willing to fight and die for some
effort deals with the question as to who is responsible for the downing
divine promise.
of MH-17 over Ukraine in July 2014. As a result of its media saturaAnother tool in the mobilization toolbox has been the creation of
tion, the majority of Russians polled believe Ukraine or the US was
the Obshcherossiiskii narodnyi front [Общероссийский народный
responsible for this tragic crime.13
фронт] or the “all-Russia people’s front” (ONF). This is not a political
Besides creating a television station dedicated to covering every
party per se, but more like a mobilization force for those who want to
facet of Russia’s Armed Forces, the Kremlin has also developed a numimprove Russia. According to its charter, the Front’s goal is “promotion
ber of military-themed programs on regular TV and radio stations.14
of unity and civil solidarity in the name of Russia’s historical success;
These programs drive home the point of mobilizing for future battle.
the country’s development as a free, strong and sovereign state with a
robust economy; fast economic growth; and reliance on the family.”9
There are a host of other methods which the Kremlin uses to help
Barriers to Mobilization
increase defense awareness. Russians can now visit “Patriot Park,”
Despite the efforts of the Kremlin leadership, there are a number of
located just west of Moscow. This is a huge complex (almost 66 sq.
barriers which have thus far thwarted their efforts to fully mobilize the
kms.) that boasts tank grounds and airfields, as well as a number of
country for war. First, there is the typical Russian бардак/bardak (the
educational-military clubs, areas for paintball games, concert halls
general inefficiency of Russian society, literally “whorehouse”). Some
10
and camp grounds for tourists. Instead of shaking Mickey Mouse’s
of this may stem from the average Russian’s deep skepticism toward
hand, youngsters can check out the Kremlin’s latest weapons. There are
those in leadership positions. While the Kremlin has tried to exploit
a host of other, more subtle means (sporting events, fashion, advertisthe sentiment of “Russia getting back up off her knees” after the humiling) to promote military awareness.
iations of the 1990s, many Russians still harbor doubts that the counThe primary weapon, however, in
the Kremlin’s mobilization arsenal
has been its indirect control over the
major media outlets. One might argue that the most significant achievement of Putin’s reign over the past 16
years has been the consolidation of
major Russian media under Kremlin
control. Regarding specific policies
(e.g., Ukraine, Syria, or the refugee
crisis in Europe), the major Russian
media outlets all pretty much sing
off the same page of music.11 This is
especially true for the three major
Russian TV stations, which remain
the chief conduit of information and
entertainment for the majority of
Russians.
This control over the media has
allowed the Kremlin to portray its
The opening of Patriot Park near Moscow, June 2015.
message in a consistent, persistent,
Source: Government.ru
coordinated and largely one-sided
try’s leadership is genuinely concerned with the welfare of the people.
manner, from morning talk shows, to call-in radio, to magazines and
These doubts may escalate as costs mount.
newspapers, evening TV news programs and documentary films,
Second, Russia’s endemic corruption continues to retard the mowhich are then cut and pasted across much of the Internet, resulting
bilization effort. While the popular image of Putin’s power vertical
in a 24/7 highly professional media saturation which has proven to be
suggests strict accountability, the reality is far different. Based on past
very effective. Unless the average Russian media consumer makes the
experience, probably 25-40% of what is allocated toward mobilizaeffort, he or she has hardly ever been exposed to a perspective which
tion is siphoned off into personal accounts through various corrupt
deviates significantly from the approved Kremlin viewpoint.
schemes. Mobilization, like patriotism, often remains the last refuge
Besides using daily news programs to pound this message home,
for scoundrels.
over the past decade the Kremlin-sponsored media has developed an
Somewhat related to corruption are the economic strains resulting
untold number of TV and radio talk shows where “experts” discuss
12
from depressed fossil fuel revenues and Western sanctions. The Kremand explain what is really happening in the news. These programs
are an interesting mix of propaganda, analysis, entertainment and
lin’s plan to modernize the military with 70% modern equipment by
discussion, often designed less to inform than to incite emotions and
2020 will likely have to be pushed back a few years. Programs to mobiprovoke indignation. These highly professional television and radio
lize the wider Russian society will also likely be delayed.
programs have helped to craft a narrative whereby the West/US is
The fourth factor might be labeled the “general decency” of the Rusalways out to weaken Russia, while the Kremlin leadership remains
sian people. Despite the shrill, bellicose rhetoric of their media, many
above reproach.
Russians are still capable of thinking for themselves. Those connected
OE Watch | November 2016

(continued)

64

SPECIAL ESSAY

Top

By Ray Finch

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: The Mobilization of Russian Society
to the Internet have access to other sources of information.
Finally, there may be questions as to the degree to which the Kremlin truly wants to mobilize society. Does it actually want to inspire
citizens to volunteer and act independently? The Russian leadership
may prefer instead the passive and apathetic, who, rather than daring
to act outside of the system, remain content to sit on the couch, drink
beer and yell at the TV.
By one measure, the effectiveness of the Kremlin’s mobilization
effort has been outstanding. Putin’s approval ratings remain at the
rock-star level, and should he elect to run in 2018, he will likely win
without much effort. Anger and ill-feelings toward the US remain
robust, with upwards of 75% of the Russian population holding negative views toward America.15 Moreover, a majority of Russians regard
the US as the primary threat to their country. Similarly, fewer Russians
are willing to listen to Western criticisms regarding the direction their
country is taking, although Kremlin statistics regarding the level of
popular support ought to be taken with a grain of salt.
Nevertheless, this mobilization effort has had a couple negative
consequences. Having been whipped into an emotional frenzy by the
never-ending “two-minute hate sessions,” aggression, fear and paranoia are becoming more commonplace in Russian society. Every day
the average Russian is told that foreign and domestic enemies are
working to undermine his safety, stability and well-being. In such a
poisonous atmosphere, any criticism of the authorities is interpreted
as treason; hence, although down deep the Russian citizen may suspect that he is being manipulated and lied to, many of them not only
keep their mouths shut, bit also even begin to echo the Kremlin line to
prove their loyalty.

Conclusion

Over the past half-decade, the Kremlin leadership has not only
been mobilizing the consciousness of Russian society for the eventuality of conflict, but also has taken concrete actions to improve the
readiness and combat capability of its various armed forces. With each
passing month, as the Kremlin continues to manipulate the information space, a significant percentage of the Russian people, government
1

2
3

4

5

6

7

Nikolay Petrov: “Putin’s Downfall: The Coming Crisis of the Russian Regime,” European Council of Foreign Relations, available from www.ecfr.eu/publications/summary/
putins_downfall_the_coming_crisis_of_the_russian_regime7006, accessed on 11 May
2016.
Stephen Blank, “Russia’s Hybrid War: Through a Glass Darkly,” available from http://
intersectionproject.eu/article/security/russias-hybrid-war-through-glass-darkly, accessed on 11 May 2016.
See: A. V. Kartapolov, “Уроки Военных конфликтов, перспективы развития
средств и методов их введения. Прямого и непрямого действия в современных
международных конфликтов,” [Lessons pf Military Conflicts, Prospects of Development of Means and Methods of Administering Them. Direct and Indirect Action in
Contemporary International Conflicts] Vestnik Akademii Voennykk Naukov, 2015, 2
(51).
Andrew Monaghan, “Russian State Mobilization: Moving the Country on to a
War Footing,” Chatham House, May 2016. https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/
files/chathamhouse/publications/research/2016-05-20-russian-state-mobilization-monaghan-2.pdf
According to a recent (May 2016) poll conducted by the Russian Levada Center, 48%
of Russians now view Ukraine as a threat. For more details, see: Elena Mukhametshin,
“Основными противниками жители России считают США, Украину и Турцию”
[Russian residents believe that the United States, Ukraine and Turkey are their
main opponents] Vedomosti, 2 June 2016.  https://www.vedomosti.ru/politics/articles/2016/06/02/643351-rossiyane-reshili-im-vragi
Ilya Rozhdestvensky, “Russia’s Littlest Soldiers: How the Government Teaches Kids to
Love the Motherland and to Fight for It,” available from https://meduza.io/en/feature/2015/07/16/russia-s-littlest-soldiers,  accessed 13 May 2016.  For a more general
analysis, see: Sergei Golunov, “Patriotic Education in Russia,” available from https://
www.gwu.edu/~ieresgwu/assets/docs/ponars/pepm_161.pdf,  accessed 13 May
2016.  
“Putin Signs Off on Return of Soviet Fitness Standards,” The Moscow Times, 6 October
2015, available from themoscowtimes.com/news/article/putin-signs-off-on-return-ofsoviet-fitness-standards/537259.html accessed 13 May 2016.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

and power ministries are growing more hostile toward the West in
general and the US in particular.16 This hostility has been exacerbated
by deteriorating economic conditions within Russia. Strengthening its
political legitimacy via this mobilization-mania, the Kremlin leadership may be increasingly tempted to demonstrate its ability to protect
the motherland from the sinister plans of NATO and the US.
Where this will lead, nobody knows. Here are two observations
which suggest either a positive or negative direction.
The positive scenario comes from the tail-end of Vladimir Putin’s
recently televised “direct-line” discussion with the Russian people in
mid-April, where toward the end of the performance an 8-year old
called with the following question:
“My name is Alina, and I am in first grade. Could a woman become
president of our Russia? Because daddy says that only Putin can deal
with America.” (applause)
And here’s Putin’s response: “Alina, we should not focus on how to
deal with America. We have to think about how to deal with our domestic affairs and problems, our roads, our healthcare, education, how to
develop our economy, restore it and reach the required growth pace.
If we do all this, we will not have to deal with anybody because then
– only in this case – we will be invulnerable people with bright prospects
who want to live in this country and are proud of it. As for a woman
president, maybe a woman would do best at tackling these problems.”17
The second scenario reflects a more negative direction and comes
from the Russian historian, Leon Aron, who recently warned: “the
present Russian regime, which cannot modernize and for which a modicum of institutional reform might prove fatal to its hold on power, has
staked its legitimacy on patriotic mobilization. Putin has saddled this
tiger with remarkable ease and had it trot steadily. Yet among the many
dangers of such a ride is the necessity of feeding the beast with an ever
increasing supply of fresh meat, the bloodier the better….
Victory (or, more precisely, victories large or small in the imagined
war with the West) have become the foundation of political survival and
thus must be pursued relentlessly.”
Aron concludes, “This might not end well.”18

8

9
10
11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18

For a detailed study on how the Russian Orthodox Church has helped with the mobilization effort, see: Vera Zakem, Paul Saunders, and Daniel Antoun, “Mobilizing Compatriots: Russia’s Strategy, Tactics, and Influence in the Former Soviet Union,” available
from https://www.cna.org/CNA_files/PDF/DOP-2015-U-011689-1Rev.pdf,  accessed 13
May 2016.
For more information on the ONF, see Tatiana Stanovaya, “The All Russia People’s
Front: A Party with no Power?” available from http://intersectionproject.eu/article/
politics/all-russia-peoples-front-party-no-power, accessed 13 May 2016.
Alec Luhn, “Here’s What You Can Do at Russia’s ‘Military Disneyland’” available from
https://news.vice.com/article/heres-what-you-can-do-at-russias-military-disneyland,
accessed 13 May 2016.
Much has been written over the past 15 years to describe this process. For a recent
example, see Maria Snegovaya “Stifling the Public Sphere: Media and Civil Society in
Russia,” available from http://www.ned.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Stiflingthe-Public-Sphere-Media-Civil-Society-Russia-Forum-NED.pdf,  accessed 13 May 2016.
The list of these programs is long and continues to expand. Some of the most popular
are “Sunday Evening with Vladimir Soloviev,” “Pravo Znat,” “Moment Istiniy,” “Politika,” and “Pravo Golosa.”  
Nick Robins-Early, “Few Russians Believe Separatists Shot Down MH17” available
from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/mh17-russian-missile-investigation_us_
561faff3e4b0c5a1ce622a7b, accessed 13 May 2016.
Again, the list is long, and besides the Zvezda television station dedicated to covering
military topics, there are programs like “Armeiskiy Magazine,” “Voennoye Taina,”
“Genstab,” “Voennoye Review,” and “Voennaya Programma A. Slatkova.”  
Andrei Kolesnikov, “Russian Ideology after Crimea,” available from http://carnegieendowment.org/files/CP_Kolesnikov_Ideology2015_web_Eng.pdf, accessed 13 May
2016.
For relatively recent poll data, see Alexander Sergunin, Valery Konyshev “Russian
Analytical Digest No 178: US-Russian Relations,” 11 January 2016.
“Прямая линия с Владимиром Путиным” [Direct Line with Vladimir Putin], available
from  http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/51716 accessed 13 May 2016.
Leon Aron, “Putinology,” The American Interest, available from http://www.the-american-interest.com/2015/07/30/putinology/ accessed 13 May 2016.

OE Watch | November 2016

65

