NEW WEBSITE!

community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

NEW WEBSITE!

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #5
June 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

SPECIAL ESSAY:

TRENDS IN THE
TURKISH MILITARY
INDUSTRY

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
5
6
8
9
10
11
12
13

Hezbollah Learning New War Fighting Skills in Syria
Turkish Airstrikes on Kurdish Groups in Iraq and
Syria: What’s Next?
Turkish Otokar Designs New Battle Tank for
Asymmetrical Warfare
Iran Unveils New Sniper Rifle
Iran: Qods Force General is New Ambassador to Iraq
Iran: Military Budget Increased 145%
Syrian War: The Race to Deir Ezzor
Internal Disputes and the Future of ISIS
Saudi-UAE Friction in Yemen

AFRICA

14 “Terror Twins” Targeted South African Jewish
Community, Others
15 Post-Apartheid Pain: South Africans Question
Country’s Direction
16 Somalia: Concern Over AMISOM’s Future
17 Is the African Union Ignoring Early Warnings of
Potential Conflict?
18 South Sudan: Fragmenting Opposition Diminishes
Chances for Peace
19 Malaria Fights Back: Africa’s Problem of Drug and
Pesticide Resistance
20 Nigerian Security Challenges Interwoven with New
Boko Haram Threats

LATIN AMERICA
21
22
23
24
25
25

Mexican Gas Smuggling
Measuring Mexican Gas Theft
On the Next Cuban President
About Bolivarian Motorcycle Colectivos
Outcry over Maduro’s Military Courts
Venezuela: PSUV to Militarize?

ASIA-PACIFIC

26 Bhutan’s Relations With China and India
27 Philippines Choose Chinese Investment Over
Territorial Defense
28 China and Thailand Arms Factory Deal is One Step
Closer
29 Vietnam’s Ongoing Energy Challenge
30 China’s Push on the Belt and Road Initiative: PushBack or Acceptance?
32 Operational Data: China’s Key to Victory on Future
Battlefields?
33 China Continues to Build Aircraft Carriers
34 Cooperation with Civilians Leads to Killing of Abu
Sayyaf Commander
35 Malacca Strait Patrols Reinvented for Sulu Sea

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

36 More Fallout from the St. Petersburg Metro Bombing
37 The Espionage Case Between Pakistan and India
39 Georgia’s “Strategic Defense Review”

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

40 Russia Establishes New Army Corps in the Arctic
41 New S-500 Will Increase Russian Anti-Satellite Capability
42 Russia Fielding First C2 System for Electronic Warfare
Brigades
43 A Russian Leader to Watch
44 Insourcing Military Utilities and Housing
45 Crisis of Trust over Afghanistan
46 No Need to Fear the Spring Draft
47 Winning Over Hearts and Minds in SE Ukraine
48 Arctic Air Defense Interview
49 The Nature of Threats to Russia’s Western Sector and
How to Address Them

SPECIAL ESSAY

50 Trends in the Turkish Military Industry

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER: Derivative work based on: 1. The Altay tank with multispectral
camo net show cased at IDEF 2017; 2. Flag-map of Turkey; 3. Modern Istanbul
skyline at sunset

Sources: 1. Wikimedia.org, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAltayCamoNet.png, Taken from visitors at IDEF 2017.in Turkey [CC BYSA 4.0]; 2. By Darwinek (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.
html)], via Wikimedia Commons; 3. By Ben Morlok [CC BY-SA 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 5

June | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest

		
Asia-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Sudha Ramachandran
Tim Thomas
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Tim Thomas

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Hezbollah Learning New War Fighting Skills in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages from
Middle Eastern sources discuss reports that Hezbollah has been
learning a new set of war fighting skills in Syria. The passages
from Israeli sources discuss Israel’s changing threat perceptions of
Hezbollah, given this development.
The first accompanying passage quotes a Hezbollah fighter as
saying that they have been “learning a lot by working with Russians
and Iranians in the Syria war and more specifically when it comes to
UAVs.” In addition, the excerpt discusses that “Hezbollah has moved
from an entity always fighting the same enemy in the same place
(Israel in south Lebanon) to multiple new war theatres, from barren
mountains to flat agricultural areas and inner cities.” The group is
also reported to have learned to use intelligence and reconnaissance to
develop more complex offensive operations. Hezbollah is reportedly
also improving its logistics, offensive operations skills and learning to
hold and control ground.
Meanwhile, Israel is monitoring these developments. The excerpt
quotes Avi Melamed, a former Israeli intelligence official and expert
on Israeli affairs, who says that Israel closely follows Hezbollah in
many ways, and is particularly monitoring their use of drones.
The second passage discusses a report by Israel’s Institute for
National Security Studies, which points to a significant strengthening
of Hezbollah. The piece notes that last year, Iran was ranked as the
biggest threat to Israel, while Hezbollah appeared to be bleeding from
its involvement in the Syrian war. However, it notes that over the
past year, the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) has witnessed Hezbollah
make it through the Syrian war. The piece discusses that Hezbollah
now possesses precision weaponry that can hit any point on the
map in Israel and claims that the group has the ability to deter the
Israeli air force and its stealth capabilities, the navy, its missile boats
and the ground forces. Given this background, the excerpt notes
that Hezbollah has surpassed Iran as the greatest danger to Israel
according to the think tank’s threat rankings.
While Israel has avoided getting involved in the Syrian conflict,
weapons transfers to Hezbollah have often triggered a response by
Israel. An incident in March was particularly worth noting, as it led
to the first reported use of Israel’s Arrow Missile Defense system.
As the final excerpt from the Times of Israel reports, on 17 March,
the Syrian armed forces fired three surface-to-air missiles (SAM)
against Israeli Air Force (IAF) jets, in response to Israeli jets striking
Hezbollah targets in Syria. One of these missiles was intercepted by
the Israeli Arrow missile defense system. This marked the deepest
Israeli strike inside Syria since the civil war began and the first
reported use of the advanced missile defense system. The excerpt
notes that the IDF was reportedly targeting a Hezbollah weapons
convoy in Syria, which triggered the Syrian response. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“[Hezbollah’s] increased level of expertise has
reflected a change in the perception of Hezbollah
by Israel ... The Institute for National Security
Studies’ annual report ... underlined a significant
strengthening of Hezbollah, surpassing Iran ‘as
the greatest danger to Israel’.”
Source: Mona Alami, “ANALYSIS: Hezbollah enters drone age
with bombing raids in Syria,” Middle East Eye, 20 March 2017.
http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/analysis-hezbollah-entersnew-war-use-armed-drones-syria-11412100
During an interview last month in Lebanon, a Hezbollah
fighter told Middle East Eye: “We are definitely learning a lot by
working with Russians and Iranians in the Syria war and more
specifically when it comes to UAVs.
Blanford [a Hezbollah expert] meanwhile said Hezbollah
was not only developing its knowledge of drones but is also
practising a new set of war fighting skills in Syria.
This entails calling in strikes, improved logistics to troops
deployed, improved offensive operations skills and learning to
hold and control ground.
“Hezbollah moved from an entity always fighting the same
enemy in the same place (Israel in south Lebanon) to multiple
new war theatres, from barren mountains to flat agricultural
areas and inner cities, all of which are unfamiliar to the
organisation’s cadres,” he said.
“Hezbollah has also learned to fight in larger unit sizes and
alongside other militaries which it has never done before. It even
boasts an armoured brigade today.
“It has also learned how to use intelligence and reconnaissance
to develop more complex offensive operations.”
This increased level of expertise has also reflected a change in
the perception of Hezbollah by Israel. According to the Institute
for National Security Studies’ annual report, it underlined a
significant strengthening of Hezbollah, surpassing Iran “as the
greatest danger to Israel”.
Iran was ranked the biggest threat to Israel last year.
...
Avi Melamed, a former Israeli intelligence official and expert
on Israeli affairs, said:
“Israel follows closely Hezbollah in many ways and in many
aspects. The use of drones is of course one of the issues closely
monitored by Israel.”

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Hezbollah Learning New War Fighting
Skills in Syria
Source: Noam Amir, “Analysis: Hezbollah Now Serves as
the Biggest Threat to Israel,” Jerusalem Post, 3 January
2017. http://www.jpost.com/Arab-Israeli-Conflict/
Analysis-Hezbollah-now-serves-as-the-biggest-threat-toIsrael-477327
“The Institute for National Security Studies’ annual
report ... points to a significant strengthening of Hezbollah,
which surpassed Iran as the greatest danger to Israel
according to the think tank’s threat rankings.
Iran was ranked the biggest threat to Israel last year,
as Hezbollah appeared to be bashed and bloodied from
its involvement in the Syrian civil war and deterred from
challenging Israel.
Over the past year, however, the IDF and the defense
establishment saw Hezbollah Secretary-General Hassan
Nasrallah make it through the Syrian civil war.
...
Hezbollah today possesses precision weaponry that can
hit any point on the map in Israel. They have the ability to
deter the air force and its stealth capabilities, the navy and
its missile boats and the ground forces...

Source: Judah Ari Gross and Times of Israel Staff, “ IAF ‘Arrow’ battery
intercepts Syrian missile, in first reported use of the system,” The Times of
Israel, 17 March 2017. http://www.timesofisrael.com/iaf-arrow-batteryintercepts-syrian-missile-in-first-reported-use-of-the-system/
“At approximately 2:30 a.m. [on 17 March], Israeli “aircraft targeted several
targets in Syria,” the Israel Defense Forces said, prompting a Syrian attempt
to down the Israeli jets.
According to Arab media, the target of the IAF strikes was a Hezbollah
weapons convoy. “Several anti-aircraft missiles were launched from Syria
following the mission and IDF aerial defense systems intercepted one of the
missiles,” the army said in a statement.
...
The anti-aircraft missiles were fired from eastern Syria by Bashar Assad’s
military, traveling over Jordan and toward the Jerusalem area. They were
apparently SA-5 surface-to-air missiles (SAMs).
...
The IDF statement was rare, if not unprecedented, as the Israeli military
does not generally admit to carrying out specific actions in Syria other than
retaliations to spillover fire from fighting near the border. However, Israel has
acknowledged that it does, generally speaking, attack such convoys traveling
from Syria to Hezbollah in Lebanon.

Diagram showing stages of missile interception by the Arrow system. The picture shows a hostile missile
trajectory and that of the Black Sparrow air-launched target missile used in firing tests.
By United States Missile Defense Agency [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fil e%3AArrow_system.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | June 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Airstrikes on Kurdish Groups in Iraq and Syria:
What’s Next?
Source: “Press Statement,” The Website of the Turkish Armed Forces, 3 May
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 April, a wave of
Turkish airstrikes struck Kurdish groups at Mount Sinjar
(in Iraq) and at Mount Karachok (in Syria) located
approximately 90 kilometers south of the border with
Turkey, leaving 25 fighters dead. The accompanying
passages from Turkish sources, including a press
statement by the Turkish Armed Forces (TAF), discuss
these strikes from the Turkish point of view.

The first passage is the complete press statement by
the TAF regarding the air operation. Dated 3 May, the
statement declares that the TAF carried out the operations
with the goal of eliminating terror cells in regions which
are used as bases to support and carry out terror acts by
the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and the Democratic
Union Party (PYD) “which target the unity, integrity and
security of our country and nation.” The statement goes
on to say that all the countries that have forces in the area
were notified and informed; and maximum attention was
paid to prevent any civilian casualties. It also notes that
the fight against the “separatist terror organization” will
continue with absolute resolve and determination “until
the last terrorist is neutralized.” The term “separatist terror
organization” is often used to refer to the PKK, which
Turkey considers to be synonymous with the PYD in
Syria. Turkey has a painful history with the PKK, which
has been waging a separatist war and conducting terror
attacks inside the country on and off since 1984, resulting
in the loss of over 40,000 lives.
The second passage, by a Turkish columnist considered
close to the government, discusses the political and
military messages that were meant to be conveyed with
the air operation. He notes that the message to the PKK
was that Turkey is aware that Sinjar is becoming a second
Qandil (a reference to the mountains in Northern Iraq
where the PKK has been based for years), and that Turkey
will not allow this. He also claims that a political message
is being sent to the US, Iraq and the Syrian regime,
namely that Turkey is determined to fight the PKK,
wherever they are. He also notes that while a potential
ground offensive is not completely out of the question, it is
not happening for now. (continued)

2017. http://www.tsk.tr/BasinFaaliyetleri

On 25 April 2017, the Turkish Armed Forces carried out an air operation
within the framework of our rights based on international law; with the goal
of eliminating terror cells in the regions of north Iraq/Sinjar Mountain and
northeastern Syria/Mt. Karachok, which are used to support and carry out
PKK/PYD terror acts which target the unity, integrity and security of our
country and nation.
Prior to the said air operation, the civil and military representatives of all
involved countries were contacted and informed as necessary, within the
framework of previously agreed upon rules.
The Turkish Armed Forces took all the preventive measures to ensure that
no harm is done to the potential civilian population and personnel from other
countries in the operation region, and maximum sensitivity has been shown on
this issue.
The Turkish Armed Forces and all of the units of our security forces are
conducting this fight against the separatist terror organization, both within and
beyond our country’s borders, with absolute determination and resolve. The
operations will continue with the same resolve and determination until the last
terrorist has been neutralized.
We inform the public with respect.
Source: “Abdülkadir Selvi, “Operasyon gecesi Genelkurmay’da yaşananlar
(The events in the General Staff on the night of the operation),” Hurriyet.com.tr,
26 April 2017. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/abdulkadir-selvi/operasyongecesi-genelkurmayda-yasananlar-40438402
The Operation’s Messages
No doubt the operation has a military and a political message.
The military message: The PKK was placed in Sinjar in a fait accompli. This
area became a second Qandil. We are aware of this and we will not allow this.
The political message: Turkey’s determination message was relayed to the U.S.,
Iraq and the Syrian regime. And right before President Erdogan’s visit to the
U.S.
The operation also has a message to the PKK. The PKK thought that it
wouldn’t be targeted in Sinjar. It was using the Yazidis in Sinjar as camouflage.
Sinjar and Karachok were targeted with precision. The message to the
PKK was, “I’ll hit you even in Sinjar.” Based on the reporting from after
the operation, it is clear that the targeting of Sinjar caused a great deal of
destruction for the PKK. The PKK had started moving some of its forces from
Qandil to Sinjar. And our intelligence units were identifying increased activity
in Sinjar, with the arrival of the spring months.
Is there a ground operation on the horizon? It is within the realm of possibility
but right now they are only conducting air operations.

“On 25 April 2017, the Turkish Armed Forces carried out an air operation within the framework of our
rights based on international law; with the goal of eliminating terror cells in the regions of north Iraq/Sinjar
Mountain and northeastern Syria/Mt. Karachok, which are used to support and carry out PKK/PYD terror
acts which target the unity, integrity and security of our country and nation.”
- Turkish Armed Forces Statement

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkish Airstrikes on Kurdish Groups in Iraq and
Syria: What’s Next?
The final passage features statements
by Turkish President Erdoğan, repeating
that Turkey will not tolerate the presence
of PKK terror groups in northern Iraq and
northeastern Syria, and hinting at a potential
surprise cross-border operation. It should be
noted that Turkey already has ground troops
in Iraq, at the Bashiqa camp, where it has
been training fighters to retake Mosul from
ISIS. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: “Turkey may come to PKK-held Sinjar overnight, President Erdoğan says,”
Daily Sabah, 29 April 2017. https://www.dailysabah.com/war-on-terror/2017/04/29/
turkey-may-come-to-pkk-held-sinjar-overnight-president-erdogan-says
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan warned Saturday [29 April] once again that Turkey
will not tolerate the presence of the PKK terror organization and their affiliated groups
in northern Iraq’s Sinjar region and northern Syria.
“Turkey knows what to do and when to do it, we may come there overnight all of a
sudden,” Erdoğan said, hinting at a cross-border operation to drive the terrorist group
from the areas in its south.

The Syrian Crisis from a Neighbor’s
Perspective: View from Turkey by Karen Kaya
What started out as internal turmoil in Syria in March 2011 turned into a regional
crisis, which then turned into an international crisis. The crisis in Syria is now affecting
the surrounding region, most critically Syria’s neighbors, who have all had to contend
with instability at their borders. This article analyzes the Syrian crisis from Turkey’s
perspective, discussing the direct security threats that it poses to Turkey. The article
focuses on the following four themes: Border security and the spill-over effects of
internal clashes; Turkey’s concerns regarding the formation of an autonomous Kurdish
region in northern Syria; its concerns regarding the PKK expanding its base and
influence; and the risk of Turkey having a jihadi presence on its border along with
becoming a transit point for Islamic militants going to join the fighting in Syria.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Turkish Otokar Designs New Battle Tank for Asymmetrical
Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey’s main military vehicle manufacturer Otokar has unveiled a new version of Turkey’s first new-generation
main battle tank, the Altay. As the accompanying passages discuss, this new version, called the Altay-AHT, is the “urban operation” version
of the same tank, and is designed for asymmetrical warfare. The design reportedly incorporated lessons learned from the Euphrates Shield
Operation that the Turkish Armed Forces had launched in Syria in August 2016. The passages discuss the capabilities of this tank and its
export potential for armies looking to renew their battle tanks.
As the first passage from Turkish daily Milliyet discuses, the Altay-AHT was showcased at the International Defense Industry Fair in
Istanbul in early May. The passage features comments by Otokar’s general manager Serdar Görgüç, who notes that the Altay-AHT tank was
designed in response to hybrid and asymmetrical threats, with the future needs of the Turkish Armed Forces in mind. He also discusses that
the new tank will have high export potential, claiming that most of the battle tanks were designed with the technology of the 1970’s and 1980’s
and that a new era is about to begin, where many armies will be looking to update or revise their battle tanks. He notes that the Altay will be
a strong option for such armies.
The second passage, from Otokar’s website discusses the features of the tank, which include explosive reactive armor and bar armor systems
on each side for better survivability against guided and unguided ballistic missile attacks. The tank also has improved situational awareness
with the addition of a telescopic elevated observation system. It is fitted with a jammer to protect against remote controlled improvised
explosive devices and equipped with a directional dozer blade that can be operated by the driver. Its gunshot detection system can identify
the direction of sniper threats; its laser warning system can identify threats by laser-guided, anti-tank missiles; and its laser range finders can
measure distance. The vehicle can also release a layer of smoke toward the direction of an identified threat.
The Turkish government will decide this year whether to sign a serial product contract with Otokar for the Altay-AHT or launch competition
for the contract. These developments are taking place within the greater context of a Turkish military industry which is working to become
more self-sufficient while increasing defense exports. The longer-term goal is to become one of the top 10 countries in the world in the military
industry. (For more information, see the Special Essay in this issue, “Trends in the Turkish Military Industry.”) End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya)
(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkish Otokar Designs New Battle Tank for
Asymmetrical Warfare
“We worked on a new version of the Altay based on the experiences gain in the Euphrates Shield
Operation ... and developed a different type of Altay, which is the Asymmetric Battle Tank.”
- Otokar’s general manager Serdar Görgüç
Source: “Altay tankı gücüne güç kattı (The Altay tank has added strength to its
strength!),” Milliyet.com.tr, 10 May 2017. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/altay-tankigucune-guc-katti--otomobil-2447772/
Otokar has produced the new and improved Altay Asymmetrical War Tank (ALTAY
AHT), based on the experiences gained from the Euphrates Shield Operation.
At the 13th International Defense Industry Fair (IDEF 2017), Otokar is exhibiting
the [new version] of the national main battle tank the Altay: the Altay Asymmetrical
War Tank (ALTAY AHT), which was developed in accordance with asymmetrical war
conditions in peace-support operations.
...
Altay’s new hardware
[Otokar’s general manager Serdar] Görgüç, who provided information about the Altay
AHT said, “We worked on a new version of the Altay based on the experiences gain in
the Euphrates Shield Operation.... and developed a different type of Altay, which is the
Asymmetric Battle Tank.” Görgüç, who explained that the new version [of the tank] is
designed as an urban operation vehicle, said that the tank ended up with equipped with
various sensors, sub-systems and protective measures.
Görgüç said: “For example, on both sides of the tank, there are stronger armor against
missiles that may come from the sides, and the ceiling features an electro-optical column
that can see 10-15 km away... Similarly, the vehicle can release a layer of smoke to
mislead laser-guided missiles, which works with the laser-warning system. In addition,
there is a gunshot detection system can identify the direction of sniper threats, giving the
personnel [inside the vehicle] detailed coordinates of the sniper.”
...
“Most of the tanks were produced with the technology of the 1970’s and 1980’s. The
Altay, with its brand new technology, and its numerous capabilities, represents an
alternative to these older tanks. Tanks typically stay in an army’s inventory for 20-30
years, but these are all getting old. So, both in the western armies and in the eastern
armies, a new era is about to start, where tanks get updated or renewed. Some try to
deal with this problem by renovating old systems but this is just a band-aid and does
not really improve the capability of the tank. When we consider all of these factors,
the Altay is a good Turkish product and will be successful in export markets as well.
For armies that are looking to renew their inventory, we believe it will be a strong and
alternative product.”

Source: “Otokar Unveils Altay-AHT, Urban
Operations Tank at the IDEF,” Otokar.com.
tr, Undated. https://www.otokar.com/en-us/
corporate/media/news/Pages/altay-urban-idef.
aspx
•
Explosive Reactive Armour (ERA)
and Bar Armour Systems are applied on
the tank to enhance its survivability against
guided and unguided ballistic missile attacks
that pose great threat in 360-degrees for main
battle tanks in hybrid and asymmetric combat
conditions.
•
Situational awareness improved with the
addition of Telescopic Elevated Observation
System (EOS), YAMGÖZ system that enables
360-degrees awareness, and repositioning of
remote control weapon stations (RCWS).
•
The tank is fitted with a Jammer against
remote control IED attacks. The Gunshot
Detection System can identify the direction of
sniper threats, the Laser Warning System can
identify the threats by laser guided anti-tank
missiles, and laser range finders that measure
distance. The direction of the identified threat
can be automatically smoked using the Soft
Kill (Smart Smoke Curtain) System. The EOS,
RCWS and tank turret can be automatically
directed to the threat depending on the user’s
preference.
•
The tank is fitted with a directional
dozer blade that can be operated by the
driver, and used for a variety of tasks such
as preparing the defence lines, clearing the
obstacles on the battlefield, and filling the tank
trenches.

The RED DIAMOND is the
Army’s leading e-journal highlighting current threats
in the Operational Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | June 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Unveils New Sniper Rifle
OE Watch Commentary: Iranian authorities continue to steer resources
into the Islamic Republic’s domestic armament industry. After the Islamic
Revolution, then-leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini declared 18 April to be
Islamic Republic of Iran Army Day. Each year, the government celebrates this
day with military parades and, in recent years, it has also used the occasion to
unveil new developments and equipment. This year was no exception: Iranian
authorities unveiled a new ‘Nasir’ anti-ship missile, an upgraded Mohajer-6
unmanned aerial vehicle, the Heidar-5 vehicle to lay Mersad-2 mines, and a .50
caliber Heidar sniper rifle.
In the excerpted article which appears to be a reprint from the Tasnim News
Agency which is affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the
details of the new sniper rifle are provided. However, the specifications are
curious: The sniper rifle is far heavier than the French FR F2 used since 1986
and put into action most recently in Afghanistan and the Hécate II, the French
army’s standard-issue heavy sniper rifle, yet lacks its 1,800 meter useful range.1
Even if the Heidar sniper rifle may be heavy, exaggerated, and unwieldy, the
Iranian manufacture of sniper rifles might raise operational concerns given
Iranian patterns of proliferation in areas such as Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, and
Yemen. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

1. “PGM Hécate II,” Ministère de la défense, no date,
www.defense.gouv.fr/content/download/105853/1034977/file/HECATE.pdf

Source: “Jadidtarin Tektirand az Irani ba Nam Heidar
Ravanmayi shod (Iran Unveils its newest Sniper Rifle called
Heidar),” Boultan.ir, 16 April 2017. https://goo.gl/P9fPWf
During a ceremony attended by the chief-of-staff of the
army, a new “Heidar” semi-automatic sniper rifle and
the newest army products were unveiled. According to the
Tasnim News Agency defense team, in the presence of [Gen.]
Amir Kiomars Heidari, commander of the ground forces,
ahead of the Army Day of the Islamic Republic of Iran [April
18] unveiled the newest products of this force which by
virtue of our jihad the army has achieved self-sufficiency in
production. [Specifications] include:
•

The 50 caliber semi-automatic “Heidar” sniper rifle.

•
The weight of the weapon without its magazine and
accessories is 11.057 kilograms [24.37 lbs] and with all the
accessories, it is 17.5 kilograms [38.58 lbs]. Body length
is 33.6 centimeters [13.2 inches], barrel length is 81.28
centimeters [32 inch], and length with full accessories is
134.86 centimeters [53.09 inches]. Initial muzzle velocity is
1,734 meters per second [5689 feet per second], and it has a
5,000 bullet barrel life. It has a useful range of 1,600 meters,
a maximum effective range of 2,000 meters, and a maximum
range of 3,000 meters

OE Watch | June 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Qods Force General is New Ambassador to Iraq
OE Watch Commentary: While most
countries appoint traditional diplomats to
represent their governments in Baghdad, the
Islamic Republic of Iran continues to name
ambassadors to Iraq not from Iran’s foreign
ministry but rather from the Qods Force, the elite
unit of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
charged with export of Iran’s revolution. Various
US government entities consider the Qods Force
to be the main Iranian mechanism to engage in
terrorism.
The excerpted article from Iran’s most
prominent economic daily describes the arrival
of Iraj Masjedi in Baghdad to take over Iran’s
embassy there. What it omits is mention of
Masjedi’s background. According to a 2012
profile of Masjedi written by Danish analyst Ali
Alfoneh, Masjedi is a brigadier-general in the
Qods Force who served in several leadership
roles in forward operating bases during the IranIraq War. In recent years, the Iranian press has
described him as a senior advisor to Qods Force
leader Qassem Soleimani. His promotion to be
Iranian ambassador to Iraq suggests that Tehran’s
focus in Iraq in the coming years will be
military. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Iraqi officials expressed their hope that Iran’s new ambassador
would further expand relations between the two countries.”
Source: “Safir-e Jadid Iran dar Iraq Varad Baghdad Shod (The New Iranian Ambassador
to Iraq Has Arrived in Baghdad),” Donya-e Eqtesad, 19 April 2017. http://donya-eeqtesad.com/news/1097580
Before an [assembled] group of Iraqi foreign affairs ministry officials and heads
of Iran-related departments in Iraq, on Wednesday afternoon Iraj Masjedi, the new
ambassador of Iran to Iraq, arrived in Baghdad. Outgoing ambassador Hassan
Danaeifar, Nasir al-Azzawi, head of the protocol department in the Iraqi Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, and Muhammad ‘Amr, head of the neighboring state bureau in the
Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs, were present at the welcoming ceremony. Senior Iraqi
foreign ministry officials were also present for the arrival of Iraj Masiji at Baghdad
International Airport, and offered a warm welcome and they expressed their hope that
Iran’s new ambassador would further expand relations between the two countries
Iranian news agencies circulated reports that IRGC Brig. Gen. Iraj Masjedi started in
his position as Iran’s ambassador to Iraq on April 18. Masjedi previously served as a
senior advisor to IRGC Quds Forces Commander Maj. Gen. Qassem Soleimani.
Brigadier General Iraj Masjedi, a senior aide to Quds Force Commander Major
General Qassem Soleimani, was reportedly welcomed by a senior delegation from
Iraq’s Foreign Ministry at the Baghdad International Airport. He replaces Hassan
Danaeifar, who served as Tehran’s ambassador to Baghdad for more than six years.
According to Fars News Agency, an outlet affiliated with the Islamic Revolution
Guards Corps (I.R.G.C.), the Iraqi government had approved Tehran’s controversial
ambassador nominee last month.

Iraj Masjidi, Iran’s new ambassador to Iraq.

Source: Islamic Students News Agency, http://cdn.isna.ir/d/2017/01/15/3/57418182.jpg , Public Domain

OE Watch | June 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Military Budget Increased 145%
OE Watch Commentary: Many in Western diplomatic circles view Iranian President
Hassan Rouhani as a pragmatist or reformer but, within his decades-long career inside the
Islamic Republic, he has always been the regime’s “Mr. Fix-it,” especially with regard to
questions over Iran’s military arsenal. Revolutionary leader Ayatollah Khomeini turned to
Rouhani to institutionalize the Iranian military at the conclusion of the Iran-Iraq War.
Between 1988 and 2005, Rouhani was secretary of the Supreme National Security
Council, effectively in charge of coordinating investment in Iran’s ballistic missile and
then-covert nuclear enrichment and warhead design programs.

“The defense budget grew 145

percent since the beginning of [my]
administration…”
- Iranian President Hassan Rouhani

It is against this backdrop that Rouhani’s statement on Islamic Republic of Iran Army Day bragging
about his administration’s investment in Iran’s military becomes so important. In the excerpted
passage, Rouhani brags about a 145 percent increase in Iran’s military budget, a figure which he might
also use to shore up his credentials before this summer’s presidential elections. Such a major increase
coinciding with the windfall Iran received in unfrozen assets—the Iranian state media claimed to have
received $100 billion —following the activation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action suggests
that the Iranian government has disproportionately invested its augmented income into Iranian military
programs. After all, against the backdrop of a presidential campaign in which Rouhani’s handling of
the economy has been a central subject of debate, Rouhani has not been able to make similar claims
with regard to domestic expenditures when faced with a public increasingly uneasy over their standard
of living.
While Iranian authorities have used their defense budget to develop their indigenous military
industry, they also continue to import certain technologies. One noteworthy example of this is Iran’s
purchase of the S-300 air defense missile system from Russia, which was displayed during the military
parade following Rouhani’s speech. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Budgeh-e Defa’e 145 dar
sad nesbat beh Agaz Dawlet Rashad
Dashteh Ast (Defense Budget Grew
145% Since the Beginning of
Administration),” Iran, 19 April
2017. http://www.iran-newspaper.
com/Newspaper/BlockPrint/180105
The president of the republic,
during the Islamic Republic of Iran
Army Day celebrations [said]:
The defense budget grew 145
percent since the beginning of [my]
administration…. The president of
the republic said that love, trust
and the sense of religious duty
towards the Commander-in-Chief
is a distinguishing feature of the
commanders of the armed forces
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
stressed: “Our power is defensive
and deterrent, not offensive but we
have demonstrated how firm and
decisive we are against aggressors.”

President Hassan Rouhani speaks at National Army Day.

Source: Islamic Republic News Agency, http://img8.irna.ir/1396/13960129/3441753/3441753-5777663.jpg, Public Domain

OE Watch | June 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syrian War: The Race to Deir Ezzor
OE Watch Commentary: The strategic depth of the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in Syria lies not in
Raqqa Province but further down the Euphrates, near the
border with Iraq, in the province of Deir Ezzor (Dayr az
Zawr). Deir Ezzor and Iraq’s Anbar Province were divided
by a berm and occasional border posts until the summer
of 2014, when ISIS gained control over both provinces and
effectively erased the border. The majority of Deir Ezzor
Province has been outside of Syrian government control
since as early as 2012, although the Syrian military and
allied militias have held onto a strategic enclave near the
provincial capital throughout the conflict.
The two armed Syrian groups most likely to challenge
ISIS for control over Deir Ezzor Province are the Syrian
Army and its allies on the one hand, and the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) on the other. Neither would be
greeted as liberators, according to the first accompanying
excerpt, which claims “The tribes of Deir Ezzor will not
welcome the regime or SDF forces. The advance of either
of these will push these tribes to fight alongside ISIS.”
The article, published in a Syrian news website called alJumhuriya, further notes the spike in violence that would
follow an ISIS retreat: “Tribal revenge is what threatens
the province the most if ISIS were to withdraw, due to
the fracturing of tribes between supporters of ISIS who
enjoyed material and social benefits and its opponents
who lost hundreds of their sons to ISIS.” Local residents
who fled Deir Ezzor following ISIS control in July 2014
“have indicated they will seek revenge and death for ISIS
members and those who aided and abetted them, whether
individuals or tribes.”
Further tangling the situation are recent statements
from leaders in Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF)
claiming that the Syrian government-allied PMF will seek
to secure at least parts of the Iraqi border with Deir Ezzor
Province. The second passage cites a statement made
by PMF spokesman Karim al-Nuri to Iran’s Fars News
Agency, in which he notes that after expelling ISIS from
Hatra District south of Mosul, “The PMF’s battle will now
move to the Syrian border to liberate and secure border
areas… [after which] we will have opened a full line
toward Syria and will be able to control ISIS’s main supply
lines and encircle them in Mosul.”
The third accompanying passage, from the Lebanese
daily al-Akhbar, links the PMF’s intentions to “a race”
with Iraq-based US troops to secure the Iraq-Syria border,
particularly the Albu Kamal-Al-Qaim crossing along the
Euphrates. According to one PMF leader quoted in the
article: “The essence of the matter is that we want to get
to the Syrian border before the Americans do.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…The tribes of Deir Ezzor will not welcome the
regime or SDF forces. The advance of either of these
will push these tribes to fight alongside ISIS…”
Source:
‫ عشائر دير الزور ما بعد داعش‬،‫الخوف من القادم‬
Mohammed Hassan. “Fear of What’s to Come: Deir Ezzor Tribes After ISIS,”
al-Jumhuriya (Syria), 17 April 2017. http://aljumhuriya.net/37772
Tribal revenge is what threatens the province the most if ISIS were to
withdraw, due to the fracturing of tribes between supporters of ISIS who
enjoyed material and social benefits and its opponents who lost hundreds of
their sons to ISIS… The men and armed groups who withdrew from Deir Ezzor
after ISIS controlled the province in July 2014 have indicated they will seek
revenge and death for ISIS members and those who aided and abetted them,
whether individuals or tribes… “The tribes of Deir Ezzor will not welcome the
regime or SDF forces. The advance of either of these will push these tribes to
fight alongside ISIS, even if they oppose the group, as they are considered the
least criminal of these groups. The entry of the regime carries with it fears of
massacres while the SDF fears of forced displacement, as they did to Arabs in
southern Hassakah and northern Raqqa.”

“…The essence of the matter is that we want to get to the
Syrian border before the Americans do…”
- A leader in Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces
Source:
‫الحشد الشعبي ينقل معركته الى الحدود السورية‬
“Popular Mobilization Forces Take their Battle to the Syrian Border,” Fars
News Agency, 29 April 2017. http://ar.farsnews.com/middle_east/
news/13960209000288
Karim al-Nuri, a leader in the Popular Mobilization Forces, told the Fars
News correspondent: “The PMF’s battle will now move to the Syrian border to
liberate and secure border areas. After freeing al-Baaj and al-Qairouan on the
border west of Mosul, we will have opened a full line toward Syria and will be
able to control ISIS’s main supply lines and encircle them in Mosul.”
Source:
‫الحشد الشعبي ينقل معركته الى الحدود السورية‬
“The Race to the Syrian Border: PMF Break American Balance,” al-Akhbar, 1
May 2017. http://www.al-akhbar.com/node/276542
After PMF forces took control over Hatra (al-Hadher) SW of Mosul, there are
indications that this is but a preface to another operation near the border…
“The essence of the matter is that we want to get to the Syrian border before
the Americans do,” a PMF leader told al-Akhbar. “The Americans want to take
advantage of the desert and the situation in Syria to build new military bases.”
Although the Americans have sufficient influence along the 605-kilometer
border, especially in the south near the tri-border area with Syria and Jordan
and north and northwest of Mosul, the central area has extremely important
locations, such as the al-Qaim border crossing. The battle over this area may
begin soon… “Any operation in the Nineveh Plains and west Anbar, whether by
the Americans or the PMF, will be a race to the border,” a political source told
al-Akhbar.

OE Watch | June 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Internal Disputes and the Future of ISIS
OE Watch Commentary: The most discussed book at the March
2017 Tunis International Book Fair was the memoir of Mohammed
Fahem– a former militant of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS). The book, titled I Was in Raqqa and written by a prominent
Tunisian journalist, is based on the voluntary testimony of Fahem,
who was born in Germany to Tunisian parents but moved to Tunisia
at an early age. It is being translated into English and French and
will likely be picked up by a major Arabic-language publisher for
distribution in key markets like Cairo, Baghdad and Beirut.
The book’s main insight is about the relations between ISIS’s
Tunisian contingent and their comrades from Syria and Iraq. As
the first two accompanying passages from Arabic sources discuss,
the book notes that Tunisians stuck together and were practically
“a state within a state,” often viewed with distrust and suspicion
by Syrian and Iraqi leaders as well as by the residents of Raqqa,
ISIS’s purported Syrian capital. Tensions between the Tunisians
and ISIS leaders were attributed to a doctrinal disagreement, pitting
the Tunisian “Hazmiites” (followers of Saudi preacher Ahmed
al-Hazmi) against the Syrian and Iraqi “Binaliites” (followers of
Bahraini preacher Turki al-Binali). The disagreement between the
two groups centers on the limits of takfir, a basic pillar of modern
jihadism whereby other Muslims are branded as infidels (kuffar)
so they may be killed without violating the Islamic prohibition on
killing coreligionists. When the Tunisians arrived in Raqqa, they
realized that many of Raqqa’s residents – known in ISIS-speak as
the Muslim “common people” (the ‘awam) – were violating Shari’a
precepts as defined by ISIS and were not fighting jihad. For the
Hazmiites, this made them kuffar, while for the Binaliites minor
transgressions could be attributed to ignorance and be forgiven.
ISIS leaders did not compel local residents to fight on their side,
and the Binaliite trend prevailed as ISIS solidified control over
Raqqa. In 2015, ISIS security members executed hundreds of
Tunisian ISIS members, including one of its main Shari’a judges,
for “overzealousness in takfir” after they branded ISIS leader Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi as an infidel.
The debate may seem esoteric, but it has important implications
for the future of ISIS. In Raqqa at least, ISIS leadership prioritized
relations with local residents (‘awam) over relations with foreign
fighters (muhajireen). ISIS is often portrayed as a detested
interloper in the communities it has ruled, but its appeals to local
residents illustrate the group’s focus on building popular support
from local communities. Indeed ISIS was able to establish a deep
presence in Syria by providing recourse to local residents who were
fed up with the impunity and corruption of armed gangs claiming
to be freedom fighters. At the same time, as a Tunisian journalist
argues in one of the country’s Arabic-language dailies in the third
excerpt, the more extreme Hazmiite vision of ISIS may benefit
from the group’s demise in Syria and Iraq. ISIS’s next iteration, the
author believes, may tend toward greater extremism and “consider
all the Sunni ‘common people’ as apostates whose blood can be
spilled due to their refraining from jihad. Such a group would be
led by foreigners who have lived through ISIS’s failure and decline.
The main reason for this decline would be regarded as the clemency
and leniency by ISIS leaders toward local residents.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…[ISIS] was so focused on popular support and

pleasing the residents of Raqqa and other places under
its control that the punishment for attacking a local
could be execution…”
Source:
‫كيف تعيش الرقة تحت خالفة داعش؟‬
Abdelsalem Hershi. “How is Life in Raqqa under the ISIS
Caliphate?” al-Mayadeen, 17 April 2017. https://goo.gl/gzbUh6
From the book we can understand that ISIS relies heavily on its
popular environment, which leads the group to deal with it in a
particular fashion, including by allowing residents the choice of
whether or not to participate in the groups battles: “What struck me
during my time in Raqqa is that the state [ISIS] was not intent on
forcibly recruiting Raqqa’s young men”…. many of the muhajireen,
like me, criticized and insulted the common people. ISIS also allowed
the common people (women) in areas under their control to show
their eyes, which led some of the group’s fighters to declare takfir on
them. The group was so focused on popular support and pleasing
the residents of Raqqa and other places under its control that the
punishment for attacking a local could be execution… Tunisians
in ISIS were like a state-within-a-state, which angered many of the
Syrian and Iraqi leaders… the undeclared war on Tunisians by ISIS
included constant surveillance and forced disappearances… ISIS
executed over 500 Tunisians at the Kashish Airbase… ISIS is divided
into two factions. The Binaliites… which includes the group’s leaders
and those with power, and the Hazmiites… who deny the excuse of
ignorance and includes many of ISIS’s fighters…
Source: Nizar Bahloul. “Moi, Abou Zakaria, terroriste tunisien fuyant
de Raqqa (Me, Abou Zakaria, Tunisian terrorist escapee from
Raqqa),” Business News (Tunisia), 14 April 2017. http://www.
businessnews.com.tn/moi-abou-zakaria-terroriste-tunisien-fuyant-deraqqa,519,71602,3
What bothered him most was the discrimination Mohammed and his
colleagues experienced. Foreign fighters were not well regarded by
local residents and vice-versa, as Mohammed increasingly resented
Syrians who did not participate in Jihad while he and thousands of
others soldiers from across the globe had come to provide them with
a state ruled by Shari’a. This mutual disdain grew, especially since
ISIS leadership clearly favored local residents and constantly sought
to curry their favor.
Source:
‫ تكفير لكل المسلمين واستباحة دمائهم‬:‫ما بعد داعش اإلرهابي‬
Hassan al-Ayadi. “After ISIS: Takfir for all Muslims and Permission
to Shed their Blood,” al-Maghreb, 27 March 2017. https://goo.
gl/0WqjnC
The importance of this book lies in its hinting at the ideological
features of the new organization that might follow ISIS and establish a
new model, one which would consider all the Sunni “common people”
as apostates whose blood can be spilled due to their refraining
from jihad. Such a group would be led by foreigners who have lived
through ISIS’s failure and decline. The main reason for this decline
would be regarded as the clemency and leniency by ISIS leaders
toward local residents…
OE Watch | June 2017

12

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Saudi-UAE Friction in Yemen
OE Watch Commentary: As the
…Hadi has in this case targeted Abu Dhabi’s two closest allies in Aden…
following passages from Arabiclanguage media illustrate, tensions
Source:
‫ إلى متى؟‬...‫السعودية تبلع الموسى اإلماراتي في حضرموت‬
are on the rise between nominally allied Saudi- and
“Saudi Arabia ‘Swallows the UAE Razor’ in Hadhramaut… For How Long?”
UAE-backed factions in various parts of former South
al-Akhbar, 28 April 2017. http://www.al-akhbar.com/node/276413
Yemen. In mid-April, the UAE sponsored a gathering
of influential figures in Hadhramaut, Yemen’s eastern
Thus far, the Saudi response to the UAE’s “Hadhramaut Conference” has been
oil-rich province that has always held strategic interest
limited to words, with Riyadh’s allies speaking out against the conference. The
for Saudi Arabia. The gathering ended with a call for
situation is unlikely to remain this way if Abu Dhabi decides to implement its
provincial autonomy, which Saudi Arabia strongly
results. According to reports, Saudi Arabia has begun taking real though indirect
opposes. As noted in the first accompanying excerpt
moves in Hadhramaut in order to reclaim a presence in the province, especially
from the Lebanese daily al-Akhbar, Saudi opposition
given the UAE’s aim for greater influence in Yemen’s south. This expansion
thus far “has been limited to words, with Riyadh’s allies
includes moving into the main southern provinces, including Socotra, where
speaking out against the conference.” Yet, the article
some believe Abu Dhabi may eventually conduct a referendum for its residents to
continues, “The situation is unlikely to remain this way
join the Arab Emirates. Also al-Mahrah, which could become an area of conflict
if Abu Dhabi decides to implement its results.” The
with Oman were the UAE to set its sights on it. In addition, the UAE is working
article further claims that the UAE is seeking to spread
to “hatch” an allied military force and gain the favor of residents with economic
its influence on the strategically located Yemeni island
opportunities and investments in ports, airports and services…
of Socotra and may also seek a presence in al-Mahrah,
Yemen’s easternmost province along the border with
Source:
‫قرارات هادي تفاجئ اليمنيين وتضع اإلمارات في مأزق‬
Oman.
“Hadi’s Decrees Surprise Yemenis and Create a Quandary for the UAE,” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 29 April 2017. https://goo.gl/34bq2n
In the port city of Aden, friction between UAEand Saudi-backed forces has been on the rise since
Hours before issuing the decree, which has shaken Yemeni politics, Hadi met
last February, when the two sides couldn’t agree on
with his national security council in Riyadh. The meeting sent reassurances to
who would guard Aden International Airport. In late
the UAE by emphasizing its role as part of the Arab coalition in Yemen. While
April, UAE-backed forces detained the head of Saudithis was welcomed by the UAE’s official news agency, Hadi has in this case
backed forces that were to take over airport security.
targeted Abu Dhabi’s two closest allies in Aden… According to many analysts,
Within days, the president of Yemen’s internationally
the dismissal of Aden’s governor would itself not be a big deal for the UAE were
recognized government Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi
it not accompanied by the dismissal and prosecution of state minister Hani Ben
dismissed several officials close to the UAE. As
Brik. He is a Salafist considered by many to be the UAE’s key man in Yemen and
noted in the second accompanying excerpt from the
the most influential commander in the “Security Belt” forces, the largest among
widely read Qatari newspaper al-Araby al-Jadid, Hadi
the recently established forces in Aden and surroundings, which was created with
dismissed the UAE’s two top allies in Yemen: Minister
support, financing and training from the UAE… Aden is militarily divided between
of State Hani Ben Brik, a Salafist leader who wields
forces loyal to the governor, the security director and the UAE (most notably the
great influence in the “Security Belt” forces established
“Security Belt”) on the one hand, and forces loyal to Hadi on the other (most
by the UAE, and Aydarous al-Zubaydi, Aden’s governor
notably the “Presidential Security”)… Given all of this, Aden appears open to
and a prominent figure of the “Southern Movement”
(for more on al-Zubaydi see: “Yemen’s Southern
many possibilities, including for local authorities to reject the decrees issued by
Powerbroker,” OE Watch, November 2015). President
Hadi...
Hadi is a close Saudi ally who spends most of his
Source:
‫ بال حلفاء و اليمن فرصتها االخيرة‬:‫االمارات‬
time in Riyadh due to security concerns in Aden, the
Mona
Safwan.
“The
UAE:
Without
Allies
and
Yemen
its Last Chance,” al-Rai
purported temporary capital of his government. The
al-Yaum, 1 May 2017. http://www.raialyoum.com/?p=667043
dismissals have pushed Aden into uncharted territory,
further increasing instability in the troubled port city.
[The UAE’s] military plan in Yemen seems poised to lose the ideological battle

“

UAE ambitions in Yemen are unsustainable,
according to a Yemeni analyst writing in the news
website al-Rai al-Yaum. In the third accompanying
passage, she argues that the UAE’s alliances in Yemen
are temporary, “based on interests and buying loyalty
rather than an ideological alliance, as is the case with
Saudi Arabia, Iran, and even Qatar.” Because of this,
the UAE can “be easily isolated by Saudi Arabia and
Qatar.” Be this as it may, the ratcheting up of tensions
between Saudi and UAE allies in Yemen bodes poorly
not just for the Saudi-UAE Yemen campaign but for the
two countries’ bilateral relations going forward. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

”

to the Islamic parties and movements that have been in Yemen for some time, if it
continues to use the same method without a broader understanding of the Yemeni
situation. The UAE’s single weak point in its Yemen war is that it is battling all
the different religious ideologies and their political movements and armed militias
with a variety of weapons but without an ideology. Its alliances have been only
with non-religious factions, a temporary alliance based on interests and buying
loyalty rather than an ideological alliance, as is the case with Saudi Arabia, Iran,
and even Qatar… Losing in Yemen would be a major regional defeat for the UAE.
Yemen is a chance to prove itself as a state with aspirations and capabilities in
this regional conflict and in this important part of the conflict. It can however, be
easily isolated by Saudi Arabia and Qatar, and in doing so lose its role and be
weakened, hence Yemen is its last chance.
OE Watch | June 2017

13

AFRICA
“Terror Twins” Targeted South African Jewish
Community, Others
OE Watch Commentary: South Africa’s Jewish
community is on edge following recent revelations from a
court indictment that twin brothers Brandon-Lee and TonyLee Thulsie, who were arrested in July 2016, had planned
to attack several Jewish institutions. According to the
accompanying article, Tony-Lee had telegram chats with
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in August 2015
as well as several people whose identity is unknown to
the state. During these communications he was instructed
to kill Jews who fought in Israel and returned to South
Africa; affluent Jews; cartoonist Jonathan Shapiro, known
as Zapiro, who drew the Messenger of Allah cartoon; and
Jewish investment banker Roy Topol. Additional targets
included the King David High School, the US and Russian
embassies, the UK High Commission, Jewish community
events, an unidentified gay imam, and several others.
The “Terror Twins,” as the duo have come to be known,
were apparently quite active on social media prior to their
arrest. According to the article, the internet search history
of the 23 year-old brothers included “The Mujahideen
Poisons Handbook,” “How to Survive in the West – A
Mujahid [Fighter’s] Guide,” and “Make a Bomb in the
Kitchen of Your Mom.” Their online activities, as described
by an investigating officer, included discussing matters
that could incriminate them. The pair apparently planned
to carry out their attacks using firearms, explosives, and
possibly even poisons.
Due to previous threats, the Jewish community was
already on what some describe as a lockdown. Even before
the arrest of the brothers, the King David High School had
begun enhancing its security. However, the latest disclosure
regarding the Terror Twins’ target list has ratcheted up
tension even further. Jeffrey Katz, national chairperson
for the South African Jewish Board of Deputies, said in
response to the contents of the court indictment that the
Jewish community is constantly vigilant and will continue
to be so. The organization also said it has confidence in
South Africa’s law enforcement agencies, whose work
averted numerous attacks by two individuals linked to ISIS.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“According to their charge sheet, the

brothers were allegedly linked to the
self-proclaimed Islamic State group
and were allegedly planning to detonate
explosives at a US embassy and ‘Jewish
institutions’ in South Africa.”

“Cartoonist Jonathan Shapiro, known as Zapiro, was one of the intended targets of the
Terror Twins,” Johann Swart (TEDxStellenbosch).

Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/tedxstellenbosch/7788849708/in/photolist-5kHpFR-mVU7q7-8jfMD6-cSgTEd-cSgThs-ithSLe-cSgSVm-dsVxJ, CC
BY-NC-ND 2.0.

Source: “South Africa: Jewish Community Will Remain Vigilant Following
Thulsie Twins Revelations – SAJBD,” News24Wire, 26 Apr 2017. http://
www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/jewish-community-will-remainvigilant-following-thulsie-twins-revelations-sajbd-20170426
According to their charge sheet, the brothers were allegedly linked to the
self-proclaimed Islamic State group and were allegedly planning to detonate
explosives at a US embassy and “Jewish institutions” in South Africa.
In August 2015 [Tony-Lee] became a participant in a series of Telegram
chats with Abu Fidaa, an ISIS network, and other persons whose real
identities are unknown to the State during which he was instructed to:
- Attack the best targets involving ‘US/Brit[ish]/French interest in South
Africa’;
- Kill Zapiro who drew the Messenger of Allah cartoon;
- Kill Jews who fight in Israel and return to South Africa;
- Kill affluent Jews; and
- Kill gay imam, “as yet unidentified”.
Other targets included King David High School in Linksfield, Johannesburg,
the UK High Commission, the embassies of the USA and Russia, the First
Secretary of French Mission, Jewish investment banker Roy Topol, SA Zionist
Federation Telfed, state-owned arms manufacturer Denel, Jewish community
events and foreign interests at airports.
According to the indictment, the twins’ internet search histories included
downloading “The Mujahideen Poisons Handbook”, “How to survive in the
West – A Mujahid [Fighter’s] Guide”, “Muslim Gangs”, “Make a Bomb in
the Kitchen of Your Mom”, and guides to making homemade explosives and
silencers.

OE Watch | June 2017

14

AFRICA
Post-Apartheid Pain: South Africans Question
Country’s Direction
OE Watch Commentary: This wasn’t how it
was supposed to be. People knew there would
be struggles post-apartheid, but there was hope
that the fractured society would eventually unite
and prosper. However, as the accompanying
article reports, a mood of despair and foreboding
permeates the country. It is not difficult
to see the reasons: high unemployment,
rampant crime, widespread poverty,
a stagnant economy, ongoing racial
divisions, and a growing disparity
between rich and poor. However,
perhaps most disconcerting to the
people has been the failure of their
government, resulting in what has
been described as a toxic political
environment.

“In an unprecedented move, three former presidents and a deputy
president will come together for the country to discuss the ‘deep
and pervasive national general crisis’ facing South Africa.”

This is the context in which three
former presidents and several respected
leaders, including Desmond Tutu, are
coming together to provide a nonpartisan platform for South Africans of
all races to address the issues facing the
country. Notably absent from the list of
prominent participants is the country’s
current president, Jacob Zuma, against
whom much of the populace’s ire is
directed. Indeed one of the scheduled
topics of discussion is a review of the powers of the president. This is in
response to the parliament failing to uphold the country’s constitution
when it did not hold Zuma accountable for not reimbursing the
government for money it spent on his private residence, one of the many
grievances against Zuma. While a CEO of former President Mbeki’s
foundation said the former presidents do not aim to “govern from the
grave,” former President F.W. de Klerk’s foundation stated that the goal of
the mobilization is to remove Zuma from office.
The National Foundations Dialogue Initiative Chairperson, Nomhle
Canca, after listing the many problems the country faces, said it is time
to assess the country’s journey since CODESA, the Convention for a
Democratic South Africa that resulted in the settlement to end apartheid.
After acknowledging past challenges and missed opportunities, she
turned to the present by asking what the country needs to do now to right
itself.
South Africa’s struggle to find its way has implications far beyond its
borders. As the accompanying article discusses, there is concern that
the country’s stature is diminishing across the continent. South Africa is
often expected to provide leadership for other African nations, but mired
in multiple crises, its voice has been somewhat muted. Thus, not just
South Africa but all of Africa is hoping that the convening of the former
presidents along with other notable people can help set the country on a
course to fulfilling the post-apartheid aspirations of so many. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

One of many protests against President Zuma in South Africa.

Source: UIhsaan Haffejee/GroundUp, http://www.groundup.org.za/imagegallery/photo/477/, CC BY-ND 4.0.

Source: “South Africa: Former Presidents Unite to Deal With
Crisis Facing SA,” AllAfrica.com (News24Wire), 2 May 2017.
http://allafrica.com/stories/201705030139.html
In an unprecedented move, three former presidents and a deputy
president, will come together for the country to discuss the “deep
and pervasive national general crisis” facing South Africa.
She [National Foundations Dialogue Initiative Chairperson
Nomhle Canca] said that since the Convention for Democratic
South Africa - Codesa - which resulted in a negotiated settlement
to end apartheid - it was now time for the country to “asses the
road traversed so far”.
“The national dialogue will take the form of an Imbizo in
traditional society where the people come together to talk about
matters of concern or Town hall engagements, in the American
context,” Canca said.
CEO of the Thabo Mbeki foundation Max Boqwana said the
national dialogue is not an attempt by former presidents to
“govern from the grave”. He said the Mbeki foundation joined
forces with others, as they were particularly concerned that the
stature of the country across the continent was diminishing

OE Watch | June 2017

15

AFRICA
Somalia: Concern Over AMISOM’s Future
“

Despite its gains, AMISOM, together with the
OE Watch Commentary: It has been 10 years
since the African Union Mission in Somalia
20,000-strong Somali National Army, has not been able to vanquish
(AMISOM) tried to establish peace in a country
al-Shabaab’s forces. Inadequate military hardware and dependence
at war with itself. To be sure, there have been
gains, but AMISOM along with the Somali
on international donors have largely constrained the mission from
National Army have not been able to defeat
proactive interventions to free regions from the group.
the forces, including the radical Islamist group
al-Shabaab, that wreak havoc on the nation. As
the first accompanying article relates, with the
Third London Conference on Somalia underway, there
is concern, including from neighboring Kenya, that if
AMISOM withdraws before Somalia is fully capable of
dealing with al-Shabaab on its own, a security vacuum
could be created which would threaten regional stability.

”

The present plan, as detailed in the second article, is
for AMISOM to start pulling back its forces beginning
in 2018. The African Union is arguing for a final push
against al-Shabaab before then, in order to dislodge
the militants from some of their strongholds in the
Jubba Valley, Hiran region, and northeast coastline.
Left unmentioned in these articles is whether there will
also be an increased effort to root out al-Shabaab from
areas such as Mogadishu where their presence, though
greatly diminished, is still made known by periodic and
devastating car bomb blasts.
There are two important issues highlighted in the
articles. First, there have been other conferences
regarding Somalia and funding, and one of the main
reasons for the Somali military’s inability to defeat
al-Shabaab has been previous inadequate support
from the international donor community coming
out of these events. Perhaps the most striking
problem regarding this lack of monetary support for
the Somali military has been the large number of
soldiers who have defected to al-Shabaab. Second,
as the second article notes, al-Shabaab has taken
advantage of the country’s famine with a publicity
campaign highlighting its provision of food to
people in areas under its control. If the international
community wants to keep al-Shabaab out, it will
need to make long term and substantial humanitarian
aid commitments. However, past misuse of foreign
aid by previous Somali governments has resulted
in international donors being wary of pledging
additional funds.
Thus, while many recognize the necessity to
defeat al-Shabaab not just for Somalia’s sake but for
regional stability, international donors are cautious
and in many instances constrained by their own
economic problems. It will be interesting to see
whether the Third London Conference on Somalia
can help to finally put the country on a path towards
a full and lasting peace, or if a Fourth London
Conference will be necessary. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

Without continued AMISOM support such as the soldiers pictured here on patrol in the
town of Qoryooley, it is doubtful that Somalia will be able to defeat al-Shabaab.

Source: AMISOM Public Information through Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:African_Union_soldiers,_as_part_of_the_
Ugandan_contingent_of_AMISOM,_conduct_a_patrol_on_April_29_through_the_town_of_Qoryooley,_Somalia,_just_over_(13894467038).jpg, Originated
Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/au_unistphotostream/13894467038/, CCO 1.0 Universal, Public Domain.

Source: “Uhuru alarms premature AMISOM troops withdrawal,” Shabelle News
(Somalia), 10 May 2017. http://www.shabellenews.com/2017/05/uhuru-concerned-bypremature-focus-on-amisom-troops-exit/
On the eve of the Third London Conference on Somalia, President Uhuru Kenyatta
insists that it would be catastrophic for the African Union Mission in Somalia to exit
before realizing the extermination of the al-Shabaab terror group.
“We can hurry to leave but what happens when an inadequately prepared Somali
force is left to its own devices? A vacuum is left and the root of the problem will reemerge.”
Source: “Final Push for Peace in Somalia,” Institute for Security Studies (South
Africa), 10 May 2017. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/final-push-for-peace-in-somalia
Despite global efforts to combat terrorism in Somalia, al-Shabaab’s attacks continue
and the group still controls large parts of the country.
[Al-Shabaab’s] publicity campaign to highlight how it is providing food in areas
under its jurisdiction – despite having blocked aid in the past – is winning over some of
Somalia’s starving people.
Despite its gains, AMISOM, together with the 20,000-strong Somali National Army,
has not been able to vanquish al-Shabaab’s forces. Inadequate military hardware
and dependence on international donors have largely constrained the mission from
proactive interventions to free regions from the group. Al-Shabaab has between 7 000
and 9 000 forces.
More likely, there will remain a need for international support to Somalia’s forces
beyond 2020 – the year AMISOM’s withdrawal is expected to be complete.
The conference must tackle the other issues that make Somalians vulnerable to
radicalization and extremism – including the looming famine caused by the drought
that has affected over half the population.
OE Watch | June 2017

16

AFRICA
Is the African Union Ignoring Early Warnings of
Potential Conflict?
OE Watch Commentary: The Continental Early Warning System (CEWS), created by the
Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the African Union (AU), is tasked with sounding the
alarm regarding potential conflicts on the continent. The CEWS uses open sources such as
newspapers and scholarly writings to publish situation reports and make recommendations
based on its findings. However, as the accompanying article reports, these are often
downplayed or ignored, resulting in possible missed opportunities to avert conflict.

There are several reasons why these warnings do not always reach the level of urgency they
possibly should, with the biggest one being simple denial. As the accompanying article details,
countries on the receiving end of the warning often react negatively to the news of trouble
brewing within their borders, basically denying there are problems of the magnitude described
by the CEWS. As a result, the PSC does not discuss certain conflicts even though a CEWS
report may have raised significant concerns. Zimbabwe is a prime example of this situation.
Despite marked political instability in the country, it has remained off the PSC’s agenda.
The PSC has recognized this problem of denying objective and credible signals that possibly
serve as harbingers of significant problems such as violent conflict. Indeed, the entire AU has
taken note, with one of its major publications vowing to expose those who deny the presence of
developing crises. However, it is still too early to say whether or not the AU in general and the
PSC in particular will be able to overcome the forces seeking to keep emergent crises hidden.
There is another aspect of this early warning system that is worth discussing. Based on
the current mandate, CEWS has to focus on directly preventing conflict. Thus, it looks only
at possible events that could trigger conflict, but not at the larger structural issues that often
serve as the root causes of conflict. This means that issues such as corruption, marked income
inequality, and interethnic tension are generally not included as part of an issued warning
because they might not be potential proximate causes of a conflict. As the article points out,
this tendency to only focus on short term factors is fueled, once again, by AU member states’
reluctance to have their structural problems addressed externally. Not surprisingly it makes
for a weak warning system when so many are unwilling to hear the alarm or to even allow
the alarm system to be sounded by all appropriate triggers. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Source: “Denialism plagues Africa’s early
warning system,” Institute for Security Studies
(South Africa), 19 Apr 2017. https://issafrica.
org/pscreport/on-the-agenda/denialismplagues-africas-early-warning-system
However, the main challenge is the negative
reaction by some member states when situations
in their countries are the subject of early
warning. The PSC, following its meeting on
21 March 2017, expressed ‘concern over the
continued denials of objective/credible early
warning signals of looming crisis, thereby
undermining the conflict prevention capacity of
the council’…It is also addressed in the recent
AU Master Roadmap Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa by 2020, which vows to
‘expose those who deny brewing crises’.
The issue of denialism is strongly linked to the
lack of political will – sometimes within the PSC
– to address crises. In this regard, the master
roadmap calls for ‘the establishment of clear
channels of communications on early warning
reports to the PSC’. In the recent past, some
member states have even lobbied their allies
within the PSC to avoid being placed on the
agenda, despite alerts by the CEWS.
This tendency to look at short term triggers is
again fuelled by the reluctance of member states
to see their structural problems addressed by
an external actor, including the AU.

Africa’s Brain Drain: Its Impacts on Security and Stability
By Robert Feldman

Africa is bleeding. Much of its lifeblood, composed of well-educated
people who could help tackle its toughest problems, is ﬂowing away.
This hemorrhaging of individuals with extensive training constitutes
Africa’s brain drain. African militaries are not immune to the problem.
From the upper echelons of the services where strategic decisions
are made, to the lower echelons where technical equipment must be
maintained, the lack of qualified individuals is being felt. Loss of educated
individuals on the civilian side also affects military capabilities. Fewer businesspersons
generate taxable revenue, fewer engineers design roads and other critical infrastructure,
and perhaps most damning of all, fewer educated people are available to serve in
government jobs and provide, among other functions, important civilian oversight of
the armed services. However, there are certain offsets that must be considered. As an
example, an African military pilot who takes a position in Europe might send remittances
back home. The brain drain also possibly serves as a safety valve, allowing disgruntled
individuals who are unable to find positions matching their educational achievements in
their home countries to leave and find employment elsewhere.
Military Review, November-December 2012

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/
OE Watch | June 2017

17

AFRICA
South Sudan: Fragmenting Opposition
Diminishes Chances for Peace
OE Watch Commentary: Perhaps in an effort to simplify the conflict in
South Sudan, reporting often describes the situation in terms of a civil war
with one side being the government and the other the opposition. However,
what is missing from this overly brief explanation is that the opposition is
not a single unified force. As the accompanying article relates, there are
multiple rebel groups or militias – at last count six but probably more –
fighting President Salva Kiir’s government. Unfortunately as the number of
opposing groups increases, the chances for a comprehensive peace decreases.
Even obtaining a lasting ceasefire has proven elusive as there are so many
competing interests among the various parties.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), an eight-nation
east African trading bloc that includes South Sudan, only recognizes the
largest rebel group, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army - in Opposition
(SPLA-iO), led by Riek Machar who was Kiir’s vice president until the two of
them had a major falling out in 2013. Such an approach by IGAD misses other
groups such as the National Salvation Front (NSF), formed in March 2017 by
the former deputy head of logistics of the South Sudanese military (SPLA),
Thomas Cirillo Swaka. As the accompanying article reports, Swaka accused
Kiir, who is ethnically Dinka, of turning the SPLA into an exclusively Dinka
tribal army. Complicating the chart of which rebel group is which, shortly
after Swaka founded the NSF, it joined forces with an older group, the South
Sudan Democratic Front (SSDF).
Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Government of Southern
Swaka was not the only disgruntled government official to leave and form
Sudan that speaks to news reporters outside the Security Council
a rebel organization. The former Minister of Agriculture, Lam Akol, founded chamber at United Nations Headquarters in New York, United
States of America. 2009.
the National Democratic Movement. Rounding out the six known groups are
Source: By Photo Credit: Jenny Rockett (jenny.rockett@journalist.com), https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File%3ASalva_Kiir_Mayardit.jpg [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://
the People’s Democratic Movement, the South Sudan National Movement for creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
Change, and the Former Political Detainees. The
South Sudan’s protracted political crisis has increased in
six groups are fighting over several different issues
including land distribution, local political grievances, complexity as the main actors fragment into factions or form new
and the number of states into which the country
alliances and the dynamics of the conflict change.
should be divided. Abusive security responses by
government forces aggravate the situation, driving
locals to support the rebels. Perhaps the only unifying Source: “South Sudan crisis deepens as main rebel groups fragment and realign,” The
factor among these opposition factions is their lack of Conversation (South Africa), 1 May 2017. https://theconversation.com/south-sudancrisis-deepens-as-main-rebel-groups-fragment-and-realign-76240
confidence in Kiir’s ability to successfully deal with
the country’s ongoing conflict.
South Sudan’s protracted political crisis has increased in complexity as the main
The driving force behind many of the country’s
actors fragment into factions or form new alliances and the dynamics of the conflict
problems can be traced to interethnic rivalry, a
change. This means that the search for lasting peace will have many more players
condition which existed before the country gained
around the table.
independence from Sudan. However, many of the
The number of rebel groups and local militias continues to rise, and will probably
disparate groups, including the Dinka who comprise
continue to do so. Six is the number often cited but this could easily be off the mark.
the majority of the present government, set aside
Certainly it does not include numerous local factions.
their differences in order to battle their common
The SPLA-iO is the biggest and somewhat multi-ethnic opposition group… But
foe. Independence was won, but the steep price has
SPLA-iO has recently lost members who defected to another group while gaining
been a violent inability to find unity. As the article
new ones in the former Central Equatoria regions. It probably remains the main
relates, the country is going in the opposite direction,
opposition group but its strength is unclear.
becoming more fragmented, and adding even more
While there is an increasing and diverse opposition to Kiir, these groups lack a
instability to an already unstable country. End OE
shared agenda and common approach. There is no group that promises a unified
Watch Commentary (Feldman)
future for South Sudan. That ultimately undermines their collective abilities to
confront Kiir’s consolidation of power.

“

”

OE Watch | May 2017

18

AFRICA
Malaria Fights Back: Africa’s Problem of Drug and
Pesticide Resistance
“

OE Watch Commentary: In the
The main fear is that drug resistance in Africa will trigger the same intense
war against malaria that rages across
transmission patterns that have been seen in South East Asia.
parts of Africa, victory against this
disease has once again become more
elusive. As the accompanying article
relates, both the microbes that cause
the disease and the mosquitoes that
transmit it have changed in response
to the measures used against them.
The problem with the microbes,
which are parasitic protozoans, is
their development of resistance
against certain drugs. This issue of
drug resistant strains of malaria has
been around almost since the first
antimalarial drug was developed,
and the solution has been to develop
new medications and/or use certain
ones in combination. However what
is particularly worrisome is that the
first case of resistance to the latest
drug regimen, known as artemisininbased combination therapy, appeared
in Africa, specifically Equatorial
Guinea, just over two months ago.
The female Anopheles mosquito, the vector for malaria, has adapted to some of the measures designed to eliminate it.
Three more countries were added to
Source: James Gathany, CDC, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anopheles_albimanus_mosquito.jpg, Public Domain.
the tally shortly thereafter. Many now
fear that Africa will follow the path of Southeast Asia which has been battling
Source: “Africa’s anti-malaria efforts face a new hurdle
with these same drug resistant strains of malaria for nearly a decade.
- drug and insecticide resistance,” The Conversation
(South Africa), 20 April 2017. https://theconversation.
Just as the malaria parasite has evolved to resist the chemicals designed to
com/africas-anti-malaria-efforts-face-a-new-hurdle-drugcombat it, so have the mosquitoes that carry the pathogen evolved to resist the
and-insecticide-resistance-76047
chemicals designed to combat them. Interestingly, as the accompanying article
notes, another modification has been the mosquitoes’ biting behavior. Prior to
The main fear is that drug resistance in Africa will
the introduction of pesticide impregnated bed netting, only 5% of mosquito bites
trigger the same intense transmission patterns that
occurred between 6:00 PM and 9:00 PM. However, with the widespread use of
have been seen in South East Asia. The region has been
bednets, the number of bites during this time right before many people go to
battling drug resistance since 2007.
bed increased to 15%. Additionally, mosquitoes have begun avoiding resting on
Firstly, mosquitoes have adopted survival tactics,
insecticide treated surfaces inside houses. Instead, they bite and then leave the
changing their human biting behavior and developing
premises.
resistance to insecticides such as DDT and pyrethroid.
The article points out another challenge: global warming. As the temperature
Before the widespread use of treated bednets, only 5%
increases, certain parts of Africa that were previously too cold for mosquitoes
of mosquitoes were biting humans between 6pm and
now become hospitable. Spreading the range of mosquitoes means spreading the
9pm before people went to bed. Since bednets have been
range of mosquito-borne infections, such as malaria.
introduced, up to 15% of mosquitoes bite people before
The way forward includes several approaches. These entail new antimalarial
drugs, increased disease surveillance, improved management of pests through
methods such as better drainage management that eliminates standing pools of
water, and changes in housing architecture to better prevent mosquitoes from
entering. A highly effective vaccine against malaria would also be most welcome,
but until then, the war against malaria will continue, with both sides struggling to
gain an advantage over the other. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

”

they go to bed, increasing the risk of infection.
The second challenge is climate change which has
resulted in mosquitoes breeding faster and the disease,
in turn, spreading faster. Malaria is now present in areas
that were previously not marked as transmission zones.

OE Watch | June 2017

19

AFRICA
Nigerian Security Challenges Interwoven with New
Boko Haram Threats
OE Watch Commentary: According to the excerpted article in
Nigerian media outlet Vanguard dated 12 April, Nigerian security forces
have broken up a Boko Haram cell that was targeting the US and British
embassies in Nigeria. The Boko Haram cell that was implicated is a faction
loyal to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) known as the ISIS West
Africa Province. This attack plot suggests that ISIS is seeking to activate
its African affiliates to increase its attacks on Western targets, something
the group has been doing as it faces pressure in Iraq and Syria.

“The group had perfected plans to attack the
UK and American Embassies and other western
interests in Abuja.”

Yet, while this ISIS West Africa Province attack plot in Nigeria carried
the headlines, the article also recounts other important security forces
operations in recent weeks, which reflect the diverse nature of local
and international security threats in Nigeria. For example, the security
forces also broke up a cell in southern Nigeria’s Edo State. This cell was
reportedly connected to Ansaru, which is affiliated to al-Qaeda and has
carried out several kidnappings-of-foreigners in Nigeria from 2011 to 2014
but has otherwise been operationally quiet since 2014. The security forces
also uncovered a cell that was involved in selling counterfeit certificates
to foreigners that “proved” non-Nigerian West Africans were indigenes
of Nigerian tribal or ethnic groups. Foreigners could use these certificates
to obtain benefits to Nigerian academic institutions. This criminality
cannot be fully separated from Boko Haram. According to the article,
the counterfeit recipients included Boko Haram members, which was
discovered when the security forces reportedly found a Guinean Boko
Haram member with such documentation.
Separately, the article reports that the security forces arrested the
governor of Benue State for his lack of cooperation after loads of arms
were discovered in his home. Benue State is also where the ISIS West
Africa Province cell that had been planning the US embassy attacks was
based and is also the site of increasing ethnic clashes between Muslim
Fulani herders and Christian indigenous sedentary farmers. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Boko Haram in Lake Chad Region”, Zeogludon.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABoko_Haram_in_Lake_Chad_Region.png, Public Domain.

Source: “How DSS foiled ISIS-linked Boko Haram attack on U.S, UK
embassies” Vanguard, 12 April 2017. http://www.vanguardngr.com/2017/04/dss-foiled-isis-linked-boko-haram-attack-u-s-uk-embassies/
The [Nigerian] Department of State Services (DSS) wishes to inform the public about its continued effort in ensuring that the activities of
Boko Haram insurgents, kidnappers and other criminal elements are drastically reduced or decimated. To this effect, their capabilities are
daily being downgraded. Between 25th and 26th March, 2017, the Service busted a ring of ISIS linked Boko Haram members based in Benue
State and Abuja. The group had perfected plans to attack the UK and American Embassies and other western interests in Abuja.
In the month of April, two suspected Ansaru kingpins, Ahmed MOMOH and Al-amin Mohammed JAMIN were arrested on 4th April, 2017 at
Igarra, Akoko Edo LGA, Edo State. The duo were confirmed associates of Abu UWAIS, a main Ansaru kingpin terrorizing residents in Kogi
and Edo States. While these terrorists are already undergoing detailed investigations, the Service stepped up its efforts at stamping out the
menace of kidnapping.
It has also become instructive to let the public note that the Service has uncovered a racketeering network involved in the issuance of
Certificates/Letters of indigeneship to persons from neighbouring African countries. The Boko Haram terrorist group has become part of
this network and uses it to buoy its membership in Nigeria. A particular case was the arrest on 10th April at Damaturu, Yobe State of JALO,
a Jos resident, Guinean and Boko Haram suspect.
The case of former Governor of Benue State, Gabriel SUSWAM, is typical. The Service has continued to hold him in line with the dictates of
the law – more so that he has not cooperated on the issues concerning the recovery of large cache of arms at his facilities.
These successes have been achieved following the cooperation of well-meaning Nigerians who have volunteered credible intelligence.
OE Watch | June 2017

20

LATIN AMERICA
Mexican Gas Smuggling
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying source, four
soldiers and at least six civilians were killed in clashes between Mexican
authorities and huachicoleros [popular name given to gasoline thieves/
smugglers, which may translate roughly to ‘gasaholers’] in an area Mexicans
are referring to as the Red Triangle. The Red Triangle comprises the
municipios [counties] of Quecholac, Acatzingo and Acajete, in Puebla State.
Federal Highway 150D runs between Mexico City and the port of Veracruz
to the southeast and passes through all three municipios. Apparently a
major gasoline pipeline goes through the triangle as well. The violence
occurred close to the town of Palmarito Tochiapan in Quecholac.
As their central economic activity, the huachicoleros steal gasoline from
the pipeline and resell it. They have gained quite a bit of popular support
within the Red Triangle such that efforts by Mexican federal authorities
to thwart the activity are being met by organized physical resistance from
within the communities.
According to the source, the theft, smuggling and resale of gasoline (along
with some corruption or complacency of local political and law enforcement
authorities) has birthed a minor cultural phenomenon featuring images,
songs, souvenirs and the like, all extolling the huachicolero. The source
points out that the federal government has sent as many as 2,000 soldiers to
the area to stop the practice. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“Robbery of fuel has become a
business in which communities of the
region are immersed.”

Municipio of Quecholac.

Source: De Battroid - own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=58531522

Source: Editors, “El ‘Triángulo Rojo’, el lugar de México
en donde el robo de gasolina es un jugoso negocio (The
‘Red Triangle’, the place in Mexico where the theft of
gasoline is a lucrative business),” El Diario and EFE, 8
May 2017. http://www.msn.com/es-us/noticias/otras/el%E2%80%9Ctri%C3%A1ngulo-rojo%E2%80%9D-el-lugarde-m%C3%A9xico-en-donde-el-robo-de-gasolina-es-unjugoso-negocio/ar-BBAQjoJ?srcref=rss
In early November, ‘premium’ gasoline could be found for
five pesos (0.26 dollars) per liter, and now it is at seven pesos
(0.36 dollars), 61.5% below the price of this kind of fuel at the
service stations. One has to travel some to get to the place-which changes--some 260 kilometers. ‘In spite of the distance,
it is worth it,’ considering that at times one buys ‘as much as
100 liters’, he [an anonymous source] indicated.…So much
is the acceptance of this practice in the communities of the
region that it has become reflected in the popular culture. An
example of this are the corridos [songs] such as ‘Del Triangulo
Rojo’ by the group Nato y los Huachix, or the song ‘La cumbia
del huachicol’ by Tamara Alcántara….Likewise, last year
an image of ‘Child Saint Huachicolero’ was popularized -- a
figure of the boy Jesus with a gasoline hose that was criticized
by Victor Sánchez, Archbishop of Puebla, who said it was a
‘distortion of devotion’.…According to figures from Mexican
Petroleum (Pemex), the theft of hydrocarbons in Puebla, one
of the states in which this crime has hit with the most force,
increased in 2015 some 134% with respect to the previous
year.…Public security expert Guillermo Alberto Hidalgo
indicated to the EFE [news agency] that the robbery of fuel
has been going on for years and ‘was left to grow in an
irresponsible manner’ until it has become a business in which
communities of the region are immersed.…Governor of Puebla
José Antonio Gali said today that the presence of the Army in
the region will be reinforced with the arrival of 2,000 soldiers.

Location of Municipio of Quecholac in Puebla State.

Source: Wikipedia,
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/25/Mexico_Puebla_Quecholac_location_map.
svg/240px-Mexico_Puebla_Quecholac_location_map.svg.png, Public Domain

OE Watch | June 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA
Measuring Mexican Gas Theft
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages from
Mexican sources provide insight into the growing Mexican
phenomenon of gas theft. The passages discuss various features
of the problem including the use of minors, and how drugcartels use gas theft as a way to diversify their income and resist
law enforcement pressure from the Mexican government.

“...minors were obligated to work for criminal groups that
are dedicated to the ‘milking’ of the PEMEX [Mexican
Petroleum Corporation] pipelines.”

The first passage gives us an overall context of the growing scale
of the problem. It notes that fuel smuggling is a diversification
effort on the part of the drug cartels that is more lucrative than
drug-trafficking at some times and some places. While it is not
the main business of a drug cartel, it adds to the cartels’ capacity
to fight back against the Mexican authorities.
The second source reports on an angle of concern brought up in
the Mexican Congress -- that the size of the consequences of fuel
theft can be poignantly measured by the number and location of
underage perpetrators that are arrested. These underage recruits
are arrested “for the crime of hydrocarbon theft
and for being involved in the robbery of vehicles.”
The problem involves 26 Mexican states as well as
the federal capital district, probably every state in
which there is a Mexican Petroleum Corporation
(PEMEX) pipeline. Apparently most of the arrests of
underage perpetrators are made because the minors
“were obligated to work for criminal groups that are
dedicated to the ‘milking’ of the PEMEX pipelines.”

Source: José Antonio Torres, “El robo de combustibles, un delito más
lucrativo que las drogas en México (Fuel theft, a crime more lucrative
than drugs),” Agencia EFE, 5 May 2017. http://www.efe.com/efe/
america/mexico/el-robo-de-combustibles-un-delito-mas-lucrativo-quelas-drogas-en-mexico/50000545-3257433
…Senator Roberto Gil Zuarth, of the conservative National Action
Party (PAN), said to EFE in considering the gravity of the criminal
activity, that it already represented ‘the second most important income
source for organized crime’ in Mexico.…The losses now reach 97,000
million pesos (some 5.086 billion dollars) during the government of
President Enrique Peña Nieto, begun in December of 2012…

The third source is a three-minute video produced
by the editors of Contralínea, which describes itself as
an organization dedicated to investigative journalism.
The video cites a study done by José Ignacio Montero
Vieira of the Spanish Strategic Studies Institute
(IEEE) which includes in its sources PEMEX and
the Economist. According to the sources, fuel theft
Mexican gas station , operated by PEMEX.
represents an effort by the cartels to diversify their
Source: Wikimedia, zzCC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1435484
income in order to better resist law enforcement
The losses now reach 97,000
pressures from the Mexican federal government. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“

Source: Gustavo Castillo García, “De 2010 a 2016, se ha detenido
a 642 menores por robo de hidrocarburos (From 2010 to 2016, 642
Minors Have Been Arrested for Theft of Hydrocarbons),” Periódico
La Jornada, 10 May 2017. http://www.jornada.unam.mx/2017/05/10/
politica/004n1pol
Between 2010 and 2016 a total of 642 minors have been arrested and
subjected to criminal prosecution for the crime of hydrocarbon theft
and for being involved in the robbery of vehicles, according to reports
of the National Security Commission….Authorities have warned that the
minors were obligated to work for criminal groups that are dedicated
to the ‘milking’ of the PEMEX pipelines, and the Federal Police report
that between 2010 and 2016, the entities in which the greatest number of
minors were arrested transporting stolen fuel were Tamaulipas, with 70;
Michoacán, 55; Nuevo León, 54; Guerrero, 48; Zacatecas, 31; Jalisco,
13; Guanajuato, 14, and Coahuila, 11….

million pesos (some
5.086 billion dollars.”

Source: Editors and Jose Reyes as presenter, “Video: El robo
de combustible, bajo control de 5 cárteles (Video: Fuel theft
under the control of five cartels),” Contralínea, 11 April
2017. http://www.contralinea.com.mx/archivo-revista/index.
php/2017/04/11/video-el-robo-de-combustible-bajo-control-de5-carteles/
In Mexico the theft of fuel is controlled by five organized crime
cartels….In his [José Montero] study of the robbery of fuel in
the context of drug trafficking, this expert details that the Zetas,
Gulf Cartel, Knights Templar, Sinaloa Cartel and the New
Generation Jalisco Cartel control the robbery of fuel in the
country complicit with employees of PEMEX in accordance with
the zone of influence of each criminal organization.

OE Watch | June 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA
On the Next Cuban President
OE Watch Commentary: Mariela
Castro, daughter of Cuban President
Raul Castro, recently threw some
uncertainty into conversations about who
will replace Raul Castro as president
when she stated that there could be
surprises and that everyone in Cuba was
a candidate. Mariela also discounted
the idea that she herself might be in the
running. According to the editors of
the accompanying Spanish-language
reference, it is still likely to be an
institutional transition to the current
Vice President, Miguel Díaz-Canel.
The editors also point out that current
president, Raúl Castro, will likely stay
on as head of the Cuban Communist
Party, which wields overall power in
the country. In other words, they do not
expect to see abrupt changes in leadership
or policy. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: Editors, “Mariela Castro: Puede
haber ‘sorpresas’ en relevo político de Cuba
(Mariela Castro: There could be ‘surprises’ in
Cuba’s political leadership change),” Diario
Las Americas, 3 May 2017. http://www.
diariolasamericas.com/america-latina/marielacastro-puede-haber-sorpresas-relevo-politicocuba-n4121159

Cuban first Vice President Miguel Diaz Canel (2015).
Source: Wikipedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ADiaz-canel.jpg, Public
Domain2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)]

“There could be
‘surprises’…”

Mariela Castro Espin.

Mariela Castro, daughter of Cuban chief
executive Raúl Castro, said this Wednesday
that there could still be “surprises” in the
political change of guard that is being
organized in Cuba for next year, when her
father will leave the presidency of the island,
at the same time she roundly denied that
she aspires to that position. For Mariela,
“the entire people of Cuba is in candidacy,
men and women of the people of Cuba are
candidates” facing the political transition
process that must be begin by the end of
this year when municipal elections are
expected, as a step prior to the designation
of a new president.…In the absence of an
official posture, the prognostics point to an
institutionalized change and the designation
of 56-year old Miguel Díaz-Canel as the next
Cuban chief executive, named Vice President
of the government in 2013 by Raúl himself.…
Since he assumed [the presidency] the littler
of the Castros assured that he would only
occupy the position for two terms, of five years
each, although he did foresee staying until
2021 as the head of the Communist Party, the
only formation that controls the structures of
power in the country.

Source: By Montrealais (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMariela_Castro.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)]

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked
concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up
debate and critical thinking. As Geoff
Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the
ideas in it will be contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

OE Watch | June 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA
About Bolivarian Motorcycle Colectivos
OE Watch Commentary: OE Watch
introduced the phenomenon of Venezuela’s
government-sponsored armed motorcycle
gangs (called colectivos) in a June 2014 entry
titled “Motomilicias.” The accompanying
passages from Spanish-language sources provide
significant insight into these formations.
The first accompanying passage, from Hacer
Latin American News demonstrates a decidedly
negative tone toward the colectivos and their
political employers. Nevertheless, the author
provides some history on the formation as well
as the names of some of the more established
of these hybrid units. The term colectivo can
apply to a variety of pro-government community
political support and enforcement organizations
in Venezuela, but the term now prominently
connotes the motorcycle-mounted variety. The
Venezuelan National Guard (GN), a national
armed force with domestic police attributes and
authorities, loosely controls at least some of the
motorized colectivos. This makes considerable
practical sense, because, among other reasons,
the GN relies on the motorcycle for the mobility
of its own units. The author notes, however, that
as a coercive tool of the Venezuelan Marxist
left, the colectivos predate Hugo Chavez’s
rise to power. The first and perhaps best
known of the colectivos, La Piedrita
(apparently named after a Caracas
neighborhood), dates from 1985. The article also
highlights the colectivos’ Cuban birthright and
the continuing influence of Cuban intelligence.

“The Movimiento Revolucionario de Liberación Carapaica … is
considered the most dangerous of all of them.”
Source: María Celsa Rodríguez, “Los Colectivos Bolivarianos: verdaderos escuadrones de
la muerte (The Bolivarian Colectivos: true death squads),” Hacer Latin American News, 21
April 2017. http://www.hacer.org/latam/venezuela-los-colectivos-bolivarianos-verdaderosescuadrones-de-la-muerte-por-maria-celsa-rodriguez/
The Bolivarian colectivos are dangerous armed entities directed and financed by the
Venezuelan dictatorship and Cuban intelligence that, mounted on their motorcycles,
‘patrol’ the cities of Venezuela with impunity, robbing and killing opponents as they
pass… Financed by the Intergovernmental Fund for Decentralization and provided with
weapons that Fidel Castro sent to them by boat from Cuba, the best known circle and
one of the most powerful and violent is the one from ‘La Piedrita’ which was born in 1985
at the hands of Carlos Ramirez and Valentín Santana. The following appeared after the
Caracazo in 1989: ‘Ali Primera de Monte Piedad’, ‘Los Tupamaros’, ‘Las Comunas’, ‘Las
Unidades de Batalla-Bolívar Chávez’, ‘Consejos Comunales’, ‘Círculos del Buen Vivir’
and others with names of that kind. In 2002, with the death of Alexis González Revette,
the ‘Colectivo Alexis Vive’ was born. The ‘Movimiento Revolucionario de Liberación
Carapaica’ (Revolutionary Liberation Movement of Carapaica’ , often just Carapaica)
under the orders of Murachí y Oswaldo Arenas, is considered the most dangerous of all
of them…The civil war to which Venezuela finds itself submitted is in good part under the
direction of the referenced bolivarian colectivos…They rely on social works, propaganda
and marketing apparatuses, communications systems and a process of paramilitary type
activity in the service of the autocracy that finances them, so long as they remain ‘ faithful’
to the self-proclaimed ‘revolution’.

“Two of these groups, the Carapaicas and the Tupamaros, have had
military training by guerrillas such as the Colombian FARC.”

The second of the accompanying sources
asserts that the colectivos have Russian
weapons and have had military training from
the Colombian FARC (Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia). The article also suggests
that there exist, as within the country’s governing
political party, fissures and confrontations
among the colectivos. According to the article,
the most dangerous ones are the Movimiento
Revolucionario de Liberación Carapaica
(Revolutionary Liberation Movement of
Carapaica), The Piedrita, The Tupamaros,
La Coordinadora Simón Bolívar (The Simón
Bolívar Coordinator), Colectivo Alexis Vive
and El Gran Polo Patriótico (The Great Patriotic
Pole). As a coercive organizational form, the
motorized colectivo seems to be a well-suited
tool, considering the speed and flexibility of their
employment, for repressive response to street
demonstrations and protests. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Los 5 colectivos chavistas más temidos por la población civil de Venezuela (The 5
chavista colectivos most feared by the Venezuelan civilian population),” Infobae, 29 April
2017. http://www.infobae.com/america/venezuela/2017/04/29/los-5-colectivos-chavistasmas-temidos-por-la-poblacion-civil-de-venezuela/
…It is that these groups operate as owners of zones they occupy. Their principal function
id ‘to defend the bolivarian revolution’, and for that they have every type of weapon
and strike groups that they use to attack those who they consider to be opposed to the
model….There are hundreds of colectivos, but the most important, and dangerous, in
Venezuela have sophisticated weapons: Russian-origin shoulder arms (AK) and tear gas
grenades. Two of these groups, the Carapaicas and the Tupamaros, have had military
training by guerrillas such as the Colombian FARC, product of the good relations between
this terrorist Group and the chavista government. In addition, they have had relations
with Colombian paramilitary gangs, such as the Rastrojos, who also provide them with
weapons.…The government finances them by way of social programs, they authorize
allowances for their cultural projects and they generate public tasks like the distribution of
foodstuffs. But the colectivos, in addition to maintaining their social front, combine their
political activities with drug trafficking, auto theft and other forms of organized crime….
Hugo Chávez protected them within his coalition government, financed them and permitted
them to grow in the country’s poorest neighborhoods as promoters and guardians of the
Bolivarian Revolution. But Nicolás Maduro does not control all of them, as neither does
he have control over a good part of the government PSUV (United Socialist Party of
Venezuela). Some few are still responsive, but others are under the control of shadowy
characters within the regime: Diosdado Cabello, accused in the United States of drug
trafficking, and Freddy Bernal, the current national chief of the Local Committees for
Supply and Production….
OE Watch | June 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA
Outcry over Maduro’s Military Courts
“

OE Watch Commentary: Venezuelan military courts
…Maduro invited El Salvador, Nicaragua, San
have recently tried dozens of civilian protesters. The use of
Vicente and the Grenadines, the Dominican Republic
military courts is a jurisdictional aberration in Venezuela
and constitutes a sign that the scale and nature of the conflict
and Uruguay to adhere themselves as mediators to the
there is rapidly changing. This particular phenomenon has
political dialogue…
attracted international attention. As the accompanying
passage points out, the Venezuelan government has involved
friendly countries in what the Maduro administration hopes to set
Source: Editors, “Cuestionan al gobierno venezolano por enjuiciar a
up as some kind of internal dialog with opposition party leaders.
civiles en tribunales militares (Government of Venezuela questioned
The list of invited countries include El Salvador, Nicaragua, San
for the judicial processing of civilians in military courts),” Periódico
Vicente and the Grenadines, the Dominican Republic and Uruguay.
La Jornada, 10 May 2017. http://www.jornada.unam.mx/2017/05/10/
The list might say as much about the governments of the countries
mundo/026n1mun
that were invited than it does about the use of military courts or
In a message directed to the Minister of Defense, General Vladimir
the prospect of political dialog with the opposition. Several of the
Padrino López, the president of the Congress, Julio Borges, said that
countries are members of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples
the Constitution is clear, military jurisdiction is not for civilians,
of Our America (ALBA), an organization dedicated to support
carrying demonstrators there is a violation of human rights. According
for Bolivarian governments, especially Cuba’s and Venezuela’s.
to the opposition and the NGO Foro Penal, dozens of civilians are
El Salvador is not in ALBA, but its president, Salvador Sánchez
being presented to military tribunals in the context of protests against
Cerén, is from the marxist Farabundo Marti Party for National
Maduro that began the first of April.…Luisa Ortega, Venezuela’s
Liberation (FMLN). Likewise, while Uruguay is also not a
attorney general, urged officials of the Public Ministry to work so
that the citizens can believe in the public institutions and services,
member of ALBA, its president, Tabaré Vázquez, hails from the
while Maduro invited El Salvador, Nicaragua, San Vicente and
leftist Broad Front, Frente Amplio. By enlisting the voices of
the Grenadines, the Dominican Republic and Uruguay to adhere
ideologically like-minded governments in the region, it appears that
themselves as mediators to the political dialogue that he is attempting
the Venezuelan government is attempting to get ahead of negative
to constitute with the opposition, according to minister [of foreign
international press or at least least hoping to gain international
affairs] Delcy Rodríguez.
acquiescence or indifference. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

”

Venezuela: PSUV to Militarize?
OE Watch Commentary: According to the excerpted
public announcement
made by a leader in
the incumbent United
Socialist Party of
Venezuela (PSUV),
the party has been
organizing into
military units and
will begin anti-riot
and military training.
The plan seems
Seal of the Venezuelan National Militia.
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
ambitious, with
wiki/File:Seal_of_the_Venezuelan_National_Militia.png
Public Domain
the announcement
revealing some
organizational form for what are called the BolivarChavez Battle Units (UBCH), and their overall
numbers. Those numbers, provided by PSUV official
Pedro Carreño, suggest that the party has more than
600,000 activists who could be trained, and that the
plan calls for the recruitment of 200,000 more. This is
in addition to the 500,000-member Bolivarian Militia.
The article does not indicate whether there might be
an overlap of memberships or when the training might
start. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“We have, with more than sixty activists [in each unit],
10,176 UBCH [Bolivar-Chavez Battle Units]”
- PSUV Representative Pedro Carreño

Source: Editors, “(VIDEO) Pedro Carreño: Militantes del PSUV recibirán
entrenamiento militar y antimotín. ‘Cada UBCH será un pelotón’ (Video, Pedro
Carreño: PSUV activists will receive military and riot control training, ‘Every
UBCH will be a platoon’),” Aporrea and Venezuelan Television (VTV). 8 May 017,
https://www.aporrea.org/civico-militar/n308169.html
Representative to the National Assembly for the United Socialist Party of Venezuela
(PSUV), Pedro Carreño, today announced that his party will begin military training
of its activists ‘ for the integral defense of Venezuela’. …‘We are going to go, the
PSUV activists, to the training ranges for firing, combat, infiltration, instinctive
fire, personal defense and anti-riot action’, he asserted during an interview on
the government Venezolana de Televisión (VTV) station. Under the plan outlined
by Carreño, each Bolívar Chávez Battle Unit (Unidad de Batalla Bolívar Chávez,
UBCH) of the PSUV will have the task of recruiting activists to form combat
battalions. ‘We have, with more than sixty activists [in each unit], 10,176 UBCH.
Each UBCH is going to obtain twenty compatriots and each UBCH is going to be
a platoon. He said that ‘ four UBCH, that constitutes a Popular Struggle Circle
(Círculo de Lucha Popular, CLP), will be a company. That will be 3, 680 Companies.
… 920 battalions’. …Added to the training of the PSUV activists is the recently
announced increase in combatants of the National Bolivarian Militia. This past
April, President Maduro approves a plan to expand Milicia Bolivariana to 500,000
members, who will be armed with rifles to de deployed in the integral defense zones
of the country.
OE Watch | June 2017

25

ASIA-PACIFIC
Bhutan’s Relations With China and India
by Sudha Ramachandran
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol.17, Issue 6, dated 20 April 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/bhutans-relations-china-india/

OE Watch Commentary: A small state sandwiched between China and India, Bhutan
has borne the cost of their geopolitical rivalry. China, which has generally settled its
border disputes with its smaller neighbors in the latter’s favor, has shown little generosity
in dealing with Bhutan due to Bhutan’s ‘special relationship’ with India. Bhutan is also
China’s only neighbor with which Beijing does not have official diplomatic relations. The
accompanying passages provide insight into Bhutan’s difficult position between China and
India and the factors that may lead Bhutan to move gradually towards establishing formal
economic and diplomatic relations with Beijing.
The Sino-Bhutanese border dispute involves 764 square kilometers of territory in
Bhutan, comprising the Doklam Plateau. Although this dispute is over a small area
of land, the Doklam Plateau has enormous strategic significance for China, Bhutan as
well as India. India’s defense of its northeast would be undermined should Bhutan cede
control over it to China.
Direct talks between China and Bhutan commenced in 1984. China offered to give
up claims on other areas in exchange for the Doklam Plateau. It also pressed for the
establishment of trade and diplomatic relations as a quid pro quo for a border settlement.
Bhutan’s dilemma is that accepting this deal would bring it a stable and settled border
with China, but it would not be easy to sell the deal at home. Ceding the Doklam Plateau
would involve giving up rich pastoral land that supports the livelihoods of people living
in the western border districts and legislators from those districts are opposing the deal.
Bhutan would also have to contend with Indian pressure. India is strongly opposed to
the deal as its defenses would be significantly weakened if Bhutan ceases control of the
Doklam Plateau to China.
A landlocked country, Bhutan is heavily dependent on India for access to the sea, trade
and development aid. Around 79 percent of Bhutan’s total imports are from India and
India provides a market for 90 percent of its exports. India is also Bhutan’s largest aid
donor and has financed much of its Five Year Plans; its contribution of US$750 million
towards Bhutan’s Eleventh Five Year Plan (2013–18), for instance, represents 68 percent
of the total external assistance that Bhutan received.

“So far, Bhutan has not accepted

China’s package deal ‘due to India’s
pressure and this situation is likely
to continue.’ However, diplomatic
relations seem ‘a real possibility in
the foreseeable future’.”
Source: Author’s Interview, Mathew Joseph
C., Associate Professor at MMAJ Academy of
International Studies, Jamia Millia Islamia, New
Delhi, March 28; Pranav Kumar, “Sino-Bhutanese
Relations: Under the Shadow of India-Bhutan
Relations,” in China Report (New Delhi), vol.46,
no.3, 2010, p. 251.
“So far, Bhutan has not accepted China’s package
deal “due to India’s pressure and this situation is
likely to continue.” However, diplomatic relations
seem “a real possibility in the foreseeable future.”

Source: Author’s Interview, Caroline Brassard,
Adjunct faculty at the Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy, National University of Singapore,
March 30.
“Clearly, ‘more economic opportunities’ lie ahead
for Bhutan by engaging with China and Beijing
‘can help significantly’ in developing Bhutan’s
‘very small private sector.’”

As the first accompanying quote points out, so far, Bhutan has not accepted China’s
package deal “due to India’s pressure and this situation is likely to continue.” However, diplomatic relations seem “a real possibility in the
foreseeable future.” There is growing interest in Bhutan for establishing diplomatic relations with China. Democratization has ushered in
expanding space for public debate and highly sensitive issues are being debated in the National Assembly. Parliamentarians are raising
questions on foreign policy issues and the government is under growing pressure from the private sector, including the Bhutan Chambers
of Commerce to resolve the border dispute and importantly, establish economic relations with China. Public access to television and
the Internet has enhanced public awareness about China, its robust economic ties with other South Asian countries, including India.
Bhutanese would like to benefit from such relations too. As the second accompanying quote notes, “more economic opportunities” lie
ahead for Bhutan by engaging with China; and Beijing “can help significantly” in developing Bhutan’s “very small private sector.”
In addition to desiring proximity to China for economic reasons, a ‘normal relationship’ with China is seen to be necessary for Bhutan
to secure its sovereignty. Experts note that ignoring China at the behest of India is seen to be in itself a long-term peril to Bhutanese
sovereignty. Fear drew Bhutan away from China. That is slowly changing and some Bhutanese are keen to engage China for the economic
opportunities it offers and to balance India’s outsize influence in the kingdom. Though few in number, this group is growing.
Emerging pressure from its own population and China could see Bhutan move gradually towards establishing formal economic and
diplomatic relations with Beijing. Both Bhutan and China would need to tread carefully. Should this process stir unease in India, Delhi
can be expected to press Bhutan to pull back. More importantly, any Chinese aggression in the Himalayas, including military crackdowns
in Tibet, would reawaken old fears of China in Bhutan. That would slow the establishment of Sino-Bhutanese diplomatic relations. End
OE Watch Commentary (Ramachandran)
OE Watch | June 2017

26

ASIA-PACIFIC
Philippines Choose Chinese Investment Over Territorial
Defense
by Peter Wood
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol.17, Issue 6, dated 20 April 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/philippines-choose-chinese-investment-territorial-defense/

OE Watch Commentary: In early April, Philippine President
Rodrigo Duterte made waves when he promised to improve Philippine
defenses on islands in the South China Sea. Additional comments
claimed that the Philippine armed forces would seize unoccupied
islands, and that Duterte would plant a flag in Pagasa. As the
accompanying passage shows, Duterte rolled back these comments less
than a week later, “Because of our friendship with China.” Earlier in
March Duterte had declared that
he did not wish to confront China
in the South China Sea.

“Because of our friendship with China, I
will not go there [the island of Kalayaan,
Pagasa] to raise the Philippine flag.”
- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte

The Philippines are an
interesting test case for the
effectiveness of Chinese attempts
to export values and win allies
through economic incentives—
even those with whom it has
competing territorial claims.
Economic development is a
core plank of Duterte’s political
appeal, one he is unlikely to risk
through real action in the South
China Sea. During his October
2016 state visit to China, Duterte
secured $24 billion worth of loans
and infrastructure projects. These
loans are critical because Duterte’s
President Rodrigo R. Duterte poses with the 8th Infantry Division troops during his visit at Camp Vicente
Lukban in Catbalogan, Samar on August 8, 2016.
“National Security Policy 2017–2022”,
Source: By Presidential Communications Operations Office [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/fc/President_Rodrigo_
Duterte_poses_with_the_8th_Infantry_Division_troops_080816.jpg
proposed in October 2016, places internal
conflicts, economic and social threats, (such
as poverty, corruption, drugs, food security) as its focus—not external
Source: “Duterte won’t plant PH flag in Kalayaan because
security. Fiery rhetoric about improving bases aside, budgetary figures
of China friendship,” ABS-CBN News, April 13 2017.
http://news.abs-cbn.com/news/04/12/17/duterte-wontindicate that the focus will be on these internal economic and security
plant-ph-flag-in-kalayaan-because-of-china-friendship
issues—not confrontation with China.
President Duterte has clearly changed the direction of Philippine
defense policy, prioritizing achieving internal security and economic
prosperity first. Duterte’s acceptance of Chinese investment in exchange
for not challenging territorial claims has important security implications
for the rest of South-east Asia. With Chinese island reclamation projects
nearing completion, Duterte may have traded away the Philippines’
ability to effectively enforce their claims. It also sets a precedent for
other states which face similar hard choices: improve defenses and bring
China to the negotiation table over territorial claims, or accept economic
investment for acquiescence. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“I would like to correct myself along the way... I said I
will go to the island of Kalayaan, Pag-asa on June 12 to
raise the Filipino flag there,” Duterte said in a meeting
with the Filipino community in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
where he is in a two-day state visit.
“If every heads of state of the contending parties around
the West Philippine Sea will go there to plant their flags,
there will likely be trouble. Because of our friendship with
China, I will not go there to raise the Philippine flag,”
Duterte said.

OE Watch | June 2017

27

ASIA-PACIFIC
China and Thailand Arms Factory Deal is One Step Closer
OE Watch Commentary: China and Thailand
are reportedly finalizing a plan to build a
Chinese weapons production and maintenance
facility in Thailand. As the accompanying article
discusses, the plan will be concluded this July
and will make Thailand an armament technology
transfer hub. Thailand hopes to use the facility
to produce drones and marine aircraft and as
a maintenance depot for Chinese weapons,
including building spare parts for armored
vehicles.
Thailand turned to China for support
following its 2014 military coup, which ousted
the Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra’s
administration. Over the past several months,
Thailand has attempted to secure arms deals
with the Asian giant to bolster its capabilities
and to replace older US systems that need
to be decommissioned. It will be interesting
to see how much cooperation will truly take
place between China and Thailand. According
to the article, the facility “will play a major
role in passing on knowledge and the latest
technology associated with Chinese armaments
used in Thailand and Southeast Asia to Thai
military personnel.” The question is, will China
be completely transparent with the country,
allowing it access to important technology, or
will it take measures to ensure Thailand remains
beholden to it to a certain degree? End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Arms Factory Deal Edges Closer,” Bangkok Post, 24 April 2017.
http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1237890/arms-factory-deal-edges-closer
First revealed to the public late last year after Gen[eral] Prawit’s (Wongsuwong) trip to
Beijing, the plan [to build a production and maintenance facility for Chinese weapons in
Thailand] which will also make Thailand an armament technology transfer hub, has been
gathering momentum with talks between officials from both countries making progress.
It aims to provide a maintenance depot for Chinese weapons sold to Thailand as well as
build spare parts for armoured vehicles.
Authorities also want the centre to produce drones and marine aircraft.
In the long term, it will play a major role in passing on knowledge and the latest
technology associated with Chinese armaments used in Thailand and Southeast Asia to
Thai military personnel.
Thailand needs “strategic weapons”, which are also being used by neighbouring
countries to protect maritime interests and provide “military muscle to back up
negotiations,” he [Defense Ministry Spokesman Major General Kongcheep Tantrawanit]
quoted Gen[eral] Prawit as saying during the meeting.
“Widening access for private capital to enter these industries, together with improved
regulation, will both boost development efficiency and stimulate private investment
growth,” Li [“Widening access for private capital to enter these industries, together
with improved regulation, will both boost development efficiency and stimulate private
investment growth,” Li [Wei, head of the Development Research Center of the State
Council] said.
Growth in private investment slowed to 3.2 percent year on year in 2016, 6.9 percentage
points lower than in 2015, due to poor performance in manufacturing, service and mining
sectors, as well as continued price decline of investment in fixed assets. But the downward
trend was reversed after the government moved to spur growth, with private investment
recording growth of 6.7 percent in the first two months of the year.
China aims to increase output of strategic emerging industries to account for 15 percent
of GDP by 2020.

“Widening access for private capital to enter these industries, together with improved regulation, will
both boost development efficiency and stimulate private investment growth.”
China’s Concept of Military Strategy

By Timothy L. Thomas

China’s concept of military strategy is very different from
that of the United States. This article examines the various
components of the strategic thought of the People’s
Liberation Army and how its theory of strategy
can be applied in contemporary times.
Among other things, the article
offers US analysts a template
for confronting Chinese
strategy.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/
OE Watch | June 2017

28

ASIA-PACIFIC
Vietnam’s Ongoing Energy Challenge
OE Watch Commentary: Vietnam
was once completely self-sufficient
in coal. However, that has changed
and now the country is struggling
to maintain pace with its growing
domestic demand for coal powered
electricity. The accompanying article
from VN Economic Times, a news
portal run by Vietnam’s Ministry of
Information and Communications,
offers insight into some of Vietnam’s
struggles to meet its current and
future demand for electricity. One
major issue, according to the article,
is that the country will need to
diversifying energy resources because
it is growing so quickly. However,
cost is also an issue. For example,
Vietnam has been considering
building two nuclear reactors, but as
the passage notes, the cost is too high
“for a country with a public debt now
touching 65 percent of gross domestic product.”
Therefore, the project is not moving forward.

Map of Vietnam, Vietnamese version.

Source:By Lưu Ly, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ALocation0fVietnam.svg [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0 (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

It appears that Vietnam’s best option for electricity is to
increase its use of coal, which is much cheaper. The article
discusses that by 2020, the country’s coal plants will be
producing 49% of its electricity output by burning 63 million
tons of coal. While Vietnam was once able to meet its coal
demand through its domestic mining efforts, it now depends
more on imports. Today, Vietnam imports most of its coal
from Australia, Indonesia, Russia, China, and Malaysia.
According to the article, as its economy continues to expand,
driving energy demand up, the country will need to diversify
its energy sources, or continue to increase its consumption
of coal, which seems to be the most likely option based
on affordability. Of course, as the article points out, there
is the ongoing challenge of ensuring coal-powered-plants
meet the clean air requirements, which will drive up costs
as well. It will be interesting to see how Vietnam ultimately
meets is energy challenge. Otherwise there will be serious
ramifications on the country’s economy. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“Historically, Vietnam has been
self-sufficient in coal but this has now
changed. It is now transitioning from
exporting to importing energy.”

Source: Energy an Ongoing Challenge for Vietnam,” VN Economic Times,
10 May 2017. http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/business/178108/energy-anongoing-challenge-for-vietnam.html
Historically, Vietnam has been self-sufficient in coal but this has now
changed. It is now transitioning from exporting to importing energy.
“Vietnam imported nearly 10 million tons of coal in 2016 and purchased 5
billion kWh of electricity from China in the peak period,” Deputy Minister of
Industry and Trade Hoang Quoc Vuong told a recent energy conference.
Coal-fired power, while having environmental impacts, is still the necessary
power source for Vietnam to meet its growth demand, Deputy Minister
Vuong explained, adding that Vietnam will not sacrifice the environment for
economic development. “In the time to come, the supervision process and
environmental standards applied on coal-fired power plants will be stricter.
Investors will also have to come up with eco-friendly solutions for coal ash
handling.”
Last November, after years of mulling over costs, feasibility, foreign
cooperation, and safety issues, Vietnam pulled away from nuclear power. The
two nuclear reactors still on the drawing board would have added 40,000
MW to the national grid but the estimated price tag of $27 billion was too
high for a country with a public debt now touching 65 per cent of GDP.
The country’s annual power consumption is about 162 billion kWh,
according to estimates by Electricity of Vietnam (EVN). It has some 20 coalfired plants and plans to increase that number to 32 by 2020 and 51 by 2030.
This means that, by 2020, the country’s coal plants will be producing 49 per
cent of its electricity output by burning 63 million tons of coal.

OE Watch | June 2017

29

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Push on the Belt and Road Initiative: Push-Back or
Acceptance?
OE Watch Commentary: China’s state-controlled media has been
trying to promote its proposed One Belt One Road (OBOR) initiative
through a series of articles discussing the benefits of the project.
Chinese President Xi Jinping had proposed OBOR as a development
strategy to connect China with Asian countries, Europe, and Africa.
The first three accompanying excerpts from the Chinese media provide
examples of this promotion effort, while the last two offer different
perspectives from Myanmar and India.
The first article, for example, released by China’s state-run media
outlet Xinhua, discusses that a center in Africa is working to “create
a green environment” along the Belt and Road in Africa. The second
article argues that the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC),
which is “a flagship project of OBOR, will raise the living standards in
Pakistan through infrastructure and improved access to much needed
energy. The third article argues that Europe will benefit because
OBOR will further cooperation and bring Europe closer to China.
Not all countries see China’s proposal as a good thing, however, and
perceptions vary depending on viewpoint. For example, in the fourth
article from Mizzima, a private daily newspaper in Myanmar, the
author points out that China has been seeking to secure an 85 percent
ownership of a planned deep-water port in Kyauk Phyu, Rahkine
State in western Myanmar as part of the OBOR initiative. The author
explains, however, that the local population would likely oppose
China’s level of ownership based on three things: its distrust of the
country; fear that a lack of access to facilities could harm opportunities
in oil and gas offshore development since only Chinese firms would
have access, thereby employing only Chinese workers; and fear of
Myanmar losing some of its land. The author opines that if China were
to ignore the local community’s concerns, it would “doom the project
to failure.”
The fifth article, written from India’s perspective, describes China’s
OBOR initiative as “part of an awakening that has transformed China
into the world’s second most powerful country “poised to overtake the
first” and claims that “The economic muscle that is being built through
projects such as OBOR is but an extension of the military and strategic
muscles that are continuously being strengthened.” The author also
claims that China’s plans for OBOR are creating a shift in regional
geopolitical ties. For example, Iran was once interested in building
relations with India. However, the country has since moved towards
joining the growing China-Pakistan-Russia partnership.
China still has a lot of legwork to make its goal a reality. Only
time will tell if the initiative will be fully realized. Clearly, there is
much apprehension to allowing China’s OBOR initiative go through,
at least completely within the Asian giant’s terms. Furthermore, as
China continues to push its proposal, it could very well create a major
geostrategic shift in regional relations as some countries focus on
the advantages, while others push back in protest. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Center Helps Protect Environment Along Belt and Road,”
Xinhua, 10 May 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/201704/01/c_136274191.htm
A center in Africa is working to “create a green environment”
along the Belt and Road.
The Sino-Africa Joint Research Center (SAJRC) under the Chinese
Academy of Sciences has been helping with biodiversity, water,
and ecological environmental monitoring, agriculture, disease
prevention, etc. in Africa, said SAJRC director Wang Qingfeng in a
press conference.
Source: Liu Tian, “How the China Pakistan Economic Corridor is
Raising Living Standards in Pakistan,” Xinhua, 10 May 2017. http://
news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-05/10/c_136272053.htm
Residents of Pakistan’s southwestern port city of Gwadar will enjoy
better emergency medical treatment thanks to the opening of a
hospital donated by China earlier this month.
Adjacent to the newly built hospital is Faqeer Primary School
where over 300 pupils sit in new classrooms with freshly painted
desks. Opened in September 2016, the school was the first Chinadonated project aimed at improving the livelihood of people along
the CPEC.
The company is now building the Sukker-Multan section of
the Peshawar-Karachi Expressway, a 392-km road with a total
investment of 2.89 million U.S. dollars that involves some 10,000
Pakistani as well as 1,500 Chinese engineers and laborers working
around the clock on the site.
Energy is a major pillar of CPEC projects. According to Sun
Weidong, Chinese ambassador to Pakistan, 11 of the 19 CPEC
projects completed so far are within the energy category to address
Pakistan’s chronic power shortages. They include coal-fired plants,
hydropower facilities, wind and solar power farms.

Source: “Feature: Europe Shares Benefits Brought by Belt Road
Initiative,” Xinhua, 10 May 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2017-05/10/c_136271970.htm
Proposed by China in 2013, the initiative consists of the Silk Road
Economic Belt and the 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road. It aims
to build a trade and infrastructure network connecting Asia with
Europe and Africa along, and beyond, the ancient Silk Road trade
routes. Many European countries believe that the Belt and Road
Initiative and Europe’s revival plans bring opportunities for each
other, and only catching the “Chinese Express of opportunities”
might help better share the benefits.

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

30

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s Push on the Belt and Road Initiative:
Push-Back or Acceptance?
“The sheer sweep of the concept—shall we say, the daring —is a proclamation of China’s ambitions. We
will miss the big message underlying the big idea if we see OBOR in isolation. It is part of an awakening
that has transformed China into the world’s second most powerful country, poised to overtake the first.”
Source: Andre Wheeler, “Kyauk Phyu
and China’s One Belt One Road –
Fake News or Wishful Thinking?”
Mizzima, 10 May 2017.
http://www.mizzima.com/
business-opinion/kyauk-phyu-andchina%E2%80%99s-one-belt-oneroad-%E2%80%93-fake-news-orwishful-thinking
China seeks 85% control / ownership
of the Kyauk Phyu development [a
deep-water port in Rahkine State]. In
my view, this is an unlikely outcome…
China has considerable economic
muscle to exert pressure on the
civilian government.
… having a contract or agreement
to proceed with a project / investment
does not necessarily mean that the
project will proceed.
… recent geo-political events, not
just in Myanmar, but in the Region
have suggested that community
activism is increasingly playing a role
in project roll out.

Source: AT.J.S. George, “China’s Take-Over of the South China Sea is Complete; A Summit
Next Week Clinches its Strategic Gains,” The New Indian Express Online, 7 May 2017. http://
webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:PHZQ2JtZfNUJ:www.newindianexpress.com/
opinions/columns/t-j-s-george/2017/may/07/chinas-take-over-of-the-south-china-sea-is-completea-summit-next-week-clinches-its-strategic-gain-1601868.html+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us
The sheer sweep of the concept—shall we say, the daring —is a proclamation of China’s
ambitions. We will miss the big message underlying the big idea if we see OBOR in isolation.
It is part of an awakening that has transformed China into the world’s second most powerful
country, poised to overtake the first. The economic muscle that is being built through projects such
as OBOR is but an extension of the military and strategic muscles that are continuously being
strengthened.
China’s attitude to India has changed, too. It seems to have concluded that India is no longer the
serious competitor it once appeared to be. On the OBOR issue, China officially stated that “India
will have a representative”. (Perhaps a middle rank diplomat or businessman). The Chinese
media, however, felt no need to be diplomatic. It said Delhi would be isolated and embarrassed by
its stand that Russia and Iran are “seeking to join the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor which
will put India in a more awkward position”.
Iran was initially most interested in building relations with India. Given Shia Iran’s problems
with Baluchistan, close ties with Tehran should have been a strategic (besides economic) priority
for India. But our responses were tardy.
Iran has since moved away to the warmer China-Pakistan-Russia partnership. Yet another
pointer to the altered situation is India’s apparent loss of interest in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. There was a time when India was eager to get full membership. In another month
formalization of full membership, along with Pakistan’s, is to be processed. Despite the fact that
this is part of the profound realignments that are taking place in Eurasia, India is sulking.

China in Red, the members of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in orange. The 6 proposed corridors ( https://www.merics.org/en/merics-analysis/
infographicchina-mapping/china-mapping/ ) in black.
Source: By Lommes (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AOne-belt-one-road.svg [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | June 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
Operational Data: China’s Key to Victory on Future
Battlefields?
OE Watch Commentary: Sun Cuijuan of the Navy
Command Academy of the People’s Liberation Army and Yin
Chengyou of the Air Defense Command Academy discuss the
importance of data in a May issue of the Chinese newspaper
Jiefangjun Bao Online. They note that operational data
does three things. It provides support to the functioning of
operational systems, plays a role in multiplying the effects of
military equipment, and, as the excerpted passage notes, helps
ensure decisive victories on future battlefields. Operational
data transforms intuitive-based concepts into precise plans
and delivery mechanisms. More importantly, the authors
claim that in the course of informatized warfare, accurate data
support enables commanders to possess real-time command
of dynamic battlefield situations and serves as the foundation
for operational calculations and control. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“Winning victories by means of data is an
inevitable trend in informatized warfare.
On future battlefields, superiority in combat
operations mainly finds expression in
information superiority, and information
superiority is overwhelmingly dependent on
data superiority.”

Source: “Sun Cuijuan and Yin Chengyou, “机器战争纪元”帷幕正在拉
开 (The Curtain of the “Era of Machine Warfare” is Being Pulled Open),”
JiefangJunBao Online, 4 May 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/mil/201705/04/c_129588629.htm
Winning victories by means of data is an inevitable trend in informatized
warfare. On future battlefields, superiority in combat operations mainly
finds expression in information superiority, and information superiority is
overwhelmingly dependent on data superiority.
Operational data refers to all data needed in such military activities
as operational command, operational action, operational support, and
combat readiness training; and encompasses information in the aspects
of military forces, personnel, equipment, materials, positions, postures,
and intelligence in close relation with operational command. Operational
data plays an important role in system-of-systems operations based
on information systems and determines the functional stability of the
command information system, the effectiveness of data processing, and
the scientific character of command decisions. So data constitutes crucial
resources that are indispensable in the course of building and using the
command information system.
The overall effectiveness of the operation system is dependent upon
the timely and orderly direction and guidance given by operation data
to various combat units on various nodes of the battlefield network.
Therefore, great importance must be attached to the building of
operation data based on information systems, with efforts being made to
continuously expand and enhance the scale and quality of operation data
building, implement operation data in all the phases of reconnaissance
and early warning, command and control, information confrontation,
and combat effects evaluation, provide scientific, accurate, real-time data
support for combat operations, drive the regrouping and integration of
various combat forces according to the operational requirements so as to
truly shape the system-of-systems operation capabilities.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/
OE Watch | June 2017

32

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Continues to Build Aircraft Carriers
OE Watch Commentary: China recently launched its second
aircraft carrier, the Type 001A. As the excerpted passage from
Global Times Online, an English-language newspaper sponsored
by the People’s Daily discusses, still planned are a third carrier
(Type 002, reportedly under construction in Shanghai since
March 2015) that will be conventionally powered but will use
steam launch catapults; and a fourth carrier predicted to be
nuclear powered and able to use advanced launch systems. In
all, China plans to build ten carriers. Also under construction is
the Type 075 large-deck amphibious assault ship in Shanghai,
which will be similar in size to the US Wasp-class amphibious
ships. It is a 40,000-ton vessel planned for service in 2020 and
most likely will be used to accompany aircraft carriers. End OE
Watch Commentary (Thomas)

“‘We will definitely continue to build aircraft
carriers’ ... ‘The People’s Liberation Army
Navy (PLAN) will have more than three in
the future, so as to ensure its combat ability
while conducting practice and maintenance
at the same time’. ”

Source: “Experts Weigh in on What to Expect from China’s Next Two
Aircraft Carriers,” Global Times Online, 9 May 2017, http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/1046052.shtml
China’s second aircraft carrier, the first one to be made domestically,
was recently launched and the country is on track to field a dualaircraft carrier strike group in a couple of years. “We will definitely
continue to build aircraft carriers,” Li Jie, a Beijing-based navy
expert, told the Global Times. “The People’s Liberation Army Navy
(PLAN) will have more than three in the future, so as to ensure its
combat ability while conducting practice and maintenance at the same
time.”
China’s fourth carrier will carry fourth-generation fixed wing
aircraft, warning aircraft, electronic warfare aircraft, and other shipbased aircraft. “The full-load displacement and deck of the fourth
aircraft carrier will likely be larger; its stealth performance will be
better,” Li said. “The possibility of adopting an electromagnetic
aircraft launch system (EMALS) and aircraft landing technology that
may be on par with or even outclass the US’s cannot be ruled out.”
The PLAN is projected to have between 265 and 273 warships,
submarines, and logistics vessels by 2020, more than the US Navy’s
260 vessels, the Washington DC-based Center for Naval Analyses said
in a report last year.
“The economic benefits seem imbalanced considering the huge cost
of construction and maintenance, but many other benefits are invisible
and cannot be calculated,” Li argued. The US’s ten aircraft carriers
help it deter other countries, maintain its maritime hegemony, and
protect it strategic interests globally, Li said. “The carriers will not
only help safeguard Chinese ocean security, protect our interests, and
rescue Chinese nationals, but will also enhance our power on the seas
and in diplomacy.” Li stressed.

Sergey Shoygu:
Russia’s Emergency Defense Minister
A Bio-Sketch
By Ray Finch, FMSO

This paper briefly examines the background of Russia’s Minister
of Defense, Sergey Shoygu, the speculation behind his sudden
appointment in November 2012, the challenges he faces,
his efforts thus far within the Defense Ministry, and
possible future implications -both military and political
– surrounding his selection as Russia’s chief military
representative. This paper posits that should the stars
align correctly, as a close friend of President Vladimir
Putin, Shoygu could become the next leader of Russia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/
OE Watch | June 2017

33

ASIA-PACIFIC
Cooperation with Civilians Leads to Killing of
Abu Sayyaf Commander
OE Watch Commentary: On 12
April, the Philippine website Rappler,
which commonly reports on terrorism
and social issues, carried details of the
Philippine Armed Forces operation that
killed Muamar Askali, a commander of
Abu Sayyaf. Askali had been involved
in kidnappings of foreigners, including a
German hostage who Abu Sayyaf killed
in February 2017. The article discusses
several local factors that led to the
success of this operation.
According to the article, when
Askali’s group of fighters arrived on
pumpboats to an area near Bohol in
Central Visayas, locals in the area
informed the military about the
suspicious presence of the pumpboats.
The area was outside of Askali’s typical
area of operations and the locals were
especially vigilant because it was Easter
week. It was their detection of this
unusual activity and coordination with the military
that enabled the military to carry out the raid that
killed Askali.

Inabanga, Bohol, Philippines.

Source: By P199 (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], via
Wikimedia Commons

Also important to the success of this operation against Askali were the
ongoing operations against Abu Sayyaf in Jolo and Sulu, where Abu Sayyaf’s
main bases are located. According to the article, the military has forced Abu
Sayyaf out of its main bases, which is why Askali moved to less familiar terrain
in Bohol to carry out operations. Askali’s move to Bohol was likely because
it is a popular tourist area, thus providing significant opportunities to kidnap
foreigners. The article notes that the US issued a travel warning about potential
kidnappings in Central Visayas several days before the operation that killed
Askali.
The article also quotes the chief of the Philippine Armed Forces Western
Mindanao Command (Westmincom), who says the death of Askali and five
other Abu Sayyaf members is a big blow to Abu Sayyaf and will prevent its
power projection outside of Jolo and Sulu. This counter-terrorism success for
the Philippines can be attributed to several factors, based on the account in the
article. These include the coordination between the civilians and the military
and the military’s pressure on Abu Sayyaf in its main bases that forced it to
operate outside of familiar terrain. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Residents of Inabanga town reported the
presence of pumpboats to the police, who
immediately coordinated with the military.”

Source: “ASG leader behind foreigners’ kidnap killed in
Bohol” Rappler, 12 April 2017. http://www.rappler.com/
nation/166731-abu-sayyaf-leader-killed-bohol
Muamar Askali, a subleader of the Abu Sayyaf Group
[ASG], who also served as its spokesman, was among
those killed in clashes with government forces in Inabanga,
Bohol. At least 5 other ASG members were reportedly
killed in the clashes, a military spokesman said.
They reached the famous tourist destination as the island
prepared for the influx of tourists for the Holy Week break.
Residents of Inabanga town reported the presence of
pumpboats to the police, who immediately coordinated with
the military. Lieutenant General Carlito Galvez said the
death of Askali is a big blow to Abu Sayyaf.
The damage will be felt when it comes to the group’s
projection of power outside Sulu. Askali’s group slipped
out of Mindanao as the military stepped up operations
in the group’s base in Jolo and neighboring islands in
southern Mindanao.
The encounter between security forces and the armed
group happened days after the United States issued
a travel advisory warning of planned kidnappings by
terrorist groups in Central Visayas.

OE Watch | June 2017

34

ASIA-PACIFIC
Malacca Strait Patrols Reinvented for Sulu Sea
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted Indonesian-language article in
Sindonews from 15 March discusses the decision by Malaysia, the Philippines
and Indonesia to set up not only maritime patrols, but also air patrols along
the waters and coastlines in the Sulu Sea. According to the article, the success
of multilateral patrols in virtually eliminating piracy in the Malacca Strait
and the confidence built between the countries engaging in joint patrols there,
including between Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, has inspired
the design of the new patrols in the Sulu Sea. This new level of cooperation will
allow member countries to pursue pirates or terrorists in the naval waters of
other member countries. The key security issues faced in the Sulu Sea include
kidnappings, such as those carried out by Abu Sayyaf or other bandits as well
as illegal fishing and various forms of smuggling and trafficking.
Just as in the Malacca Strait, where India received permission from the four
countries involved in the patrols to join in April 2017, in the Sulu Sea Australia
may be considered as partner in the new patrol there. The article states that
Australia expressed an interest in joining during the visit of the Malaysian
Defense Minister with the Australian Foreign Minister. The Malaysian Defense
Minister had the approval of Malaysian Prime Minister Abdul Razak to seek
new partnerships in the Sulu Sea, such as one with Australia.
Nonetheless, the geopolitical reality of India patrolling in the Malacca Strait
and Australia patrolling in the Sulu Sea is likely to face some resistance from
China, which will perceive this as threatening. Thus, operationalizing a role for
Australia in the joint patrols in Sulu Sea may prove more difficult in practice
than in discussion. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Malaysian tug prepares for de-fueling near USS Guardian.

Source: “Malaysia, Indonesia, Filipina Akan Patroli
Bersama di Laut Sulu (Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines
Will Patrol the Sulu Sea Together),” Beritasatu, 17 March
2017. http://www.beritasatu.com/asia/419496-malaysiaindonesia-filipina-akan-patroli-bersama-di-laut-sulu.html
Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines will start joint
patrols in the Sulu Sea in April. This step is expected to put
an end to decades of lawlessness in the rich waters. Chief of
the Navy Malaysia Admiral Ahmad Kamarulzaman said the
cooperation is unprecedented and shows the level of trust
and confidence among the three countries.
Ahmad said the initiative in the Sulu Sea will involve
not only maritime patrols, but also air patrols along the
waters and coastlines. The plan was designed after the
latest multilateral patrols in the Malacca Strait which
were successful in reducing the number of reported cases
of piracy to almost zero. Malaysia and Indonesia have
been given the “green light” to pursue militants vessels in
Philippine waters.
Meanwhile, Malaysian Defense Minister Hishammuddin
Hussein said Australia also expressed interest to take steps
in the fight against piracy in troubled waters.

“The plan was
designed after the
latest multilateral
patrols in the
Malacca Strait which
were successful in
reducing the number
of reported cases
of piracy to almost
zero.””

Source: Official Navy Page from United States of America AW3 Geoffrey Trudell/U.S. Navy, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMalaysian_tug_prepares_for_de-fueling_near_USS_Guardian.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | June 2017

35

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
More Fallout from the St. Petersburg Metro Bombing
OE Watch Commentary: More details are emerging on
the St. Petersburg metro bombing that took place on 3 April.
The accompanying excerpted articles from Russian and
Central Asian sources report on the arrests of a number
of Central Asians in the weeks following the attack. One
nuanced Russian analysis claims that “the jihadist factor...
is now returning to Russia,” and is motived by “Russia’s
support of the Assad regime in Syria.”
The article from Fergana, a Moscow based news website
with contributors from Central Asia, reported on the arrests
of the brothers Abror and Akram Azimov, who are ethnic
Uzbeks from the city of Osh, Kyrgyzstan. Russian officials
stated that the brothers organized the attack and provided
support to the suicide bomber Akbarjon Jalilov, also an
ethnic Uzbek from Osh. The article points out that Abror
was allegedly the last person to contact Jalilov before the
bombing took place. Videos released by the Russian Federal
Security Service (FSB) are embedded in the Fergana
article and they briefly show the brothers being arrested and
Russian FSB officers finding a Makarov pistol on Abror
and an RGD-5 grenade on Akram. Sources in Kyrgyzstan
doubted the authenticity of the videos.
The article from Tajikistan’s Asia-Plus reports on the
arrest of a Tajik-national, Sodik Ortikov a few days after
the bombing. Ortikov has been charged by a court in
Moscow with being involved in the attack, but Russian
officials provided no details on this other than that they
found weapons and explosives in his residence. “Ortikov
said that the weapons and explosives do not belong to him”
and while this cannot be verified, Russian officials stated
no connection between Ortikov and Jalilov or the Azimov
brothers.
The article from the Russian newspaper Nezavisimaya
Gazeta notes that the Azimovs and the suicide bomber
Jalilov came from the city of Osh in Kyrgyzstan, but
questions remain about the connections between the bomber
and those arrested, including their affiliation with any
terrorist group. The authors of the Nezavisimaya Gazeta
article believe that the shooting of two traffic patrol officers
in Astrakhan (southern Russia, near the Russian-Kazakh
border) a day after the metro bombing “was carried out by
a mixed ethnic group, the backbone of which is made up of
natives of Kazakhstan.” The authors acknowledge that “the
terrorists from Astrakhan were not only Russian citizens,
but also grew up in Russia.” This is a little more nuanced
view than other sources in Russia simply blaming Central
Asians, whether they are Kazakhs, Uzbeks, or Tajiks, but
there has been a prevailing view that more Central Asians
have become radicalized. Lastly, the authors claim that “the
motivation of activity of jihadists” is “Russia’s support of
the Assad regime in Syria.” This statement is not likely
to shift focus from Central Asians living and working in
Russia, but it is worth noting as Russian operations in Syria
continue. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The motivation of activity of jihadists – Russia’s support
of the Assad regime in Syria…”
Source: Saipov, Shokhrukh. “Кто такие братья Азимовы - «организаторы»
теракта в Санкт-Петербурге? Рассказывают родственники и соседи (Who
are the Azimov brothers – “organizers” of the terrorist attack in St. Petersburg?
Relatives and neighbors discuss),” Fergana, 27 April 2017. http://www.
fergananews.com/articles/9387
…Is it possible, like some Russian government officials, to put responsibility
for the latest situation on all migrants from the southern former Soviet states?...
The family and neighbors of the Azimov brothers Abror and Akram, who the
security services of Russia suspect of organizing the terrorist attack in St.
Petersburg, do not believe in their involvement…At the end of 2013 the Azimov
brothers received Russian citizenship…The mother of the brothers claims that
her eldest son was abducted from a hospital in Osh…
…According to Russian officials, the arrest of Abror took place on April 17
in the Odintsovskiy District outside Moscow…On April 19 the FSB reported
the arrest of Akram…Abror was the last person in touch with Akbarjon
Jalilov before the terrorist attack in the St. Petersburg metro…Akram was
“involved with falsifying documents of members of an international terrorist
organization”…A doctor who wished to remain anonymous confirmed that
Akram Azimov was in the hospital from 12-15 April and had an operation…
Source: “Суд проверит законность ареста гражданина Таджикистана за
причастность к теракту в питерском метро (The court will verify the legality
of the arrest of the citizen of Tajikistan for involvement in the terrorist attack in
the Petersburg metro),” Asia-Plus, 24 April 2017.
http://news.tj/news/tajikistan/laworder/20170424/sud-proverit-zakonnostaresta-grazhdanina-tadzhikistana-za-prichastnost-k-teraktu-v-piterskom-metro
…The Basmany court of Moscow on April 7 imprisoned Sodik Ortikov until
June 3 as one of the suspects in the involvement in the terrorist attack. He was
arrested immediately after the attack…a Russian said at the courtroom that
during the arrest of Ortikov, a Makarov pistol, two blocks of explosives and an
F-1 grenade were found. Ortikov said that the weapons and explosives do not
belong to him…
“Sodik Ortikov was born and raised in Kurgan-Tube, he has worked in
Russia for 15 years as a chef in a Moscow restaurant…,” said a spokesperson
for the Tajik embassy in Moscow…
Source: Artur Priymak and Pavel Skrylnikov. “Бумеранг радикализма
возвращается из Средней Азии (The boomerang of radicalism is returning
from Central Asia),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 19 April 2017. http://www.ng.ru/
ng_religii/2017-04-19/9_419_bumerang.html
…Azimov is a fellow countryman of the perpetrator of the attack Akbarjon
Jalilov and both are from the Kyrgyz city of Osh…In the days after the terrorist
attack in St. Petersburg the arrests of people suspected of involvement in this
crime took place in several regions of Russia. All of them are natives of Central
Asia…The Central Asian terrorist trail has also shown itself 2 thousand km
from Petersburg – in Astrakhan. It has now been established that the shooting
of two DPS officers in the city was carried out by a mixed ethnic group, the
backbone of which is made up of natives of Kazakhstan…
…the terrorists from Astrakhan were not only Russian citizens, but also grew
up in Russia…The motivation of activity of jihadists – Russia’s support of the
Assad regime in Syria…
OE Watch | June 2017

36

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
The Espionage Case Between Pakistan and India
OE Watch Commentary:
Espionage has long been part of the
conflict between India and Pakistan.
The accompanying passages from
Pakistani and Indian sources discuss
a recent espionage case that may have
a significant impact on Pakistan-India
relations.
On 10 April, a Pakistani military
court sentenced Kulbhushan Jadhav, an
alleged Indian spy, to death. One month
later, the International Court of Justice
(ICJ), of which Pakistan and India are
signatories, ordered the government of
Pakistan to suspend the execution after
India petitioned on the grounds of an
unfair trial. While Pakistan is unlikely to
proceed with the execution due to ICJ’s
judgement, the next step in the case will
be worth watching.
The article from Pakistan’s Dawn
reports that the Indian spy in question,
Kulbhushan Jadhav, was working for
India’s Research and Analysis Wing
(RAW) and was arrested in March of last
year. The Pakistani Minister of Defense
is quoted as saying that they have “ruled
out immediate execution” and that there
are three appellate levels available to
Jadhav.

The four major ethnic groups of Pakistan in 1980.
Source: U.S. Central Intelligence Agency,

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMajor_ethnic_groups_of_Pakistan_in_1980_borders_removed.jpg, Public Domain
The article from India’s Live Mint provides further
information. It points out that Jadhav was formerly an
Source: Khan, Iftikhar. “Defence minister rules out
officer in the Indian Navy, and was apprehended by Pakistan in March 2016 for
immediate execution of Indian spy,” Dawn, 12 April
“fomenting trouble in Balochistan.” The article notes that “Four days before
2017. https://www.dawn.com/news/1326393
the death sentence was pronounced, a Pakistani colonel, Muhammad Habib
Zahir, went missing from Nepal” in addition to news that “three more RAW
Defense Minister Khawaja Mohammad Asif has ruled
agents have reportedly been picked up in Pakistan.” Opinion pieces and analysts
out immediate execution of a convicted Indian spy and
in both countries believe that the additional arrests will eventually result in an
said three appellate are available to Kulbhushan Jadhav
exchange of officers. The Live Mint article notes that “India would like to keep
under the law. He was the one who was working for
things quiet” suggesting that India would rather not draw attention to Pakistan’s
India’s Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) and was
Balochinstan Province (where Jahdhav was arrested), given that this area is home arrested in March last year… The charges he faced
to a conflict where Pakistan claims that India interferes in its internal affairs.
included spying for India, working against Pakistan’s

The Jadhav case drew some international attention, but the viewpoint that
the Indian government wants to keep the case quiet due to Jadhav’s alleged
activities in Balochistan is worth noting, particularly at a time when Pakistan
is conducting counterterrorism operations across the country. Since the launch
of Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad in February to combat various terrorist groups,
Pakistan has executed several people convicted of charges related to terrorism.
Like Jadhav, they went on trial in Pakistan’s military court system, which some
Pakistani officials and the public believe is more effective. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

integrity, sponsoring terrorism in the country and
attempting to destabilize the state.
Speaking in the Senate on Tuesday, Mr Asif claimed
that Jadhav had the right to move in the army of the
court against his conviction within 60 days, followed
by the submission of mercy pleas to the army chief and
the president. However, a perusal of the Army Act, 1952
showed that under Section 131 of the act, an appeal
could be moved within 40 days, and not 60 days…

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

37

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Continued: The Espionage Case Between Pakistan and
India
“India would like to keep things quiet, as they [Pakistan] have not caught an agent working in Kashmir, a
red flag for international observers, but one operating in the Baloch-Iran area.”
Source: Prasad, Rohit. “The hapless fate of an alleged spy,” Live Mint, 20 April 2017. http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/
U0eysVQGgTb9Z93Iiz9BlK/The-hapless-fate-of-an-alleged-spy.html
… Jadhav, formerly an officer in the Indian Navy, was apprehended by Pakistan in March 2016 and was accused of fomenting trouble
in Balochistan. He was tried by a military court of Pakistan over the last three-four months. The Indian government was denied consular
access to him. The military court sentenced Jadhav to death. He has 60 days to appeal to the Supreme Court and, in case of the verdict
is upheld, an option for a mercy petition to the president of Pakistan. Four days before the death sentence was pronounced, a Pakistani
colonel, Muhammad Habib Zahir, went missing from Nepal. In the past week, three more RAW (Research and Analysis Wing) agents have
reportedly been picked up in Pakistan.
…India would like to keep things quiet, as they (Pakistan) have not caught an agent working in Kashmir, a red flag for international
observers, but one operating in the Baloch-Iran area…Pakistan’s main motive is to establish a moral equivalence with India by proving
that India meddles in their country. If India is indeed behind the disappearance of Zahir and if it chooses to admit that, things could get
interesting…

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the state became
independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation with Russia, the United
States and other partners, but there have also been internally driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact.
One of these efforts over the past several years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in
the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end
2016. While the result has yet to be announced, an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up
of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the impact this could have on the capabilities of
the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

OE Watch | June 2017

38

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Georgia’s “Strategic Defense Review”
“

OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article
As to the new reserve system, it will consist of three
from a Georgian source discusses the Georgian Ministry of Defense’s
(MoD) recent publication of its “Strategic Defense Review.” While
parts: army, territorial and specialists’ reserves…
it restates the well-known fact that the Georgian government views
Russia as one of the main threats to its security and stability, it also
discusses steps that the government plans to take to deal with this. In
addition, the article highlights the Georgian MoD’s development priorities
and planned structure for 2020, along with some changes in its strategic
defense approach after the Russo-Georgian War of 2008.

”

The article notes that the Strategic Defense Review states “the main
factor for planning national defense and security still remains the threat
from the Russian Federation” and that “The Georgian MoD also expects
continued Russian covert activities and soft power directed against
Georgia…” The Georgian MoD is not the only ministry tasked with
defense or security dealing with covert or soft power activities aimed
at Georgia, but the document mentions a “total defense approach” and
“names reserve and conscription as important elements of [it].”
In a meeting with the Georgian Parliament’s Defense and Security
Committee in early April, Georgian Defense Minister Levan Izoria
discussed reestablishing conscription and setting up a reserve system
based on the armed forces of several European states. Last year Izoria’s
predecessor abolished conscription in the MoD. The article mentions that
the new reserve system “will consist of three parts: army, territorial and
specialists’ reserves,” but it remains to be seen how this three part system
Photo of Levan Izoria.
would function and if it includes defending against covert or soft power
Source : Andro Osadchev, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ALevan_Izoria.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
activities.
Source: Georgian MoD Adopts Strategic Defense Review for 2017-2020,” Civil.ge, 25 April
2017. http://civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=30054
The article points out that Georgia’s
defense approach changed from its 2007
version of “capability-based methodology,” to
a “threat-based methodology” following the
Russo-Georgian War of 2008. It notes that
this is because Georgia still faces possible
aggression by Russia.

Lastly, the article discusses Georgian
defense spending and notes that “it will
remain within 2% of the GDP.” This is worth
noting alongside how the Strategic Defense
Review includes a list of “new projects for
the coming years that can be financed by
the military budget, including: air defense,
reserve and mobilization system, transport
and attack helicopters, and anti-armor
capabilities.” Air defense in the Georgian
Armed Forces has already received upgrades
over the past several years and while the
reserve force and anti-armor weapons
could take out a portion of future defense
expenditures, the transport and attack
helicopters will likely cost a considerable
amount. It has been reported that Georgia’s
attack helicopters are in need of major repairs
and upgrades and that the reason this has not
already taken place has been because of the
cost. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

On April 24 Georgia’s Ministry of Defense published its new Strategic Defense Review (SDR)
document for 2017-2020. The document describes development priorities of the MoD and
Georgian Armed Forces for the designated time period, as well as the armed forces’ planned
structure by 2020…The previous two versions were adopted in 2007 and 2012. According to
the 2017 document, the 2007 version used “capability-based methodology,” but the RussoGeorgian War of 2008 changed Georgia’s policy, with the 2012 document employing “threatbased methodology”…The 2017 document says that since Georgia is still facing possible
aggression by Russia, it also uses threat-based methodology…
SDR 2017-2020 states that for Georgia “the main factor for planning national defense
and security still remains the threat from the Russian Federation,”…The Georgian MoD also
expects continued Russian covert activities and soft power directed against Georgia in order
to cause internal conflicts and achieve “controlled destabilization” in the country…
The SDR envisions the total defense principle to be adopted by the Georgian Armed
Forces…The total defense approach also means “continuing resistance through both
conventional and non-conventional means.” The document names reserve and conscription as
important elements of the total defense concept… As to the new reserve system, it will consist
of three parts: army, territorial and specialists’ reserves…
Air defense is another component of the national defense system designated in the SDR
as critically important. The document cites the war of 2008 as an example of inadequacy
of Georgia’s air defense and stresses the necessity to acquire modern capabilities in this
regard…The document authors do not expect serious changes in defense spending during the
reporting period, saying it will remain within 2% of the GDP. At the same time, the document
lists the MoD’s new projects for the coming years that can be financed by the military budget,
including: air defense, reserve and mobilization system, transport and attack helicopters, and
anti-armor capabilities…
OE Watch | June 2017

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Establishes New Army Corps in the Arctic
“

OE Watch Commentary: In April, the Russian Federation
The Russian Ministry of Defense has deployed an
established the 14th Army Corps in Murmansk. As explained in the
army corps (OAK) in the Polar Region, which will
accompanying article from Russian daily Izvestiya, the bulk of the
new corps combat power will consist of the existing 80th Motorized accomplish missions in support of the Northern Fleet.
Rifle Brigade (Alakurtti) and 200th Motorized Rifle Brigade
(Pechenga). The new corps will not gain any new maneuver
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “В
brigades or divisions. Although the Russians are not adding any
Мурманске формируется новое сухопутное объединение
(A New Ground Combined Formation Is Being Formed in
new maneuver units to the region, the combat power of existing units
Murmansk),” Izvestiya Online, 13 April 2017. http://izvestia.
will likely significantly increase if the 14th Army Corps gains new
ru/news/681638
combat support and combat service support units. These enabling units
(engineer, logistics, medical, etc) are important for all military units, but
The Russian Ministry of Defense has deployed an army corps
especially so for units operating in the Arctic, where most resources must
(OAK) in the Polar Region, which will accomplish missions
be shipped in and all support must be organically provided.
in support of the Northern Fleet. The headquarters of the
new combined formation is located in Murmansk. The arctic
The establishment of the 14th Army Corps is a significant addition to
motorized rifle brigades, which are deployed on the Kola
Russian military capabilities in the Arctic, but it is by no means a return
Peninsula, will be part of the army corps’ composition. In
to the level of the Soviet military’s presence in the Arctic during the
the experts’ opinion, the new army corps will become a very
Cold War. In 1952, the Soviets formed the 6th Combined Arms Army
important element of the defense of Russian interests in the
(CAA) in Murmansk. (In 1960, the 6th headquarters was moved to
Arctic Region.
Petrozavodsk.) The 6th CAA had subordinate divisions in Pechenga,

”

Murmansk, Alakurtti, and Sortavala, and a separate motorized rifle
regiment in Ozerki. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, most
maneuver units were downgraded to storage bases, and in 1998 the 6th
CAA was disbanded. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

A Northern Fleet Headquarters spokesman told Izvestiya
that the formation of the new separate army corps has been
proceeding since the beginning of this year. The recruitment
of servicemen is occurring right now – contract servicemen
for the signals battalion. This military unit will provide
the continuous exchange of information among the corps
headquarters, subordinate units and subunits, and also the
Northern Fleet command authorities and the General Staff.

Two arctic motorized rifle brigades will be part of the
separate army corps’ composition: 80th Motorized Rifle
Brigade (the village of Alakurtti) and 200th Motorized Rifle
Brigade (Pechenga). These unique military units are equipped
with MT-LB combat vehicles with a high off-road capability,
arctic prime movers, and other military vehicles, which
operate effectively on the snow covered expanses of the Polar
Region with a temperature below – 30 degrees.

Arctic Region

Source : CIA World Factbook, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=531491, Public Domain.

The personnel of the arctic motorized rifle brigades undergo
special training. The soldiers know how to fight on skis, use
reindeer and dog sleds, and to even build igloos (Eskimo
dwellings made of snow). In the future, the separate army
corps will be augmented by artillery, air defense weapons,
reconnaissance units, and also by chemical, radiological,
and biological defense subunits. “Arsenal of the Fatherland”
Magazine Editor Viktor Murakhovskiy, a military expert, told
Izvestiya that the formation of the new army corps on the
Kola Peninsula was caused by the need to defend Russia’s
interests in the Arctic. “NATO’s activity in the Arctic regions
has greatly increased recently. We must also not forget that
we border a NATO country – Norway – in the north,” Viktor
Murakhovskiy explained. “Norwegian military personnel are
very actively operating at sea and near the arctic islands. Of
course, there are enormous territories in the Polar Region.
But one army corps will be adequate in order to parry
emerging threats”.
OE Watch | June 2017

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
New S-500 Will Increase Russian Anti-Satellite Capability
OE Watch Commentary: The
...the
Russian Federation believes space-based
capabilities (satellite communications;
precision navigation and timing; and
space-based intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance) are essential for effective
U.S. combat operations. Hence, it is pursuing
several lines of effort to disable, deny, and/or
degrade these capabilities. These efforts include
developing cyber, electronic warfare, and, as the
accompanying article describes, anti-satellite
(ASAT) capabilities.

“

The Russian Federation is currently developing
or fielding several ASAT capable systems. The
Soviet Union first started experimenting with
ASAT capabilities in the early 1980s. The coorbital Naryad “killer satellites” were equipped
with projectile launchers that could destroy other
satellites. Although the Naryad program was
discontinued, such technologies may be included
with current and future on orbit assets. Other
Soviet and/or Russia ASAT endeavors include
ground-based explosively driven pulsed iodine
lasers; the A-60 aircraft mounted laser (a “Skif-D”
laser mounted upon a Il-76MD transport plane);
and ground and air-based direct ascent missiles.
In addition to systems specifically designed
to function as ASAT weapons, some Russian
ballistic missile defense systems (BMDS) also
have ASAT capabilities due to performance
characteristics. Russia’s A-235 ‘Nudol’ BMDS
missiles also reportedly have a direct ascent ASAT
capability. The accompanying article discusses
the capabilities of the forthcoming S-500 missile
system. The S-500 is reportedly designed to
destroy ballistic missiles, high-altitude aircraft
and UAVs, hypersonic targets, and low Earth orbit
(LEO) satellites. Although the S-500 has yet to
reach an initial operational capability, when fielded
it will significantly enhance Russia’s ability to
destroy LEO communications and intelligence
surveillance and reconnaissance satellites. End
OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

S-500 will become an effective means of strategic missile defense.”
Source: Andrei Kots, “Зенитные ракеты комплекса С-500 оставят противника
без спутников (Air Defense Missiles of S-500 Complex Will Leave the Enemy
Without Satellites),” RIA Novosti Online, 24 April 2017. https://ria.ru/defense_
safety/20170424/1493007070.html
Almaz-Antey Aerospace Defense Concern General Designer Pavel Sozinov
revealed certain details of combat capabilities of the Russian S-500 advanced SAM
system…”We forecasted the development of offensive aerospace weapons for the
next 25 years,” the general designer explained. “Our system must be able to combat
those targets which still are absent today, but may appear. It is a matter of an
intercept in layers of the atmosphere that are not dense, including upper layers of
the atmosphere a hundred kilometers from Earth.”
The S-400 Triumf is the most state-of-the-art Russian SAM as of today. Its
capabilities suffice for combating any existing aerodynamic targets -- aircraft,
helicopters, unmanned aerial vehicles, and cruise missiles at ranges up to 400
kilometers and at altitudes up to 30 kilometers. But missiles of the advanced S-500
in fact will be able to engage targets in near space.
“It is obvious that the S-500 was conceived as a general-purpose air and missile
defense complex capable of combating the entire nomenclature of targets,” Igor
Korotchenko, military expert and member of the Public Council under the Russian
Defense Ministry, told RIA Novosti. “At those altitudes about which Sozinov is
talking, its missiles will be able to engage warheads of intercontinental ballistic
missiles in the terminal phase of their flight path. Thus, the S-500 will become an
effective means of strategic missile defense.”
…In addition to ICBM warheads, the S-500 will be able to effectively combat
hypersonic targets, orbital platforms, and high-altitude UAV’s. By the way, the area
of application of the new system is not limited exclusively to missile and air defense
functions. The majority of military satellites operate in near space, specifically
at altitudes of around 100 kilometers. They support troops with communications,
navigation, and target designation. Destruction of an enemy satellite grouping
will permit “blinding” and “deafening” his armed forces in the literal sense,
depriving them of the advantage. To achieve these objectives, Russian armorers
are developing not only new air defense missiles, but also a family of advanced
electronic warfare systems.
“In accordance with instructions of the country’s leadership, we are conducting
tests to accomplish the mission of countering space-based assets,” Sozinov
emphasized. “This concerns capabilities of EW suppression of certain means
of location reconnaissance, electro-optical reconnaissance, and space-based
communications as well as direct functional damage of those elements deployed in
orbit.”

The Adaptive Transformation of Yemen’s Republican Guard
by Lucas Winter

This paper presents an analytical summary of the Yemeni Republican Guard’s adaptation to changing conditions in Yemen
following the 2011 resignation of Ali Abdullah Saleh. The Yemeni Republican Guard has effectively amalgamated with Huthi
forces into a hybrid that pairs young, ideologically motivated foot soldiers with trained operators of heavy weaponry and advanced equipment. This is similar in structure to successful fighting groups emerging from the battlefields of Syria and Iraq,
and may provide a template for the type of forces that will define the region’s operational environment for years to come.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/
OE Watch | June 2017

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Fielding First C2 System for Electronic Warfare
Brigades
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Ground Forces, and to a lesser extent
Airborne (VDV) and naval infantry, have dedicated Electronic Warfare (EW)
companies, battalions, and brigades. Russia’s largest and most powerful EW
systems such as the Murmansk-BN, Krasukha, Leer-3, and Moskva, are found
in the Ground Forces’ EW brigades. EW brigades have capabilities to work
at the tactical, operational, and arguably strategic levels. These capabilities
include wide area cellular communications jamming, GPS location spoofing,
reconnaissance and communication satellite jamming, and disrupting early
warning aircraft such as the E-3 Sentry (AWACS). While EW companies
(organic to the maneuver brigades) have dedicated EW C2 systems, such as the
R-330K Mobile Automated Command Post, to provide command and control,
minimize interference with friendly assets, and communicate targeting data
(SIGINT/ELINT), until now EW brigades have had no such similar asset.
The accompanying article discusses the capabilities of Russia’s first brigadelevel EW C2 system, the RB-109A ‘Bylina’. In addition to the aforementioned
capabilities of company-level EW C2 systems, the RB-109A also reportedly has
an artificial intelligence capability which automates C2 duties. Presumably,
this artificial intelligence is some sort of a more advanced technology, as the
term ‘automated’ [автоматизированный] is often used to describe Russian
systems, but the RB-109A is specifically mentioned to have ‘artificial intelligence’
[искусственный интеллект]. The accompanying article also shares an
interesting tidbit about Russian EW force structure, as each EW brigade
reportedly consists of four battalions and one separate company. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“In 2018 the Russian Defense Ministry will get
a smart automated control system for managing
electronic warfare (EW) brigades.”

Source: Aleksey Ramm, Dmitriy Litovkin, and Yevgeniy
Andreyev, “В войска радиоэлектронной борьбы придет
искусственный интеллект
Система «Былина» сама найдет, опознает и задавит
помехами радиолокаторы, средства связи и спутники
противника (Troops Will Get Electronic Warfare
Artificial Intelligence System: Bylina System Will
Independently Find, Identify, and Suppress Enemy Radar,
Communications, and Satellites),” Izvestiya Online, 4 April
2017. http://izvestia.ru/news/675891
In 2018 the Russian Defense Ministry will get a smart
automated control system for managing electronic
warfare (EW) brigades. The RB-109A Bylina analyzes
in real-time the situation in the combat area, finds
and categorizes targets, chooses how to suppress
them, and issues orders to EW stations. The Bylina
prevents “ jammers” from “suppressing” and distorting
(“spoiling”) signals from its own troops’ electronic
equipment. According to experts, the new system
resembles artificial intelligence in its capabilities. As
Izvestiya was informed by the Main Staff of the Ground
Troops, the first Bylina’s should reach the troops in 2018.
And by 2025 it is planned to equip all EW brigades with
it.
The RB-109A is a fully autonomous system. It includes
five all-terrain trucks as well as life support equipment.
After deployment, the system automatically interfaces
with battalion and company command posts, senior
commanders, and even individual EW stations. Information
exchange and command and control take place in real time.
The brigade headquarters officers and Bylina operators
only need to monitor the operation of the automated control
system.
The RB-109A takes only seconds to independently select
and identify targets (radio stations, communication
systems, radars, long-range radar aircraft, satellites). After
which it decides how to more effectively suppress the enemy
and chooses the most appropriate jamming stations for
that. Then it specifies the sequence of actions and monitors
their operation. The state-of-the-art automated control
system also “sees” the EW devices of its own troops. So it
suppresses targets without impacting on its own…

Leer-2 mobile complexes received by EW units of the Russian military base in Abkhazia.
Source : Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12123417@egNews, CC 4.0

Currently every military district has an EW brigade while
the fleets have separate EW centers. The staff structure
of these military units is quite complicated. Each brigade
consists of four battalions and one company. Their role is
to suppress aviation, communication systems and command
and control, and space vehicles at distances of hundreds
of kilometers. Brigade subunits can also very accurately
get a fix on and suppress even low-power individual radio
sets used by saboteurs, swamp and intercept cellular
communication signals and, in addition, incapacitate
satellite navigation systems…
OE Watch | June 2017

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
A Russian Leader to Watch
OE Watch Commentary: Despite economic challenges, military
reform and readiness remain key Kremlin priorities. As Minister
of Defense, Sergey Shoygu has been at the helm of leading and
developing the armed forces. On his 26th anniversary of becoming
a Russian government official, the popular daily newspaper
Moskovskiy Komsomolets, published an article praising Shoygu’s
many contributions to his country. The tribute suggests that he is an
influential figure to watch in Russia.
The article points out that Shoygu was born into “an ordinary
Soviet family” in far off Tyva, where he was trained as an engineer,
and “directed the construction of the Sayansk Aluminum Plant.” His
achievements in Siberia caught the attention of officials in Moscow,
and in 1991 was “invited to take charge of the fledgling Russian
Rescue Personnel Corps.” The article describes how Shoygu built
the new Ministry of Emergencies from “ничего” [nothing] to where
it quickly became “one of the world’s most powerful departments of
rescue personnel with its own aviation, robotics, and institutions of
higher learning.”
The article describes the role that Shoygu played as Minister
of Emergencies, in helping to resolve many of the disputes which
erupted after the collapse of the USSR, including “the OssetianIngush conflict, the Georgian-Abkhazian war, the civil war in
Tajikistan, the combat operations in Chechnya, and the Transnistria
conflict.” The article points out that Shoygu was directly involved in
helping secure the release of Russian hostages during the Tajik Civil
War in 1995. During the summer of 1996, when Grozny (Chechnya)
was mired in violence, the Emergency Services “sought out the
peaceful population in basements, evacuated the wounded and the
sick, and distributed food, warm clothing, and medicines.”
The article concludes by recounting many of the achievements
Shoygu has made since becoming Minister of Defense in November
2012, which “could be described endlessly.” Simply put, “Shoygu
literally forced the Russian military to believe in itself,” and has
“restored to our country pride in its army.” Russian presidential
elections are scheduled for March 2018, and while the incumbent
has yet to officially announce his candidacy, the conventional
wisdom suggests that Vladimir Putin will remain in charge. Should
he decide, however, to step down and make room for a new leader,
articles such as this one published in Moskovskiy Komsomolets,
could certainly help to convince the electorate to consider Sergey
Shoygu. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Shoygu literally forced the Russian military to
believe in itself…”

Source: “Cергей Шойгу: человек с сибирским характером (Sergey
Shoygu: Man of Siberian Character),” Moskovskiy Komsomolets, 17
April 2017. www.mk.ru/politics/2017/04/16/sergey-shoygu-chelovek-ssibirskim-kharakterom.html
Twenty-six years ago, on 17 April 1991, when Sergey Shoygu was put
in charge of the State Committee for Civil Defense (which subsequently
became the Ministry of Emergencies), no one had an inkling even that
so many tests would fall to the lot of the 35-year-old Siberian. The
young construction worker would have to extinguish armed conflicts,
clean up in the aftermath of natural disasters, and rescue people in
areas of humanitarian catastrophes and, as of late, direct unique
military operations thousands of kilometers from Russia….
Sergey Shoygu was born in Tyva, to an ordinary Soviet family…. After
graduating from the Krasnoyarsk Polytechnic, the young construction
engineer worked at key Siberian construction projects…. In the mid1980s, when he directed the construction of the Sayansk Aluminum
Plant… Moscow noticed the young and energetic manager and offered
him the post of deputy chairman of the [Russian Federation] State
Committee for Architecture and Construction. Unaccustomed to office
work, Shoygu found the new position irksome and was about to go back
to Siberian construction projects, but he was unexpectedly invited to
take charge of the fledgling Russian Rescue Personnel Corps….
Many years later he jokes that the sole asset of the new body at that
time was the edict on his appointment: “And so I was on the street, a
paper folder in my hand, and in it, the edict on my appointment. That
was it, I had to start to do something. There was nothing -- neither
premises nor checking account, no-th-ing.” …And by the end of the
1990s the Ministry of Emergencies under his leadership had become
one of the world’s most powerful departments of rescue personnel with
its own aviation, robotics, and institutions of higher learning….
In its time of operation Shoygu’s team negotiated all the “trouble
spots” on the post-Soviet territory -- the Ossetian-Ingush conflict,
the Georgian-Abkhazian war, the civil war in Tajikistan, the combat
operations in Chechnya, and the Transnistria conflict.
In 1995 in Tajikistan Shoygu evacuated the Russian-speaking
population, which was fleeing the rebels’ persecution…. Sergey
Shoygu himself, who was able to come to terms with the rebels on the
release of the women and children, and then of the other hostages
also…Many people remember today that fire in the ravaged Groznyy
of 1996 we cease as soon as it was reported that Shoygu’s white
armored personnel carrier was driving through the streets. … Shoygu’s
people sought out the peaceful population in basements, evacuated
the wounded and the sick, and distributed food, warm clothing, and
medicines….
…As early as November [2012] he once again by decision of President
Vladimir Putin donned the uniform, assuming the office of defense
minister. The breadth of his achievements in this office could be
described endlessly. But it would be most correct to say briefly that he
restored to our country pride in its army…. Shoygu literally forced the
Russian military to believe in itself…

Russian Defense Minister, Sergey Shoygu.

Source : http://structure.mil.ru/management/minister/photo/port.htm CC By 4.0

So what constitutes the Shoygu phenomenon? Responsibility, firmness
of purpose, determination, and the ability to unite people and secure
a result and also the splendid sense of humor that many people have.
But in the case of Shoygu there has in this palette to be one further
important ingredient -- an inexhaustible desire to serve his country.
OE Watch | June 2017

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Insourcing Military Utilities and Housing
OE Watch Commentary: Seven years ago, one
of the key reforms initiated under former Defense
Minister Serdyukov dealt with outsourcing nonmilitary functions to various commercial enterprises,
particularly housing and public utilities. It was
presumed that such reforms would better allow
the armed forces to focus on military tasks, while
reducing the likelihood of high-level corruption
associated with these commercial operations.
Although these reforms may have encouraged the
military to place greater attention on its core mission,
the potential for fraud has remained a problem
(Serdyukov was removed in 2012 over allegations
related to corruption in the outsourcing sphere).
According to an article in the centrist-news source,
Kommersant, the Defense Ministry has recently
decided to reject “outsourcing and transition to direct
contracts with suppliers” with regard to housing and
public utilities.
The justification for this change sounds familiar, as
“the military believes this will increase control over
expenditures and reduce corruption considerably.”
Apparently, the commercial structures established
under Serdyukov to handle housing and public
utilities have not proven to be any more effective
or cost efficient. As the article points out, the
Ministry of Defense has now re-consolidated these
functions under one entity and returned “to direct
settlements with energy suppliers to exclude the
chain of intermediaries.” According to Minister of
Defense Shoygu, these new “approaches will permit
increasing control over expenditure of funds in the
sphere of ZhKKh [housing and public utilities] and
getting them to end recipients, as well as excluding
commercialization of the work of Defense Ministry
subunits and significantly lowering the corruption
element.”
Although the Defense Ministry has reassumed direct
control over housing and public utility operations and
payments, the question of previous incurred debts
has yet to be resolved. The article points out that the
“overall debts of Defense Ministry organizations to
utility providers is around R29 billion” [$50 million],
but that “the military does not recognize these
debts…and will be in no hurry to pay them.” The
Russian government does “not share that position of
the military,” and has directed the Defense Ministry
to repay these debts. The Kremlin leadership has
invested considerable resources into strengthening
the military and continues to search for the optimal
model for managing these funds. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“From the first days of its existence, the outsourcing model has
been leading consistently to negative performance indicators and
to the presence of debts to resource providers and regions of the
Russian Federation…”
Source: Aleksandra Dzhordzhevich, Ivan Safronov, and Tatyana Dyatel,
“Сергей Шойгу начал новую реформу ЖКХ (Sergey Shoygu Began a New
Reform of Housing and Public Utilities),” Kommersant Online, 3 April 2017.
http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3260539
Kommersant has learned that the RF [Russian Federation] Defense
Ministry decided to carry out a reform of departmental ZhKKh [housing and
public utilities], the meaning of which reduces to rejection of outsourcing
and transition to direct contracts with suppliers. The new system is being
constructed around a specially established “Housing and Public Utility Services
Fund” FGBU [Federal State Budgetary Institution], which already has assumed
functions of certain Garnizon Holding Company subunits. The military believes
this will increase control over expenditures and reduce corruption considerably.
At the same time, the question of debts to supply organizations which companies
subordinate to the Defense Ministry have accumulated since 2009 has not yet
been resolved once and for all.
Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu sent President Vladimir Putin a letter “ for
your attention” “On Increasing the Efficiency of Garnizon AO [Joint-Stock
Company] Holding Company”… “From the first days of its existence, the
outsourcing model has been leading consistently to negative performance
indicators and to the presence of debts to resource providers and regions of
the Russian Federation,” the Minister writes, adding that the system at hand
“demands constant administrative intervention of military command and
control entities in matters of accident-free servicing of ZhKKh.” In order to
go over to direct settlements with energy suppliers and exclude the chain of
intermediaries, the military decided to establish a separate FGBU, rejecting
outsourcing de facto. Shoygu asserts that “implementing those approaches will
permit increasing control over expenditure of funds in the sphere of ZhKKh
and getting them to end recipients, as well as excluding commercialization of
the work of Defense Ministry subunits and significantly lowering the corruption
element.” He clarifies that tenders will be conducted if specialized utility
organizations must be involved….
The main issue involves debts of companies subordinate to the Defense
Ministry. Thus, at a government conference in early February with the
participation of vice premiers Dmitriy Kozak and Arkadiy Dvorkovich, Deputy
Defense Minister for Rear Services Dmitriy Bulgakov stated that overall debts
of Defense Ministry organizations to utility providers is around R29 billion. The
military does not recognize these debts, however, and will be in no hurry to pay
them…
By the way, the [Russian] White House did not share that position of the
military. According to Kommersant information, on 22 February the Defense
Ministry was ordered to take steps to prevent indebtedness for public utility
services (resources) supplied for Defense Ministry needs, and to pay utility
providers the existing indebtedness of companies subordinate to the Defense
Ministry for previously supplied public utility services (resources)….

OE Watch | June 2017

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Crisis of Trust over Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: For the past six years, the
Russian Ministry of Defense has hosted the Moscow
The refusal of US and NATO representatives to take part in
Conference on International Security, a forum where
senior Russian political and military officials share their the International Security Conference, ...[a] forum held under
perspective on topics related to international security.
Moscow’s aegis, was a new indication of the growing crisis of
As the accompanying excerpt from the relativelytrust between Russia and the US over Afghanistan.
independent Russian news source Kommersant points
out, one of the key topics at this year’s conference
Source: Sergey Strokan, Maksim Yusin, Aleksandra Dzhorzhevich,
(26-27 April) was the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan. As
“Афганская война слов Россия и США не поделили безопасность в
the excerpt demonstrates, and not surprisingly, senior Russian
Центральной Азии (Afghan War of Words. Russia and the United States
officials used this opportunity to criticize US/NATO operations
Are Not Sharing Security in Central Asia),” Kommersant Online, 28 April
in that country.
2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3283490
The excerpt begins
…The war of words between Moscow and Washington which broke
with the comments of
out following the US military’s employment in Afghanistan of the super“Sergey Naryshkin,
powerful bomb and the accusation against Russia of its secretly supplying
head of the Foreign
weapons to the Taliban was a central topic of the Sixth International
Intelligence Service
Security Conference which concluded yesterday in Moscow. The
(SVR)” who asserted
numerous strongly-worded statements of Russian representatives prior to
that “the Pentagon’s
the closing of the forum were summed up by Sergey Naryshkin, head of
recent employment
the SVR of Russia, who confirmed the existence of serious disagreements
in Afghanistan of the
between Moscow and the new US Administration over the Afghan conflict.
super-powerful ‘mother
Touching on the US military’s employment in Afghanistan of the “mother
of all bombs’” was “a
of all bombs,” which, the Pentagon says, was designed to strike at rebels
wholly uncoordinated
of the Islamic State contingent (ISIL), Mr Naryshkin expressed doubt that
show of strength.”
this action would achieve its declared aims. “All that we have thus far
The excerpt goes on
Map of Afghanistan.
Source : CIA.gov. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CIA_map_
observed in Afghanistan are instances of a wholly uncoordinated show of
to include a statement
of_Afghanistan_in_2007.gif Public Domain
strength like the detonation of the super-powerful bomb,” he said.
from Russian Foreign
Minister Sergey Lavrov, who “accused the US military of
In turn, Sergey Lavrov, head of the RF Foreign Ministry, who opened
‘spreading false unprofessional statements,’ countering the
the Moscow conference, accused the US military of “the spread of false
accusations addressed to Moscow of its allegedly secretly
unprofessional statements,” countering the accusations addressed to
supplying weapons to the Taliban.” He was followed by Igor
Moscow of its allegedly secretly supplying weapons to the Taliban.
Korobov, chief of the RF General Staff Main Intelligence
Igor Korobov, chief of the RF General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate
Directorate, who reproached the Americans for failing to defeat
(GRU), accused the Americans in his speech of simply not having defeated
the terrorists in Afghanistan, despite fighting “in this country
the terrorists in Afghanistan and, while in this country for many years,
for many years.” The article also quotes Korobov as suggesting
“having left the Afghans to face difficult domestic political problems, a
that the Americans and its allies were at fault for leaving “the
ravaged economy, an undeveloped social sphere, and a manifold growth
Afghan Government to confront the extremists on its own.”
of drug trafficking.”… Igor Korobov reproached the Americans and their
allies here for the fact that “declaring how dangerous it is to leave the
The article bemoans “the refusal of US and NATO
Afghan Government to confront the extremists on its own, they are taking
representatives to take part in the International Security
action to maintain their military presence…
Conference,” and that instead of being an area of mutual

“

”

cooperation, Afghanistan “is once again coming to be a
principal irritant in the relations of the two superpowers.”
The article concludes on a pessimistic note, claiming that
“the refusal of US and NATO representatives to take part in
the International Security Conference, ...[a] forum held under
Moscow’s aegis, was a new indication of the growing crisis of
trust between Russia and the US over Afghanistan.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

…The refusal of US and NATO representatives to take part in the
International Security Conference, one further forum held under
Moscow’s aegis, was a new indication of the growing crisis of trust
between Russia and the US over Afghanistan. The conflict in this country,
which at the start of the 2000s brought Russia and the United States closer
together and forced them to act as ad hoc allies, is once again coming to
be a principal irritant in the relations of the two superpowers.

(Key speeches at 2017 MCIS can be found here: http://mil.ru/
mcis/appearance.htm)
OE Watch | June 2017

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
No Need to Fear the Spring Draft
OE Watch Commentary: Russia remains
in the midst of its Spring conscript campaign,
which as the accompanying excerpt from the
government newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta,
points out, runs from “1 April through 15 July.”
The campaign will augment “142,000 young
men” into “the ranks of the Armed Forces,
Rosgvardiya [Federal Service of National Guard
Troops], the MChS [Ministry for Affairs of Civil
Defense, Emergency Situations, and Elimination
of Natural Disasters], and the special services.”
The article is designed to allay the fears of
prospective conscripts, stressing the fact that
the quality of military service has improved and
that there are many more conscripts than actual
billets. For instance, it points out that “5,000
young men in Kaluzhskaya Oblast will receive
their draft notice this spring. But just 1,000 will
be dispatched to the barracks.” The situation
is even more selective in Dagestan, where
“12,000 will attend the board at the military
commissariat, but only 480 of these will be
picked to serve.”
The article reminds young men that there are
serious penalties for those who attempt to evade
the draft, where the punishment ranges from
fines “up to R200,000 [$3500] …, forced labor
(up to two years), arrest (up to six months), or
prison (up to two years).” It also points out that
draft evaders will no longer be able to “request
a military service card” upon reaching the age
of 27. Legislation has changed, and now these
draft-dodgers will instead be issued a certificate
which states that the individual “evaded the
draft without lawful grounds for doing so.” Such
documentation will prevent a young man from
getting “a job with the state service or in the
security structures.”
To dispel other anxieties regarding conscript
duty, the article suggests that “the hazing problem
is not as acute as it was,” and that today’s draftees
are provided with sufficient rations and other
necessities-even while traveling. To prepare for
the rigors of military service, potential draftees,
should “get accustomed to reveille at 7 o’clock in
the morning,” and “do some army calisthenics”
before induction. The article concludes by
describing the pay for conscript soldiers (2,000
rubles or $35 per month). Not surprisingly, the
article makes no mention of possibly being
involved in an armed conflict. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“…At the words ‘draft notice’ and ‘military commissariat’ the
young men’s mothers start taking sedatives. And for absolutely no
reason.”
Source: Igor Yelkov, “Новации весеннего призыва в армию: что нужно знать
призывнику и его родителям (Innovations to the Spring Draft Into the Army: What the
Conscript and His Parents Need To Know),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 12 April 2017. https://
rg.ru/2017/04/12/chto-nuzhno-znat-prizyvniku-i-ego-roditeliam.html
Over the course of 106 days, 1 April through 15 July, the ranks of the Armed Forces,
Rosgvardiya [Federal Service of National Guard Troops], the MChS [Ministry for Affairs
of Civil Defense, Emergency Situations, and Elimination of Natural Disasters], and the
special services will be augmented by 142,000 young men….
…At the words “draft notice” and “military commissariat” the young men’s mothers
start taking sedatives. And for absolutely no reason.
Getting into the army is no simple matter today. For example: 5,000 young men in
Kaluzhskaya Oblast will receive their draft notice this spring. But just 1,000 will be
dispatched to the barracks….And even this is not the toughest selection. In Makhachkala,
12,000 will attend the board at the military commissariat, but only 480 of these will be
picked to serve. That’s where the competition is so competitive….
…This spring hundreds of thousands of young guys in the 18-27 age range will be
attending the boards at the military commissariats. But only 142,000 are to serve the
Motherland.
…Naturally enough, both for themselves and their parents this is very stressful. But two
circumstances ought to reassure you a little at the very least. First, the army has changed,
the hazing problem is not as acute as it was…. And second -- and this is the main thing
-- being drafted into the army is not a bonus package giving entry to a fitness club or
a paintball team…. You have to serve simply because it’s the law. Evasion of service is
punishable in monetary terms (up to R200,000 or 18 months’ salary), forced labor (up to
two years), arrest (up to six months), or prison (up to two years).
Performing compulsory service is also useful for your future career. In the old days,
after “evading service” until the age of 27, a young man would turn up at the military
commissariat with his lawyer and blithely request a military service card. This routine
won’t work anymore. At the age of 27 those individuals who do not have valid reasons for
not serving will be issued not with a military service card but a certificate: evaded the
draft without lawful grounds for doing so. You’ll find out what this means when you decide
to get a job with the state service or in the security structures. You’ll be shown the door.
…Let me give a couple of pieces of advice…. In the army it’s difficult to get accustomed
to reveille at 7 o’clock in the morning. But the draft has only just begun. Get up a little
earlier, do some “army” calisthenics… -- believe me, it’ll make it easier in the barracks.
Most fathers and grandfathers of today’s conscripts would be in shock at the current
conditions of service. In their time, conscripts in transit to their units would eat what
they had brought along with them from home. And they couldn’t have imagined that while
traveling to their service location their sons and grandsons would be fed…in a restaurant
car! Not to mention the army providing buffet-style meals….The drafted man receives a
SIM card and a travel bag containing 18 personal hygiene items, including shower gel and
hand cream. A bank card is registered in the name of each individual.
Forget the terms “pay” and “salary.” There are only monetary allowances in the army.
For the compulsory-term soldier this allowance starts at 2,000 [rubles]….

OE Watch | June 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Winning Over Hearts and Minds in SE Ukraine
OE Watch Commentary: Kremlin official sources
continue to deny that Russia has been providing military
support to the separatist enclaves in southeast Ukraine,
or that they have a vested interest in destabilizing
the current Ukrainian government. They claim that
Russia remains committed to the Minsk II agreement,
particularly the key point, which implies that these
separatist regions will remain part of the Ukrainian
state-albeit with a “special status.” Kremlin actions,
however, tell a different story.
Over the past year, the Kremlin has integrated these
separatist regions into the ruble zone and have recognized
the passports issued by local separatist governments in
Donetsk and Luhansk. Russian officials assert that these
moves were designed to alleviate the sufferings of the
local people. Kremlin-supported Russian media continue
to argue that these separatist regions will one day become
part of Russia. As the accompanying excerpt from a
Ukrainian source points out, the Kremlin has also heavily
invested in propaganda to win over the hearts and minds
of the people living in these separatist regions.
The article describes how the propaganda campaign in
the Donbas region focuses on “the republics’ common
past with the Russians, radiant future and prosperity.”
To achieve this goal, the authorities have adopted a
multi-vector approach. In schools, “senior students
undergo basic military training, with militants coming to
primary school classes to tell how they fought ‘for [the]
homeland.’” The primary propaganda focus has been with
local media where “new online media outlets and radio
stations have been set up.” These new media sources
are not only funded by the Kremlin (approximately $1
million per quarter) but are also “working under vigilant
surveillance of Russian supervisors. Every week, they
receive updated orders on what news to cover and how.”
According to the article, this media “levels all their
criticism against Ukraine and the West,” not “allowing
itself a hint of criticism against the local ‘government.’”
While most poll data from the region should be
regarded with some skepticism, the article suggests that
the propaganda campaign has indeed hardened local
views toward Kiev and improved how people living
in these separatist regions perceive their local leaders
and Russia. According to one survey, “43 per cent of
residents of the self-proclaimed republics are sure that
the readiness of the militants who seized power there
are much more eager to heed fellow citizens’ opinions
than in Ukraine. Moreover, almost one-third of residents
in the uncontrolled part of Donetsk Region are afraid
to get back under Ukrainian control.” A Ukrainian
journalist summed up, that “despite their clumsiness,
their propaganda methods are effective.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Despite their clumsiness, their propaganda methods
are effective…”
Source: Maksim Butchenko, “Обработка населения. Как работает пропаганда
в ‘ЛНР/ДНР’ (Indoctrination of the Population. How Propaganda Works in the
‘LNR/DNR’),” Novoye Vremya Online, 14 April 2017. http://nv.ua/ukraine/events/
obrabotka-naselenija-kak-rabotaet-propaganda-v-lnr-dnr-973815.html
Russia’s propaganda machine launched in occupied Donbass is slowly but surely
turning our fellow citizens living there into people who feel that they are not
Ukrainians and not even Russians but citizens of the so-called LPR-DPR (Luhansk
People’s Republic-Donetsk People’s Republic)….
…In 2014-15, local media laid emphasis on hostilities and casualties among
civilians. Now they are writing that a radiant future is being built in areas
uncontrolled by Ukraine. “After Russia recognized LDPR passports, they
launched a campaign about the republics’ common past with the Russians, radiant
future and prosperity,” Vasin said.
Novoye Vremya’s sources say that the propaganda machine seeks to change the
consciousness of residents in occupied Donbass. With direct assistance from the
Kremlin, the chieftains of the self-proclaimed republics have managed to build an
efficient system for brainwashing the population through the media. The emphasis
is primarily on local media. In addition to Russian media, there are local TV
channels and newspapers. New online media outlets and radio stations have been
set up. Note that none of the occupiers’ media has allowed itself a hint of criticism
against the “government”.
....They level all their criticism against Ukraine and the West, harping on the
same point that, allegedly, life is getting ever worse there….Local journalists and
all kinds of propagandists are working under vigilant surveillance of Russian
supervisors. Every week, they receive updated orders on what news to cover and
how…
“Despite their clumsiness, their propaganda methods are effective,”
Dikhtyarenko said, shrugging his shoulders….Meanwhile experts emphasize that
local media are controlled by the Russian side….
In early March, the Security Service of Ukraine [SBU] published a report about
Russia funding the media in the LPR. Analysts of Ukraine’s special services
even specified the amounts. According to their data, the quarterly budget of the
“republic’s” propagandists is about 30m rubles (13,600,000 Ukrainian hryvnyas)
[over 500,000 dollars].
Now that three years has elapsed the situation looks as follows: Russian TV
channels account for about 80 per cent of all broadcasting and local ones for the
remaining 20 per cent…. “Local propaganda is more aggressive, persistent and
one-sided,” said Makiyivka resident Vasin….
… “I have been monitoring the media of the DPR and the LPR for three years
and I have not seen a single critical report about the republics’ authorities. There
is all-out propaganda and no journalism at all,” Harmash said.
…However, sociologists say that even such propaganda does work. According
to an IFAK [an independent research institute] survey, 43 per cent of residents
of the self-proclaimed republics are sure that the readiness of the militants who
seized power there are much more eager to heed fellow citizens’ opinions than
in Ukraine. Moreover, almost one-third of residents in the uncontrolled part of
Donetsk Region are afraid to get back under Ukrainian control.
OE Watch | June 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Arctic Air Defense Interview
Source: Olga Vorobyeva, “Небо над Арктикой (The Sky over the Arctic),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 10 April 2017. http://redstar.ru/index.php/
newspaper/item/32791-nebo-nad-arktikoj
OE Watch Commentary: The
expansion of the First Air Defense
Division represents an improvement
in command and control and a
strengthening of Russia’s northern border
defenses. The division’s weapons are
modern, mostly S-400, S-300 and Pantsir
mobile systems. As the accompanying
passage from an interview with the
Commander of this Division discusses,
new units of S-400 Triumf (NATO SA-21
Growler) are being incorporated into the
division. The mobile S-400 employs four
different missiles (very-long-range-400
km, long-range-250 km, mediumrange-120 km and short-range-40 km).
Each transporter-erector-launcher (TEL)
carries four missiles and can be rapidly
reloaded by a support vehicle. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“[Vorobyeva] Sergey Yuryevich, your air defense formation is one of the largest in Russia.
What is its area of responsibility?
[Moskvichev] It covers nearly two million square kilometers. Precisely we monitor the
air situation from the border with Finland to the village of Tiksi in Yakutia. Our subunits
are deployed in five Russian Federation points: Murmansk and Arkhangelsk oblasts, the
Republic of Saki (Yakutia), the Nenets Autonomous Okrug, and Krasnoyarsk Kray. The First
Air Defense Division covers that northern territory along the length. A significant increase
of the area of responsibility occurred after the resumption of Russia’s military presence in the
Arctic.
[Vorobyeva] How far have the PVO men and equipment advanced into the Arctic?
[Moskvichev] The division defends the Russian Federation’s air borders not only in the Polar
Region but also in the Arctic. Already for the second year our military subunits are deployed
on Alexandra Land (the Franz Josef Land Archipelago), in the village of Rogachevo (Novaya
Zemlya), on Sredniy Island (Severnaya Zemlya Archipelago) and in the village of Tiksi
(Republic of Saki). The air defense forces have also been included in the composition of the
separate arctic grouping on Kotelnyy Island (the Novosibirsk Islands).
The largest military formation is located on Novaya Zemlya: an air defense missile
regiment under the command of Colonel Nikolay Savosin has been on alert in the village of
Rogachevo since 2015. The regiment is equipped with the S-300PM modernized air defense
missile system. Four of our radar sites are located at the other locations I mentioned and are
completely equipped with necessary weapons and military equipment.

We are deployed on Franz Josef Land which is 800 kilometers from the North Pole. The construction of the most state-of-the-art
administrative-housing complex is being completed there right now. This is a very massive engineering project, which will be put into
operation soon.
[Vorobyeva] Is it difficult to command and control such a far-flung division?
[Moskvichev] The command and control of the units is carried out from the
Northern Fleet main base – the city of Severomorsk. Space communications
systems permit all of the subunits to be in constant contact and to report on
the air situation immediately. The command and control algorithm has been
developed, and complications are caused only by the differences in the time
zones: we have a time difference of four hours with Sredniy Island and six hours
with the village of Tiksi. It is understood that our closest attention is being paid
to the Arctic Sector right now. We are responsible to insure that our subunits in
the Arctic are always provided with fresh fruit and vegetables and other food
and that they receive proper medical services. The rotation of personnel, as
well as leave and temporary duty assignments are under special control. At the
center of our attention is maintaining necessary combat readiness in our units
and subunits.

“The First Air Defense Division, which
celebrated its 60th anniversary this year,
defends the sky of our North. Division
Commander Major-General Sergei
Moskvichev discussed the distinctive
features of service in the Arctic and the
Polar Region in an interview.”

Representatives of the command authorities of the Northern Fleet and the 45th Air Force and Air Defense Army, of which we are a part,
regularly conduct flights to the Arctic islands, as does the division. We monitor the activities of the subunits on-site. We pay special attention
to the resolution of morale issues.
[Vorobyeva] How is the upgrading of the division’s units proceeding?
[Moskvichev] An S-400 complex has been deployed on the Kola Peninsula since 2015. That same air defense missile complex will go on alert
in Arkhangelsk Oblast this year, and one more will go on alert on the Kola Peninsula. This is the most powerful air defense weapon in the
world and is capable of detecting a target at a range of 400 kilometers and of destroying it. The upgrading is proceeding a full speed both in
the air defense missile troops and also at the radio-technical units. The latter are receiving new radar, which operate within a broad spectrum
of ranges and are highly accurate. We plan to upgrade all units with the latest equipment by 2020.
[Vorobyeva] What would you wish to the servicemen on Air Defense Troops Day [9 April]?
[Moskvichev] I wish everyone unrelenting combat improvement, successes in the mastery of their specialties, good health and family wellbeing. Let there always be a peaceful sky above our heads.
OE Watch | June 2017

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Nature of Threats to Russia’s Western Sector
and How to Address Them
OE Watch Commentary: In a 2015
issue of the Journal of the Academy of
Military Science Colonel General A.
A. Sidorov wrote an analysis of threats
to Russia from the Western Strategic
direction. His analysis is important, for
this fall the Western Sector will host
the huge exercise Zapad-2017 opposite
the borders of concerned neighbors (the
Baltics, Ukraine, etc.). It will be of interest
to watch Russia’s approach to the threats
he postulates. The accompanying excerpts
from Sidorov’s analysis highlight six of his
many points.
Sidorov claims that the West is
deliberately destabilizing Russia’s
internal political situation via political
and economic means; an information
campaign has been taking place in the
region, designed to sow anti-Russian
sentiments; the Western Military District
and Northern Fleet, in peacetime,
have conducted an integrated strategic
deterrence campaign to counteract these
threats. Provisions are made for defending
against air and missile strikes and the
destruction of enemy air assets aimed
against targets deep in the European part
of Russia; the elimination of weapons
located deep in the European part of
Russia; and the destruction of opposing
forces and the localization of conflict
under circumstances favorable to Russia.
As the excerpted passage notes, he also
accuses the West of stirring up trouble
in the area via the use of hybrid warfare
methods against Russia. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

Source: A. A. Sidorov, “The Nature of Threats to the Military Security of the Russian Federation
on its Western Strategic Sector and Methods to Confront them in Collaboration with the Joint
Strategic Command of the Northern Fleet,” The Journal of the Academy of Military Science (a
quarterly journal of the Academy on military affairs), No. 2 2015, pp. 40-42.
Russia’s military and political situation in the Western strategic sector is very dynamic,
complicated, and confusing due to the processes occurring on the European continent and
due to the attempts by the United States to retain its leadership role using the resources of
its European allies. Analyzing activities of the U.S. and western nations, we can see that the
first stage of a hybrid war is being waged against Russia. It is characterized by deliberately
destabilizing Russia’s internal political situation through political and economic means using
international and European bodies.
In order to counteract threats to Russian military security, the Russian Armed Forces of the
Western Military District and the Northern Fleet in Peacetime conduct integrated strategic
deterrence activities in the air, under and on the sea, on land, and in space…
In order to disorganize the command and control systems and weapons of foreign armed forces
it is possible to use the electronic warfare forces and means of the Western military district
and Northern Fleet strategic command to perform countermeasures against the command
systems of foreign armed forces by: performing surveillance and jamming signals in the
short wave range, thereby covering forces from any aerial radar surveillance and precision
air strikes against command centers; jamming receiver equipment for all users of space
navigation systems of foreign governments; covering up activities of bombers and fighter jets
from detection by long-range aerial radar surveillance and command units; forces of the Baltic
Fleet, when completing measures of strategic deterrence, decide on the missions and forms of
combat, such as the conduct of operational surveillance; guarding and defending Russian state
borders both under the sea and in the air (in Kaliningrad area, a separate air defense region);
following foreign aircraft that perform surveillance along the Russian state borders and over the
Baltic Sea; direct observation of U.S. Navy ships that carry anti-aircraft weapons and longrange sea-based cruise missile; escorting long-range patrol flights; conducting information
countermeasures; and securing sea navigation in accordance with Russia’s international
agreements.
During the actual preparation for hostilities and the repulsion of aggression, provisions are
made for…the elimination of aerially-launched weapons against targets located deep in the
European part of Russia. The dynamics of the military and political situation set forth stringent
requirements for combat and mobilization readiness. The dynamics of the military and political
situation set forth stringent requirements for combat and mobilization readiness.

“Russia’s military and political situation in the Western strategic sector is very dynamic,

complicated, and confusing due to the processes occurring on the European continent and
due to the attempts by the United States to retain its leadership role using the resources of
its European allies. Analyzing activities of the U.S. and western nations, we can see that the
first stage of a hybrid war is being waged against Russia. It is characterized by deliberately
destabilizing Russia’s internal political situation through political and economic means using
international and European bodies.”

OE Watch | June 2017

49

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Trends in the Turkish Military Industry
As the 16th largest economy in the world and a regional power
with the second largest army in NATO, Turkey has initiated various
national military and defense projects in recent years. These include
the national combat aircraft project, the national tank, the national
combat ship, the national unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) and national
helicopters. In addition, there is an effort to produce indigenous missile and rocket systems, battleships, and much more. With such initiatives, Turkey hopes to become one of the top 10 countries in the world
in the military industry.1 Turkish open sources and military journals
reveal several important trends in the Turkish military industry in the
last decade; along with plans for the next decade.
Becoming Self-sufficient: The defense industry in Turkey went
through a strategic transformation in the 2000’s. In the past, Turkey
used to meet its defense needs entirely through import; but in the last
decade, Turkey has made it a strategic priority to reduce dependence
on foreign weapons, become more self-sufficient and more competitive in the defense industry. To this end, the Turkish military industry
has been promoting strategies that would allow Turkey to design and
develop its own weapons. The goal of becoming more self-sufficient
in this field is meant both as a deterrent, and a way to reduce dependence on foreign companies. In addition to serving the Turkish Armed
Forces, the goal is also to increase export and transfer technology. The
focus has been on satisfying the needs of the armed forces with indigenous development, increasing efficiency; and increasing cooperation
with small and mid-sized businesses.
In the past, the equipment of the Turkish military mostly came
from the US or Europe. In the last decade however, the Turkish defense industry has made a huge leap. The rate at which the equipment
needs of the Turkish Armed Forces are domestically produced rose
from 25% in 2003 to 44.2% in 2009 to 50% in 2011 to 55% in 2013,
with the aim to increase this number to at least 75% by 2020 and 100%
by 2023.2 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a speech
in 2015, “Our goal is to completely rid our defense industry of foreign
dependency by 2023.”3 Similarly, the President of Turkish Aerospace
Industries (TAI- one of the world’s top 100 defense companies) has
said, “We are talking about a country that will have its own national
tank, national ship, national helicopter, satellite and war plane...We
are aiming to have everything the five permanent members of the UN
Security Council have.”4
Increasing Defense Exports: Turkey has also become an
export power in the field of defense. Turkey’s first target market for
exporting defense goods is the Middle East, followed by the Caucasus
and North Africa. One third of the Turkish defense and aviation export is to the United States, mostly in the form of commercial aviation
systems and parts.5 The Turkish Undersecretariat for the Defense
Industry is making plans to open five defense industry contact offices
in the Middle East, Far East, United States, Caucasus-Central Asia,
and EU-NATO regions to boost sales in the near future.6
‘Force 2020’ Concept: Turkey is in an uncertain geography
with various types of threats. Thus the Turkish Army’s vision for the
2020 years is to be a deterrent force and a force that can prevail in
symmetrical situations; but also one that underscores hybrid operations. In addition to conventional force use, it would have capabilities
that can handle asymmetrical environments, and capabilities that
would be used in the cyber, air and space domains; and a force which
is ready for war at any moment, with a high degree of survivability. It

SPECIAL
ESSAY

would be a rapid reaction force, with global reach and sensitive engagement capabilities.7 One of the central pieces of the ‘Force 2020’ vision is the modernization and strengthening of the Malatya 2nd Army
Command with new military systems as discussed later in this article.
(The eastern province of Malatya is where the NATO missile defense
shield radar is installed.)
The Future Soldier: Similar to the ‘Force 2020’ concept, Turkish military experts are conducting research on a ‘future soldier’ concept. They are aiming for a future soldier who has increased capability
to protect others and increased survivability; superior mobility; the
ability to integrate into other systems via networks; a comprehensive
system of technological capabilities (energy production, non-lethal
systems, remote surveillance and control, etc.) In addition to these, the
soldier would have systems which improve his maneuver and resistance capabilities, liquid armor that would improve his survivability, a
bio-sensor system that would identify and diagnose biological weapons, and robotic assistance systems that would improve his capacity to
carry more equipment.
In addition, a new system called the CENKER system will
equip the future soldier with wearable computers, combat zone smart
glasses, smart watches, a heart rate monitor, a command computer, a
long-lasting battery set, a microphone that filters out external noise, a
live-feed camera, and software-based radio. The system will be used
by Special Forces, but is envisioned for all soldiers over time.8 The
CENKER system’s smart glasses will enable the team commander and
headquarters to see the surrounding area of each soldier through their
glasses and computers. The Bluetooth connection enables the smart
watch to inform all soldiers in a team about the ammunition supply.
The smart watch also enables exchanging urgent messages and information regarding enemy contact. The heart rate monitor allows for
the evaluation of wounded soldiers.9
A Space Agency and a Space Roadmap: The Turkish Armed
Forces (TAF), who set out with the “concept of using space for peaceful and defense purposes” has prepared a Space Roadmap. The Roadmap includes the capability to identify a ballistic missile threat in
advance and surveillance-reconnaissance to satisfy the need for visual
intelligence. Another important project is the Space Group Command.10 This Space Group Command is expected to be structured by
2023 and also aims to develop the TAF’s abilities to identify a ballistic
missile threat in advance and to develop the TAF’s visual intelligence
abilities by utilizing the space dimension. This constitutes the military
component of an initiative to establish a Space Agency, (similar to
NASA and the European Space Agency) which would be a centralized
body which coordinates all space and aviation efforts under one roof.
Efforts to Improve National Cyber Defense: Turkey ranks
within the top five countries where dangerous software programs
originate, putting it in the same category as Brazil and Russia.11 Government officials and security experts haves closely watch the development of the United States Cyber Command and have recently taken
steps to establish a Cyber Command based on the US model. In late
2010, the Turkish National Security Council added cyber-threats into
its ‘National Security Policy Document,’ its official policy paper defining security threats.12
Against this backdrop, Turkey has recently increased its efforts
to develop a national cyber defense strategy and establish institutions

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

50

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: Trends in the Turkish Military Industry

SPECIAL
ESSAY

to deal with cyber threats. The Turkish Armed Forces has plans to
The Turkish National Tank Project (ALTAY): Altay is Turestablish a Cyber Defense Command, which like other commands,
key’s first domestically designed and produced main battle tank,
would develop its own doctrines, have its own budget and be autoncurrently in the making. It has received much interest from export
omous. There is an increased awareness of the fact that a new ‘war
markets, including Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf countries. Aldomain’ has emerged in the form of ‘cyber space’ in addition to the
tay is the third generation of the main battle tank (MBT), Turkey’s first
traditional domains of land, sea, air and space. Since cyber attacks are
indigenous tank development program. The tank is named after Army
asymmetric, borderless and hard to attribute, Turkey is focusing its
General Fahrettin Altay, who led the V Cavalry Corps during the 1923
13
efforts on cyber-defense.
Turkish War of Independence.
				
Turkey’s scientific research institute TÜBITAK operates a cyber
Altay will be equipped with a 120mm L/55 smoothbore gun.
security institute (SGE), which accounts for 70 percent of all existThe front side of the tank will have special modular reactive composite
ing Turkish cyber security programs. Its work in this field is focused
armor protection. The tank will be designed to resist chemical, biologon seven areas of
ical and radiological (CBR) attacks. Both the gunner
work: building
and the commander will be provided with stabilized
legal infrastrucday/thermal sights. They are expected to be incorpoture; supporting
rated with a laser range-finder having hunter-killer
legal proceedings
capability. The tank will have a maximum speed of
through expertise;
70km/h and maneuverability at depths of 4.1m in wastrengthening nater.16
tional cyber infraIn January 2016, officials from the Undersecrestructure; building
tariat for the Defense Industry declared that five proa rapid reaction
totypes of the tank had been produced and succeeded
force against cyber
in tests in different spots across Turkey.17 In mid-May,
threats; improving
2017 Turkey’s main military vehicle manufacturer
human resources in
Otokar unveiled a new version of the Altay. This new
the field; developversion, called the Altay-AHT, is the “urban operation”
ing local solutions;
version of the same tank, and is designed for asymand expanding
metrical warfare. The tank features include explosive
cyber defense ca14
reactive armor and bar armor systems on each side
pabilities. Other
Turkish institutions
for better survivability against guided and unguided
working on the
ballistic missile attacks. The tank also has improved
The Altay tank with multispectral camo net show cased at IDEF 2017.
issue are the Inforsituational awareness with the addition of a telescopic
Source:Wikimedia.org, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAltayCamoNet.png, Taken from visitors at IDEF 2017.
in
Turkey
[CC
BY-SA
4.0]
mation and Comelevated observation system. It is fitted with a jammer
munication Technoloto protect against remote controlled improvised explogies Authority, the General Staff; and Turkish companies Aselsan and
sive devices and equipped with a directional dozer blade that can be
Havelsan, specialists in military electronics and software.
operated by the driver. Its gunshot detection system can identify the
direction of sniper threats; its laser warning system can identify threats
The Turkish Land Forces Command’s Modernization Efby laser-guided, anti-tank missiles; and its laser range finders can meaforts: The Turkish Land Forces is in the process of modernizing and
sure distance. The vehicle can also release a layer of smoke toward the
restructuring its 400,000 force according to the ‘Army 2020’ vision,
direction of an identified threat. The Turkish government will decide
which entails a modern army that can respond to the 21st century’s
this year whether to sign a serial product contract with Otokar for the
warfighter requirements, by being more streamlined and flexible.15
Altay-AHT or launch competition for the contract.18
This is envisioned as a force that can carry out operations on a wide
National Infantry Rifle Project: The Turkish National Infanspectrum, and one which is smaller but more nimble. One of the
try Rifle (MPT-76), a modular rifle is the first indigenously designed
central pieces of the ‘Force 2020’ vision is the modernization and
service rifle in Turkey, designed and produced to meet the demands of
strengthening of the Malatya 2nd Army Command with new military
the Turkish Armed Forces. The MPT-76 was designed for robust high
systems.
altitude, extremely hot and extremely cold mountain warfare as well as
New military equipment are being included into the inventory
combat on easier terrain. It is certified to operate under dusty, mudof the Malatya 2nd Army. These include five second-hand intelligence
dy, wet, and areas of high and low atmospheric pressure such as high
class reconnaissance aircraft based in Malatya; and four Husky 2G
mountain or deep sea environments. The MPT is a rifle intended to be
Vehicle Mounted Mine Detectors (WMMD) which were delivered to
extremely robust and maintain high accuracy and reliability in order
the Malatya 2nd Army Command in 2013. Another new system for
to survive in true battle environments.
this Army Command includes the R-Visor Talon remote-controlled
The first batch of 200 MPT-76s were delivered to the Turkish
landmine identification robot. This is to address the Turkish Land
Armed Forces on 18 May 2014 and received positive feedback. The riForces’ need for vehicle mounted mine identification systems and
fle was reported to be extremely accurate, reliable, and had impressive
entails a deal with STM (Savunma Teknolojileri Muhendislik – Turkknockdown power. The Turkish Army is in the process of phasing out
ish for ‘Defense Technologies and Engineering) and Critical Solutions
its old G3 battle rifles and making the MPT-76 its main service rifle by
International (CSI).”
2017.19

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

51

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: Trends in the Turkish Military Industry
The Turkish National Machine Gun Project: An extension
of the Turkish Infantry Rifle, the Turkish National Machine Gun is
a more complex weapon with many more parts. The project was
launched in January 2011 and is being managed by the Machinery
and Chemical Industry Agency (MKE) in close cooperation with the
expert personnel of the Turkish Armed Forces. The National Machine
Gun is planned to be an effective weapon precisely developed for
Turkey’s needs, fully reflecting the experience of the Turkish Armed
Forces. The design and development of the project is currently ongoing.
The modern machine gun is being built according to the following specifications:
-It must be usable by a single person,
-It must have a long barrel pitch,
-The barrel should dispel heat quickly and not bulge,
- It must have low backfire power, must be used with a delayer gas
system and revolving lock system,
- It should be able to fire 750 shots/minute and not have any stoppage/locking,
- It must have a range greater than 1000 meters [3280 feet].’20
The Turkish Navy’s Modernization Efforts / The First Domestic Warship: In 2011, Turkey joined the ranks of the few countries
in the world that can build their own warships. The warship, a corvette, was built by a local shipyard and joined the Turkish Navy fleet in
late September 2011. The warship was part of the MILGEM (National
Ship) project, which had kicked off in 2004. The first Turkish-built
warship, called the ‘TCG Heybeliada’ is designed for anti-submarine
warfare. Its capabilities include performing reconnaissance and surveillance, target detection, recognition and identification, early warning, base and coastal defense, anti-submarine warfare, surface warfare,
anti-air warfare, amphibious operations and patrolling. The design
concept of the warship is similar to the Freedom class combat ship
developed by Lockheed Martin as the first member of the next generation of US Navy warships.21
The Heybeliada is planned to be protected by a domestically
produced defense shield called the ‘Hızır’, a countermeasure anti-torpedo system. The system allows the ship to detect a torpedo that is directed at it. It then identifies the best defense measure to take accord-

SPECIAL
ESSAY

ing to the threat. The system was developed by ASELSAN (a Turkish
military electronics specialist company and Turkey’s biggest defense
firm), whose officials said about the ‘ Hızır’: “Ships are developing new
methods to counter threats from torpedos; thus forcing torpedos to
become more silent and quicker in targeting the ship. Thus the system
has been designed to be responsive and flexible.”22 The system has
been designed for corvettes and surface ships.
The Turkish Air Force Command’s Modernization Efforts:
With its modernization program, the Turkish Air Force is also becoming a major air power. It has made improvements to its planes
and ammunition; in addition to important strides in air warning and
control, radar support operations as well as pilot training. The Peace
Eagle Airborne Early Warning and Control system (AEW&C) which
consists of a Boeing 737-700 airframe, fitted with a surveillance radar provides Turkey with significant advantage.23 Turkey also has
electronic intelligence and signals intelligence capacity in addition
to a powerful radar network. In addition, 163 of Turkish F-16’s have
undergone CCIP (Common Configuration Implementation Program),
meaning that they have been updated for comprehensive avionic and
ammunition modernization.24
National Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV): Turkey was one of
the first countries to integrate UAVs into its inventory. While it initially purchased UAVs from the US and Israel, Turkey decided in 1998
to indigenously produce UAVs. The first Turkish UAV prototype, the
‘ANKA’ conducted its first debut flight in 2010 and integrated into the
Turkish Air Forces’ inventory in 2013, marking the first locally pro-

Boeing 737 AEW&C Mesa Peace Eagle in Seattle, September 6, 2007.

Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABoeing_737_AEW%26C_MESA_Peace_Eagle.jpg, By Seattle Aviator
(Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0]

duced UAVs including their software and mechanics.
Turkey is now working on an ‘ANKA-S’ system that will have
additional capabilities including, control by satellite capacity (SATCOM) and crypto data link, national flight control computer and
Aselsan “CATS” Electro-Optical Reconnaissance, Surveillance and
Targeting Systems capabilities. The delivery of these systems is expected to be completed within 2019.25 Turkey also has plans to build
upon the success of this project to produce indigenous armed drones.
The “SIHA” [Strike UAV] would have a dual ISR/armed strike role
and would be equipped with air-to-ground missiles and laser guided
bombs.26

Turkish Corvette TCG Heybeliada.

Source: By MC2 John Herman [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AU.S._Navy_Cmdr._
Russell_Caldwell_waves_to_the_Turkish_corvette_TCG_Heybeliada_(F_511)_from_aboard_the_guided_missile_destroyer_USS_Ross_
(DDG_71)_in_the_Mediterranean_Sea_during_a_passing_exercise_Sept_140902-N-IY142-159.jpg, Public Domain.

The March 2015 issue of the Turkish military journal MSI, a
monthly journal on defense technologies, featured a piece analyzing
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)-related developments in Turkey’s

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

52

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: Trends in the Turkish Military Industry
defense industry in the last 10 years. The piece provided a glimpse
of the ongoing debate going in Turkey regarding what Turkish UAV
producers must do in order to be competitive in the future. It noted
that future UAVs must be equipped with modern systems to detect

TAI Anka UAV on display at 2014 Farnborough Air Show.

Source: Wikipedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ATAI-ANKA-UAV-FAR14-3659.JPG, By MilborneOne (Own work)
[CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

SPECIAL
ESSAY

tional means. ATAK’s weapons include the laser-guided ‘Cirit’ missile
produced in Turkey and in demand by many countries; along with
the Hellfire antitank missile, which attracts attention due to its long
range. This project had been underway since late 2007. Hydra rockets
and anti-aircraft Stinger missiles can also be launched by the ATAK
T-129.36
Plans to Produce Indigenous Modern Warheads and Airplane Bombs: In 2014, Turkey opened a national modern facility to
produce indigenous warheads, airplane bombs and plastic explosives.
The ‘Warhead Production Facility’ was established in the Kırıkkale
province of Turkey.37 All of the special production equipment built in
the facility (which produces the explosives for all modern equipment),
are produced by domestic firms and inside of Turkey. The warheads
and airplane bombs produced here are meant to free Turkey from its
dependency on foreign powers for its defense needs and improve its

and escape, they must be able to quickly adapt to various tasks. For a
10-year horizon, it claims that UAVs must have extraordinary autonomous capabilities, such as the ability to ascend and descend vertically
and the ability to stay in the air for over 72 hours.27
Weapons to Defend against UAVs: Currently, the Turkish
military is considering several different projects and initiatives to
counter UAVs. One of these projects is a weapon akin to the US’s Laser
Weapons System (LaWS) which aims to neutralize ships and down
UAVs.28 Turkey has started work to develop this weapon, which is being called one of the weapons of the future. The laser weapon will be
used in the destruction of UAVs, guided missiles, navigation missiles
and mortar ammunition.29 The laser weapon to be developed will be
used in navy ships and army vehicles. The project foresees the development of ‘target detection and target pursuit’ systems, which will
enable the high strength solid laser source and laser radiation to be
focused on the target until the target is damaged. The weapon is called
the High Powered Laser Weapon System (YGLSS in its Turkish acronym). Other projects being considered to defend against UAV’s are
an ‘ammunition with 35 mm Particle’ which would contain the UAV
inside a cloud of particles;30 and an Infrared Search and Track (IRST)
System for sea platforms.31
Indigenous Long Range Air and Anti Missile Defense System: In mid-November 2015, the Turkish government announced the
cancellation of a $3.44 billion deal with China to co-produce Turkey’s
first long-range air and anti-missile defense system; in favor of developing the system domestically.32 The most likely contenders are Turkish military giants ASELSAN and the Turkish missile maker Roketsan.
33
On 22 February 2017, Turkey’s Defense Minister announced that,
Turkey was searching for systems to protect itself against missile and
air attacks until it developed its own system. He noted that Russian
S-400s were a leading contender, adding that significant progress had
been made in talks with Russia.34 The talks are on-going as of June
2017.
First Combat Helicopters: In October 2014, the ‘ATAKT-129’, the first attack and tactical reconnaissance helicopter produced
by Turkey were delivered to the Turkish Land Forces.35 The ‘T-129
ATAK’ was produced using the newest technology in the aerospace
sector, and is able to successfully conduct maneuvers that are normally very difficult to conduct. In addition, the helicopter features
an advanced weapons and control system, produced entirely by na-

TAI T129 Attack Helicopter “1001” on display at the 2014 Farnborough Air Display.
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AT-129-1001-FAR14-3651.JPG, By MilborneOne (Own work) [CC
BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)],

global standing.38
The Turkish National Combat Aircraft Project: On 15 December 2010, Turkey’s Defense Industry Executive Committee (SSIK)
decided to design, develop, and manufacture an indigenous next generation air-to-air combat fighter.39 Feasibility studies were launched in
June 2011. Four years later, in late 2015, the Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI) and the Turkish Air Force decided on a dual engine aircraft
concept, following some debate about whether the plane should have a
single or dual engine. The dual engine was preferred for the aircraft to
have a longer flight range and the capacity to fly with heavier weapon
loads. The nation’s next-generation fighter will be designed with assistance from BAE Systems.40
The TFX aircraft will make its first flight in 2023, the centennial of the Turkish Republic. After the first flight, it will go through a
testing phase until 2025. During this time, the plan is to update the
aircraft systems according to the missile, target and radar systems of
the time. The radar and weapons systems are planned to be completed
indigenously. After the testing phase in 2025, the serial production
phase will begin. This aircraft is expected to replace the F-16’s in the
Turkish Air Force, which have been in use since 1988.41
In April 2015, Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu
remarked on Turkey’s “painful experience” in World War One when
it was forced to buy arms from abroad. “A nation without its own
defense industry cannot fight the cause of liberation,” he said at the
100th anniversary of the Battle of Gallipoli, adding that by 2023 a
locally-made combat plane will “fly the Turkish skies”.42 Turkish

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2017

53

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: Trends in the Turkish Military Industry
President Erdoğan echoed the same sentiment when he said “Our goal
is to completely rid our defense industry of foreign dependency by
2023,” during a defense industry conference in Istanbul in May 2015.43

SPECIAL
ESSAY

These initiatives are a reflection of this goal- to become
completely self sufficient in defense by 2023, the centennial of the
Turkish Republic.

ENDNOTES
1. “Turkish Defense Industry Products Protecting the World,” DefenceTurkey, 9 September 2014, http://www.defence-turkey.com/index2.
php?p=article&i=1699#.VGWD2Euv20s
2. “ANKA batılı ülkeleri korkuttu (ANKA scares western countries),” Milliyet.com.tr, 20
May 2013, http://ekonomi.milliyet.com.tr/anka-batili-ulkeleri-korkuttu/ekonomi/
detay/1711315/default.htm
3. Jonny Hogg and Can Sezer, “Turkey’s president wants to turn the country into
a major defense industry power,” Business Insider, 27 May 2015, http://www.
businessinsider.com/r-erdogan-aims-to-turn-turkey-into-major-defense-industrypower-2015-5
4. Ibid.; The five permanent members of the UN Security Council are Russia, China,
the United States, the United Kingdom and France. It should be noted that they
are all nuclear powers.
5. “Interview: Sedat Güldogan,” Defense News, 10 November 2014, http://archive.
defensenews.com/article/20141110/DEFREG01/311100025/Interview-Sedat-Gldogan
6. “Turkey-Military Spending,” Globalsecurity.org, 8 November 2014, http://www.
globalsecurity.org/military/world/europe/tu-budget.htm
7. “KKK Modernizasyon Çalıșmalarına Bir Bakıș (A Look at the [Turkish] Land Forces
Command’s Modernization Efforts),” Savunma ve Havacılık (Defense and
Aerospace), Vol. 27, No. 127, October 2013 issue, pages 8-42.
8. “Türk askeri teknolojiyle donatılacak (Turkish soldiers will be equipped with
technology),” Ensonhaber.com, 11 May 2015, http://www.ensonhaber.com/turkaskeri-teknolojiyle-donatilacak-2015-05-11.html
9. Ibid.
10. “Türkiye’den Uzay Kuvvetleri Komutanlığı Adımı (Turkey’s Step [towards] a Space
Forces Command),” Bugun.com.tr, 4 January 2015, http://www.bugun.com.tr/
teknoloji/tskdan-yeni-bir-adim-haberi/1421413
11. “Pentagon Gibi Siber Ordu Geliyor (Turkey Plans to Establish a ‘Cyber Army’ like
the Pentagon),” Aktifhaber.com, 29 October 2010, http://www.aktifhaber.com/
pentagon-gibi-siber-ordu-geliyor-348004h.htm
12. Ibid.
13. Nazlı Zeynep Bozdemir, “ICWC dünya çapında bir konferans olma yolunda
(ICWC is on its way to becoming a world-class conference),” Siberbulten.com, 3
December 2014, http://siberbulten.com/sektorel/trky/icwc-dunya-capinda-birkonferans-olma-yolunda/
14. Burak Ege Bekdil, “Feeling Vulnerable, Turkey Seeks National Cyber Solutions,”
Defensenews.com, 10 December 2014, http://www.defensenews.com/story/
defense/international/europe/2014/12/10/feeling-vulnerable-turkey-seeksnational-cyber-solutions/20215515/
15. “KKK Modernizasyon Çalıșmalarına Bir Bakıș (A Look at the [Turkish] Land
Forces Command’s Modernization Efforts),” Savunma ve Havacılık (Defense and
Aerospace), Vol. 27, No. 127, October 2013 issue, pages 8-42.
16. “Altay main battle tank-Turkey,” Army Technology Market and Customer Insight,
Undated, http://www.army-technology.com/projects/altaymainbattletank/
17. “Turkey’s first domestic tank sees big regional demand,” Hurriyet Daily News, 7
January 2016, http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkeys-first-domestic-tanksees-big-regional-demand.aspx?PageID=238&NID=93567&NewsCatID=345
18. “Otokar Unveils Altay-AHT, Urban Operations Tank at the IDEF,” Otokar.com.tr,
Undated. https://www.otokar.com/en-us/corporate/media/news/Pages/altayurban-idef.aspx
19. “The New Turkish MKEK Methmetcik MPT-76 National Rifle,” The Firearm Blog,
12 May 2014, http://www.thefirearmblog.com/blog/2014/05/12/turkish-mkekmehmecik-mpt-76-national-rifle/
20. “Mehmetçik’e yerli makineli tüfek (Domestic machine gun for Mehmetçik),”
Zaman.com, 29 December 2011, http://www.zaman.com.tr/ekonomi_
mehmetcike-yerli-makineli-tufek_1221273.html
21. Source: “İlk Türk Savaş Gemisi TCG Heybeliada, Deniz Kuvvetleri Komutanlığı
Envanterine Katıldı (The First Turkish Warship TCG Heybeliada Joined the Navy
Fleet)” Haber3.com, 27 September 2011. http://www.haber3.com/ilk-turk-savasgemisi-tcg-heybeliada,-deniz-kuvvetleri-komutanligi-envanterine-k-1029409h.
htm
22. “Savaş gemilerine yerli koruma kalkanı,” Ensonhaber.com, 7 February 2011,
http://www.ensonhaber.com/savas-gemilerine-yerli-koruma-kalkani-2011-02-07.
html
23. Bill Carey, “Boeing Completes ‘Peace Eagle’ AEW&C Deliveries to Turkey,”
Ainonline.com, 9 December 2015, http://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/
defense/2015-12-09/boeing-completes-peace-eagle-aewc-deliveries-turkey

24. Metin Gürcan, “Syria’s increasingly congested skies,” Al Monitor, 9 October
2015, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2015/10/turkey-russia-syriaintervention-increasing-risks-air-combat.html
25. “SSM to Form 2020’s Defense Industry Policy,” Defense Turkey, 14 September
2015, http://www.defenceturkey.com/?p=article&i=2090#.VorEs0t160s.
26. Tony Skinner, “IDEF 2013: Turkey launches armed UAV project,”
Shephardmedia.com, 9 May 2013, http://www.shephardmedia.com/news/uvonline/idef-2013-turkey-launches-armed-uav-project/
27. “Türk Savunma ve Havacılık Sanayisi’nin IHA’lı 10 Yılı! (10 Years of UAVs in
the Turkish Defense and Aerospace Industry!),” MSI Aerospace Defense
Technologies and Strategy, March 2015.
28. “Türk ordusu lazer silahı üretecek (The Turkish army will produce a laser
weapon),” Sabah.com.tr, 19 January 2015, http://www.sabah.com.tr/
teknoloji/2015/01/19/turk-ordusu-lazer-silahi-uretecek
29. “Türkiye ilk milli lazer silahını yapıyor (Turkey is producing its first national laser
weapon),” Gazetevatan.com.tr, 19 January 2015, http://www.gazetevatan.
com/turkiye-ilk-milli-lazer-silahini-yapiyor-718539-gundem/
30. “35 mm Parçacıklı Mühimmat (Ammunition with 35 mm with Particle),”
Aselsan.com.tr, Undated, http://www.aselsan.com.tr/tr-tr/cozumlerimiz/havave-fuze-savunma-sistemleri/kundagi-motorlu-ve-parcacikli-muhimmat/35-mmparcacikli-muhimmat)
31. “ASELSAN Elektro-Optik ve Navigasyon Sistem Çözümleri (ASELSAN ElectroOptic and Navigation System Solutions),” MSI Havacılık, Savunma Teknolojileri
ve Strateji (Airospace, Defense Technologies and Defense Magazine), Nov
2013, No.10
32. “Türkiye Çin füzesinden vazgeçti, milli füze projesi başlatılacak (Turkey changed
its mind on the Chinese missile, a national missile project to be launched),”
Hurriyet.com.tr, 15 November 2015, http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/turkiye-cinfuzesinden-vazgecti-milli-fuze-projesi-baslatilacak-40014297
33. This ended a two year process which had started on 26 September 2013,
when Turkey had announced its decision to start talks with a Chinese firm to
co-produce a long-range air and missile defense system. The contract was
awarded to the China Precision Machinery Export-Import Corp. (CPMEIC), a
company noted for violating the Iran, North Korea and Syria Nonproliferation
Act. NATO had expressed concern and warned of compatibility issues between
the Chinese-made system and the NATO systems. Since then, the deal had
stalled, suggesting second thoughts on Turkey’s part.
34. “Bakan Fikri Işık’tan S400 açıklaması (Minister Fikri Işık’s S400 Declaration),”
CNNTurk.com, 22 February 2017. http://www.cnnturk.com/turkiye/bakan-fikriisiktan-s400-aciklamasi
35. “Ilk 5 ATAK helikopteri ve pilotları ‘harbe’ hazır (The first 5 ATAK helicopters and
pilots are ready for ‘combat’),” Zaman.com.tr, 17 October 2014, http://www.
zaman.com.tr/gundem_ilk-5-atak-helikopteri-ve-pilotlari-harbe-hazir_2251283.
html
36. “ATAK, Turkey’s first combat helicopters ready for mission,” Cihan.com.tr,
17 October 2014, http://en.cihan.com.tr/news/ATAK-Turkey-s-first-combathelicopters-ready-for-mission_8078-CHMTU1ODA3OC80
37. “Türkiye modern harp başlığı üretecek (Turkey will produce modern
warheads),” Anatolian Agency News, 16 April 2014, http://www.aa.com.tr/tr/
haberler/314438--turkiye-modern-harp-basligi-uretecek
38. “Türkiye savaş başlıkları üretecek (Turkey to produce warheads),” Turkish Prime
Ministry’s Press and Information Office, 16 April 2014, http://www.byegm.gov.
tr/turkce/haber/turkiye-savas-basliklari-ve-ucak-bombalari-uretecek/57849
39. “Turkey ready to produce first national fighter jet,” Today’s Zaman, 15 June
2011, http://www.todayszaman.com/news-247512-turkey-ready-to-producefirst-national-fighter-jet.html
40. Tolga Özbek, “BAE chosen to assist with Turkey’s TFX fighter project,”
Flightglobal.com, 3 December 2015, https://www.flightglobal.com/news/
articles/bae-chosen-to-assist-with-turkeys-tfx-fighter-proje-419695/
41. “İşte ilk milli savaş uçağı (Here is the first national combat aircraft),” Sabah.
com, 26 October 2015, http://www.sabah.com.tr/gundem/2015/10/26/isteilk-milli-savas-ucagi
42. Jonny Hogg and Can Sezer, “Turkey’s president wants to turn the country
into a major defense industry power,” Business Insider, 27 May 2015, http://
www.businessinsider.com/r-erdogan-aims-to-turn-turkey-into-major-defenseindustry-power-2015-5
43. Ibid.

OE Watch | June 2017

54

