community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #11
December 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

FALLOUTS FROM THE

“CALIPHATE”
SOME FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
ISIS FALLOUT
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
12

Malaysian to Become New ISIS Leader in Southeast Asia
ISIS’s “Reverse Migration”
Fallouts from the “Caliphate”
Insights from an ISIS Detainee
ISIS Propaganda in Congo Backfires
Uncertainty over ISIS Attack Claim in Kyrgyzstan
Russian Security Concerns about ISIS in Afghanistan
ISIS Video Claims Attack on Syrian Weapons Depot

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
13
14
15
16
17
18

Hamas Rejoins the Resistance Axis
Syria: Anti-Kurdish Militia Emerges in Manbij
Iran: UAVs Successfully Armed with Smart Bombs
Iran: Possible to Expand Missile Range
Iran: We Will Investigate Cyber Accusations if ‘Serious’
Mega Project: New Istanbul Airport to be World’s Largest
Hub

AFRICA
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

The Congo’s Other Conflict-Ridden Area
Mozambique’s First Islamist Attack Against the State
Burundi Leaves International Criminal Court
Somalia: Two Top Defense Officials Quit
Somalia Reaches Out for Help in Fighting Al-Shabaab
Vigilantes to Combat Insurgencies?
To Negotiate or Not with Mali’s Jihadists?

LATIN AMERICA
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

First Capital Command Evolves in Brazil and South America
Coca Production Soars in Colombia
FARC and Colombian Government Squabble over Peace
Accords
FARC-Preferential Electoral Districts
FARC Looks to Politic in Venezuela
Venezuela, Entrance for Empires
Mexico’s “Invisible Wall”
Weaponized Drone Linked to Organized Crime in Mexico
Panama Reaches Milestone in Biometric Registries
Cuba Unlikely to End Dual Currency System

ASIA-PACIFIC
36
37
38
39
40
42
42
43

China to Build Military Maintenance Facility in Thailand
China’s Military Assistance to the Philippines
Duterte Seeks to Ease Tension in the South China Sea
Chinese and Indian Competition in Space Heats Up
By Road and Rail to the Roof of the World
India’s Effort to Counter China’s Growing Naval Presence
Indonesia and Malaysia Trying to Control Flow of Militants
Drug Trafficking in Southeast Asia

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
47
50
51
52
54
56
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

Russian Military Raising Accession Standards and Training
Levels
Russia’s Development of Electromagnetic Pulse Weapons
Russia’s ‘Stealth’ Detector: The Struna-1 Bistatic Radar
The Konteyner OTH Radar to Help Combat Hypersonic
Weapons
Russia Successfully Tests Satellite ‘Mothership’ with Two
Interceptors
Lack of Investment in Railways Increases Economic and
Strategic Vulnerabilities
Moving Armor through Marshes and Mire
Russian Military Says It Will Get Drone-Killer UAVs
Russia’s National Guard Expanding Mission
Winning Over Hearts and Minds
Russian Narrative on Syria
Restricting Social Media in the Military
Arctic Sea Monster
Artic Aviation Practices Attack on Amphibious Landing
Catalonia: Police Rebellion Deflates

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
44
45
46

Security for the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor
The Armenian Security Cooperation Quandary
A New Chapter in Uzbek-Russian Security Cooperation

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 11

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Robert Bunker
Karen Kaya
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.

December | 2017

Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Zach Kelsay
Alma Keshavarz

		
Asia-Pacific

Dodge Billingsley
Cindy Hurst
Sudha Ramachandran
Spencer Shanks
Jacob Zenn

		
Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine, Europe

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Kaitlyn Johnson

ON THE COVER: Local boys observing cityscape of Qayyarah town on
fire. Mosul, Iraq. November, 2016. Source: By Mstyslav Chernov (Own work), https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ALocal_boys_observing_cityscape_of_Qayyarah_town_on_fire.The_Mosul_District%2C_
Northern_Iraq%2C_Western_Asia._09_November%2C_2016.jpg, [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

ISIS FALLOUT
Malaysian to Become New ISIS Leader in Southeast Asia
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article
from Malaysia’s bharian.com reports that the new
leader of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
in Southeast Asia is Amin Baco, a Malaysian
national and former member of Jemaa Islamiya-a jihadist group in Southeast Asia that seeks to
establish a “Caliphate” in the region. Baco takes
over the leadership of ISIS in this region from Isnon
Hapilon, the former leader of the Abu Sayyaf Group
who died in the clashes in recent months in Marawi.
Baco’s main base is believed to be in the southern
Philippines.
A separate Malaysian-language publication,
harianmetro.com, on 23 October offered a profile
of Amin Baco and how he came to be the leading
ISIS member in the region. Before taking over from
Hapilon, Baco had fought under Malaysian Jemaa
Islamiya bomb-maker Zulkifli bin Hir and then
replaced Dr. Mahmud Ahmad, as a leading expert
in bomb-making. According to the article, Dr.
Wanted Poster Depicting Amin Baco.
Source: Philippine National Police via Rea Mamogay Twitter Feed, https://twitter.com/dzxl558_rea/status/927387926454976512, Public Domain.
Mahmud Adam is believed to have joined ISIS in
the Philippines before being killed, although security forces are unsure whether he is still alive or not pending DNA testing. Before that, Baco
was responsible for smuggling Indonesian militants to the southern Philippines to undergo training in bomb-making and led a group called
Dar ul Islam Sabah, which was comprised of militants from Baco’s native Sabah region of Malaysia. Amin Baco is now leading the remaining
pro-ISIS militants in the Philippines. He reportedly considered negotiations with the government to end the fighting in Marawi but such
negotiations have not taken place.
The article concludes by discussing Malaysia’s security concerns about its nationals, such as Amin Baco, fighting in the Philippines. Like
Baco, Malaysians are believed to be gaining expertise in bomb-making that they can use when they return to Malaysia. The security forces
have arrested some Malaysian students who were planning bomb attacks and reportedly intended to target a drinking festival in Klang in the
state of Selangor. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“There are concerns about the existence of Malaysian militants since the arrest of several individuals
including students in several locations in Kelantan, who have been bomb-making specialists.”

Source: “Rakyat Malaysia ‘emir’ baharu
Daesh diburu (New Malaysian national emir of
Daesh is hunted),” bharian.com, 6 November
2017. https://www.bharian.com.my/dunia/
asean/2017/11/347351/rakyat-malaysia-emirbaharu-daesh-diburu
The Philippine authorities are hunting a
Malaysian who may be the new leader of the
pro-DAESH group in Southeast Asia following
the death of several recent high-profile militants.
Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said they
were hunting Amin Baco, who is likely to be the
new leader of the militants. Amin was reportedly
killed in Marawi but intelligence sources say
he escaped. He said Amin has been in the
Philippines for a long time and has links with the
regional militant group Jemaah Islamiyah.

Source: “Amin Baco ganti (Amin Baco Changed),” harianmetro.com, 23 October 2017.
https://www.hmetro.com.my/setempat/2017/10/275717/amin-baco-ganti
There has been a new threat since another Malaysian militant, Amin Baco, 31, who
has the skills to produce homemade bombs, allegedly took over leadership from
Dr Mahmud Ahmad who was killed in recent attacks. The man is able to produce
Improvised Explosive Device (IED) bombs and is allegedly from Tawau, Sabah and
is now believed to be hiding in Basilan or Jolo Island, South Philippines, which is a
militant headquarters in Southeast Asia. Intelligence information also confirmed that
Amin Baco, also a former member of the Darul Islam militant Sabah (DIS), was hiding
around Marawi. Amin Baco is believed to have played a major role in smuggling
Indonesian militants to the south of the Philippines to undergo training. The Philippine
Army believes Amin is now leading the militants remaining in Marawi after taking over
the leadership from Dr Mahmud. There are concerns about the existence of Malaysian
militants since the arrest of several individuals including students in several locations in
Kelantan, who have been bomb-making specialists. The individuals also had explosive
devices and are believed to have been planning to strike at particular locations in the
country including a drinking festival that will take place in Klang, Selangor.

OE Watch | December 2017

3

ISIS FALLOUT
ISIS’s “Reverse Migration”
OE Watch Commentary: At the height of its
popularity, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
and its so-called “Caliphate” had attracted thousands of
people from around the world to join the fight. Some
experts estimated that around 40,000 foreign fighters
joined the group from over 100 countries between
2014 and 2016. Now that the group has lost much
of its territory in Iraq and Syria, particularly its two
main strongholds (Raqqa in Syria and Mosul in Iraq),
the “Caliphate” appears to be over, or close to being
so. This raises the question of what happens to all
those foreign fighters who had flocked to the region.
Neighboring Turkey is expected to be a common
first stop or transit point for many of them. The first
accompanying passage from an informative article
on the issue discusses the future of ISIS’s foreign
fighters. The passage, from Turkish mainstream daily
Milliyet also provides insight into possible future ISIS
activities.
The article starts out by discussing the successive
losses that ISIS has faced in Iraq and Syria. It notes
that most Turkish fighters will return to Turkey
while some will head to Afghanistan, claiming that
“the new fighting area for foreign fighters.... will be
Pakistan, Afghanistan, Libya, the Philippines and
Myanmar.” As for those from other countries, the
article claims that the majority of these “are citizens
of countries like Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan,
described as the Fergana Valley, and Chechens who
have a Russian passport.” In addition, there are
“Uyghurs, who carry a Chinese passport” along with
“North Africans, Saudis, Jordanians, and Yemenis
who carry European passports.”
The article points out that ISIS members who
head to Europe and the US will focus on ‘lone wolf’
attacks, given the group’s guidance that people
should conduct attacks on their own initiative. It also
asserts that those who join the group are given basic
improvised explosive device training, making the
ominous claim that this “is an important clue as to
what the future holds...”
Turkish security forces have recently conducted
operations in 30 cities around the country and
apprehended 330 ISIS suspects, in an effort to tackle
the ISIS threat in the country. In addition, as the
second accompanying passage (also from Milliyet)
discusses, on 28 October, a major ISIS attack on a big
shopping mall in Istanbul was averted. As the first
passage notes, this incident is taken as an indication
that the ISIS presence in Turkey is significant enough
that the group may conduct an operation in Turkey at
any moment. Turkey shares long borders with both
Iraq and Syria, making it an important country for
ISIS’s “reverse migration,” as the articles point out.
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“It is expected that the DAESH members who go to Europe and
the US will focus on ‘Lone Wolf’ attacks.”
Source: “DAEŞ tersine göç başlattı (ISIS has started a reverse migration),” Milliyet.
com, 6 November 2017. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/daes-tersine-goc-baslattigundem-2550050/
The terror organization DAESH [the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)], which
has lost the territory it controlled in Syria, has started a “reverse migration.”
Thousands of DAESH members are leaving Syria... Turkey is undoubtedly the most
important region that the migrating terrorists are expected to head to, some by
themselves, some with their children and families...
DAESH, which had declared “ jihad” on Turkey following its loss in the Azez-El
Bab-Jarabulus region as a result of the Euphrates Shield [Operation], has started
losing its most important bases, one after another...
Furthermore; it had to leave Raqqa, where it had its Syrian base, following the
US-supported YPG [People’s Protection Units] operation. After that, Syrian regime
forces took Deir Ezzor. DAESH, who has lost the territory it controls, is preparing
for a new maneuver. The jihad regions that DAESH controlled, which had peaked
with the group’s activities in 2015-2016 in Syria’s jihad regions, was like the United
Nations. Participation from Europe, Africa, Russia and the former Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) was at its highest level. The group even had participants
from Canada and South Korea. Foreign DAESH sympathizers flocked to the war
zones in Syria and joined the group’s ranks. During this period, the group had
achieved a human resource [level], as important as financial strength...
[ISIS’s] New Strategy
DAESH’s plans for the near future cannot be ignored. According to instructions by
the organization’s leadership, women and children who have been waiting to return
to Turkey will be returned soon. In the past, passages from Syria to Turkey were
obtained for 2,000 liras [~$500], but it is being reported that these illegal crossings
now cost up to 20,000 liras [~$5000]. Turkish male fighters’ first destination is
Turkey. But, some of these male fighters are also expected to return to Afghanistan.
The new fighting area for foreign fighters, characterized as Foreign Terrorist Fighters
(FTF) will be Pakistan, Afghanistan, Libya, the Philippines and Myanmar. FTF’s will
manage DAESH’s activities in these regions.
Another analysis regarding DAESH and Turkey is as follows: The group is in a
position to conduct an operation in Turkey at any time. The latest operation in
Istanbul is shown as an example of this...
Watch the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
The issue of FTFs is perhaps even worse.
Aimless FTFs are returning to their countries, particularly to Europe.
The majority of these FTFs are citizens of countries like Uzbekistan, Tajikistan,
Kyrgyzstan, described as the Fergana Valley, and Chechens who have a Russian
passport. Similarly, there are some FTFs who are Uyghurs, who carry a Chinese
passport. FTFs who joined DAESH from Europe, along with North Africans, Saudis,
Jordanians, and Yemenis who carry European passports can conduct an operation at
any time.
It is expected that the DAESH members who go to Europe and the US will focus on
‘Lone Wolf’ attacks. There is guidance from the organization’s management that
people should “conduct attacks on their own initiative.” These types of DAESH
attacks have been taking place in Europe and the US for a while. Those who join
DAESH are initially given training on how to produce simple improvised explosive
devices and this is an important clue as to what the future holds....

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2017

4

ISIS FALLOUT
Continued: ISIS’s “Reverse Migration”
Source: “Şüpheli araç fünye ile patlatıldı! (The suspicious vehicle was destroyed via detonator!),” Milliyet.com, 28 October 2017. http://www.
milliyet.com.tr/istanbul-da-supheli-arac-alarmi--gundem-2545447/
Regional Anti-Terror units went into alarm mode when they received intelligence that an ISIS cell was planning an attack. The units, which were
activated based on intelligence received during the week, determined that a four-person cell with two women were planning an attack on the
Istanbul Forum shopping mall in Bayrampasa, with a significant amount of explosives loaded onto a white car.

“The new fighting area for foreign fighters... will be Pakistan, Afghanistan, Libya, the Philippines and
Myanmar. Foreign Terrorist Fighters will manage DAESH’s activities in these regions.”

A destroyed part of Raqqa, August 2017.

Source: By Mahmoud Bali (VOA), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Destroyed_neighborhood_in_Raqqa.png, Public Domain.

Fallouts from the “Caliphate”
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has lost most of its territory in Iraq and Syria. Many of the thousands of
fighters who had come to the region to fight on behalf of the so-called “Caliphate” are returning home or going other places. What will happen
to the children and wives who were brought to Iraq and Syria by the militants who came to join ISIS? Many of them have no paperwork, do
not speak the language, and some are injured. There are no laws to deal with this unprecedented situation. The accompanying passages from
three articles on the issue discuss the fate of some of these families, in addition to an effort to deal with some of the radicals who are local to the
region.
The first article from a Kurdish source discusses that 52 Russian citizens known as ‘ISIS families’ were returned to the Russian government
by the Kurdish authorities in the Kurdish parts of Syria. The 52 Russians includes nine women and 43 children. The families were put on buses
and taken under Russian government responsibility. The article notes that they “have not taken part in combat and have no blood of Syrians on
their hands.”
The second passage from Al Monitor, a website which features articles on the Middle East by local authors, discusses a Russian report
regarding 48 Russian children being held in different Iraqi shelters. It points out that “some of them speak Russian, while others know only
Chechen.” These children were brought to Iraq by parents who came to join ISIS, or were born in Iraq. The article notes that “most of these
children know very little about their origins. Some of them have broken legs or hands or other injuries because they were abandoned by their
parents and had no medical attention for a long time.” Bringing them back to Russia is problematic as “the minors lack documents proving their
identity and can hardly tell the authorities anything about themselves or their families, aside from a name.”
The third article, also from Al Monitor, discusses an effort to deal with ISIS members who may be local or are staying in the region. The
effort involves a ‘terrorist rehab’ center in Syria, which will take in people who have been indoctrinated in the ideology of ISIS, “putting them
through courses on moderate interpretations of Islamic law, and intellectual and cultural lectures.” According to the article, the center will
also offer counseling and psychological support. The aim is to rid the participants of extremist ideology, with various recreational and sports
programs, all offering daily classes over a period of three months. Regardless of these efforts, the fate of ISIS families and remaining militants
looks dire. The “Caliphate” may be over, but the region will no doubt face a number of social challenges from the fallout for decades. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2017

5

ISIS FALLOUT
Continued: Fallouts from the “Caliphate”
“...the minors lack documents proving their identity and can hardly tell the authorities anything about themselves
or their families, aside from a name”
Source: “Syrian Kurdish forces handover 52 ISIS
women, children to Russia,” Rudaw.net, 13 November
2017. http://www.rudaw.net/english/middleeast/
syria/13112017
Kurdish military and civilian authorities in Syrian
Rojava handed over to the Russian government 52 Russian
citizens known as ISIS families on Sunday. According
to Abdulkarim Omar, Head of Jazira Foreign Relations
Commission, the families numbered nine women and 43
children.
Omar said that the Kurds of Syria appreciated Russia’s
support for their efforts for self-rule and Kurdish
participation in Syria’s political process, adding that the
handover of the ISIS families was a gesture of reciprocity
between Kurds and Russia.
“From our commitment to human rights and
international treaties and agreements, today a number of
Russian citizens will be handed over on their own accord
and without any force as long as they have not taken part
in combat and have no blood of Syrians on their hands,
they’ll be handed over to the Russian government.” Omar
said.
At a ceremony attended by Kurdish and Russian military
and civilian envoy the families were put on buses and
under Russian government responsibility.
“We’re handing over ISIS families to the Russian state.
I’d like to say that as YPG, YPJ and the SDF we treated
those women humanely.” Nuri Mahmoud, official YPG
spokesman told reporters.

Source: Yekaterina Chulkovskaya,
“Hundreds of Russian children found in
Mideast orphanages,” Al Monitor, 5
September 2017. http://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2017/09/russiachildren-found-orphanages-mideastiraq-syria-isis.html#ixzz4yWx7I93G

Source: “Khaled al-Khateb, “’Terrorist
rehab’ opens its doors in northern
Syria,” Al Monitor, 6 November 2017.
https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2017/11/anti-extremismcenter-opened-in-northern-aleppocountryside.html

In early August, Russian state TV
network RT published a report that at
least 48 Russian children are being held
in different Iraqi shelters. Some of them
speak Russian, while others know only
Chechen. Some children were brought
to Iraq by parents who came to join IS
radicals. Others were born in Iraq. Most
of these children know very little about
their origins. Some of them have broken
legs or hands or other injuries because
they were abandoned by their parents
and had no medical attention for a long
time...

“The Syrian Center for Anti-Extremist
Ideology opened its doors October 28
in the city of Marea in the northern
Aleppo countryside. The inauguration
was attended by Free Syrian Army
(FSA) commanders, local activists,
administrators and lecturers at the
center, which received its first batch of
students the next day.

“To bring the children back, it must be
confirmed they are all Russian citizens,
which is not easy, as the minors lack
documents proving their identity and can
hardly tell the authorities anything about
themselves or their families, aside from a
name.”

The center will take in people who
have been indoctrinated in the ideology
of the Islamic State (IS), putting
them through courses on moderate
interpretations of Islamic law, and
intellectual and cultural lectures.
It will also offer counseling and
psychological support. The aim is to rid
the participants of extremist ideology,
with various recreational and sports
programs, all offering daily classes over
a period of three months.”

“Some of them have broken legs or hands or other injuries because they were abandoned by their parents
and had no medical attention for a long time.”

Syrian refugee children outside their temporary home, in Lebanon’s Bekaa Valley, 2013.
Source: By DFID - UK Department for International Development, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=30786534, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

6

ISIS FALLOUT
Insights from an ISIS Detainee
OE Watch Commentary: Last August, a Moroccan
member of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) named
Essam al-Din Adnan surrendered to advancing Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) in Raqqa Province. In October,
two well-known Arabic-language newspapers (Egypt’s
al-Masry al-Yaum and Saudi Arabia’s al-Sharq al-Awsat)
published interviews with the detainee, who claims to
have been in charge of ISIS’s border with Turkey in 2014.
The accompanying excerpts highlight key points in his
confession.
Adnan’s trajectory resembles that of other foreign ISIS
recruits: religious but not politically active, he was touched
by images coming from Syria in 2011 and encouraged to
move there by a man he met online and who was already
in Syria. His virtual friend, an Egyptian national, insisted
that “the Syrian regime would soon be wiped out and it was
important to be a participant.” Arriving in the fall of 2013
via Turkey, Adnan joined the Nusra Front and subsequently
ISIS, which was more accommodating to foreign fighters.
Adnan was put in charge of the border with Turkey
in part because of his language skills (Arabic, English,
French and Spanish). By his estimation, the number of ISIS
recruits entering Syria via Turkey jumped from around 150
per month in the fall of 2013 to 300 per day in 2014. The
greatest number came from the former Soviet Republics,
followed by the Arab Maghreb (Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia).
Adnan also confirms the rise in tensions between local ISIS
fighters and foreigners in the second half of 2014.
It is still unclear how the SDF will handle captured
militants from the crumbling “Caliphate.” With the
regional balance of power increasingly unsettled, these
confessions are also tools of statecraft. Adnan’s account,
published in Egyptian and Saudi media sources, implicates
Turkey. In the detainee’s own words: “Turkish authorities
did not interfere with us [ISIS] in the least, and sometimes
fighters entered with an official Turkish stamp.” Turkey
is allied with Qatar, which both Saudi Arabia and Egypt
consider a destabilizing force in the region. Turkish officials
deny allegations of turning a blind eye to ISIS fighters
passing through Turkey.
Adnan does not regret having gone to Syria, but he
regrets joining ISIS. Rather than a dutiful Muslim helping
build a modern-day jihadist utopia, he soon felt he was
“part of a game, a dirty game.” Yet he also conveys an
important fact: ISIS’s “Islamic State” may be over, but the
dream of a modern-day “Caliphate” lives on. In Adnan’s
view, the ISIS’s recipe was missing a key ingredient: “…
a caliphate without a capital is meaningless, and without
controlling Damascus or Baghdad it is incomplete.
Controlling all this territory is useless without controlling
capitals.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…a caliphate without a capital is meaningless, and without
controlling Damascus or Baghdad it is incomplete.”
Source:
‫  أول حوار مع قيادى في داعش بعد القبض عليه في سوريا‬
“First Interview with ISIS Leader After his Detention in Syria,” al-Masry
al-Youm, 23 October 2017. http://www.almasryalyoum.com/news/
details/1209199
“The first convincing reason was the oppression and violence suffered by the
Syrian people and the bloody scenes we saw on the TV screens… alongside
the influence of Islamic movements… The man I had met [online]… began
encouraging me to come [to Syria] and said that the Syrian regime would soon
be wiped out and it was important to be a participant. He told me how to enter
via Turkey, and he facilitated my entry via smugglers. He was waiting for me in
Syria… After a month and a half in Tel Abyad we went to work in Aleppo and
then Idlib, always working along the border with Turkey to facilitate the entry
of fighters and to welcome them… Turkish authorities did not interfere with
us in the least, and sometimes fighters entered with an official Turkish stamp
specifically for the Azaz border crossing as well as Bab al-Hawa… Our ideas
were initially not affected by anything other than religious fervor and uprisings
against injustice and oppression, which then turned into Islamic thinking, then
into jihadist thought, and from there to a state governed by Shari’a… After
a year and half the problems began with local ISIS members who controlled
the organization… I was detained for two months for investigation, since the
border issue was very delicate and secretive, making them worried about
my presence there for so long given all the information I had… I don’t regret
coming to Syria but I regret joining this group as I now know it is part of a
game, a dirty game.”
Source:
‫ التنظيم كيان هش وفارغ من الداخل‬:‫داعشي مغربي‬
Kamal Shaykhu. “Moroccan ISIS Member: The Organization is Brittle and
Empty from Within,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 31 October 2017. https://goo.
gl/2QgUqj
The next day he traveled with a group of new arrivals to Idlib, in northeast
Syria, where he stayed for around two months of [jihadist] education and
weapons and tactical training… when the disagreements between al-Qaeda
and the Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi wings intensified… he and many foreign fighters
chose to join Baghdadi’s organization because “[Nusra Front leader] alJolani was severe with foreign fighters, forcing them to stay outside of cities.
The direct reasons was the absence of a clear plan with Nusra, while ISIS
announced as its goal establishing an alleged ‘Caliphate’.” In early January,
following ISIS full takeover of Raqqa city, [Adnan] was appointed commander
along the northern border, becoming in charge of the border strip linking Ras
al-Ayn in north Hassakeh Province and Tel Abyad in northern Raqqa Province,
as well as this area’s borders with Turkey. “This was because I speak English,
French and Spanish as well as my native Arabic”… Until the end of 2013 the
number of foreign fighters entering Syria was no more than 150 per month,
he claims, “But after I took over this post in early 2014 there were an average
of 300 foreigners coming in every day wanting to fight with [ISIS]”… “Most
[foreign fighters] were Chechens, Georgians and Russians. As far as Arabs,
most were Tunisians, then Moroccans, Algerians, Egyptians, and Libyans”…
According to [Adnan], “a caliphate without a capital is meaningless, and
without controlling Damascus or Baghdad it is incomplete. Controlling all this
territory is useless without controlling capitals.”
OE Watch | December 2017

7

ISIS FALLOUT
ISIS Propaganda in Congo Backfires
OE Watch Commentary: In early October, Islamic State of Syria and Iraq (ISIS)
social media channels featured a video showing an ISIS fighter claiming to be in Congo
with around 10 armed and uniformed Congolese beside him, including what appear to be
several children. The main message of the video, which circulated on Congolese social
media networks, was to call upon Muslims in Congo to fight for a “Caliphate.” This
marked the first time that an ISIS video featured alleged Congolese jihadists.
According to the excerpted French language article from digitalcongo.net, the video has
attracted the attention of the ‘Islamic Community in the Democratic Republic of Congo’
(COMICO). COMICO responded to the video with a statement distancing itself from the
idea of a “Caliphate” or any other actions that could be destabilizing to Congo. According
to the article, the Secretary General of COMICO also urged the Congolese government
to reestablish state authority in parts of the country where state presence is lacking and
various militants are active. According to the Secretary General, those are the areas where
ISIS could operate and recruit youths. The Secretary General also urged the imams at
mosques and madrassas in Congo to preach what he called ‘authentic Islam,’ as opposed
to what ISIS preaches. Finally, the Secretary General urged greater coordination between
the government and COMICO on matters of extremism.
This video is likely not an indication of any substantive ISIS presence in Congo (beyond
the fighters in the video); it also does not suggest that there is an imminent security threat
in Congo. On the contrary, COMICO’s reaction to the video showed it would not respond
lightly to the potential for ISIS to become another source of instability in the country.
From the perspective of countering extremist ideology, this can be considered a positive
and important development for Congo. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “La Comico rejette toute idée d’un Etat
islamique en Rdc (Comico rejects any idea of
an Islamic State in the DRC),” digitalcongo.net,
20 October 2017. https://www.digitalcongo.net/
article/59e9fec76e466c000497ed6f
A statement was made during a press briefing
held at the headquarters of Comico following the
circulation in recent days on social networks of a
video attributed to Islamist jihadists addressing
a fanatical crowd and calling for the creation of
a caliphate in the DRC. The Islamic Community
in the Democratic Republic of Congo (COMICO)
seriously declared its distance from the idea of
an Islamic state or caliphate in the DRC and
warned anyone against calling for conducting
terrorism as a way to destabilize the country. On
this occasion, the Secretary General of Comico,
Idriss Katanga, called on Congolese Muslims
and especially imams in charge of mosques and
madrasas to preach and teach authentic Islam.
He has also urged the public authorities to act
urgently in restoring the authority of the state in
the troubled parts of the Republic.

“Comico has seriously declared its distance from the idea of an Islamic State or caliphate in the DRC.”

Screenshot of Video Claiming ISIS Presence in Congo.

Source: ISIS Media via Tom Feneux Twitter Feed, https://twitter.com/tomfeneux/status/919602825159733248, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

8

ISIS FALLOUT
Uncertainty over ISIS Attack Claim in Kyrgyzstan
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 October, the Russian-language Kyrgyz website kloop.kg reported in the excerpted article that the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) claimed an attack in Bishkek that killed a Kyrgyz policeman. According to the article, this was the first ISIS
attack claim in Kyrgyzstan. However, it was unclear weather the attacker who killed the police officer, which was recorded on a security
camera near a police station, was a member of ISIS or directed by ISIS. ISIS itself did not release a video of the stabbing but only a written
statement on social media claiming the attack. If ISIS had shown its own footage of the attack it would provide a much stronger indication that
the attacker had ties to ISIS and that the group was not opportunistically claiming the attack. In the absence of any proof from ISIS that its
members were watching and filming or otherwise in contact with the attacker, the
police in Kyrgyzstan are continuing the investigation but not acknowledging any
broader ISIS presence in Kyrgyzstan.
According to the article, the police have located the suspect but his personal
details did not immediately show evidence of ties to ISIS. The suspect also had
no known ties abroad. The police officer also was in the wrong place at the wrong
time; there was no reason for that officer to be targeted except that he was alone
outside the police station, which made him a vulnerable target. Knife wounds
killed him on the spot.
The stabbing comes one year after militants affiliated with al-Qaeda in Syria
carried out a suicide (car bombing) attack against the Chinese embassy in Bishkek.
It also comes at a time when ISIS is losing territory in Syria and Iraq, and amid
concern about the potential exodus of Central Asian fighters from the Middle
East. Although the evidence that has been released by the Kyrgyz police does
not indicate a specific threat to the country from the group, ISIS’s claim- whether
true or not- shows that it is paying attention to Kyrgyzstan. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

Kyrgyzstan 1996 CIA map.

Source: CIA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kyrgyzstan_1996_CIA_map.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: “ИГИЛ взяло ответственность за убийство милиционера в Бишкеке (ISIS takes responsibility for the killing of a policeman in
Bishkek),” kloop.kg, 28 October 2017. https://kloop.kg/blog/2017/10/28/smi-igil-vzyalo-otvetstvennost-za-ubijstvo-militsionera-v-bishkeke/
The media reported that Islamic State militants have committed their first attack on the territory of Kyrgyzstan. The terrorists took
responsibility for the recent killing of a policeman in the center of Bishkek. The press service of the Ministry of Internal Affairs has stated
that the information from ISIS is being watched. Meanwhile the personal data of the suspect and his connection with the terrorists of ISIS are
unknown. The dead policeman was a senior lieutenant, and he was 25 years old. On the day of the murder, he was going on vacation because
he planned to take in part a wedding. The investigation is now underway.

“The media has reported that Islamic State militants have committed their first attack on the territory of
Kyrgyzstan.”

Bishkek’s central Ala Too Square (2007).

Source: By Vmenkov (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:E7903-Bishkek-Ala-Too-Square.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0 .

OE Watch | December 2017

9

ISIS FALLOUT
Russian Security Concerns about ISIS in Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: When the Warsaw Pact collapsed, the Soviet Union lost its Western buffer zone. When the Soviet Union collapsed,
Russia lost its southern buffer zone. The second Russian war in Chechnya highlighted the dramatic change within the Chechen cause as the
Chechen resistance split from an independence movement to separate from Russia to support and further the spread of radical international
Sunni extremism. Russia is very concerned about her southern border. During the early days of Operation Enduring Freedom, Russia
supported the US and NATO presence in Afghanistan as a force to bring stability to the region. This stability failed to materialize. Now, as
the accompanying article suggests, Russia views the US presence as a destabilizing factor and is looking for other paths to stability. Russia is
working toward repairing and improving relations with Central Asia, Iran and Pakistan.
The accompanying passage from Russia’s Nezavisimaya Gazeta discusses Russia’s specific concerns regarding its southern border. With
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) getting pushed back in the Middle East, Russian officials note the possibility that ISIS militants may
relocate to Afghanistan. According to the author, this may “give Moscow the pretext to step up its military presence in those former Soviet
states bordering Afghanistan.” Accordingly, he claims that “in near future, it may be possible to observe the reinforcement of Russia’s positions
in the Central Asian region.” End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Statements about jihadists “moving” into another region give Moscow the pretext to step up its military
presence in those former Soviet states bordering Afghanistan. ...in the near future it may be possible to
observe the reinforcement of Russia’s positions in the Central Asian region [through the] Central Military
District.”

Panj river on the border between Afghanistan and Tajikistan.

Source: By Khwahan (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABeautiful_view_of_Panj_river%2C_of_the_border_between_Afghanistan_and_Tajikistan_the_in_Shughnon-shughnan_region.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2017

10

ISIS FALLOUT
Continued: Russian Security Concerns about ISIS
in Afghanistan
Source: Igor Subbotin, “Афганское притяжение России. Почему Москва хочет укрепить свое положение в Центральной Азии (Russia’s
Afghan Attraction. Why Moscow Wants To Strengthen Its Position in Central Asia),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 16 October 2017. http://www.
ng.ru/dipkurer/2017-10-16/10_7095_afgan.html
Most of all, Russia is concerned with strengthening Central Asia against the Islamic State (ISIS)….The Defense Ministry leadership asserts
that ISIS is looking for a new region for habitation after suffering heavy losses in Syria and Iraq. “One of them is Afghanistan,” said Russian
Deputy Defense Minister Alexsandr Fomin, who echoed his boss’s remarks in Dushanbe. The supposed transit of jihadists from Syria
and Iraq to the Islamic Republic [of Afghanistan] was discussed by Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)…at a meeting of the SCOAfghanistan Contact Group, which was held in Moscow… The aspects of the Afghan crisis were discussed by deputy foreign ministers.
While the existence of ISIS cells in Central Asia is certain, the question remains whether Syrian and Iraqi militants of the self-proclaimed
“caliphate” could relocate to Afghanistan….Statements about jihadists “moving” into another region give Moscow the pretext to step up its
military presence in those former Soviet states bordering Afghanistan. Given Shoigu’s proposals, in the near future it may be possible to
observe the reinforcement of Russia’s positions in the Central Asian region [through the] Central Military District.
“The dynamics of the development of the Afghan crisis have caused Russia to consider military approaches, along with diplomatic measures,
to tackling the problems surrounding the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan….Following a meeting with his Tajik counterpart, Russian Defense
Minister Sergey Shoigu said that the situation in Afghanistan “is not changing for the better” and suggested that Dushanbe take more
interest in a plan to use the combined troops of Russia and Tajikistan. In the opinion of the Russian Defense Minister, such steps would help
“guarantee that the tasks of ensuring security in the region are fulfilled.”
The Afghanistan strategy announced by US President Donald Trump, which provides for a larger US contingent and increased pressure on
Pakistan, may have acted as a catalyst. “As long as the United States remains in Afghanistan, Moscow will be concerned about Washington
having long-term ambitions to develop … an approach to Eurasia that could pose threats to Russia, for example from Central Asia,” Jeffrey
Mankoff, deputy director and senior fellow with the Russia and Eurasia program of the Center for Strategic and International Studies…
told Nezavisimaya Gazeta. “And, of course, neither the United States nor Russia wants Afghanistan to return to the state it was in prior to
September 2001, when radical rulers and civil war turned the country into a magnet for jihadists from around the world.”
Russia genuinely has cause for concern, given that… the Pentagon plans to complete the Afghan military’s “switch” from Russian Mi-17
helicopters to American UH-60 Black Hawks within three to five years…. “Helicopters, tanks, and weapons are a reminder that the Soviet
Union once made a contribution to Afghanistan,” Omar Nessar, director of the Center for Contemporary Afghan Studies, told Nezavisimaya
Gazeta. “The full switch of the Afghan military and law-enforcement structures to US arms primarily suggests that this memory will no
longer be there….”
Zamir Kabulov, the Russian President’s Special Representative for Afghanistan, called on the United States to withdraw from the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan as its actions only strengthen the instability factor. Russia had previously avoided such strong statements... It is
now working with the region in an attempt to iron out differences between key players. It was at Russia’s initiative that, after a hiatus of
almost eight years, a meeting of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group was held in Moscow with the participation of the organization’s two
new members, India and Pakistan. “Russia is trying to unite the region,” Nessar stated... “Moscow and probably Beijing realize that disunity
makes the region weaker….”
Russia and the United States have not completely severed their contacts. On the sidelines of the UN General Assembly, Kabulov and his US
counterpart, Alice Wells met. The Russian President’s Special Representative had a positive assessment of the meeting, but warned against
drawing premature conclusions about progress between the two countries. Allegations by the White House that Russia has been arming the
Taliban…have significantly complicated the Russian-American dialogue….
Moscow also disapproves of Washington’s intention to put pressure on Pakistan, which the international community suspects of harboring
militants who conduct operations on Afghan territory….Kabulov stressed that…any military pressure on that country could prove another
destabilizing factor... Pakistan’s military took part in a two-week Druzhba-2017 [Friendship-2017] exercise in Karachayevo-Cherkesiya at
the end of September… Pakistan’s Ministry of Defense explained that the maneuvers were aimed at strengthening military ties and sharing
the experience needed to conduct counterterrorism operations. The regional approach that Russia has been practicing seems…to be the most
promising one…. Moscow could take part in the process of Afghan reconciliation as well. “The best way to regain influence in Afghanistan is
to act as a mediator in some political agreement between the warring parties, to offer to play a role in monitoring compliance with the deal,
and then to provide assistance with the reconstruction of the post-war Afghan Government,” Mankoff said. “This approach does not seem
realistic, but if Russia can play a constructive role in ending the conflict in Afghanistan (as well as Syria), I do not think the United States
and other allies will stand in its way.” However, for the time being, Russia has to work exclusively with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan’s
neighbors.

OE Watch | December 2017

11

ISIS FALLOUT
ISIS Video Claims Attack on Syrian Weapons Depot
OE Watch Commentary: In October, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) released a
video through its media wing, the Amaq News Agency, showing an improvised drone dropping
two bombs over a stadium in Deir Ez Zor, Syria. According to Euronews-Farsi, the Syrian
army used the stadium to store weapons and other armaments.
The video is posted on the Al-Ansar site, which is an ISIS affiliate. The video—which is
edited for propaganda purposes—begins with a caption, “Footage of Deir Ez Zor, Syrian
weapons destruction.” According to the site, the stadium destruction is a “victory” for ISIS.
In the first few seconds of the nearly three-minute video, drone footage shows an improvised
bomb dropping over the stadium, which sets off the first wave of explosions. Nearly fifty
seconds later, a second bomb is dropped. The remainder of the video shows footage from
presumably nearby Syrian towns. Men can be heard praising the bombings as they watch the
blaze from the explosions. The video ends with a drone flying over the devastation. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bunker/Keshavarz)

Source: Hamleh Daesh ba pahbad be
estadium Deir Ez Zor: En hedam tajhee
zat artesh-e Sooreye (Drone attack by the
Islamic State in stadium in Deir Ez Zor:
Attack against Syrian Army),” EuronewsFarsi, 24 October 2017. http://fa.
euronews.com/2017/10/25/isis-dronebombs-syrian-government-munitionswarehouse-in-stadium-near-deir
“In this video, drone footage shows two
bombs dropping in a stadium where the
Syrian army was storing its weapons.”

Screenshots From Video of Alleged ISIS Drone Strike.

Source: Al-Ansar News, https://alansar.info/?video=‫ةلاكو‬-‫قامعأ‬-‫ةفصاق‬-‫ةلودلل‬-‫ةيمالسإلا‬-‫دت‬

OE Watch | December 2017

12

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Hamas Rejoins the Resistance Axis
OE Watch Commentary: In early 2012, Hamas broke ties with the
Syrian government and threw in its lot with Syria’s rebels and their
backers. Hamas’s “external leadership” moved from Damascus to Doha
and for the next several years shuttled between there and Istanbul.
The ascent of the emerging Qatari-Turkish “Muslim Brotherhood
Axis,” which Hamas had joined, came to an abrupt halt with the
overthrow of Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi in the summer
of 2013. This new bloc’s regional influence declined, and by the
summer of 2017, Hamas’s external leadership had been expelled
from Doha following Qatar’s spat with its Gulf neighbors. Turkey,
meanwhile, was scrambling to contain Kurdish secessionism and
spillover from Iraq and Syria.
According to Arabic-language media reports, in October
2017 Hamas rejoined the “Resistance Axis,” the Iranian-led de
facto alliance that also includes Syrian loyalist forces, Lebanese
Hizbullah, Iraq’s Popular Mobilization Forces, and Yemen’s Huthi
Movement. According to the first accompanying passage, Iran is
seeking to formalize the alliance by deepening military and political
coordination among its members. Published in the Palestinian daily
al-Quds, the article claims that “Iran wants to build the axis on new
foundations, relying on unified decision-making on some political
issues, regarding Israel for instance, as well as decisions of war and
peace. These include the potential of an escalation on the ground
against the [Israeli] occupation on multiple fronts.” The article adds
that Hamas’s position on this reported plan to centralize decisionmaking is unclear.
A key figure in Hamas’s rapprochement with Iran is Saleh alArouri, who was elected as the party bureau’s deputy leader in
early October. Al-Arouri played a founding role in the Izz al-Din
al-Qassam Brigades, Hamas’s military wing, and spent over a
dozen years in Israeli jails. In the years following the party’s split
with Damascus, he shuttled between Qatar and Turkey. In June
2017, he and other Hamas officials were forced out of Doha; alArouri resettled in Beirut. Following his first formal visit to Tehran
in late October, he returned to Beirut’s southern suburbs and
met with Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah, in what the second
accompanying excerpt calls a key milestone in Hamas’s return to the
Resistance Axis.
Hamas returns to the Iranian fold in a position of relative strength,
having recently agreed to an Egyptian-brokered reconciliation
agreement with its rival Fatah. The reestablishment of Hamas-Iran
ties may not sit well in Cairo, but the Egyptian government’s strategic
priority on its eastern flank is preventing the reconciliation deal from
collapsing. Thus, according to the second passage, from the proHizbullah Lebanese newspaper al-Akhbar, Egypt is unlikely to take
any steps that prevent Hamas’s return to the Resistance Axis. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Hizbullah and Iran want to revive the so-called
‘Resistance Axis’ following the Syrian crisis.”
Source:
‫هل يحتاج الجيش املصري إلى الرافال وامليسترال والغواصات؟‬
“Source Tells al-Quds: al-Aruri and Nasrallah Meeting Succeeded in
Mending Hamas and [Islamic] Jihad Ties with Iran,” al-Quds, 2
November 2017. http://www.alquds.com/
articles/1509611718867356300/
Al-Arouri is considered one of the most pro-Iran, pro-Syria and
pro-Hizbullah figures [in Hamas]. He supported restoring relations
with this axis following their major disagreements due to the Syrian
crisis in 2011… “Over the past two years, Hizbullah has redoubled
its efforts to bring Iran and Hamas’s viewpoints closer together”…
“Hizbullah and Iran want to revive the so-called ‘Resistance Axis’
following the Syrian crisis. Iran wants to build the axis on new
foundations, relying on unified decision-making on some political
issues, vis-a-vis Israel for instance, as well as decisions of war and
peace. These include the potential of an escalation on the ground
against the [Israeli] occupation on multiple fronts. Hamas’s view on
this is unclear”… These efforts come as Hizbullah continues to play
an important role in mending relations between the Islamic Jihad
Movement and Iran. Another source discussed differences between
the leaders of Islamic Jihad and Iran after the latter sought to
intervene in the movement’s internal affairs and attempted to impose
people in specific positions as well as decisions, something that was
rejected by the movement. The source pointed to ongoing discussions
sponsored by Hizbullah in order to bridge the differences…
Source:
‫حماس ومحور املقاومة منه بدأت وإليه تعود‬
“Hamas and the Resistance Axis: Where it Began, Whence it
Returns,” al-Akhbar, 2 November 2017. http://al-akhbar.com/
node/285764
The 44th Anniversary of the October 1973 war coincided with the
Egyptian military penetrating further into the national economy…
and the expansion of the activities of the Egyptian Military
Institutions to new sectors such as cinema. The conclusion of 84 new
projects overseen by the Armed Forces’ Engineering Authority was
also recently announced… there will be many new major projects this
year overseen by the armed forces, including the biggest conference
and expo center… Since Abdel Fattah Sisi became Egypt’s leader,
the military’s economic activities have expanded, especially in
infrastructure. Sisi has relied on the Armed Forces’ Engineering
Authority, one of the army’s branches, and tasked it with building the
new Suez Canal, hundreds of low-income homes, as well as laying
down the basic infrastructure for the new Egyptian capital, which the
Egyptian president announced would be built east of Cairo.

OE Watch | December 2017

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syria: Anti-Kurdish Militia Emerges in Manbij
OE Watch Commentary: An air of rebellion looms over Manbij, a key success story in the campaign to seize and hold territory taken from
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Since ISIS’s expulsion in late summer 2016, the city has been controlled by the “Manbij Military
Council,” an appendage of the US-backed Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). SDF leadership is dominated by Kurds, and Manbij falls within the
self-declared Syrian Kurdish proto-state of “Rojava.” Simmering discontent over Kurdish hegemony in this ethnically diverse area threatened to
boil over in early November, when protesters took to the streets and much of the city went on strike in response to reports of attempted forced
conscription by the SDF. The first accompanying passage, from the English-language news website Syria Direct, describes how several men
were detained for failing to enlist in the purportedly voluntary “self-defense forces.”
As happened throughout Syria in 2011, an armed faction has emerged alongside Manbij’s protesters. As with the “Free Syrian Army” (FSA)
units of yore, Manbij’s new armed group relies on the
… committed to the unity of Syrian territory... we have
Internet (particularly YouTube and Facebook) to make
its presence known, using social media to spread its
established the Qeyam Movement... to stand against the…
message and document its exploits. Calling itself the
secessionist, terrorist, treasonous parties.
‘Qeyam Movement,’ as of early November the
armed group has posted several videos of its hit
Source: “Tribal leaders halt conscription policy by Kurdish-led forces in Manbij,
squads assassinating SDF members. In contrast to
Tabqa,” Syria Direct, 8 November 2017. http://syriadirect.org/news/tribal-leaders-haltthe mostly Sunni FSA rebels, this group’s political
conscription-policy-by-kurdish-led-forces-in-manbij-tabqa/
platform is nationalist and anti-secessionist. As the
Kurdish forces in northern Syria are conscripting residents into “self-defense forces”
accompanying excerpt from its founding statement
despite local opposition… On Sunday, the US-backed Syrian Democratic Forces
explains, its goal is to “stand against the imperialist
arrested—and later released—at least half a dozen men for military service, said
secessionist policy” which “threatens the future of
Muadh, a Manbij resident who was detained… joining the Self-Defense Forces was
Syrian unity and of all Syrians.”
mandatory until local Arab tribes met with Kurdish officials in Manbij earlier this
week. After negotiations between the two groups, enlistment in the Self-Defense Forces
The ‘Qeyam Movement’ may be a local reaction
in Manbij became voluntary.
to Arab displacement and Kurdish dominance of
an ethnically diverse area that has long been ruled
Source: Qeyam Movement Twitter Feed (@syriafree1c), 15 October 2017. https://
by tribal consensus. Given the current state of
twitter.com/syriafree1c/status/919611098701160451
regional affairs, though, the group may be a proxy
After all the suffering experienced by all groups of the Syrian people throughout the
force. The third accompanying passage suggests
world and committed to the unity of Syrian territory and people both in and out of the
that Qeyam receives assistance if not direction
country, in all its components, religions and ethnicity, we have established the Qeyam
from Turkey, given its specific targeting of Kurdish
Movement, whose goals are to stand against the imperialist secessionist policy carried
forces. The fourth passage, citing unnamed
out by the secessionist, terrorist, treasonous parties. This project threatens the future of
“American analysts,” claims that the group is
Syrian unity and of all Syrians.
backed by Iran and/or the Syrian government and is
being used to reclaim SDF-held territory. End OE
Source:
‫ فصيل عسكري جديد تعرف على أهدافه‬..‫  حركة القيام‬
Watch Commentary (Winter)
“Qeyam Movement… Get to Know the New Military Faction’s Goals,” AnaPress, 18
October 2017. https://goo.gl/oUFKVv

“

”

According to political analyst Hossam Najjar… “Turkey pushed for this new formation
to fight the Kurds in these purported statelets. The Qeyam Movement’s nucleus are
Syrians who belonged to the Free Syrian Army in various parts of Syria and who were
gathered to fight the Kurds. Some of them are from the factions in Homs that resettled
in northern Syria. This movement aims to fight the Kurds as a Turkish proxy, but it has
the right to fight so long as Kurdish secessionists aim to establish their own state…
Source:
‫تساؤالت عن خطة واشنطن ملا بعد انهيار داعش‬
“Questions on Washington’s Post-ISIS Plans,” al-Rai, 20 October 2017. http://www.
alraimedia.com/ar/article/special-reports/2017/10/20/799213/nr/nc

Qeyam Movement Logo.

Source: Qeyam Movement YouTube Page, https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCySqcoB2FvCzM8849jp2WA, Public Domain.

Unconfirmed reports claim that the Kurdish administration is being implemented
on all resources in the territories it controls, and that it controls all administrative
functions, including imposing Kurdish language in schools even for Arab students…
In studying the Qeyam Movement’s announcements American specialists believe that
the group is mostly following Iran and al-Assad, despite suggestions that it is part of
the Syrian opposition by using the colors of the opposition… The American position
considers that Iran and al-Assad could seek to exploit Kurdish-Arab differences to
weaken the SDF and regain territories east of the Euphrates.
OE Watch | December 2017

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: UAVs Successfully Armed with Smart Bombs
OE Watch Commentary: On 31 October 2017, the Iranian military launched a multiday military exercise named “Devotees of Velayat Airspace-7” near Isfahan to showcase
its latest military capabilities. While the exercise included bombing runs with F-4, F-5, and
indigenous Saeqeh [“Lightening”] jets (derived from the F-5), the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC)-affiliated Tasnim News highlighted the use of smart bombs dropped
from unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).

Source: “Akhbar-e Razmayesh: Pehpahd-haye
Nahaja Rasman beh Bombha-ye Hoshmand
(News of the [Military] Exercise: UAVs now
Officially have Smart Bombs),” Tasnim News,
31 October 2017. https://goo.gl/6YQoGQ

The Iranian UAV program dates back to 1986 when the IRGC used crude drones to
survey Iraqi lines and fortifications during the Iran-Iraq War. However, in recent years, the
Iranian UAV program has advanced tremendously. There are credible reports of Iranian
UAVs in use in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Yemen. Until recently, Iran used UAVs either
for surveillance or as ‘kamikaze’ drones, circling over battlefields until their operators
identified a target of opportunity. While line-of-sight operation long limited drone
operations, on 1 April 2016, Iran announced that it had managed to tie UAVs to satellite
GPS guidance. Despite the claims of the excerpted article that Iran attached ‘smart bombs’
to the UAVs, it is unlikely that this is true. More likely, the Iranian military has successfully
wedded bombs onto its GPS-directed UAVs and created a sort of poor man’s smart bomb.
This provides Iran with an important new capability as Iranian missiles have never been
accurate enough to take out specific military targets: While Iran’s unprecedented 18 June
2017 missile strike on militants near Deir az-Zour, Syria, made headlines, for example,
there is no indication it actually hit its target.

According to a report from the defense
correspondent for Tasnim reporting from the
military exercises in Isfahan, for the first time,
army long-range UAVs capable of electronic
warfare and equipped with smart bombs took
the enemy by surprise and defeated the enemy.
General Masoud Rozkhoush, the spokesman for
the seventh airborne warfare command for the
“Devotees of Velayat Airspace-7” war games,
said with regard to the above announcement,
“At this stage of the exercise, teams specializing
in new fields of modern warfare in the exercise
area confronted the hypothetical enemy…

The excerpted article reports that the regular army (as opposed to the IRGC) was
controlling the advanced ‘smart bomb’ UAVs. Given that the IRGC usually takes custody of
Iran’s most advanced weapons systems, the army’s possession illustrates both how deeply
UAVs are now integrated into Iranian military operations and suggests that the IRGC may
have even more advanced platforms as it will always seek to maintain a qualitative military
edge over the regular Iranian army. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

UAVs Successfully Armed with Smart Bombs

He added that also present were heavy
Sukhoi-24 bombers and F-4 Phantoms equipped
to carry out precision bombing of pre-defined
points from high altitude at night and the F-4s
also used flares to illuminate the battle area and
destroy targets.

“UAVs…equipped with smart bombs took the enemy by surprise and defeated the enemy.”

An Iranian Karrar-4 UAV on display.

Source: Iran Ministry of Defense, http://mod.gov.ir/sites/default/files/images/40%20karar.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

15

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Possible to Expand Missile Range
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s ballistic missile arsenal has grown steadily since the
1980s when the Islamic Republic relied on Scud missiles in the so-called “war of the
cities” and both Iran and Iraq launched missiles at each other’s population centers. In 1998,
Iran publicly unveiled the Shahab-3 missile, a variant of the North Korean Nodong. Over
subsequent years, it has experimented with solid fuel and multi-stage rockets, leading to
the 2008 introduction of the Sajjil missile. In 2009, Iran launched a satellite from a multistage Safir rocket, in theory the same technology that would be necessary to build an
intercontinental ballistic missile.
While the Shahab-3B in theory could have a range of 2,500 kilometers [1553 miles]—
enough to put all of Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Israel in Iran’s crosshairs—there is little
evidence that Iran has yet built ballistic missiles that could hit targets further afield. Many
experts put Iran’s current missile range at no more than 2,000 kilometers [1242 miles].

Source: “Tavan Afzayesh Barad Moshakha-ye
Iran Vujud Darad (The Ability to Increase the
Range of Iran’s Missiles Exists),” Fars News
Agency, 31 October 2017. http://www.farsnews.
com/newstext.php?nn=13960809000633
General Mohammad Ali Jafari, commander of
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, at the
“World without Terror” conference held this
morning in Tehran, and speaking to a gathering
of reporters and in response to questions
with regard to the ability of IRGC missiles to
respond to threats, said:

“The range of our missiles is limited by the
If the comments of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) chief Mohammad Ali
policies set by the Supreme Leader [Ayatollah
Jafari excerpted here from the Fars News Agency are true, however, then the decision
Ali Khamenei], and that is 2,000 km. Although
to limit the range of Iran’s ballistic missile arsenal to just 2,000 kilometers is a decision
there is the capability to increase the range,
this level is currently enough because the
guided by policy rather than technical ability. Jafari suggests that Iran will expand the
Americans have enough bases within a radius
range of its arsenal in reaction to a potential US attack. Such a statement is reminiscent of
of 2,000 km around our country, and in the
the 2005 explanation by then-Secretary of the Supreme National Security Council Hassan
event of an attack [on us], they will receive a
Rouhani that a decision to limit Iran’s nuclear enrichment program was transactional and
response.
depended on European and US policies rather than any technical limitations. In particular,
Jafari says he objects to the ‘Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act’
which became public law (No. 115-44 ) on 2 August 2017. However, the fact that he made his statement almost two months after the passage of
new sanctions in the US Congress suggests his threat is rhetorical because, if it were real, Iran would already have taken the action he threatens.
Jafari also said that the range of their missiles is limited by the policies set by the Supreme Leader Ali Khamanei. If this is correct, the IRGC
may expand the range of its arsenal after Khamenei’s death and during the transition between supreme leaders. It would also suggest that a new
supreme leader will face no technical impediment to bolstering the range of Iran’s arsenal. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The range of our missiles is limited by the policies set by the Supreme Leader.”

An Iranian Khorramshahr ballistic missile with a 2,000-kilometer range.
Source: Tasnim News Agency, goo.gl/NeAwMu, CC BY 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

16

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: We Will Investigate Cyber Accusations if
‘Serious’
OE Watch Commentary: In June 2017, hackers attacked email accounts of
several dozen British members of parliament. According to both The Times
of London and The Guardian, British intelligence attributed the attacks to
hackers from inside the Islamic Republic of Iran. In the excerpted article from
the Iranian Labor News Agency, a semi-official Iranian news portal, Bahram
Ghassemi, the spokesman for the Iranian foreign ministry, suggests that the
reported incident was fabricated by “anti-Iranian circles,” adding that “the
American government or the Jerusalem occupying regime resort to a variety
of issues on a daily basis to incite public opinion against Iran.” However,
he also said that if true, the Iranian government would take it seriously and
investigate.
The foreign ministry’s castigation of the United States, Great Britain, and
Israel are gratuitous. Ghassemi’s statement acknowledging the possibility of
such hacking emanating from inside Iran also demonstrates how the Iranian
foreign ministry and, more broadly, the more public power centers inside the
Iranian system, may be blind to the activities of the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps’ (IRGC) Passive Defense Organization and other Iranian power
structures engaged in cyber activities and cyber warfare.
That blindness to the activities of the IRGC also means that neither the
Iranian foreign ministry nor, for that matter, the broader Iranian government,
have any power to investigate alleged Iranian hacking and cyber aggression,
no matter what proof foreign governments might offer. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Pasekh-e Ghassemi beh Ada’ye Rezhim Sihonisti,
Britania, va Amerika darbarayeh Hamlat-i Siberi Iran (The
Answer of Ghassemi to the Accusations by the Zionist
Regime, Great Britain, and the United States about Iranian
Cyber Attacks),” Iranian Labor New Agency, 3 November
2017. https://goo.gl/pCSStA
Accusations about Iranian Cyber Attacks
Bahram Ghassemi, in a conversation with the political
correspondent of the Iranian Labor News Agency, in
response to claims by the authorities of the Zionist regime,
Great Britain, and America with regard to Iranian cyberattacks, said, “We should not be surprised if the regime
occupying Jerusalem and America make these claims which,
without doubt, are the continuation of past hatred against
the state and nation of Iran.” He stated that he didn’t believe
the accusations and hatred, and said, “The issue that has
been brought up in Britain is related to the news circulated
by anti-Iranian circles. If such an issue is serious, Iran
will certainly pursue the matter and will investigate it in
different ways, but we won’t be surprised if the American
government or the Jerusalem occupying regime resort to
a variety of issues on a daily basis to incite public opinion
against Iran.”

“If accusations [of a cyber attack] are serious, Iran will certainly pursue the matter.”

The Parliament of the United Kingdom, allegedly the site of an Iranian cyber attack.

Source: By Maurice from Zoetermeer, Netherlands (The British Parliament and Big Ben) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABritish_Houses_of_Parliament.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

17

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Mega Project: New Istanbul Airport to be
World’s Largest Hub
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey is building the airport of the future: a massive hub
with six runways, a huge air traffic control tower, the world’s largest duty-free and the
capacity to handle over 200 million passengers a year upon its eventual completion.
The project, which is currently called ‘Istanbul New Airport,’ is envisioned to be the
world’s largest airport by 2023 and the world’s busiest airport by passenger numbers.
Recently, Turkish officials announced that the construction of the airport was
approximately 70% complete; and that the first phase would be opened on 29 October
2018, with all six runways expected to be complete by 2028. This project will impact
not only the Turkish aviation sector but regional and international travel and aviation
routes. The accompanying passages from the Turkish press provide important details
about the mega project.
The construction of the airport is planned in four phases. When the first phase is
complete and operational in October of next year, it will have the capacity to move 90
million passengers per year. Construction is moving ahead at full speed, and when
fully complete, the mega airport will have multiple hotels, a 70,000 vehicle parking
capacity, a fire station and other support facilities. As the first passage notes, the new
airport is also noteworthy for the 19,000 acres of land that it occupies. The article
claims that this is over three times the size of the largest airport in the world in terms
of land mass, which is the Beijing Airport, at 5750 acres. As the second accompanying
passage notes, the airport will be named after Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan, and will replace Istanbul Atatürk Airport, which is expected to close in 2018.

Location of the Istanbul International Airport (under
construction).

Source: By RömertOpenStreetMap contributors (Own work, based on OpenStreetMapopenstreetmap.org)
via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AIstanbul_International_Airport_
Location_Map_(English).png, CC BY SA 1.0, 2.0, 3.0

Located on the Black Sea coast on the European side of Istanbul, the airport will be 22 miles outside the city and serve the city with rail,
metro and bus links. If the ‘Istanbul New Airport’ is actually able to accommodate 200 million passengers a year on its eventual completion,
it would make it the world’s busiest airport by passenger traffic. It would surpass Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport, which,
according to the Airport Council International, handled 101 million passengers in 2015, when it became the first airport to break the 100
million passenger threshold. To put this in context, the Dubai International Airport handled 78 million passengers in that same year, while
Heathrow pushed through 75 million travelers. As the first passage notes, this will make Turkey an important aviation hub for Africa, Asia,
Europe and the Middle East. In addition, the airport will become the main base of Turkish Airlines, the national flag carrier airline of Turkey.
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)
Source: “İstanbul Yeni Havalimanı’nın yüzde 71’i tamamlandı! İşte yeni görüntüler (71
Percent of the Istanbul New Airport has been completed! Here are some new images),”
Haberturk.com, 6 October 2017. http://www.haberturk.com/ekonomi/is-yasam/
haber/1306409-ucuncu-havalimaninda-son-durum-istanbul-yeni-havalimani/8
“The New Airport” whose first phase is set to open on 29 October 2018, and whose
construction is moving forward at full speed, is 71% complete...
The Istanbul New Airport is planned to be one of the largest airports in the world and is
expected to have the capacity to handle over 200 million passengers a year, when all its
phases are complete. The airport will have terminal buildings, multiple air traffic control
towers and six independent runways able to handle any airplane type, along with connecting
taxi routes...
The project also includes hotels, open and covered parking for 70,000 vehicles, a fire station
and other similar support facilities. The airport will be complete in four phases. The airport,
whose investment expenses are forecasted as 10 billion euros, is planned to have its first phase
completed at the end of 2018...
Prime Minister Yıldırım, who highlighted that the first phase of the airport, which is among the
world’s rare projects, will handle 90 million passengers, said “Even just the first phase [of the
project] is equivalent to the world’s largest airport, if not bigger. So, with the completion of this
airport, our country is becoming the aviation meeting point of Africa, Europe, the Middle East
and Asia, and the center of aviation. No doubt this will add a totally different dimension to the
region’s economy and the global economy”...
Istanbul New Airport is also noteworthy for the 7,694 hectare land that it occupies. Right now,
the largest airport [in terms of land] is the Beijing Airport, which is 2,330 hectares, so [the
Istanbul New Airport] will be over three times that. The Atlanta International Airport is 902
hectares, and London Heathrow is 227 hectares.

“...our country is becoming the...

center of aviation. No doubt this will
add a totally different dimension to
regional and global economy.”
- Turkish Prime Minister Binali Yıldırım
Source: “3. Havalimanının İsmi Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan Havalimanı Olacak! (The Third
Airport will be called Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
Airport,” Rayhaber.com, 21 September 2017.
http://www.rayhaber.com/2017/09/3havalimaninin-ismi-recep-tayyip-erdoganhavalimani-olacak/
Following the clarification of many questions
regarding the airport, its name has also been
clarified. Even though many different names
were considered, the Transportation, Maritime
and Communication Minister Lütfi Elvan gave
the answer to the question surrounding the
name of the airport. He confirmed the claims
that the airport would be named after the 12th
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and declared
that the third airport would be called Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan Airport.
OE Watch | December 2017

18

AFRICA
The Congo’s Other Conflict-Ridden Area
OE Watch Commentary: The Greater Kasai Region has
dominated most of the news coming out of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC) recently. Interethnic conflict
in the south-central portion of the DRC has pushed some
3.2 million people onto the brink of starvation. However,
while much of the international focus has been on how to
alleviate that suffering, another region is also seeing escalating
violence. As the accompanying article describes, Eastern
Congo, in particular the provinces of North and South Kivu,
are the sites of stepped-up attacks from armed opposition
groups angry that President Joseph Kabila clings to power
even though he was supposed to step down in December 2016
when his second and final term expired.
The eastern part of the DRC has long been a source of
tension and conflict. Much of the country’s two civil wars
were fought there, and dozens of small, armed groups, known
as Mai Mai, who claim to be local self-defense militias, call
the area home. During the last few months, two insurgencies
- one in South Kivu and the other in North Kivu – both with
broad support, have emerged with the aim of toppling the
recalcitrant President.

Small, armed rebel groups in the eastern Congo known as Mai Mai.

Source: Matchbox Media Collective/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/80073447@N02/9897416936/in/gallery-131158262@N04-72157661064828240/, CC
BY-NC-SA 2.0.

“While attention has focused on the raging conflict and
humanitarian crisis in Kasai in the southern Democratic
Republic of Congo, armed opposition groups in the east of
the country have stepped up attacks and are threatening
to wage all-out war.”

This past June in South Kivu the National People’s Coalition
for the Sovereignty of Congo (CNSPC), led by former
national army ally William Yakutumba, began attacking army
positions. Although it is uncertain how many fighters are under
Yakutumba’s command, with estimates ranging from under 1,000 to 10,000, he has successfully driven the military out of large areas. He has
also resisted some counterattacks, though at least once he was beaten back by UN peacekeepers when his fighters attacked a town. His future
plans remain unknown as he has not been heard from for a while. There is doubt, however, that he could presently overthrow Kabila, especially
since many of his fighters, as the article describes, are motivated not by the politics in distant Kinshasa but instead interethnic rivalries and
their own chronic marginalization.

This past June also saw the National Movement of Revolutionaries (MNR) in North Kivu become active as it began to attack villages. Their
attacks suggest that this group is larger and more powerful than the local Mai Mai. Typically, when the local Mai Mai launch an attack they can
resist army firepower for 30 to 40 minutes; the MNR has resisted up to three hours. Additionally, it has been responsible for several attacks in a
month, leading some to believe they have a supply of heavy weapons and ammunition. Others are not so sure of their intent or capabilities and
claim they are just bandits. As often happens in news from remote parts of the DRC, it is difficult to know whether they are a powerful new
revolutionary movement or a group of bandits- or both.
The insecurity in both Kivus has led to displacement of more than 23,000 people and a tremendous decrease in farm output. Moreover,
with less development in the region because of wary foreign investors, construction of a hydroelectric dam has been delayed. Thus, while the
humanitarian disaster in the country’s Greater Kasai Region is drawing much of the international focus, concerns regarding the deteriorating
situation in the eastern part of the country are quite warranted, as the article’s author explains. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Claude Sengenya, “Rebellion fears grow in eastern Congo,” IRIN, 31 October 2017. http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2017/10/31/
rebellion-fears-grow-eastern-congo
While attention has focused on the raging conflict and humanitarian crisis in Kasai in the southern Democratic Republic of Congo, armed
opposition groups in the east of the country have stepped up attacks and are threatening to wage all-out war.
For Rukumbuzi, youths recruited by CNSPC [National People’s Coalition for the Sovereignty of Congo] are also more likely to be motivated
by chronic marginalisation and historic inter-ethnic rivalries than by any preoccupation with who is in power in distant Kinshasa.
When the local Mai-Mai launch attacks, “they only resist the army’s firepower for 30 or 40 minutes. What we are seeing today is that the
alleged Mai-Mai are resisting for one or two or three hours and plan attacks on three, four, or five locations within a month. This suggests a
supply of munitions and heavy weapons.”
These attacks have led more than 81,000 commercial farmers to abandon their fields and to a total revenue loss of some $1.9 billion over
three agricultural seasons, according to the Congolese League of Women Peasant Organisations (LOFEPACO).
OE Watch | December 2017

19

AFRICA
Mozambique’s First Islamist Attack Against the State
OE Watch Commentary: Until 5 October 2017, Mozambique,
with a Muslim population of approximately 18% - the
overwhelming majority of them Sufi, a mystical sect opposed by
scripturalist Muslims such as the Wahhabis – had not experienced
a terrorist attack. On that day, according to the accompanying
article, a predawn raid by 30 men on three police stations in
the small town of Mocimboa da Praia left two policemen dead,
although a different report claims the two fatalities were security
guards, and occurred when the men robbed a bank. The attackers
told the locals that their fight was not with them but with the state
and the police, as they stole weapons and occupied the town.
They explained that they rejected state health, state education, and
paying taxes. Swift responses to the raid by security forces from
other districts resulted in a gun battle that left at least 14 people
dead.

“The government must devise a careful and
well-thought response to this new Islamist threat.
Downplaying the affair as ‘banditry’ and dealing only
with the sect when it’s clear that there are broader
religious and social dynamics at play risks seeing the
problem reemerge elsewhere.”

The attackers appear to have been a group of young men who
had formed a sect in the same place they attacked, a town where
they control two mosques and want to implement Sharia [Islamic
law]. They call themselves “al-Shabaab.” However, initial reports
are that this was not a Somali al-Shabaab attack, nor was it
an externally driven international jihadi plot. Instead it was a
homegrown event, with all Mozambican attackers. In a country
proud of its inter-religious relations, this was shocking news.
Retrospection of what led to this violence has pointed to numerous
potential causes, requiring a bit of history to understand them.
Islam was present in the area before it became a Portuguese
colony. The colonists, favoring Catholicism, tried to squelch Islam,
but it continued to gain adherents. When the country gained
independence in 1975, it was estimated that 13% of the population
was Muslim. All religions were oppressed by the country’s
Marxist-Leninist government, but Islam was particularly under
siege as many of the state’s leaders did not understand it. When
Mozambique finally shifted to multiparty democracy, much of that
oppression was lifted, although tensions still periodically flared up,
leaving many Muslims to continue feeling marginalized.
African graduates from educational institutions in Saudi Arabia
returning to Mozambique in the 1970’s gained control of some of
the country’s mosques. The national Islamic Council was created
by Wahhabists, and in partnership with the authorities, grew in the
1980’s and 1990’s. Splinter organizations, especially in the north of
the country, would appear in later decades and soon controversies
emerged with regards to Sufi practices, dress codes, alcohol,
and education. However, despite these issues, there had been no
violence against the state.

Mozambique.

Source: OCHA via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mozambique_-_Location_Map_(2013)_-_MOZ_-_UNOCHA.svg, CC
BY 3.0.

Source: Eric Morier-Genoud, “Why Islamist attack demands a careful
response from Mozambique,” The Conversation (South Africa), 18
October 2017. https://theconversation.com/why-islamist-attackdemands-a-careful-response-from-mozambique-85504
The fact that this first Islamist attack was carried out by Mozambicans
makes the event no less shocking, particularly in a country proud of its
sound and relaxed inter-religious relations.
The government must devise a careful and well-thought response to this
new Islamist threat. Downplaying the affair as “banditry” and dealing
only with the sect when it’s clear that there are broader religious and
social dynamics at play risks seeing the problem reemerge elsewhere.
In turn, going for an all-out repression to eradicate the “Islamist
threat” could radicalize other Muslims and root the problem deeper and
more widely – think only of Boko Haram in West Africa in 2009.

One other factor must be noted. Despite a massive economic
boon related to the discovery of oil and gas, the Muslim-majority
northern area received little in the way of the billions of dollars
invested in offshore drilling, fueling anger among the impoverished populace. It is uncertain what finally ignited that powder keg, but as the
article states, there are deeper social and religious issues that must be addressed when dealing with the cause of this attack. A response such
as all-out repression of Muslims by the government could prove to be counterproductive. As the article points out, this “could radicalize other
Muslims and root the problem deeper and more widely – think only of Boko Haram in West Africa in 2009.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)
OE Watch | December 2017

20

AFRICA
Burundi Leaves International Criminal Court
OE Watch Commentary: Burundi, mired in protests and violence,
has withdrawn from the International Criminal Court (ICC), becoming
the first country to do so. As the accompanying article describes, last
year, South Africa, the Gambia (before President Yahya Jammeh was
ousted from office), and Burundi had all indicated their intention to
leave the ICC. However, South Africa and the Gambia withdrew their
request prior to the end of the one-year withdrawal process. Burundi
did not.
The withdrawal occurs as the country is spiraling deeper into the
crisis that began in April 2015 when President Pierre Nkurunziza,
constitutionally limited to two terms, declared he was seeking a third
one. A failed coup attempt followed shortly after. More recently his
cabinet’s attempt to change the country’s constitution (so that he could
stay in office until 2034) has aggravated the situation. In total, since
announcing his third term bid, hundreds have been killed, the
economy has become moribund, and 400,000 people have sought
refuge in neighboring countries. UN human rights investigators
have accused the Burundi National Intelligence Services, police
force, military, and members of Imbonerakure - the youth wing of
Nkurunziza’s ruling party - of forced disappearances, sexual violence
and a campaign of terror. The investigators’ report further designates
Nkurunziza as behind the big decisions, including those that resulted
in serious human rights abuses.
Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that President Nkurunziza
would want to withdraw from the ICC, the international tribunal
whose website says it “investigates and, where warranted, tries
individuals charged with the gravest crimes of concern to the
international community: genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.” The response from leaders in the international community
concerned with the protection of human rights has been extremely
negative, essentially declaring that he is doing this to shield himself
from the court’s prosecution.
Although Nkurunziza, whose history puts him at marked risk of
prosecution by the ICC, has strong personal reasons for his country
to leave the international tribunal, there is significant anti-ICC
sentiment in many African nations. The ICC is accused of bias as the
overwhelming majority of its investigations target those on the African
continent. Indeed, in February 2017 the African Union called on its
member states to withdraw en masse, a resolution that was not legally
binding and was opposed by some states.

President Pierre Nkurunziza of Burundi.

Source: Ilyas A. Abukar/AMISOM, https://goo.gl/VRoN8A, Public Domain.

Source: Timothy Jones, “Burundi becomes first country to leave
International Criminal Court,” Deutsche Welle, 27 October 2017.
http://www.dw.com/en/burundi-becomes-first-country-to-leaveinternational-criminal-court/a-41135062
The country notified former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
of its intent to leave the court on October 27, 2016, as one of three
countries — along with South Africa and The Gambia — to make
such moves last year. Both South Africa and The Gambia later took
back their withdrawals.
Burundi, a former German and Belgian colony, has been in a state
of deadly political turmoil since 2015, when protests broke out after
the ruling party announced that President Pierre Nkurunziza would
seek a third five-year term.
A UN commission of inquiry said last month that crimes against
humanity, including killings and sexual violence, were still being
committed in Burundi. The commission asked the ICC to open an
investigation as soon as possible.

It is unlikely that the small country of Burundi will change its mind
and rejoin the ICC as long as Nkurunziza is in power. With his control
of the security forces and a willingness to use them to violently silence
critics, he remains out of reach of both the ICC and many others who
don’t want to see the rise of another generation of African strongmen
who refuse to leave office and operate above the law. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“Burundi, a former German and Belgian colony,

has been in a state of deadly political turmoil since
2015, when protests broke out after the ruling party
announced that President Pierre Nkurunziza would
seek a third five-year term.”

CIA map of Burundi.

Source: CIA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:By-map.png, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

21

AFRICA
Somalia: Two Top Defense Officials Quit
OE Watch Commentary: The announcement could not have come at a
worse time. Both Defense Minister Abdirashid Abdullahi Mohamed and
Army Chief General Mohamed Ahmed Jimale resigned amidst stepped
up attacks by the al-Shabaab terrorist group against army bases in south
and central Somalia, and just prior to the massive truck bomb explosion
that took over 350 lives in Mogadishu. Defense Minister Abdirashid
Abdullahi Mohamed cited a lack of consultations on issues related to the
Defense Ministry as the reason for his departure. No reason was supplied
for Army Chief General Mohamed Ahmed Jimale’s resignation, though
there have been reports of a rivalry between the two men, as the brief
accompanying article details.
The resignations leave the nascent government with sudden and
unexpected vacancies in two of the most important security related jobs in
the country. Somali President Mohamed Abdullahi Farmajo has reportedly
nominated General Abdi Jama Hussein to fill the slot of Army Chief, and
it is likely there will also soon be a replacement for the departed Defense
Minister. However, any new individuals in these positions will still be on
the steep slope of a learning curve during a time when the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is handing off all of its peacekeeping
duties to Somali forces as it prepares to leave the country; the country is
teetering on the brink - if not already in - a devastating famine; and the
threat of al-Shabaab continues.

“Somali officials say the country’s defense

minister and army chief have resigned as the
al-Qaida-linked al-Shabab group steps up
attacks on army bases across south and central
Somalia.”
Source: Somalia’s Defense Minister and Army Chief resign,”
Shabelle Media Network (Somalia), 12 October 2017. http://
radioshabelle.com/somalias-defense-minister-army-chiefresign/
Somali officials say the country’s defense minister and army
chief have resigned as the al-Qaida-linked al-Shabab group
steps up attacks on army bases across south and central
Somalia.
There have been reports of a rivalry between the two outgoing
military leaders.
Somalia in recent weeks has seen an increase in attacks by alShabab extremists, who have overrun several army positions.

It is unknown if some of the conditions that led the previous two
individuals to resign have been repaired. Even with the Defense Minister
and Army Chief gone the problem of rivalry between the two offices could
continue. In a country with multiple clans and seemingly endless subclans,
rivalries are prevalent and persistent, as evidenced by the difficulty in
forming and maintaining a government.
There is hope that Somalia’s new president will be able to stabilize the
government and improve the quality and capabilities of the fledgling Somali
army. However, there is also concern that al-Shabaab will take advantage of
this transitional period of top Somali military leadership not only to launch
new attacks but also to recruit terrorists. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Somali Minister of Defense Abdirashid Abdullahi Mohamed, 12 April 2017.
Source: Ilyas Ahmed/AMISOM, https://www.flickr.com/photos/au_unistphotostream/33151876444, Public Domain.

Maj. Gen. Mohamed Ahmed Jimaale, the Chief of Somalia Defence Forces,
25 May 2017.
Source: Omar Abdisalan/AMISOM, https://www.flickr.com/photos/au_unistphotostream/34843412676, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

22

AFRICA
Somalia Reaches Out for Help in Fighting Al-Shabaab
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying article’s
headline states, in late October, Somalia’s President
Mohamed Abdullahi Farmajo visited Ethiopia to seek its
backing for a new offensive against al-Shabaab in Somalia.
Farmajo also visited other countries, including Uganda and
Djibouti, asking them to join the fight against the terrorist
group. So far, he has found receptive ears. With al-Shabaab
terrorists viewed as a threat not just to Somalia but to the
entire Horn of Africa, governments are looking for ways
to contain and eventually eliminate them. Shortly after
Farmajo’s visit, Ethiopia’s prime minister Hailemariam
Dessalegn affirmed that his country would continue both
its effort and solidarity with Somalia in the fight against alShabaab. Other countries soon followed.
The appeal for support comes against the backdrop of
several recent al-Shabaab attacks, including against the
African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali Armed Forces that have ended with numerous
soldiers from both services dead. Then there is the midOctober truck bombing in the capital, Mogadishu, which
killed over 350 people and injured 400. That attack’s
massive casualty numbers garnered international attention
and an increased awareness that, despite the setbacks
al-Shabaab has suffered in recent years at the hands of
AMISOM and Somali troops, including a loss of significant
amounts of territory it had occupied, the terrorist group is
still quite viable and deadly.
Somalia reaching out for help from its neighbors needs to
be placed in the context of AMISOM’s plans to draw down
its forces in 2018 and leave the country entirely in 2020. It
is a timetable nervously viewed by many who are unsure
that the Somali Armed Forces will be ready for a transition
that leaves them solely responsible for the country’s security.
The African Union wants AMISOM to conduct a final
push against al-Shabaab before it withdraws, weakening
the group such that it would not be a match for Somali
troops. In reaching out to nearby African countries for their
support in a new offensive against al-Shabaab, Somalia’s
president is trying to ensure that indeed the terrorist group
will not pose as grave a danger against his military as they
presently do. Whether through AMISOM, in conjunction
with AMISOM, or through other means, support from
other African countries in weakening al-Shabaab would be
most welcome by Somalia’s relatively young government.

Somali Map.

Source: CIA via wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somali_map.jpg, Public Domain.

“[Al-Shabaab] is not only a problem of Somalia but of the
region. This is why I have come here seeking for support of a
neighbouring country” Farmaajo told reporters…”
Source: “Somalia: Farmaajo in Ethiopia to Seek Backing in New Offensive On
Al-Shabaab,” Dalsan Radio (Somalia)/allAfrica.com, 23 October 2017. http://
allafrica.com/stories/201710260457.html
“The problem of Alshabaab is not only a problem of Somalia but of the region.
This is why I have come here seeking for support of a neighbouring country”
Farmaajo told reporters.
Ethiopia is a troop contributing country in the 22000 strong African Union
peacekeeping force.
Farmaajo next stop is Djibouti where he is expected to seek similar backing.

Even before the massive bombing in Mogadishu, there had been pressure from many quarters, both African and non-African, to extend
AMISOM’s mandate. It remains to be seen what the final word on that force, whose mandate has been extended in the past, will be. Meanwhile,
the reverberations from the truck bombs have strongly reminded African countries to realize the need for immediate concerted efforts against
al-Shabaab to prevent the same from happening on their soil. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | December 2017

23

AFRICA
Vigilantes to Combat Insurgencies?
OE Watch Commentary: Some African countries with
militaries too weak to combat insurgencies within their
borders have turned to vigilante groups for assistance. The
accompanying article claims that this can be a doubleedged sword. While many of these groups have mobilized
to protect their local communities and have an intimate
knowledge of both the local terrain and people that can
be extremely helpful, they also have a tendency to expand
their roles, commit serious human rights abuses, and
sometimes even challenge the state’s authority.
A review of several African vigilante groups by
the article provides keen insights into the potential
opportunities as well as costs associated with utilizing
them. Referencing an International Crisis Group report,
the article discusses the experiences and trajectories of
the Kamajors in Sierra Leone, the Zande Arrow Boys
in South Sudan, the Civilian Joint Task Force (CJTF)
in Nigeria, and the Teso Arrow Boys in Uganda, which
all contain important lessons. It claims that while some
stick to their original roles of community protection
and counterinsurgency, over time others morph into
ethnic militias, and perhaps ironically, insurgencies
themselves. To a large extent which direction a group
takes – remaining under or affiliated with the government
versus opposing it - is dependent on how the agendas
of local leaders actually align with those of the national
government. Having mutually beneficial objectives can
help keep vigilante groups from veering off track as their
leaders realize the benefits that will accrue to both them
and their people by adhering to the joint goals.
Contrasts among various vigilante groups helps
illustrate this point of mutual objectives, with the Arrow
Boys of Teso being a positive example. This group, which
battled the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in Uganda
and whose initial objective was to protect their local
communities, was successful in large measure because
the national government and the local Teso leaders agreed
on the Arrow Boys’ role and how they would work in
conjunction with the Ugandan army. Having strong local
and national political oversight along with local legitimacy
were additional factors in the group’s success.

In 2011 Arrow Boys in South Sudan, such as the ones pictured here, provided local protection
against the LRA.
Source: Guy Degen/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/fieldreports/with/5811950270/, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

Source: Ned Dalby, “Fighting African insurgencies: Are vigilantes the solution?”
African Arguments, 23 October 2017. http://africanarguments.org/2017/10/23/
fighting-african-insurgencies-are-vigilantes-the-solution/
Turning to non-state armed groups to combat insurgencies is a big risk. But
there are ways to limit the dangers.
Often lacking the resources to fight insurgents on their own, governments may
be tempted to subcontract certain security functions to vigilantes. Many of these
groups mobilise to protect their own communities, and their local knowledge and
community networks can make them more effective than state security forces.
Due to their local roots, vigilante groups enjoy greater legitimacy among their
communities and are familiar with the local language, geography and culture.
Early and close engagement with them can have positive outcomes and even
bolster state credibility in the long term.
Vigilante groups are also often guilty of committing egregious abuses, preying
on civilians and becoming involved in illicit activities. Here too, the government’s
policies to curb such tendencies are decisive.

“Turning to non-state armed groups to combat insurgencies is
a big risk. But there are ways to limit the dangers.”

When the LRA spread north, so did the Arrow Boys, and a related group was formed, the Zande Arrow Boys of South Sudan. However,
in contrast to Uganda working with its Arrow Boys, the South Sudan Arrow Boys group was first treated with neglect and then later outright
hostility by the government. As the fighters’ frustration mounted, they became increasingly autonomous in their relationship with the national
authorities and eventually many sided with the rebels during the civil war. Similarly, the case of the Kamajors fighting in Sierra Leone also
shows what can happen when a government exerts only weak control over vigilantes. Eventually the Kamajors came to view themselves as a
substitute for the basically defunct army and began brutally abusing civilians.
There are many other examples and lessons to be learned in the accompanying article regarding the use of vigilante groups to combat
insurgencies. However, the author sums up the dilemma of whether or not to use these non-state armed actors, describing them as possibly a
necessary evil, but one that needs to be limited in scope and finite in existence. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | December 2017

24

AFRICA
To Negotiate or Not with Mali’s Jihadists?
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2016, attacks by Malian jihadist groups
affiliated with al-Qaeda, such as Ansar al-Din and Macina Liberation Front
have began increasing in Mali. Malian religious and traditional leaders
have advised the government to negotiate with the jihadists. The excerpted
French-language article from maliweb.net discusses a regional forum in
central Mali where 500 participants reiterated their call to negotiate with
such groups, which are not signatories to the Algiers Agreement. The Algiers
Agreement of 2015 set out an agenda for political and security sector reforms
to devolve power and financial resources in a unified, secular Mali. However,
it was not recognized by these jihadist groups, a secular Tuareg militia, an
Arab separatist militia, and Tuareg ex-jihadist group.
The participants of the forum urged the government to do three things:
“the establishment of a dialogue with the non-signatory groups of the Algiers
agreement, control of sermons, and disarmament of militias.” The call to
control the sermons in mosques is meant to prevent religious leaders from
using their platforms to recruit and spread jihadist ideology. According to the
article, members of Ansar al-Din and Macina Liberation Front have trained
in terrorist camps and have been influenced by these sermons. The leader of
Macina Liberation Front, Hamadou Koufa, was a preacher before becoming
a jihadist leader. The 500 participants also urged for the disarmament of
militia groups in the country. However, the same hurdles to negotiations
that existed in 2016 still exist for upholding such recommendations. The
jihadists want France to end its operations in Mali; Mali’s president refuses
negotiations with the jihadists as a matter of principle. (Also see: “Mali’s
Dilemma over Dialogue with Insurgents,” OE Watch, September 2017) End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Retour de la paix et la sécurité au Centre et au Nord
: La discussion avec Iyad et Amadou Kouffa, un impératif
(Return of peace and security to the Center and to the North:
The discussion with Iyad and Amadou Kouffa, an imperative),”
maliweb.net, 8 November 2017. http://www.maliweb.net/
insecurite/retour-de-paix-securite-centre-nord-discussion-iyadamadou-kouffa-imperatif-2648172.html
Faced with the multiple attacks by the men of Hamadou
Kouffa and Iyad Ag Ghali in the center and the north of Mali,
the regional forum on the contribution of religious leaders
and traditional notables for the return of peace and security
held last weekend in Mopti recommended, among other things,
the establishment of a dialogue with the non-signatory groups
of the Algiers Agreement. According to the organizers, this
meeting of over 500 participants from all circles in the region
aimed to find ways and means to establish and maintain a
lasting peace in the region. At the end of the meeting, the
participants made several recommendations: the forum asked,
among others, for the establishment of a dialogue with the nonsignatory groups of the Algiers agreement, control of sermons,
and disarmament of militias.
The willingness to negotiate with the terrorist leaders,
including Iyag Ag Ghali and Hamadou Kouffa, is coming back
for the second time. The National Accord Conference held last
July had also requested the same.

“The willingness to negotiate with the terrorist leaders, including Iyag Ag Ghali and Hamadou Kouffa, is
coming back for the second time.”

Ansar Dine Rebels.

Source: Voice of America (VOA), https://www.voanews.com/a/mali_rebels_say_they_will_create_moderate_islamic_state/1120755.html, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

25

LATIN AMERICA
First Capital Command Evolves in Brazil and
South America
OE Watch Commentary: “Organized crime grows stronger where the state
is absent,” said Lincoln Gakiya, a São Paulo-based prosecutor and one of the
greatest authorities on organized crime in Brazil, at a recent press conference.
Mr. Gakiya was referring to the First Capital Command (Primeiro Commando
da Capital or PCC) - Brazil’s largest criminal organization. As the first
passage discusses, the group has been maintaining its operations in prisons
while consolidating control over organized crime and drug trafficking in São
Paulo (its principal operational base) and other areas throughout Brazil.
Although the PCC originated as a prison gang, it is now considered Brazil’s
most powerful criminal organization. However, what makes it truly unique is
that the group’s leadership is largely unknown to authorities. What is known
is that the PCC was originally founded as a self-protection gang within the
Brazilian prison system. It became more formalized in the wake of the
October 1992 massacre at the Carandiru prison in São Paulo, where Brazilian
security forces killed over 100 prisoners following a riot. Today, the PCC is
believed to have members in two thirds of the country. The group is also
thought to control drug trafficking routes between Brazil, Bolivia, Paraguay
and Colombia for shipment outside South America, making it a transnational
criminal group.
As the second passage discusses, Luiz Carlos da Rocha- a key leader within
the PCC- was arrested in July 2017 after evading arrest for 30 years. Referred
to by authorities as Cabeça Branca (Portuguese for White Head), da Rocha
lived in the shadows of the criminal community like a ghost and underwent
multiple surgeries to conceal his identity. His arrest is significant because
he “maintained a vast cocaine trafficking empire in South America.” His
shipments are thought to have been procured from neighboring countries to
include Bolivia, Peru and Colombia. Prior to his arrest, Luiz Carlos da Rocha
also served as a key cocaine supplier to criminal organizations within Brazil;
especially in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.
Furthermore, as the third passage discusses, the group claimed
responsibility for the largest heist ever reported in April 2017 when PCC
operatives armed with guns and hand grenades stole millions of dollars from
a security vault in Ciudad del Este, in Paraguay. Other signs that the group
has become transnational are its money laundering and weapons trafficking
activities in areas outside South America. In terms of strategy, the PCC is
actively looking to increase the volume of its cocaine shipments to foreign
markets while still maintaining a presence in Brazil. The group is also
actively recruiting FARC dissidents in its quest to further gain access to key
cocaine producers. The PCC may have started out as a prison gang, but open
source channels indicate that the group now maintains a significant power
base in Brazil and in other areas within South America. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“... the PCC now maintains widespread
operations in Sao Paulo and in other areas
throughout Brazil.”
Source: “O avanço do PCC (PCC Spreads),” Revista Isto É,
13 July 2017. https://istoe.com.br/o-avanco-do-pcc/
Brazil watched appalled at recent clips of intense violence
inside its prisons which was orchestrated by the PCC criminal
organization. However, this heinous violence was not the
only thing that shocked Brazil as following the aftermath of
the incident, PCC leader Marcos Willians Herbas Camacho,
alias Marcola (currently serving time in a maximum-security
prison) indicated that the PCC now maintains widespread
operations in Sao Paulo and in other areas throughout Brazil.
Source: “Tras 30 años, capturan a uno de los capos de las
drogas más buscados en Brasil (After 30 Years, Authorities
Arrested One of the Biggest Drug Lords in Brazil),” BBC
Mundo, 2 July 2017. http://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticiasamerica-latina-40472297
Brazilian Police arrested a renowned drug kingpin identified
as Luiz Carlos da Rocha, aka “Cabeça Branca” (White Head)
in July 2017. Prior to his arrest, this individual served as a
key leader within the PCC and maintained a vast cocaine
trafficking empire in South America. According to authorities,
Luiz Carlos underwent multiple plastic surgeries which helped
him evade authorities for more than 30 years.
Source: “La historia de la banda criminal que hizo el robo de
‘película’ en Paraguay (The Story of the Criminal Gangue
Responsible for the ‘Movie Scene’ Robbery in Paraguay),”
elsalvador.com, 25 April 2017. http://www.elsalvador.
com/noticias/internacional/341314/la-historia-de-la-bandacriminal-que-hizo-robo-de-pelicula-en-paraguay/
The First Capital Command (PCC) was responsible for the
robbery at the headquarters of Prosegur, Ciudad del Este, in
Paraguay. It is believed that the action was carried out by a
group of 30 to 50 PCC members who were armed with rifles,
grenades, and explosives. During the robbery, they used
explosives to penetrate the buildings’ façade which enabled
their entry and enabled the theft of six million dollars.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | December 2017

26

LATIN AMERICA
Coca Production Soars in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: Colombia is currently
seeing its highest coca production since 1994.
Soaring coca production is concerning as the
country is currently in the process of implementing
an important peace accord with the country’s
largest guerrilla organization – the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC, per its Spanish
acronym). A key part of the agreement stipulates
that the FARC will renounce drug trafficking and
work with the government to replace coca production
with alternative crops. However, the agreement has
ironically created an incentive for peasant farmers to
continue growing coca plants knowing they will later
be awarded subsidies if they agree to renounce this
activity and grow legitimate crops such as potatoes
and fruit instead. As the second passage discusses,
some experts say this is simply a misinterpretation of
a paragraph of the peace accord, which “talks about
the benefits that will be provided to those willing to
substitute coca cultivation for legal crop production.”

Erythroxylum coca, Erythroxylaceae, Coca, flower.

Source: JBy H. Zell (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Erythroxylum_coca_003.JPG, CC BY-SA 3.0.

In Putumayo, a department along Colombia’s border
... a principal concern is the... lack of specificity with regard
with Ecuador and a key coca production zone, farmers
said they would be willing to renounce drug production to how direct subsidies are going to work. There is also a lack
if the government provided a viable alternative for them
of clarity regarding investments that will need to be made by
to earn a living. Furthermore, peasants signed a pledge
to produce legal crops earlier this year, but many doubt
the government to implement crop substitution.
they can support their families on food crops alone. As
the third passage discusses, for many farmers, one of the biggest issues with switching from coca production to legitimate crops is the lack of
clarity provided by the government. In short, the idea to eradicate coca production by producing legal crops requires a solution for farmers who
are simply concerned with earning a living to support themselves and their families. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“

”

Source: “Se dispara siembra y producción de coca en
Colombia (Cultivation and Production of Coca Soar
in Colombia),” El Nuevo Herald, 14 July 2017. http://
www.elnuevoherald.com/noticias/mundo/americalatina/colombia-es/article161480183.html
In 2012, coca production was at its lowest level in the
past decade with 47,790 hectares utilized to cultivate
the plant. However, since 2013, production rates have
steadily soared in Colombia. At present, 63 percent of
all coca plants are grown in Nariño, Putumayo and
Norte de Santander.

Source: “¿Por qué se disparó la siembra de coca en Colombia? (Why the
Cultivation of Coca Plants in Colombia Soared),” El País, 23 July 2017.
http://www.elpais.com.co/colombia/por-que-se-disparo-la-siembra-de-coca-en.
html
Carlos Serrano, commander of Poseidon Task Force Against Drug Trafficking
- whose mission is to combat the FARC and drug trafficking activities
in the Department of Nariño – states that on the one hand, there was a
misrepresentation of paragraph 4 in the peace agreement which talks about
solutions to eradicating production of illicit drugs. This paragraph also talks
about the benefits that will be provided to those willing to substitute coca
cultivation for legal crop production.

Source: “Los problemas que enfrenta la sustitución de coca (The Problems Faced When Substituting Coca Crops),” El Tiempo, 10 May 2017.
http://www.eltiempo.com/datos/problemas-de-la-erradicacion-de-coca-en-colombia-85662
For the Fundación Ideas para la Paz (Ideas for Peace Foundation), a principal concern is the lack of balance in terms of commitment and a lack
of specificity with regard to how direct subsidies are going to work. There is also a lack of clarity regarding investments that will need to be made
by the government to implement crop substitution. Another concern is how the government will deal with those farmers who are not interested in
crop substitution and what the consequences will be for non-compliance.

OE Watch | December 2017

27

LATIN AMERICA
FARC and Colombian Government Squabble
over Peace Accords
OE Watch Commentary: Years of talks between the Colombian
government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)
leaders finally ended in December 2016 after the two parties reached
agreements on how the guerilla organization would demobilize under the
peace accords meant to end a 52-year armed conflict. But nearly a year
after the agreement’s inception, the FARC and the government continue to
squabble about expectations. The FARC argues that the government is not
holding up its end of the deal while the government claims that high level
drug traffickers are using the accords to be released from prison along with
thousands of other demobilized FARC members.
The first accompanying passage discusses the FARC’s complaints
that the government is not holding up its end of the deal in providing
billions of dollars promised for education, land reform, construction of
rural infrastructure, and guaranteed political representation over the next
decade. The FARC is particularly upset about education and infrastructure
because part of the demobilization deal dictated that members would
leave encampments and report to designated zones in areas throughout the
country. This is happening, but the FARC claims that the schools are not
fully functional in some zones and infrastructure has taken longer than
expected to build. This has led to further concerns that the funding to do
what was promised may not be available in the quantities as originally
promised.
On the opposite side, the government has lashed back at these complaints
stating that the FARC would not allow builders into the demobilization zones
before the peace talks concluded. The government is also less than pleased
with how long it is taking the group to hand over weapons and explosives.
However, these concerns took a back seat in September 2017 when the
government realized that the FARC peace accords are being exploited by
powerful drug lords looking to receive a virtual “get out of jail” free card,
as discussed in the second passage. This is likely because past mobilization
agreements in Colombia have been exploited by crime bosses in a similar
manner. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...former FARC leader Ivan Marquez said the
government has not followed through on promises of
food, clothing, money or housing.”

“... at least 25 drug traffickers appear on the
list of names of more than 3,800 prisoners
submitted to the government by the FARC [to
be released from prison]...”

Source: “¿Se está cumpliendo el acuerdo con las Farc? (Is the
Government Complying with FARC Peace Accords?),” La
Semana, 18 February 2017. http://www.semana.com/nacion/
articulo/se-esta-cumpliendo-el-acuerdo-con-las-farc/515855
In exchange for the rebels’ agreeing to lay down their
weapons, the government promised billions of dollars in aid and
education, land reform, rural infrastructure and guaranteed
political representation over the next decade. Santos also
committed to protecting the rebels from reprisals by rightwing paramilitary groups. However, former FARC leader Ivan
Marquez said the government has not followed through on
promises of food, clothing, money or housing. In many cases,
the government failed to build the tent cities in time for the
rebels’ arrival from their jungle and mountain hideouts, he said.
Source: “Así se han construido los listados de las Farc
(How the FARC has Compiled a List of Group Members),”
El Espectador, 17 September 2017. http://colombia2020.
elespectador.com/politica/asi-se-han-construido-los-listados-delas-farc
El Espectador reported that at least 25 drug traffickers
appear on the list of names of more than 3,800 prisoners
submitted to the government by the FARC. Under the terms of
the peace accord signed last year, confirmed FARC members
on the list are to be released from prison in order to join the
demobilization process. At least 5 foreigners were on the list
including a Mexican national who served as broker for the
Sinaloa Cartel and Los Zetas and two Italian nationals who
worked as intermediaries for the Italian Mafia.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | December 2017

28

LATIN AMERICA
FARC-Preferential Electoral Districts
OE Watch Commentary: One feature of the power-sharing
agreement reached by the Colombian administration of President Juan
Manuel Santos and the leaders of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC) is a guaranteed set of legislative seats for the FARC.
According to information in the accompanying references, 10 are to
be at-large, but 16 more are geographically representative. About 167
of Colombia’s approximately 1120 county-level administrative entities
will be the loci of the special electoral districting. In these counties,
voters will apparently get to vote twice, once for the normal seat
corresponding to their electoral district, and another, the candidates
of which are to be chosen from a set of organizations more-or-less
controlled by the FARC. The new electoral concept apparently expires
in 2026. For opponents of the agreement this was one of its more
offensive features. The geographic areas represented are said to be
those ‘most harmed by the conflict,’ a euphemism that for detractors
of the agreement hides the culpability of the FARC in those precise
locations. The zones are also highly coincident with coca crops and
smuggling corridors, which are controlled by the FARC.
The second accompanying reference, while perhaps not perfectly
in accord with the final legislative determinations, has an excellent
set of interactive maps for those who wish to view one visual/spatial
perspective of where the conflict was, and perhaps where it remains.
For an excellent map expressing an early interpretation of what the
FARC negotiators in Havana had asked for, see: http://www.pares.
com.co/mafias-y-conflicto/3466/. It is from mid-2016, just after
the agreement was publicly announced from Havana. Apparently,
the FARC leaders got what they had sought. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…the guerrilla group is not being given legislative
seats arbitrarily…”

“…in all of the special districts there are illicit
crops…”
Source: Felipe Fernández, “El Congreso de Colombia aprueba
“circunscripciones especiales” a las FARC (Colombian Congress
passes ‘special electoral districts’ to the FARC),” Panama Post
and Blu Radio, Bogotá, 10 November 2017. https://es.panampost.
com/felipe-fernandez/2017/11/10/congreso-colombiacircunscripciones-especiales/
“According to the Minister of the Interior, Guillermo Rivera, those
electoral seats are prohibited to persons who are not certified
in their quality as victims, including prohibition against the new
FARC party, he said. Nevertheless, this proposal in transition
has generated multiple critiques, but in spite of the objections, the
National Government has said that the guerrilla group is not being
given legislative seats arbitrarily.”
Source: Juan Esteban Lewin et al, “Estas son las circunscripciones
especiales (These are the special electoral districts),” La Silla
Vacilla, 26 April 2017. http://lasillavacia.com/hagame-el-cruce/
estas-son-las-circunscripciones-especiales-60690
“One of the controversial points of the Agreement with the FARC
are the special electoral districts of peace, the locations about
which the Administration has maintained in strict discretion.
La Silla finally found out which they are, where they are going
to be and what characteristics they have….They are 16 zones
where the inhabitants can vote two times: for the congressional
representative in ordinary elections and for a second candidate
from lists from social organizations, significant citizen movements,
indigenous reservations or afro-community councils for the 2018
and 2022 elections.…In eight of every ten counties and in all of the
special districts there are illicit crops in the jurisdiction. And they
are zones strongly hit by the conflict.”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | December 2017

29

LATIN AMERICA
FARC Looks to Politic in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying reference is from
the blog of Venezuelan writer Alfredo Coronil Hartmann, opposed to
the continuing consolidation of Marxist party power in Venezuela and
northern South America. It relates a recent meeting of the FARC in
Caracas in which the subject of building a FARC political party structure
in Venezuela is broached. Such a move by the FARC makes sense on
a number of levels. Certainly it explains why the word ‘Colombia’ was
changed out for the word ‘Común’ (common) in the FARC initialing,
which now stands for Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(perhaps Alternative Common Revolutionary Party or perhaps ‘Alternative
Shared’ or ‘Alternative Joint’ Revolutionary Party). Smuggling routes don’t
end at the international borders, either. In this, Marxist internationalism
can be a commercial alleviative, dedicated as it seems to be in this part
of the world to the flow of commodities. As a central element of the
Bolivarian block, the FARC will be amply welcomed by officialdom in
Venezuela and will enjoy effective political space within the overall,
internationalizing Marxist party structure. The mission call to help
Venezuela oppose the empire at least fits a shared historical-cultural
legacy of the two nations, a legacy to which the accompanying photograph
alludes. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“The organization of the FARC-Venezuela encounter
expects to contribute to peaceful coexistence, to the
union of the common borders, to the fight against
paramilitarism, to the eradication of corruption and the
smuggling of extractive resources and to the struggle
against the economic blockade that the USA is trying to
apply against the homeland of Hugo Chávez.”

Source: Libardo Muñoz, “Primer encuentro para crear
estructura FARC en Venezuela (First get-together to create a
FARC structure in Venezuela)” in “¿Un partido de las Farc
en Venezuela? (A party of the FARC in Venezuela),” Para
Rescatar el Porvenir, Caracas, 11 November 2017. https://
pararescatarelporvenir.com/2017/11/11/un-partido-de-las-farcen-venezuela/
“This internationalist activity of the FARC party in Venezuela
is ‘an indispensable exercise in the current and complex context
created by imperialism with the open shameless complicity of
fascism and the ultra-right, that is mounting attacks against the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.’”
Source: Efe, “Las Farc se preparan para crear estructura política
en Venezuela (The FARC prepare to create a political structure
in Venezuela),” El Mundo, 11 November 2017. http://www.
elmundo.com/noticia/Las-Farc-se-preparan-para-crear-estructurapolitica-en-Venezuela/362614
“This Saturday and Sunday, the recently created political party,
Common Alternative Revolutionary Force (Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común, FARC) celebrates its first act in
neighboring Venezuela, with the objective of beginning its
implantation in the oil-rich country… The organization of the
FARC-Venezuela encounter expects to contribute to peaceful
coexistence, to the union of the common borders, to the fight
against paramilitarism, to the eradication of corruption and the
smuggling of extractive resources and to the struggle against the
economic blockade that the USA is trying to apply against the
homeland of Hugo Chávez.”

Monument to the Fourteen Lancers at the site of the Battle of Pantano de Vargas near Paipa, Colombia (2013 photo).
Source: Jrdelacruz via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Monumento_a_los_catorce_Lanceros_-_Pantano_de_Vargas.jpg, CC BY SA 3.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

30

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela, Entrance for Empires
OE Watch Commentary: In the accompanying reference,
Venezuelan author Elizabeth Burgos describes in unflattering terms
the returned role of Cuba as interlocutor between foreign powers and
Latin America, and describes Venezuela as the entryway. Elizabeth
Burgos is an author of some renown, having transitioned away from
being an apologist for radical socialism (including author of the
iconic I, Rigoberta). The new empires of which she writes are, of
course, China and Russia. The United States is all but absent from
her text. She uses as a guide to her description a book written by
Cuban defector Rafael del Pino a quarter century ago. As presented by
Burgos, that book, Proa a la libertad (Prow Toward Liberty, Planeta,
1991) remains illuminating today for the ideological, forensic and
practical historical context of the Marxist strategy and model for the
region. She does not strike a hopeful note, but obviously sees this as a
turning point. In her view, now that the Marxist party has control of
the Venezuelan population, we will see the remaking of the society in
the post-Cold War Marxist model, an effort that will proceed under
the tutelage of the new Marxist empires, with intercession by Cubans.
End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Elizabeth Burgos, “Venezuela, puerta de entrada de los
nuevos imperios (Venezuela, port of entry of the new empires),”
Revista Zeta (Caracas), 10 November 2017. http://revistazeta.
net/2017/11/10/venezuela-puerta-entrada-los-nuevos-imperios/
‘Cuba, true to its mission as the Madam [or Matchmaker] for
empires, will be the interlocutor to the new imperial guardians of
Venezuela: China and Russia’, affirmed the author, with the addition
that both ‘empires’ forged themselves in the heat of communism….
The objective of the [Venezuelan] regime to exercise absolute power
unlimited in duration, is not practicable without Cuba. At this
point in time, the castro-chavista regime, with control of the key
sectors of the State, among them the armed institutions being now a
consummated fact, equally the destruction of the liberal democratic
Republic and thereby its economy, now is the moment to reorganize
the society and the economy in the image of the model that has arisen
from communism: Russia, Belorussia, Vietnam and of course, China.
In the economic sphere, State capitalism. In the political, absolute
control of the society under the aegis of the single party.

“Cuba... will be the interlocutor to the new imperial guardians of Venezuela: China and Russia.”

Opposition protesters holding a sign criticizing the alleged Cuban intervention in Venezuela saying “Cuba Out” (2014).
Source: By Jamez42 (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ACuba_Out_Sign_Venezuela_2014.jpg, [CC0], via Wikimedia Commons.

OE Watch | December 2017

31

LATIN AMERICA
Mexico’s “Invisible Wall”
OE Watch Commentary: The most common adjective used
to describe Mexico’s southern border with Guatemala and Belize
is probably “porous.” The large volume of Central American
migrants, including many families and unaccompanied minors
from Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala attempting to cross
into Mexico and travel north suggests as much. The simultaneous
operations of criminal groups involved in drug trafficking, human
trafficking, migrant smuggling and other sinister pursuits in the
region adds several layers to the challenge. In response to these
challenges, and to facilitate the legal flow of commerce, migration,
tourism and temporary workers, the Mexican president launched
Plan Frontera Sur (Southern Border Plan) in 2014. The plan’s
principle purpose was to protect migrants traveling through
Mexico. However, the accompanying passages claim that the
increased security measures are having the opposite effect.
On paper, Plan Frontera Sur includes five key components:
regular and ordered migration; improvements in infrastructure
for border security and migration; migrant protection; shared
regional responsibility; and interagency cooperation. However, in
recent months sources have been reporting that Mexico has created
an “invisible” border wall in its southern border, which entails
“intense police and military vigilance, cartels, human trafficking
organizations, and widescale deportations” with the “risk [of]
being robbed, raped or extorted by drug cartels and even police.”
This “invisible wall” on Mexico’s southern border is making it
particularly hard for Central Americans traveling north.
The second passage claims that the “invisible wall” is working,
noting that in 2016 alone, 47,678 Hondurans were deported from
Mexico to Honduras while only 21,587 were deported from the
United States. Critics further claim that the plan is not vested in
protecting migrants, and assert that if it were important to Mexico,
measures would be implemented to protect the thousands of
victims that are killed by organized crime groups, police and harsh
conditions (desert in the north) while transiting through Mexico
every year. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “El muro empieza en el sur (The Wall Starts in the South),” El
Pais, 17 February 2017. https://elpais.com/internacional/2017/02/06/
mexico/1486340656_933536.html
Intense police and military vigilance, cartels, human trafficking
organizations, and widescale deportations are factors that contribute to
the invisible wall along Mexico’s southern border. Every individual who
chooses to enter Mexico via the southern border knows they risk being
robbed, raped or extorted by drug cartels and even police.
Source: “Hondureños se enfrentan a un “muro invisible” (Hondurans
Face an “Invisible Wall”),” El Heraldo, 04 October 2017. http://
www.elheraldo.hn/minisitios/hondurenosenelmundo/1113825-471/
hondure%C3%B1os-se-enfrentan-a-un-muro-invisible
The Southern Border Plan that Mexico has been carrying out since
2014 to prevent the entry of migrants into its territory is now the biggest
obstacle for thousands of Hondurans who wish to fulfill the “American
Dream.”
In Chiapas, Campeche, Quintana Roo, and Tabasco, immigration
security has increased and not without consequence. In fact, out of
69,370 deportations of Hondurans recorded in 2016, 47,678 were in
Mexican territory against 21,587 that occurred in the United States,
according to figures from the Consular and Immigration Observatory of
Honduras (Conmigho). According to a detailed analysis made by Manuel
Antonio Flores, master in population and development and professor of
economic and social research of the National Autonomous University of
Honduras (UNAH), this phenomenon is classified as an “invisible wall.”
Source: “Plan Frontera Sur: entre el desierto y el plomo (South
Border Plan: Between the Dream and the Bullets),” El País,
18 March 2015. https://elpais.com/elpais/2015/03/06/planeta_
futuro/1425657094_335230.html
Plan Frontera Sur has caused routes to disperse significantly. Before,
there were two very clear routes. Now there are many routes and migrants
are much more likely to suffer violence at the hands of authorities and of
organized crime.

“Intense police and military vigilance, cartels,
human trafficking organizations, and widescale
deportations are factors that contribute to the
invisible wall along Mexico’s southern border. Every
individual who chooses to enter Mexico via the
southern border knows they risk being robbed, raped
or extorted by drug cartels and even police.”

Mexico-Guatemala Border.

Source: By Fernando Reyes (Bello Paisaje en la Frontera), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frontera_guatemala_mexico.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

32

LATIN AMERICA
Weaponized Drone Linked to Organized Crime in Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: On 20 October 2017, Mexican Federal
Police detained four men in Guanajuato, in possession of a weaponized
drone that could be remotely detonated. HispanTV and other outlets
reporting on this incident indicated that the men were allegedly linked
to a criminal organization in Mexico. Since the beginning of this year,
there has been a significant increase in violence in Guanajuato related
to organized crime. The accompanying passages discuss the incident,
which may indicate that criminals are incorporating more advanced and
dangerous drones.
As the first passage notes, the Attorney General of Guanajuato,
Carlos Zamarripa Aguirre, confirmed that the four men were arrested
for possession of a drone affixed with a large explosive charge with a
remote detonator. The second passage points out that Guanajuato is
disputed land among Jalisco New Generation, The Zetas, and Sinaloa
cartels.
According to reports, the four men were travelling in a stolen white
Mazda SUV when they were stopped by authorities on the SalamancaMorelia highway. Initially, they were stopped because the vehicle was
reported as stolen and the men were suspected of a robbery. When
authorities searched the vehicle, they discovered an improvised 3DR
drone, taped with explosive materials attached by means of a rope and
a remote radiofrequency detonator. According to HispanTV, which
is a Spanish language news outlet operated by Iran’s state-owned
broadcasting company, police officials stated they had seen similar
explosives before but never attached to a drone. Periódico am further
reported that, in addition to the drone, authorities seized an AK-47, six
cell phones, and other weapons that are used exclusively by the Mexican
Army. End OE Watch Commentary (Bunker/Keshavarz)

“... four men were arrested in the Salamanca
municipality for possession of a drone affixed with a
large explosive charge with a remote detonator.”
Source: “‘Dron bomba’ listo para detonar a distancia (Drone bomb
readied for remote detonation),” Periódico am, 20 October 2017.
https://www.am.com.mx/2017/10/20/sucesos/dron-bomba-listo-paradetonar-a-distancia-385808
“The Attorney General of the State, Carlos Zamarripa Aguirre,
confirmed that four men were arrested in the Salamanca
municipality for possession of a drone affixed with a large explosive
charge with a remote detonator.”
Source: “Dron explosivo: Último artefacto del crimen organizado
en México (Explosive drone: the latest object of organized crime in
Mexico),” HispanTV, 21 October 2017. http://www.hispantv.com/
noticias/mexico/357219/incautan-dron-crimen-organizado-violencia
“Guanajuato is disputed land among Jalisco New Generation, The
Zetas, and Sinaloa cartels.”
Source: “Interceptan ¡dron bomba! (Drone bomb intercepted!),”
Periódico am, 20 October 2017. https://www.am.com.
mx/2017/10/20/leon/sucesos/interceptan-dron-bomba-385781
“Additionally, three of the men had weapons used exclusively by the
Mexican Army.”

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
CELEBRATING 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | December 2017

33

LATIN AMERICA
Panama Reaches Milestone in Biometric Registries
OE Watch Commentary: Panama has a state-of-the-art border
management system that includes a biometrics-capture program
called BITMAP (Biometric Identification Transnational Migration
Alert Program) to identify high-threat travelers. Using this
program, the country has captured and shared a substantial amount
of data regarding such travelers.
BITMAP was installed in late 2011 at Tocumen International
Airport, Panama’s largest international airport. Authorities also
use the system at other airports across the country, as well as at
overland entry points. Panamanian security services use BITMAP
to obtain biometric records on foreigners entering the isthmus
through various routes. In fact, as the first excerpt claims, Panama
has obtained more than 20,000 biometric records since the system
was installed. This figure surpasses the biometric records of several
nations combined. As part of the BITMAP program, Panamanian
authorities examine the fingerprints of foreign nationals entering
the country as tourists. When they appear before immigration
officials, the agents check whether they were previously registered.
If not, they are fingerprinted, photographed, and their passport is
digitized and saved in the same record. In certain cases, an iris scan
of their eyes is taken.
Individuals entering the country via the jungle or other nontraditional paths are required to register at stations in communities
with BITMAP technology. Once processed, those foreign
nationals who do not pose security threats to the region are allowed
to continue on their way. As the second excerpt discusses, the
BITMAP system identified the 25 Pakistani nationals with links to
terrorism who were detained last July.
Just a few years ago, a program like BITMAP in Central America
was considered to be futuristic, but now it is a reality. More
importantly, it continues to serve a key role in identifying high-risk
travelers entering Central America and has been cited as a model
for the entire world. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “EE.UU. destaca cooperación con Panamá en registro de datos
biométricos (U.S. Government Acknowledges Cooperation with Panama
in Biometric Registries),” La Estrella de Panama, 20 July 2017. http://
laestrella.com.pa/panama/nacional/eeuu-destaca-cooperacion-panamaregistro-datos-biometricos/24013724
A protocol ceremony in acknowledgement of Panamanian Security
agencies (Security Council, Ministry of Security, National Migration
Service, National Border Service, National Air and Sea Service,
and National Police) took place in July 2017 at the United States
Embassy in Panama headquarters. The purpose of the ceremony
was to acknowledge Panama’s 20,000 registries in the biometric
database. During the ceremony, both nations discussed the importance
of gathering and exchanging information of potentially dangerous
individuals as it is a key component to early mitigation of security
threats.
Source: “Arrestan a 25 sospechosos de terrorismo en Panamá (25
Suspected Terrorists Arrested in Panama),” Crítica, 21 July 2017. http://
www.critica.com.pa/nacional/arrestan-25-sospechosos-de-terrorismo-enpanama-482458
Some 25 Pakistani citizens with terrorist links were arrested in Panama
after an analysis of biometric encryption made in the country through
the BITMAP system.
Source: “Panamá lidera la region en registros biométricos (Panama
Leads the Region in Biometrics Records),” Diálogo, 27 September
2017. https://dialogo-americas.com/es/articles/panama-leads-regionbiometric-records
Panamanian authorities capture fingerprints from people entering the
country as tourists and from individuals entering the country from the
jungle or other non-traditional ports of entry. When they appear before
SNM officials, the agents check whether they were previously registered
with BITMAP. If not, they are fingerprinted, photographed, and their
passport is digitized and saved in the same record. In certain cases, an
iris scan of their eyes is taken.

“Some 25 Pakistani citizens with terrorist links were arrested in Panama after an analysis of biometric
encryption made in the country through the BITMAP system.”

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | December 2017

34

LATIN AMERICA
Cuba Unlikely to End Dual Currency System
OE Watch Commentary: In 1995, the Cuban government announced
the beginning of limited economic reforms in response to the ‘Special
Period in Time of Peace’ (an extended period of economic crisis that
began in 1989 primarily due to the dissolution of the Soviet Union).
As the accompanying excerpt from the pro-government source, La
Joven Cuba notes, “it was decided to not use one single exchange rate,
but several simultaneously to achieve greater state profits.” The Dual
Currency system replaced the US Dollar as the primary currency for the
Cuban economy with the Cuban Convertible Peso (CUC) and instated a
local currency, Moneda Nacional (MN), solely for Cubans. The system
included a government set exchange rate between MN and CUC such
that “for national persons and citizens, the rates would be 24 or 25 for 1
(presently) and the exchange rate for state companies would be 1 for 1.”
For the Cuban economy, profit is multiplied because the CUC is
pegged to the US dollar but the prices of socialist goods are set by
the government, offering the Cuban people a barrier to international
inflation or economic shocks. In other words, Cubans capture dollars
from tourists and other non-nationals by forcing the exchange to
CUC without letting inflation of the dollar affect the cost of living.
The system is often criticized by Cubans and tourists because many
transactions require complex calculation of the exchange rates to make
change or determine the cost of a product. For example, if a tourist
goes to a restaurant and prices are listed in MN (the citizen’s currency),
the restaurant will need to calculate the equivalent cost for the tourist
paying in CUC (pegged to the dollar), and make change accordingly.
The Cuban government first announced that it would work to integrate
the economy back into a single currency in 2013. Such a conversion
would involve devaluing the CUC. However, since 2013, the government
has made no major policy change regarding the Dual Currency
system. Cuba’s tourist market is a primary source for the government
to generate hard currency for buying imports. With over two million
tourists per year, the Dual Currency System creates a unique benefit to
Cuban currency reserves and allows the state to use tourism profits to
subsidize social spending.
The excerpt points out that removing the Dual Currency System
without creating alternative sources for companies to generate profit,
would be disastrous for the Cuban economy, noting that “about 35
percent of the companies that are profitable today would cease being
profitable.” It is unlikely that Cuba will adjust to a single currency
system soon. The Dual Currency System has become vital to Cuban
economic growth, as a split currency system allows for subsidized
goods, access to hard capital, and potentially decreases the cost of living
while preventing the effects of international inflation. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kelsay)

“.... about 35 percent of the companies that are
profitable today would cease being profitable.”

A combination of CUC and MN being used to pay for a meal.
Source: Zach Kelsay.

Source: Alejandro Martínez, “El problema no es la doble moneda
(The Problem is not the Double Currency),” La Joven Cuba, 13
October 2017. https://jovencuba.com/2017/10/13/el-problema-noes-la-doble-moneda/
On their first steps towards building Socialism, the Russians
managed their currency in this manner to solve some internal
problems of their economy. Along with the ruble, they created
the chervonets ruble. The ruble was the real currency they used
for foreign exchange. To avoid chaos in domestic trade and
hyperinflation, they used chervonets. For this, they established
a fixed exchange rate, maintaining a constant equivalence ratio
between the two currencies. This was a temporary measure and
they returned to normalcy: one single currency.
When comparing with Cuban practice, we can note the defects
of our “duality.” Undoubtedly, this was a measure for resolving
objective needs to sustain our economy. It was not distant from the
conditions of the formerly mentioned case. But the implementation
of this monetary policy had its peculiarities, which allowed the
growth of the economy. Precisely these peculiarities have delayed
the long-desired monetary unification.
The reason for change was not and is not the same for all
economic agents. It was decided to not use one single exchange
rate, but several simultaneously to achieve greater state profits.
For national persons and citizens, the rates would be 24 or 25 for
1 (presently) and the exchange rate for state companies would be 1
for 1. This made the income of companies to multiply as much such
as the ratio of the exchange rate, concealing the true productive
efficiency that they could reach. Thus, part of the profitability of
the socialist state enterprises is subordinated to the anomaly of
this system, delaying the desired economic benefit: the unification
of the exchange rates. If this happened right now, it would mean
a significant drop in business profitability. To be concrete: about
35 percent of the companies that are profitable today would cease
being profitable.

OE Watch | December 2017

35

ASIA-PACIFIC
China to Build Military Maintenance Facility in Thailand
OE Watch Commentary: On 8 October, six months
ahead of schedule, China sent the first batch of 28
NORINCO-built VT-4 tanks to Thailand. According
to the first accompanying article, the VT-4s will
replace Thailand’s ageing M-41 light tanks and will
be commissioned into a newly established division in
Khonkhaen Province, Thailand-- a plateau that borders
Laos and Cambodia. The Royal Thai Army’s military
equipment standardization board must first inspect and
carefully vet the tanks prior to completely accepting
them. According to Defence Blog, an independent
military news source, the VT-4 is “equipped with
turbocharged diesel developing 1,200 horse power
coupled to an automatic transmission.” It weighs 52
tons and is armed with a 125mm smoothbore gun and
fitted with an automatic loader. It also has a secondary
armament of coaxial 7.62-mm machine gun and remotecontrolled 12.7mm machine guns. The first article
explains that ten more VT-4s are expected to be shipped
to Thailand within a year.

Source: Sompong Nonhasa, “VT4 Tanks Reach Thailand Ahead of Schedule,”
Shepard Media, 13 October 2017. https://www.shephardmedia.com/news/
landwarfareintl/vt4-tanks-reach-thailand-ahead-schedule/
A $137 million contract had been signed in March 2016 for these tanks to be
delivered to the (RTA) by March 2018. The project will replace the ageing M41 light
tank that will soon retire.
Additionally, China will build a logistics and maintenance centre for the RTA in
Thailand, where Chinese technicians and engineers will be stationed.
The army will procure a second batch of ten VT4s with a budget of $55 million
under FY2017 funding, plus it will seek a third batch of ten more tanks. The earliest
of these could be delivered within a year.
Source: Dylan Malyasov “China unveils first VT4 tanks produced for Royal Thai
Army,” Defence Blog.com, 1 August 2017. http://defence-blog.com/army/chinaunveils-first-vt4-tanks-produced-for-royal-thai-army.html
The VT4 is armed with a 125mm smoothbore gun and fitted with an automatic
loader. Secondary armament of VT4 consists of coaxial 7.62-mm machine gun and
remote-controlled 12.7mm MG operated by the tank commander.
Source: Sompong Nondhasa, “D&S 2017: China to Build Maintenance Centre in
Thailand,” Shephard Media, 2 November 2017. https://www.shephardmedia.com/
news/mil-log/ds-2017-china-build-maintenance-centre-thailand/

According to the second accompanying article, China
plans to move forward to build a repair and maintenance
center in Thailand to create a more efficient means to
maintain the tanks and other military equipment. Along
with setting up the maintenance center, the second
article places hope in that “some technologies will be
transferred as well,” stating that “this is a key component
of Chinese arms sales to Thailand as it will eventually
enhance self-reliance.” It will be interesting to see how
this growing partnership develops and what level of trust
China ultimately puts in Thailand with its technology,
some of which could be proprietary. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“Cooperation with an allied country

A local repair and maintenance centre will benefit equipment support in the
future.
Apart from setting up the centre, some technologies will be transferred too. This
is a key component of Chinese arms sales to Thailand as it will eventually enhance
self-reliance.
Deputy Minister of Defence Gen Udomdej Sitabutr commented, ‘Cooperation with
an allied country to build a military production facility is essential because, in the
future, when some military hardware from that country is out of service, equipment
will need to be repaired and maintained. If that can be done by ourselves, or some
key spare parts can be built ourselves, then we can save a lot of budget to solve
those issues.’

to build a military production facility is
essential because, in the future, when
some military hardware from that country
is out of service, equipment will need to be
repaired and maintained…”

A VT-4 tank undergoing inspection.

Source: Kekoku, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/df/VT-4_in_Thailand.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

36

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Military Assistance to the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: The People’s Republic
of China (PRC), often noted for its outwardly
unconditional foreign aid, where the PRC supplies
monetary, capital, and military goods to governments
with whom the country is seeking closer ties, has begun
to increase military assistance to the Philippines. As
the excerpt from the Chinese pro-government Global
Times points out, “China handed 50 million yuan
($7.53 million) of military assistance to the Philippine
government to help combat terrorism.” The excerpt also
indicates that earlier in June, “a second batch - 3,000
assault rifles, 3 million rounds of ammunition and 90
sniper scopes - also arrived in the Philippines. The
aid sent a positive signal of practical Sino-Philippine
cooperation and anti-terrorism collaboration.”
According to the second excerpt from a proPhilippine government source, on 23 October, the June
aid was successful in ending a five-month long siege
by terrorists lined to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) in the Philippine city of Marawi, which displaced
hundreds of thousands of people. The end of the siege
also served as fodder for increased cooperation at a
meeting between the Philippine and PRC governments
on 25 October, where both sides sought an increase in
“bilateral security engagements,” leading to an increase
in counterterrorism and security operations.
While the PRC is actively locked in territorial
disputes with the Philippines, the partnership for
counterterrorism potentially signals “a starting point
not only for friendlier Beijing-Manila ties but also for a
closer relationship between China and Southeast Asia.”
The extent of the partnership, however, remains to be
seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Shanks)

“Meeting at the Department of National
Defense, Defense Secretary Delfin
Lorenzana and his Chinese counterpart
Gen. Chang Wanquan agreed to increase
the two nations’ bilateral security
engagements in the coming months in a
bid to strengthen their defense and military
relations.”

President Rodrigo Duterte and President Xi Jinping shake hands prior to their
bilateral meetings at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on October 20.
Source: By King Rodriguez of Philippine Presidential Department (https://goo.gl/hLaAnG) [Public Domain].

Source: “Beijing’s aid to anti-terror fight supports regional stability,” Global Times,
23 October 2017. http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1071634.shtml
On June 28, China handed 50 million yuan ($7.53 million) of military assistance to
the Philippine government to help combat terrorism. Duterte received the weapons
in person. Earlier this month, a second batch - 3,000 assault rifles, 3 million
rounds of ammunition and 90 sniper scopes - also arrived in the Philippines.
The aid sent a positive signal of practical Sino-Philippine cooperation and antiterrorism collaboration….
This can be a starting point not only for friendlier Beijing-Manila ties but also for
a closer relationship between China and Southeast Asia. More and more facts have
demonstrated that cooperation between Southeast Asian countries and China is
conducive to regional stability.
Source: “Manila, Beijing eye transfer of more Chinese weapons, cooperation in
fight vs terror,” Philstar—Global, 25 October 2017. http://www.philstar.com/
headlines/2017/10/25/1752394/manila-beijing-eye-transfer-more-chinese-weaponscooperation-fight-vs
“Meeting at the Department of National Defense, Defense Secretary Delfin
Lorenzana and his Chinese counterpart Gen. Chang Wanquan agreed to increase
the two nations’ bilateral security engagements in the coming months in a bid to
strengthen their defense and military relations.”
…Lorenzana and Chang agreed to enhance their fight against terrorism and
extremism, just days after the Philippines announced the end of the siege of
Marawi City in Mindanao.
To achieve this goal, the two nations are looking at the possibility of improved
intelligence sharing, joint counterterrorism exercises and specialized training.
Chang said there were already plans for China to donate another batch of
weapons and equipment later this year or early next year to help Manila in fighting
terrorism which the two nations consider as a “common enemy.”
Lorenzana also thanked China for its support in the military’s operations in
Marawi including its earlier donations of rifles and ammunition which the defense
chief said, “helped a lot in our fight against terrorists in Marawi.”…

OE Watch | December 2017

37

ASIA-PACIFIC
Duterte Seeks to Ease Tension in the South China Sea
OE Watch Commentary: On 30 and 31 October, Philippine president Rodrigo
Duterte visited Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe in Japan. The excerpted
Chinese-language article from dwnews.com offers a Chinese perspective on
the outcome of his visit. The article suggests that China is satisfied that Duterte
sought to ease tensions over concerns about Chinese activities in the South China
Sea. The article states that Duterte expressed to Abe that he was not prepared
to become enemies with China and that dialogue was the best way to resolve
disputes in the South China Sea. Duterte also said he was hopeful about China
not expanding its presence in the South China Sea or occupying new reefs and
islands.
The article notes that Duterte reiterated that Japan and the Philippines should
not aggravate the “superpower,” and that it was pointless to protest China’s
construction of artificial reefs and islands in the South China Sea. These artificial
reefs, according to Duterte, should be treated differently than other natural
contested islands and reefs that China is occupying.
The article discusses that the Japanese government spokesman did not elaborate
on Japan’s positions after the meeting, except to say that freedom of navigation
issues were discussed. Duterte’s stance towards China is less confrontational than
that of the Japanese government and is welcome for China. This is likely why
dwnews.com emphasized Duterte’s statements in the article. It may also explain
why the Japanese government spokesman had few comments after the meeting
between Abe and Duterte. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “访日回国 杜特尔特立即表态不与中国为敌
(Visiting Japan Duterte Immediately Says China is Not
an Enemy),” dwnews.com, 1 November 2017. http://
news.dwnews.com/global/news/2017-11-01/60020965.
html
President Rodrigo Duterte said on 31 October that
he hopes China will honor its promise not to occupy
new islands and reefs in the South China Sea. Duterte
also reiterated that the resolution of maritime affairs
meant that the superpower should not be annoyed.
After returning from his second visit to Japan, Duterte
told reporters that he is still optimistic that China
will cease new expansion in the South China Sea in
accordance with the agreement reached between the
two sides. Duterte also said that the Philippines is not
prepared to be enemies with China and that dialogue
with Beijing is still an important strategy for preventing
China’s dissatisfaction and settling maritime disputes. A
Japanese government spokesman said Abe and Duterte
also discussed maritime security and free navigation
issues, including in the South China Sea, but did not
elaborate.

“Duterte.. said that the Philippines is not prepared to be enemies with China and that dialogue with

Beijing is still an important strategy for preventing China’s dissatisfaction and settling maritime disputes.”

Shinzō Abe and Rodrigo Duterte, September 2016.

Source: King Rodriguez - Presidential Communications Operations Office, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shinz%C5%8D_Abe_and_Rodrigo_Duterte_3_9.6.16.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

38

ASIA-PACIFIC
Chinese and Indian Competition in Space Heats Up
by Sudha Ramachandran
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 13, dated 20 October 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinese-indian-competition-space-heats/

OE Watch Commentary: India and China have been competing for
markets, resources and influence on land and sea, especially in Asia,
Africa and the Indian Ocean. This competition is spilling over into outer
space. China and India are using satellites in space to win influence and
secure their geo-political and economic interests. The accompanying
passages from Chinese and Indian sources provide insight into this
competition.
As the first accompanying passage notes, on 5 May India began a new
diplomatic push in South Asia by launching the “South Asia satellite” into
space. Built and launched by the government-run Indian Space Research
Organization (ISRO), the satellite will provide communications and
meteorological data to India’s South Asian neighbors, including Nepal,
Bhutan, Maldives, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. The satellite is an attempt
to not only strengthen India’s ties with its smaller neighbors and promote
India-led regional co-operation but also to contain mounting Chinese
influence in the region and counter its space co-operation with these
countries.
For example, China’s influence in Sri Lanka has grown due to robust
bilateral economic and defense ties. Space collaboration has taken this
cooperation to a higher level. In 2012, China put a commercial satellite
into space for Sri Lanka. As the second accompanying passage discusses,
China is now extending its Beidou Navigation Satellite (BDS) System
to Sri Lanka and is setting up at least 10 Continuously Operating
Reference Stations there for this purpose. Having drawn Sri Lanka
into its orbit, China is attempting to build additional space partnerships
with Afghanistan, Nepal and the Maldives—much to Delhi’s alarm. In
response, India has turned to space diplomacy to court neighbors and allies
in East Asia. As the third passage discusses, India set up a dual civilianand military- use satellite tracking and imaging center in Vietnam “that
will give Hanoi access to pictures from Indian earth observation satellites
that cover the region, including China and the South China Sea.”
China’s space program is more advanced, better-funded and extends over
a larger range of activities than India’s more focused program. China’s
space program is likely to keep it ahead in the Sino-Indian race in and
over space. In the short term, Sino-Indian competition can be expected to
deepen in the commercial satellite launch business. This competition is
likely to intensify as more private players enter the space sectors of the two
countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Ramachandran)

“India made its biggest space diplomacy push

today when... the ‘South Asia’ satellite was launched
successfully... with an objective to provide different
communication applications in Ku-band with coverage
over South Asian countries...”

“China’s home-grown BeiDou Navigation
Satellite System (BDS) will expand its
cooperation to Thailand and Sri Lanka, and
then to the entire Southeast Asia, in a bid to go
global...”
Source: “India aces space diplomacy test with Modi’s satellite gift
to South Asia; 14 things to know,” Economic Times/India Times,
5 May 2017. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/science/
india-aces-space-diplomacy-test-with-modis-satellite-gift-to-southasia-14-things-to-know/articleshow/58534107.cms
India made its biggest space diplomacy push today when
the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV-F09),
carrying the GSAT-9 or the “South Asia” satellite, was launched
successfully at 4.57 p.m. from Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh...
The GSAT-9 has been launched with an objective to provide
different communication applications in Ku-band with coverage
over South Asian countries, the ISRO said...
Data from GSAT-9 will be shared with Nepal, Bhutan, Maldives,
Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. It was also offered to Pakistan, which
turned it down. India is also working with Afghanistan but a deal
has still not be ironed out.
Source: “China’s BeiDou system to expand cooperation to SE
Asia,” China Daily, 1 April 2017. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/2017-04/01/content_28774844.htm
China’s home-grown BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (BDS)
will expand its cooperation to Thailand and Sri Lanka, and then
to the entire Southeast Asia, in a bid to go global, the system’s
operator has said...
Wuhan Optics Valley BeiDou this year will cooperate with
Sri Lankan related authorities to develop at least 10 CORS
[Continuously Operating Reference Stations] in the South Asian
country for such applications as land surveying and mapping,
ocean fishery and disaster warning, Du [general manager of
Wuhan Optics Valley BeiDou Holding Group Co.] said.
Source: “India to build satellite tracking station in Vietnam
that offers eye on China,” India Today, 25 January 2016. http://
indiatoday.intoday.in/story/india-to-build-satellite-tracking-stationin-vietnam-that-offers-eye-on-china/1/578967.html
India will set up a satellite tracking and imaging centre in
southern Vietnam that will give Hanoi access to pictures
from Indian earth observation satellites that cover the region,
including China and the South China Sea, Indian officials said.

OE Watch | December 2017

39

ASIA-PACIFIC
By Road and Rail to the Roof of the World
OE Watch Commentary: Tension continue to rise between China and India over the disputed territory of Arunachal Pradesh. As the
first accompanying passage from Hindustan Times discusses, India recently celebrated another milestone in its race to build road and rail
infrastructure in the disputed area—making military logistical lines shorter and more capable. Until recently India had not put much effort into
improving the roads and any other means of transportation within Arunachal Pradesh. China protests all infrastructure moves made by India
into Arunachal Pradesh.
India has its work cut out for it. The terrain from the Brahmaputra River on the Assam plane, which sits at roughly 200 ft above sea level,
to the border post with China at Bum La, which sits at 15,200 ft above sea level, is a very steep rise. The cost of road and rail would be very
expensive and time consuming. There is also the fear in India that a good road, or a road at all, once constructed could likewise be used by the
Chinese to invade deep into Arunachal Pradesh, as they did in 1962, when lead Chinese forces reached as far south as Bomdila before retreating
northward back across the Line of Actual Control (LAC) or de-facto border with China.
However, as the second passage notes, now that China is building its own roads and rail links on the Himalayan plateau, India has announced
and engaged in various road and rail link projects. The latest logistical round fired was inaugurated months ago as India opened up rail service
between the State of Assam and the Arunachal Pradesh frontier town of Bhalukpong.
Bhalukpong is the starting point for all travelers seeking to go up the Himalayan face northward towards the Chinese border or LAC. It is
also the only road to Tawang, a favorite place for tourists and Buddhist pilgrims en route to its historical monastery. Foreign visitors must stop
in Bhalukpong to pick up a Protected Area Permit (PAP) to continue any further north. After securing documentation, there is only the one
road from Bhalukpong to Tawang. It is a painstakingly slow route. Massive rock and mudslides frequently wash out the road and there have
been multiple traffic fatalities due to vehicles running off or being swept off the road. There is commercial helicopter service to Tawang but it is
spotty and dangerous due to weather. In October an Mi-17 Indian Air Force helicopter taking off from the helipad at Tawang crashed, killing all
seven on board.
Road and railway are vital elements to India’s strategic goals in the disputed territory. However, it took five years to finish the section to
Bhalukpong. It will be an even more formidable and time consuming engineering task to connect Bhalukpong to Tawang by rail, likely taking
years or decades to complete if it is completed at all. In the meantime India continues to modernize the road. (For more information, see: https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dtwv8_ jBrmw) End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

(continued)

Indian Army trucks approach Sela Pass from Tawang.
Source: Dodge Billingsley.

OE Watch | December 2017

40

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: By Road and Rail to the Roof of the World
“Bhalukpong is the gateway to Tawang 330km uphill by road. The project brings Indian trains 50km
closer to China border.”
Source: “Train to Tawang near China border in
Arunachal closer to reality,” Hindustan Times,
4 April 2017. http://www.hindustantimes.
com/india-news/train-to-tawang-near-chinaborder-in-arunachal-closer-to-reality/storyuz71E02T2wK91mQAUyhAHK.html
India’s bid to take trains to Himalayan
heights has inched closer to reality with the
start of survey work for a broad gauge track
to Tawang, the focus of China’s claim on
Arunachal Pradesh.

Source: “Train to Tawang brings China border 50km closer to India,” Hindustan Times, 10
August 2015. http://www.hindustantimes.com/india/train-to-tawang-brings-china-border50km-closer-to-india/story-e6z6gH3y1RUxxAQfv0bXhI.html
Last year, China opened a railway line connecting Tibetan capital Lhasa to Shigatse
257km west. More importantly for New Delhi, Shigatse is north of Sikkim and a show of
Beijing’s intent to expand the Chinese railway network to the politically charged border
with India and Nepal.
This made the NDA government plan railway connectivity to areas bordering China.
Earlier this year, the Railway Board cleared a proposal for final location survey of a
proposed 378km track from central Assam’s Sonitpur district to Tawang. The alignment
envisaged starts with the 52km Dekargaon-Bhalukpong stretch laid in the last five years.

From “The Pragmatic Dragon: China’s Grand Strategy and Boundary Settlements.”
Source: Used by permission of the author Eric Hyer.

OE Watch | December 2017

41

ASIA-PACIFIC
India’s Effort to Counter China’s Growing Naval Presence
OE Watch Commentary: The continued expansion
of China’s naval presence in the South China Sea
region has been a cause for concern for its neighbors.
According to the accompanying passage, prompted
by its growing concern, India is seeking to join forces
with 10 area “friendly countries” to try to “counter
conventional and non-conventional threats through
cooperation.” The article explains that for the first
time, India is offering to share “real time information
and intelligence” with the navies of regional countries
including Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Sri-Lanka, and
Mauritius. For example, through the GSAT-7 satellite –
Rukmini, the Indian Navy can offer a complete picture
of the Indian Ocean. The intelligence would then allow
Indonesia, Mauritius, and Malaysia to coordinate with
India’s Navy to mobilize ships as needed to counter any
threats. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Real Time Intelligence Sharing with Friendly Countries Offered by India
Amidst Increasing Chinese Presence,” India Today, 3 November 2017. http://idrw.
org/real-time-intelligence-sharing-with-friendly-countries-offered-by-india-amidstincreasing-chinese-presence/
As China becomes more aggressive in the South China Sea region, India has
formed a new grouping of friendly countries and Navies in the Indian Ocean to
explore areas of mutual interest and cooperation.
It has got together Navies of 10 friendly countries under a single umbrella.
Once the information and intelligence sharing agreement is operational, it
would mean countries like Indonesia, Mauritius, and Malaysia would be acting
in coordination with India Navy. “On the basis of information shared by India,
Indonesia and Malaysia can mobilize ships to handle threats,” a senior officer who
was part of the discussion told India Today.
Speaking exclusively to India Today the First Admiral of Indonesia B. Irwanto
said, “It is great move, no one can take on all threats alone, there [is a ]need for
cooperation and coordination between friendly navies.”

“…no one can take on all threats alone, there [is a] need for cooperation and coordination between
friendly navies.”

Indonesia and Malaysia Trying to Control Flow of Militants
OE Watch Commentary: Indonesia and Malaysia have
been working together to add five joint command posts
along the borders of Sabah, Sarawak, and Kalimantan and
to boost joint trilateral maritime patrols with Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Philippines, with Brunei and Singapore as
observers. According to the accompanying article from
a Malaysian news source, there are currently four posts
along the borders of Sabah and Sarawak. The plan aims to
increase patrols to control the flow of militants. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The five posts, along with the four

located in Ba’Kelalan, Lubok Antu, Biawak
and Seliku, will increase our presence and
patrol frequencies to make sure movements
of unwanted parties like militants can be
stopped...”

Source: “Malaysia, Indonesia to Boost Border Patrols to Curb Militancy,” The
Star, 28 September 2017. https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2017/09/28/
malaysia-indonesia-to-boost-border-patrols-to-curb-militancy/
Malaysia and Indonesia would be adding five more joint command posts along
the borders of Sabah, Sarawak and Kalimantan to curb any possible militant
movement in the region.
Hishammuddin said that along with the setting up of more posts, the joint
trilateral maritime patrols by Malaysia, Indonesia, and Philippines as well
as Brunei and Singapore as observers, will be boosted to a three-pronged
approach which includes land and air patrols.
“The five posts, along with the four located in Ba’Kelalan, Lubok Antu, Biawak
and Seliku, will increase our presence and patrol frequencies to make sure
movements of unwanted parties like militants can be stopped”...
The joint air patrols initiative will be launched on October 12 at the Subang
Air Force Base. He said before the launch of the land patrols, there would be
joint exercises between the countries’ armies.

Map of the states of Malaysia.

Source: by Golbez, Mdzafri, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Malaysia_states_named.png, CC 3.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

42

ASIA-PACIFIC
Drug Trafficking in Southeast Asia
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article describes Thailand’s
largest ever seizure of crystal meth, shedding light on the ongoing drug
problem and the actors behind it in the Golden Triangle-- an area that covers
Myanmar’s Shan State, Laos and northern Thailand. According to the article,
drugs are “churned out in unprecedented volume by Myanmar-based drug
labs operated by the Wa (a self-governing ethnic group).” These drugs are
then smuggled from Myanmar through Laos and into Thailand, destined for
Malaysia or even Australia.
According to the website People’s of the World, approximately half of
the world’s one million ethnic Wa live in Myanmar, where they are mostly
concentrated in the southeastern and northeastern parts of Shan State.
Previously, the ethnic Wa grew poppy to produce opium. However, recently
they have been focusing more on producing crystal meth. In 1989, the Wa had
formed a military wing, which the highlighted article describes as a “powerful
militia.” The article explains that the Wa churn out ice, heroin and highlyaddictive caffeine-laced methamphetamine pills to fund their powerful militia.
For more information on the ethnic Wa, see http://www.peoplesoftheworld.org/
text?people=Wa. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Thai Police Make ‘Largest Ever’ Crystal Meth
Seizure,” Singapore News, 17 October 2017. https://
sg.news.yahoo.com/thai-police-largest-ever-crystal-methseizure-091322948.html
Police said the seizure was made on Monday in the
northeastern province of Nakhon Ratchasima when a pick-up
truck tried to evade a checkpoint before dawn.
It (the drug) is being churned out in unprecedented volume
by Myanmar-based drug labs operated by the Wa -- a selfgoverning ethnic group behind the drug trade in the Golden
Triangle which covers Myanmar’s Shan State, Laos and
northern Thailand.
Drugs are smuggled south into Thailand, mostly destined
for Malaysia or even Australia -- the world’s largest per
capita consumer of crystal meth -- where the price surges.
The Wa churn out ice, heroin, and highly-addictive caffeinelaced methamphetamine pills to fund their powerful militia.

“The Wa churn out ice, heroin, and highly-addictive caffeine-laced methamphetamine pills to fund their
powerful militia.”

Nandeng, Wa-Bang, Northern Shan State, Myanmar.

Source: David and Jessie Flickr Account, https://www.flickr.com/photos/74568056@N00/3880588519, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

43

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Security for the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor
OE Watch Commentary: When the government of Pakistan signed agreements with
China to develop infrastructure projects as part of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor
(CPEC) several years ago, it considered infrastructure security an important factor
alongside economic growth. The accompanying excerpted articles demonstrate that a
recent incident involving the kidnapping and murder of two Chinese citizens in Pakistan
is causing Pakistani authorities to increase security to protect CPEC projects. The articles
also provide insight into how the incident may impact Chinese-Pakistani relations.
The first article comes from the Chinese government news agency Xinhua and it reports
on China’s reaction to the announcement that “DNA reports have confirmed that the two
persons killed in Balochistan in June 2017 were the same two Chinese nationals, who were
kidnapped from Quetta in May 2017.” The article notes that Pakistan already provided
China information in June that the two abductees were “probably dead.” The quote
from the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson stating that it “will continue to support
Pakistan’s efforts to fight terrorism and safeguard national stability” shows that China has
not reacted harshly to the news. The two Chinese citizens killed did not work on CPEC
projects and the Chinese government appears to be satisfied with Pakistan’s efforts for
security on CPEC projects so far. Pakistan established the Special Security Division in
2016 with 9000 soldiers from the Army and several thousand paramilitary personnel under
the command of a two star general to protect CPEC projects.
The second article from Dawn, a widely read English-language newspaper in Pakistan,
reports on new security units that will be set up to protect Chinese citizens working
in Pakistan. The article notes that Pakistani officials “decided to establish two more
specialised units in Sindh — in addition to an existing one — for the security of Chinese
nationals working in the province” and that the two units “would be set up in Hyderabad
and Sukkur, respectively, as the existing unit was responsible for the security of Chinese
nationals in Karachi alone.” The article also reports that the current unit providing
protection for Chinese workers is made up of “as many as 1,358 personnel, mostly retired
army men” and that officials believe that “1,469 personnel were needed for the identical
purpose.” It is significant that Pakistan decided to double the number of personnel assigned
to protect Chinese citizens working on various CPEC projects, but it is worth noting that
the new units will not be assigned in Balochistan where the two Chinese people were
abducted and killed.
The kidnapping and murder of two Chinese citizens in Balochistan earlier this year does
not appear to have caused any major issues in Chinese-Pakistani relations. The formation
of two new units to protect Chinese workers demonstrates steps Pakistan is taking as it
continues to work on CPEC projects and conduct the nation-wide counterterrorism effort
‘Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad.’ End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

China–Pakistan Economic Corridor.

Source: Javedpk05 via Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AChina_Pakistan_Economic_Corridor.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: “Pakistan confirms death of 2 kidnapped
Chinese nationals,” Xinhua, 30 October 2017.
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/201710/30/c_136715642.htm
Pakistan on Monday confirmed the death of two
Chinese nationals who were killed in southwestern
Balochistan province days after they were
kidnapped from Quetta, the provincial capital in
May this year. “The DNA reports have confirmed
that the two persons killed in Balochistan in
June 2017 were the same two Chinese nationals,
who were kidnapped from Quetta in May, 2017,”
Pakistan’s foreign ministry said in a statement…
”The Government of Pakistan would continue to
conduct thorough investigation and apprehend
the perpetrators of this crime and to bring them to
justice,” the statement said…
The Pakistani side provided China information
in June that the two abductees were “probably
dead.” Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson
Hua Chunying, speaking on the matter in June,
has stressed that China opposes terrorism in any
form, and that China will continue to support
Pakistan’s efforts to fight terrorism and safeguard
national stability.

“It was decided that two more units would be set up in Hyderabad and Sukkur, respectively, as the existing
unit was responsible for the security of Chinese nationals in Karachi alone.”

Source: Imtiaz Ali, “New security units to be set up in Sindh for Chinese working on CPEC projects,” Dawn, 28 October 2017. https://www.
dawn.com/news/1366711
Police on Friday decided to establish two more specialised units in Sindh — in addition to an existing one — for the security of Chinese nationals
working in the province on projects relating to the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). A meeting chaired by Inspector General of Police
A.D. Khowaja at the Central Police Office also decided to recommend to the provincial government the recruitment of over 1,400 policemen for the
new units. The participants exchanged views about “restructuring” of the Special Protection Units (SPUs) and provision of security to the CPEC…
It was decided that two more units would be set up in Hyderabad and Sukkur, respectively, as the existing unit was responsible for the security of
Chinese nationals in Karachi alone…Informed sources told Dawn that the meeting was informed that presently as many as 1,358 personnel, mostly
retired army men, had been recruited for providing security to the Chinese nationals working on CPEC-related projects in the province.
The meeting was told that as many as 1,469 personnel were needed for the identical purpose, but retired army personnel who also met the
required criteria were not available in Sindh for recruitment. Therefore, it was decided that 1,469 fresh recruitments would be made in the police
department for the new units. The new recruits would be selected from the waiting list of policemen…Meanwhile, the IGP issued directions for
setting up a Chinese desk at Karachi airport where personnel of Special Branch would be deployed for foreigners’ security…
OE Watch | December 2017

44

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
The Armenian Security Cooperation Quandary
OE Watch Commentary: On 12 October 2017, the
Armenian Parliament approved a deal for a $100 million
loan from Russia to purchase weapons. While at first glance
the deal does not stand out from previous agreements, the
accompanying excerpted articles point out some noteworthy
aspects of it.
The first article from 1in.am, a Russian language news
website in Armenia, discusses the agreement and mentions
how a “previous loan related to military-technical cooperation
for $200 million between Armenia and Russia was signed
in June 2015.” The recent $100 million loan agreement is
reportedly the first half of another $200 million loan, though a
key difference is that in 2015 Russia stipulated which weapons
Armenia could purchase.
The article also includes some analysis as to what Armenia
could acquire with the loan and notes the possibility to
purchase self-propelled artillery systems. According to
estimates of the inventories of the Armed Forces of Armenia
and Azerbaijan, self-propelled artillery is one area in which
Azerbaijan has an advantage, including double the overall
number of systems and more modern systems like the 152mm
2S19 Mtsa-S. The expert quoted in the article believes “Russia
will not agree to sell the “Msta-S” self-propelled howitzers to
Armenia” and instead points to the 152mm 2S5 Giantsint-S
which he notes “are somewhat outdated, but practically fulfill
the same combat tasks.”
The piece from Lragir, an independent Armenian news
website, is a brief interview with Eduard Sharmazanov, the
Vice President of the Armenian National Assembly and it
provides an official viewpoint of the deal and the security
situation facing Armenia. Sharmazanov mentions that the
loan agreement allows Armenia to purchase weapons “from
Russia not at market prices, but [at Russian] domestic prices.”
The purchase of weapons at prices the Russian military
receives domestically is something that takes place through
Armenia’s membership in the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), though Sharmazanov’s comment that
“The weapons that Russia will sell to Armenia for $100
million could be sold to others for $500 million,” makes it
appear as if Armenia is getting preferential treatment.
Lastly, the interviewer asks Sharmazanov about the
ongoing Russian sales of weapons to Azerbaijan, which has
been, as Sharmazanov notes, “…one of the painful issues in
Armenian-Russian relations.” In the past few years Armenian
officials have been increasingly vocal about their frustration
over Russia’s sales of weapons to Azerbaijan and have
made attempts to look for additional security cooperation
partners. If the recent approval of the loan from Russia is any
indication, Armenia remains closely allied with Russia despite
the quandary. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Armenian officials consider [Russian] weapons sales to
Azerbaijan to be one of the painful issues in ArmenianRussian relations…”
Source: Sargsyan, Aram. “Какие виды вооружений будут поставлены
Армении по новому военному кредиту? (Which types of weapons will
Armenia be given from the new military loan?),” 1in.am, 23 October 2017.
http://ru.1in.am/1203132.html
Experts continue to discuss the meaning and goals of the new Russian
“military loan.” Remember that on 12 October, the Armenian government
approved an agreement to receive a new “military loan” from Russia, upon
which $100 million will be provided for preferential terms for the acquisition
of modern weapons and equipment from Russia…The previous loan related to
military-technical cooperation for $200 million between Armenia and Russia
was signed in June 2015.
What problems will the new batch of Russian weapons solve for the Armenian
Armed Forces, keeping in mind the acquisition by Azerbaijan of the same
Russian and other countries’ weapons worth billions?...
Assessing the military-technical aspects of this and looking at the question of
what types of weapons will be provided to the Armed Forces of Armenia under
the new agreement, (expert) Eduard Abrahamyan (noted), that the Armenia
Army needs powerful artillery systems…but that Russia will not agree to sell
the “Msta-S” self-propelled howitzers to Armenia…“I think that the $100
million loan will give us an opportunity to purchase (other) mobile artillery,
which is noticeably non-existent in the armed forces…it is realistic that
Armenia will acquire the 2S5 “Giantsint,” which are somewhat outdated, but
practically fulfill the same combat tasks. The purchase of these corresponds to
obtaining inexpensive weapons…
Source: Papyan, Siranush. “Если вы знаете, где можно купить оружие
дешевле, скажите (If you know where it is possible to buy cheaper weapons,
then say so),” Lragir, 17 October 2017. http://www.lragir.am/index/rus/0/
interview/view/58776
Interview with Eduard Sharmazanov, Vice President of the Armenian National
Assembly
Lragir: Mr. Sharmazanov, how do you regard the new loan agreement (for
weapons)…Are we not just increasing our dependence on Russia?
Sharmazanov: …Russia already provided Armenia with a $200 million loan
and now agrees to give another $100 million at our request…complaining about
this loan is equal to complaining about strengthening security…At the moment
not a single country can provide us with weapons on such terms, or even terms
close to it…Parliament passed a decision, according to which Armenia purchases
weapons from Russia not at market prices, but (Russian) domestic prices. Many
in Armenia protested and asked why Russia is slow with deliveries of weapons
in the framework of the $200 million loan. The weapons are delivered…The
weapons that Russia will sell to Armenia for $100 million could be sold to others
for $500 million.
Lragir: Do Russia’s sales of weapons to Azerbaijan also come from our
interests?
Sharmazanov: Our position is known – Armenian officials consider [Russian]
weapons sales to Azerbaijan to be one of the painful issues in Armenian-Russian
relations…

OE Watch | December 2017

45

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
A New Chapter in Uzbek-Russian Security Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: Shavkat Mirziyoyev’s first year
as Uzbek President has been notable for his efforts to repair
relationships with neighboring and regional governments after years
of strained relations under former President Islam Karimov. The
accompanying excerpted articles report on recent Uzbek-Russian
security cooperation and provide insight into the new partnership
that is emerging between Uzbekistan and Russia.
The first article from Gazeta.uz, a Russian language website
with news on Uzbekistan, reports on the Uzbek-Russian joint
military exercise that took place “at the mountain-field training
center ‘Forish’.” It notes that the exercise concluded with “the two
countries carrying out a counterterrorism operation to eliminate
an armed group in difficult to reach mountainous terrain.” The
exercise marks the first time that Uzbek and Russian Armed Forces
have worked together since 2007, when they both participated in the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization’s Peace Mission exercise. They
also held a joint exercise at the Forish training center in 2005. There
are currently no other scheduled joint Uzbek-Russian exercises.
The second article is from the online version of the Russian daily
newspaper Kommersant and it discusses the military-technical
agreement that the countries signed earlier this year. The article
notes various aircraft and tanks of the Uzbek Armed Forces that
could be refitted under the agreement, but the most important
aspect of the agreement is how “Uzbekistan receives the same
de facto privileges as Russia’s CSTO (Collective Security Treaty
Organization) partners” and that this means “Uzbekistan has the
right [to] purchase weapons and equipment not at commercial
prices, but [at Russian] domestic prices.” It is worth remembering
that Uzbekistan suspended its membership in the CSTO in 2012.
The right to purchase Russian arms at lower than commercial prices
might be a way for Russia to either entice Uzbekistan to return to
the CSTO or establish good relations with President Mirziyoyev, but
this may only be partially successful. As the article notes, “Russia
expected that Uzbek Su-25 attack aircraft and MiG-29 fighters
ready for repairs would be modernized at locations in the Russian
aviation industry,” but that “even after signing the agreement, the
Uzbek military preferred to send them not to Russia, but to the
558th aircraft plant in Belarus.” While Uzbekistan and Russia have
increased security cooperation since President Mirziyoyev came
into office, there are signs that this could be slow to develop. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The situation changed after the death of
Uzbek President Islam Karimov. Already with
his successor, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, the militaries
of the two sides have signed an agreement on
military-technical cooperation…The terms of
the agreement are unprecedented: Uzbekistan
receives the same de facto privileges as Russia’s
CSTO partners.”

Vladimir Putin with Shavkat Mirziyoyev.

Source: The Russian Presidential Press and Information Office via Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AVladimir_Putin_with_Shavkat_Mirziyoyev_(2017-04-05).jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

Source: “Военные учения Узбекистана и РФ завершены (The military
exercise of Uzbekistan and Russia has finished),” Gazeta.uz, 7 October
2017. https://www.gazeta.uz/ru/2017/10/07/mil/
The special tactical exercise of units of the Ministries of Defense of
Uzbekistan and Russia has ended at the mountain-field training center
“Forish”…On the last day of the exercise, soldiers of the two countries
carried out a counterterrorism operation to eliminate an armed group
in difficult to reach mountainous terrain…
Source: Ivan Safronov and Aleksandra Jorjevich, “Список,
вооружающий воображение (A weapons wish list),” Kommersant, 4
October 2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3428668
As it has been reported to Kommersant, Uzbekistan has decided which
types of weapons and military equipment it wants to acquire from Russia.
There is interest in armored vehicles and ammunition as well as Su-30M
fighters. However, according to Kommersant’s information, Uzbekistan’s
inquiries do not match up to its finances…
…on September 20 Nikolay Patrushev, (Russian) Security Council
Secretary, discussed the prospects of military-technical cooperation at a
meeting with Viktor Makhmudov, Security Council Secretary under the
President of Uzbekistan…the sides touched on the issue of repairing the
equipment Tashkent inherited after the collapse of the Soviet Union (T-62
and T-72 tanks brought to the level of T-62M and T-72B3 and “Mi” type
helicopters)…up until 2005 there were separate deliveries of BTR-80s,
Mi-8 helicopters, and various caliber ammunition. Afterwards, the Uzbek
security services’ interests were limited to supplies of ammunition and
explosives…Russia and Uzbekistan did not sign larger contracts.
The situation changed after the death of Uzbek President Islam Karimov.
Already with his successor, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, the militaries of the two
sides have signed an agreement on military-technical cooperation…The
terms of the agreement are unprecedented: Uzbekistan receives the same
de facto privileges as Russia’s CSTO partners. In particular, Uzbekistan
has the right purchase weapons and equipment not at commercial prices,
but (Russian) domestic prices (for example, according to this arrangement,
Kazakhstan acquired Russian Su-30M fighters)…
…Russia expected that Uzbek Su-25 attack aircraft and MiG-29 fighters
ready for repairs would be modernized at locations in the Russian aviation
industry. However, even after signing the agreement, the Uzbek military
preferred to send them not to Russia, but to the 558th aircraft plant in
Belarus…
OE Watch | December 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russian Military Raising Accession Standards
and Training Levels
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying interview of Colonel
General Viktor Goremykin, Chief of the Russian Federation Defense
Ministry Main Personnel Directorate, in the Russian Journal Oriyentir
discusses some recent developments in the Russian military’s efforts
to promote enlisted professionalization. In particular, Colonel
Goremykin discusses the legal and regulatory measures required to
increase the quality and quantity of contract servicemen. Towards this
end, the Russian Federation is in the process of tweaking the program
for contract serviceman accession and developing a system for their
professional development. If successfully implemented, the Russian
Federation will have, for the first time, a multi-tier system for selecting,
training, and employing contract serviceman through a full career life
cycle.
In terms of contract serviceman accession, Russia is implementing
a three-stage process for selecting candidates involving an initial,
preliminary, and in-depth (final) selection. The initial selection will
be a two-step process first involving a computer-based assessment on
the Russian Ministry of Defense website designed by the General Staff
Academy of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, and then an
interview with an Armed Forces representative at an initial recruiting
station, unit of intended service, or local military commissariat (draft
board).
The preliminary selection includes military orientation; filing
a formal application for service, verification of personal data and
background (citizenship information, academic and employment history,
law enforcement background check, and medical documentation);
preliminary medical examination; and preliminary psychological
examination. If no disqualifying conditions are found, the findings are
sent to the recruiting station for further review. Both the initial and
preliminary stages may be conducted at the unit of intended service.
In-depth selection is carried out at certain recruiting stations with
all candidates who passed the preliminary selection. Sometimes
preliminary and in-depth selection occur at these recruiting stations,
in cases where the candidates live nearby. In-depth selection includes
further verification of personal data and background; in-depth medical
examinations; in-depth psychological examinations; physical fitness
exam; building the candidate’s personnel file; and registration for access
to state secrets (if necessary). The selection process is completed
when the candidate’s eligibility for military service is determined. The
selection process typically takes 1-2 weeks to 6 months, depending on
the: needs of the Armed Forces; previous civil education and military
training; place of residence, and unit training cycle. After the candidate
is assessed into service, the new serviceman is in a probationary status
for three months. The commander of the military training unit may
discharge the new serviceman at this time, if deemed in the best interest
of the Armed Forces. This probationary status applies both to contract
serviceman that are assessing into the military from civilian status and
former conscripts that are changing their status to contract serviceman.
(continued)

Source: Andrey Sokolov, “Система Контрактного Отбора
Доказала Свою Эффективность (The Contract Recruitment
System Has Proven Its Effectiveness),” Oriyentir Online, 1 August
2017. http://orientir.milportal.ru/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/8.17.
pdf
In accordance with the Military Doctrine of the Russian
Federation and taking into account the instructions of the President
of the Russian Federation an extremely important role in carrying
out Army reform is assigned to the improvement of the system for
manning the Armed Forces and the phased transition of service
members at private and NCO level to a contract footing. A number
of new legal regulatory documents governing this process as well
as other aspects of the defense department’s personnel policy have
recently been adopted…
[Sokolov] Colonel General, to begin our conversation, please
describe the system for the selection of candidates for military
service under contract that is operating at the present stage.
[Goremykin] First of all a few words about how we arrived at the
need for the development of the selection system. In May 2012 Edict
No. 604 of the President of the Russian Federation “On the Further
Improvement of Military Service in the Russian Federation” set the
starting point for the present stage in the development of military
service under contract for personnel at private and NCO level, and
this is currently continuing…During this period work was carried
out on an unprecedented scale, as a result of which the number of
service members performing military service under contract in the
military posts of soldiers (seamen), sergeants (petty officers), and
warrant officers more than doubled…In four and a half years more
than 330,000 people have been selected for military service under
contract. At present the number of service members under contract
already exceeds the number of drafted service members.
[Sokolov] What tasks have been set for the personnel bodies in
the sphere of manning the troops with service members under
contract?
[Goremykin] …A guideline target of 405,000 military posts subject
to filling with service members under contract has been established
for the year 2017…
[Sokolov] From what sources are you planning to improve the
quality of selection of service members under contract?
[Goremykin] One important but not fully realized source that we
can see is work with citizens who are subject to the draft and who
have received higher education…As a result of this work in the
military districts and in the Northern Fleet in 2015-2016 alone more
than 11,000 people with higher education were accepted for military
service under contract instead of service under the draft…

“In four and a half years, over 330,000 people have been selected for military service under contract. At present
the number of service members under contract already exceeds the number of drafted service members.”

- Colonel General Viktor Goremykin, Chief of the Russian Federation Defense Ministry, Main Personnel Directorate
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Russian Military Raising Accession
Standards and Training Levels
In terms of enlisted professional development, Russia has laid out guidelines for
standardizing the training of contract serviceman (enlisted soldiers and warrant
officers) throughout the Russian Armed Forces. These personnel would include
all contract serviceman in major branches (Ground Forces, Navy, Aerospace
Forces) and specialty branches (Strategic Rocket Forces (RVSN) and Airborne
Troops (VDV)) found in the Ministry of Defense. This standardization involves
establishing specific requirements and qualifications for contract service as they
progress through their careers. Russia envisions a five-tier system for contract
serviceman career development.
The first tier is for training of serviceman to fill rank-and-file entry level
positions. These positions would have been (or currently are) filled by conscripts.
This level of training is accomplished in two phases. The first phase involves a six
week ‘basic training’ that is conducted at 29 training units and 4 higher military
educational institutions. The second phase involves attendance at a Military
Occupational School (MOS). This training usually lasts from three to 10 months,
but some programs are as long as two years, 10 months. This second phase may
be omitted if the serviceman assesses into the Armed Forces with a valid MOS,
such as one provided through a Volunteer Society for Cooperation with the Army,
Aviation, and Navy (DOSAAF) program, vocational school, or other means.
The second tier is for squad leaders, tank commanders, crew leaders, etc.
Candidates for second-tier positions are picked from the first tier based upon
leadership qualities and technical proficiency, having served at least two years in a
first-tier position. In addition, there are more administrative requirements relating
to age, health, education level, physical fitness, and military discipline. They
receive an additional three months of training that may be conducted at various
locations, depending on branch of service and specialty.
The third tier is for platoon leaders and deputy platoon leaders. (In the
Russian system, contract serviceman often fill platoon leader positions for the
‘Combat Support Platoons’ that are found in most battalions.) Candidates for
these positions are selected based upon recommendations from their immediate
supervisor and have served at a tier two position for 3-5 years. They receive an
additional three months of training that may be conducted at various locations,
depending on branch of service and specialty.
The fourth tier is for contract serviceman serving in regiments, brigades, and
divisions. Candidates for these positions are selected from third-tier contract
serviceman, who have served at least 10 years. They receive three to five months
of staff training at the Ryazan Higher Airborne Command School (RVVDKU).
The fifth tier is for contract serviceman serving at the Army Group-level and
higher echelons. Candidates for these positions are selected from fourth-tier
contract serviceman, who have served at least 15 years. They also receive three to
five months of staff training at the RVVDKU.

Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Призывник по конкурсу:
Военкоматы России стали более тщательно отбирать
в строй солдат-новобранцев (Drafted through
Competition: Russia’s Military Commissariats Have
Begun Selecting New Recruits to the Ranks More
Carefully),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 19 October
2017. https://rg.ru/2017/10/19/voenkomaty-stali-boleetshchatelno-otbirat-v-stroj-soldat-novobrancev.html
The mass recruitment of contract soldiers into the
Armed Forces has enabled the generals to toughen
the requirements applied to young men of draft age.
In essence, it is a matter of organizing a kind of
personnel filter at the country’s military commissariats.
Commanders, who were for a long time compelled to
deal with not very healthy subordinates, undereducated
people, and arrant slobs, are now full of optimism. It
seems that the Defense Ministry has decided to put an end
to the practice of drafting such a contingent into the Army
once and for all.
What is more, the selection of fixed-term draftees has
been placed on a competitive footing in many regions of
Russia. Priority in the process of selecting future soldiers
is being given to strong, educated lads who have some
pre-Army military training and who are geared toward
conscientious service.
“Over seven or eight years, especially during the
last three to four years, the quality of draftees has
undoubtedly improved. This is due to the established
state policy. Draftee numbers have diminished. But
the reduction of their recruitment is actually making it
possible to select a smaller number from a larger number
for the Armed Forces’ needs while raising their quality,”
Colonel General Mikhail Mizintsev, Chief of the Russian
Federation National Center for Defense Management.
As an example, he referred to the following statistic.
Whereas, previously, two out of 10 draftees would make it
into the ranks, now it is one. At the same time, the Army is
not experiencing any shortfall of soldiers, as previously.
The number of young Russian citizens who are prepared,
and even keen, to serve for the legally-required 12 months
is progressively rising. Moreover, vacancies in the
soldiers’ ranks are more and more frequently being filled
by soldiers with valid occupational military occupational
specialties.[acquired from DOSAAF programs or
higher education] It is precisely this fact that has made
it possible to reduce the draft intake to 134,000 in the
current fall, which is 18,000 fewer than it was in the same
period last year…

The accompanying article from Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses how increasing
the number of contract serviceman has allowed Russia to reduce draft quotas for
conscripts. The Russian Federation has made significant strides in improving
enlisted servicemen’s quality of life and raising the prestige of military service, as
described by Colonel General Mikhail Mizintsev, Chief of the Russian Federation
National Center for Defense Management. (Apparently, many young men are
now viewing service as a two-year contractor as being more advantageous than being a one-year conscript.) Russia has made legislative
changes to allow young men that have reported to draft boards, but not conscripted, to now work in the government. Previous legislation
was worded to not only bar draft dodgers from government positions, but also young men who reported to draft boards but were not
drafted due to the needs of the government. (In certain areas, particularly the North Caucuses, military service is very prestigious, with
regional draft quotas often being met or exceeded. The young men turned away in such situations often had difficulty finding employment
in the security services, which are also considered prestigious in these areas.) Russia appears to be making significant gains in regard to
(continued)
enlisted professional development. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
OE Watch | December 2017
48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Russian Military Raising Accession
Standards and Training Levels
“Over seven or eight years, especially during the last three to four years, the quality of draftees has
undoubtedly improved. This is due to the established state policy. Draftee numbers have diminished. But
the reduction of their recruitment is actually making it possible to select a smaller number from a larger
number for the Armed Forces’ needs while raising their quality..”
- Colonel General Mikhail Mizintsev, Chief of the Russian Federation National Center for Defense Management

TOP TWO, BOTTOM RIGHT: Scenes from Day of recruit on the basis of the mountain junction of the Southern Military District (Republic of Karachay-Cherkessia)
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=46577@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

MIDDLE TWO, BOTTOM LEFT: Control firing of the tankers of the South-Eastern Military District within the framework of the final inspection (Kadamovsky, Rostov region)
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=46749@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russia’s Development of Electromagnetic Pulse Weapons
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying excerpt
from Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses Russia’s development of
a new Electromagnetic Pulse Weapon (EMP) program. The
Alabuga [Алабуга] EMP program is being developed by the
Radioelectronics Technologies Concern (KRET) [Концерн
Радиоэлектронные Технологии (КРЭТ)]. One component
of the program involves the development of an EMP missile
that emits an electromagnetic pulse 200-300 meters above
an enemy position by means of a high-frequency high-power
electromagnetic field generator. This EMP would create an ultra
high frequency (UHF) field of approximately 3.5 kilometers, not
only disabling computers, radars, communications systems and
precision weapons, but also making them unusable by damaging
their electronic components. Although the system is nonlethal
and causes no adverse effects to humans, the electromagnetic
effects of the missile (up to 100 gigawatts) are reportedly
comparable to a nuclear weapon.
The second accompanying excerpt from Svobodnaya Pressa
discusses the development of a now abandoned ground vehicle
based EMP weapon. The Ranets-Ye [Ранец-Е], is based on
a MAZ-543 wheeled chassis, weighing around 5 tons. The
Ranets-Ye is essentially a short-range surface-to-air system
in which the kill element utilized is not a missile, but a 60
degree cone of 500 megawatt SFH radiation that lasts 20
nanoseconds. This EMP is capable of neutralizing all aircraft,
cruise missiles, and any munition with electronics. At a range
of 8-14 kilometers the EMP destroys electronic components,
and disrupts electronic at a range of up to 40 kilometers. The
Ranets-Ye consists of a diesel generator, electromagnetic pulse
generator, and targeting radar. The system is also reportedly
capable of integrating into air defense networks, in order to
obtain targeting data.
Although these capabilities are impressive, the Ranets-Ye
was not adopted by the Russian military for two reasons. First,
in order to be effective, the system needs a direct line-ofsite to the target. Second, the system requires 20 minutes to
recharge its capacitors between pulses. Recent technological
advances in capacitor technologies and the proliferation UAV
and missile technologies may resurrect the Ranets-Ye, or lead
to the creation of a similar, new program. The Ranets-Ye could
be a very effective air defense system. The 60 degree cone of
energy emitted from the system would be excellent for targeting
various stealth technologies and small UAVs with small radar
signatures, as precise coordinates required. In addition, such
a system may be quite economical and has fewer sustainment
issues, as it does not require expensive missiles and associated
provisioning.
The Svobodnaya Pressa article also explains what
technologies future Russian EMP weapons could be based upon.
The Soviet Union, and later the Russian Federation, have also
conducted research on developing more powerful EMP pulses
with new technologies, or in Russian parlance ‘new physical
principles.’ In the 1980s and 1990s, the Russians experimented
with crossing plasma streams to generate powerful bursts of
radiation, possibly strong enough to disrupt the operation of an
ICBM warhead. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Aleksey Ivanov, “В России создали электромагнитные бомбы
(Electromagnetic Bombs Created in Russia),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 28
September 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/09/28/v-rossii-sozdali-svch-bomby.html
Russia’s creation of electronic munitions damaging enemy equipment
through a powerful microwave pulse has moved into the stage of specific
experimental development. RIA Novosti was informed of this by Vladimir
Mikheyev, advisor to the first deputy general director of Radioelectronics
Technologies Concern (KRET) [Концерн Радиоэлектронные Технологии
(КРЭТ)]…He lifted slightly the veil of secrecy over so-called Project Alabuga.
Rossiyskaya Gazeta already reported that tests began back a few years ago
of “ jammers” exploding at a height of 200-300 meters and shutting down
electronic equipment within a radius of 3.5 kilometers. Because of this, a
potential enemy loses the capability of effective control of his own weapons
-- communications and means of command and control and guidance do not
function.
According to Mikheyev, a package of scientific research codenamed Alabuga
concluded several years ago in which the main directions of development
of electronic weapons became understandable. That said, their effect on
equipment can vary, from “blinding” to physical damage of main electronic
elements, circuit boards, assemblies, and systems…Now Russian military
personnel and scientists from the military-industrial complex have moved
on to a new stage of the project -- creation of electromagnetic weapons:
projectiles, bombs, and missiles carrying a special magnetic explosion
generator.
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Российская «Алабуга» будет страшнее атомной
бомбы (Russia’s Alabuga Will Be Scarier Than an Atom Bomb),” Svobodnaya
Pressa Online, 3 October 2017. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/182594/
…Russia already has such a weapon [in reference to the Alabuga], which is
totally viable. And has had it for a long time already. Admittedly, it has still
not been put into service for reasons on which we will dwell below. In 2001 a
working prototype of the Ranets-Ye electromagnetic device, which is based on
a MAZ-543 wheeled chassis and weighs around 5 tonnes, was presented at a
Malaysian military equipment exhibition.
Ranets-Ye is essentially a short-range surface-to-air system in which the kill
element utilized is not a missile but an SFH electromagnetic pulse of up to
20 nanoseconds in duration and a power of 500 megawatts. It is capable of
neutralizing all types of aircraft -- from UAVs to fighters and bombers -- cruise
missiles, and all types of munitions that make use of electronics in one form or
another. At a distance of 8-14 kilometers the pulse fries electronic components,
and at a distance of up to 40 kilometers it disrupts the normal operation of
electronic systems without destroying them. Its broad angle of diffusion of
electromagnetic radiation -- 60 degrees -- should be including among its
merits…The most important elements of this device are its diesel electric
generator, electromagnetic pulse generator, and radar, which is designed to
detect targets that need to be disabled. Incidentally, the device is linked to air
defense systems’ radar equipment, obtaining target data from it…
…an extremely interesting project that stood on the threshold of the transition
from research and development to design planning with a view to building a
prototype combat weapon based on new physical principles was dropped in
1993. In the 1980s the generation of local plasma formations in the atmosphere
was achieved as a result of work on a joint project by the Radio Instrument
Building Scientific Research Institute and the Ioffe Physical Technical Institute.
They were obtained at the point of contact between two or more streams of
powerful electromagnetic radiation. Aerial vehicles and also munitions were
subjected to an impact that destroyed them when they encountered plasma
clusters. The energy from such a plasma device may be sufficient to combat
ICBM warheads…
OE Watch | December 2017

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russia’s ‘Stealth’ Detector: The Struna-1 Bistatic Radar
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpt from an article in
Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses one component of Russia’s solution to stealth
technologies: the Struna-1 series of low altitude early warning radars which
allow the detection of stealth aircraft. The system is manufactured by the
Nizhny Novgorod Research Institute of Radio Engineering (NNIIRT), a
division of the Almaz-Antey Joint Stock Company, the manufacturer of
many of Russia’s strategic air defense systems, including the S-300 and
S-400.
The Struna-1 series is designed to detect the intrusion of low flying
targets with small radar cross sections (cruise missiles, UAVs, light aircraft,
parachutists, etc.) into relatively small geographical areas (military facilities,
urban areas, etc.). The system uses a new, bistatic radar-based technology
that functions by networking several transmit/receive stations. Each of
these stations emits a low energy signal that is collected by all transmitters,
and then triangulated to determine target altitude and flight direction. The
system can also perform non-cooperative identification and classification
into target categories. The Russians claim that the system’s bistatic radar
signature of target is two to three times greater than the monostatic
signature of the same target. A typical, high density employment of the
system involves placing transmit/receive station spans in two parallel
chains, separated by 10 to 11 km, with stations in each span separated by 40
to 50 km distance (the span length is determined by elevation and terrain
features). Although the system is usually deployed as a series of networked
transmit/receive stations, it can function with just one station.
The 52E6 Struna-1 was the first iteration of the system, completed in
1999. The system reportedly operates at a frequency of 450 MHz, but
other sources claim 390-430 MHz. The target detection probability is
reportedly 80-90%, with a false alarm rate of one in a 72 hour period. The
area coverage footprint for the first variant of the system was cited at 50 to
400 km, subject to the number of available stations. The current variant,
which is in serial production for the Russian Armed Forces, is designated
52E6MU Struna-1MU. The principal difference between the versions is
the newer technology, which permits smaller containers and lower power
consumption for deployment and operation of the Struna-1MU. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Ruslan Melnikov, “Российская РЛС превратит
истребители-”невидимки” США в устаревший хлам
(Russian Radar Station Will Transform US Stealth Fighters
into Obsolete Junk),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 16 October
2017. https://rg.ru/2017/10/16/v-ssha-rasskazali-o-rossijskomotvete-na-stels-istrebiteli.html
An effective system for countering aviation “stealth”
technologies is being used in Russia. It is able to convert
American fifth-generation F-22 and F-35 multirole “stealth”
fighters into obsolete junk.
As reported by the American publication The National
Interest this refers to the Struna-1 bistatic radar system,
which differs from the majority of radars by the location of
the transmitter and the receiver in two different places. This
makes the radar more sensitive and it allows the tracking
of targets developed with “stealth” technologies that are
undetectable by ordinary radars. The Struna-1 ignores antiradar coverings which scatter radar waves. “This allows the
detection of not only ‘stealth’ aircraft, but also other targets
such as hang-gliders [deltaplan] and cruise missiles,” writes
The National Interest.
It is also noted that the Struna-1 itself requires and transmits
less energy, which makes it less vulnerable to anti-radar
weapons.
This system is rather effective in searching for targets flying
at low altitudes. The publication also cited the [maximum]
limit of the [system’s] detection altitude: seven kilometers.
“Although the Struna-1 bistatic radar is not a universal
solution for the detection of ‘stealth’ aircraft, it represents
a serious threat to NATO aviation. Integrated with other
modern radars, the Struna-1 systems can provide the enemy
with critically important information on the location and
movements of ‘stealth’ aircraft’,” summarizes the American
publication.

“An effective system for countering aviation ‘stealth’ technologies is being used in Russia. It is able to
convert American fifth-generation F-22 and F-35 multirole ‘stealth’ fighters into obsolete junk.”
THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | December 2017

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
The Konteyner OTH Radar to Help Combat
Hypersonic Weapons
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Missile Attack
Warning System (SPRN) has three components: 1. A satellite
constellation (a space-based infrared system), that detects
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launches, and then
tracks the ICBM’s flight path. 2. The Voronezh-series of radars,
with ranges of 4,000-6,000 kilometers, that are designed to detect
ICBMs and medium range missiles that enter the exoatmosphere.
These radars have one major weakness: they are designed to
detect high-speed, high-altitude ballistic targets at the greatest
possible range. Due to technical reasons, it is impossible for
these radars to accurately detect and track slower targets,
especially low-flying targets, such as cruise missiles. (Radars of
this type cannot glance beyond the horizon since the radio signal
is propagated in a straight line in the space that is being scanned.)
3. Over-The-Horizon (OTH) radars, with operating ranges of
approximately 3,000 kilometers. OTH radars are capable of
seeing beyond the horizon, because they use shortwave to reflect
their signals off the ionosphere for long-range detection that
is particularly effective at tracking low-flying targets, such as
cruise missiles, as described in the accompanying article from
Rossiyskaya Gazeta.
The Russians have experimented with OTH radars since the
1970s. In 2013, they started trials of the Konteyner OTH radar
(which has been referred to as ‘Product 29B6’) and ‘Konteyner-Z’
manufactured by the Nizhny Novgorod Research Institute of
Radio Engineering (NNIIRT), a division of the Almaz-Antey
Joint Stock Company. The Konteyner has a range of up to 3,000
kilometers, with a coverage area of 60 degrees and maximum
detection altitude of 100 kilometers. There are already plans to
increase the coverage area by increasing the number of masts
(currently 144) and by upgrading the receiver station hardware.
The system is a bistatic radar, where typically the transmit and
receive stations are separated by approximately 300 kilometers,
as described in the accompanying article from Svobodnaya
Pressa. The Konteyner OTH radar appears to be part of Russia’s
solution for defeating hypersonic weapons. The Aerospace
Troops (VKS) estimate that in order to combat hypersonic
weapons, the hypersonic weapons must be detected and target
information must be provided to VKS interceptors at a range
of at least 1,033 kilometers. In order to meet this requirement,
these hypersonic weapons must be detected by the early warning
radars at a range of at least 1,144 km. Although the Konteyner
and several other types of Russian radar could theoretically
detect a target at the required minimum range, Almaz-Antey has
made it clear that there is still much work to do in developing
new hardware, software, and algorithms for proper integration
of OTH radars into the future aerospace defense systems that
could possibly defeat a US hypersonic weapon. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “«Воронеж», «Контейнер», «Тундра»:
Засечь и пресечь атаку на Россию Три источника и три составные
части системы предупреждения о ядерном нападении (‘Voronezh,’
‘Konteyner,’ ‘Tundra,’: Locate and Suppress an Attack Against Russia),”
Svobodnaya Pressa Online, 5 September 2017. https://svpressa.ru/war21/
article/180765/
The creation of the Missile Attack Warning System’s (SPRN) continuous
radar field should be completed in 2018. Sergey Boyev, the Radiotechnical
and Information Systems (RTI) Concern Chairman of the Board of
Directors, announced this in a Kommersant interview. We need to say that
this field actually has already existed since 2016 when the test operation
of three Voronezh radars began in Yeniseysk, Barnaul, and Orsk. But one
will be able to talk about the complete readiness of the Global Missile
Attack Warning System when these radar sites will be placed on alert.
Boyev assumes that this event should occur already at the end of this
year. A continuous radar field will be obtained for the first time in the
country’s history. The northwestern axis of a possible missile attack was
not monitored in the Soviet Union…
The over-the-horizon radars, the operating range of which reaches
3,000 kilometers. Their operation is based upon the effect of Novosibirsk
Engineer Nikolay Kabanov. The effect is the reflection of shortwave
band radio waves from the ionosphere. Having been reflected from the
ionosphere (as light beams are reflected from a mirror), the wave turns
toward the Earth’s surface. Then, having struck an object, the wave
returns to the receiving antenna along that same route… this radar sees
absolutely all objects, which are located in the airspace, while tracking
their motion trajectory to a depth of up to 3,000 kilometers, in other words,
not only aircraft but also cruise missiles, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
During the setup work on the first over-the-horizon radar, the specialists
demonstrated to the members of a Ministry of Defense commission how
a small airfield in Norway operates, from which 2-3 seat light aircraft
conduct flights. But, in the process, the Konteyner, in contrast to the
Voronezh, is not capable of looking into outer space. These two types of
radars supplement each other, while permitting them to obtain complete
information on airborne and space objects.
The first Konteyner was placed in test operation in 2013 in the Mordovian
Village of Kovylkino. The reception antennas are located here. The
transmitting antennas are located 300 kilometers away – in Nizhniy
Novgorod Oblast.
The radar’s reception portion is a field with dimensions of 1,300 X
200 meters, on which 144 antenna masts with a height of 35 meters are
located. Initially, the surveillance sector totaled 180 degrees, and it has
been expanded up to 240 meters by the present time. The first Konteyner
has already been placed on alert. The operating radius - is up to 3,000
kilometers. The cost of the first radar while taking development into
account is R10 billion. However, subsequently, when the new radars will
appear, the cost of each of them will be reduced.
The second Konteyner radar is being built in the Far East at the present
time. It should be ready this year. RTI plans the construction of that
number of over-the-horizon radars, which would also permit the creation
of a continuous radar field for radars of this type. They assume that they
will obtain a complete over-the-horizon field by 2025.

“…the latest Konteyner over-the-horizon radars... are most effective in determining the location of fast
aerodynamic targets, in other words, aircraft and cruise missiles.”
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2017

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: The Konteyner OTH Radar to Help
Combat Hypersonic Weapons
Source: Dmitriy Grigoryev, “Россию накроет сплошное противоракетное радиолокационное поле (A Continuous Missile Defense Radar
Field Will Cover Russia),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 3 September 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/09/03/rossiiu-nakroet-sploshnoe-protivoraketnoeradiolokacionnoe-pole.html
An RTI Press Service spokesman explained that the latest Konteyner over-the-horizon radars will also participate in the creation of the single
radar field along with the Voronezh, Dnepr, Don, and Podsolnukh radars that are already on alert duty. They can ensure the detection of
ballistic missiles, but are most effective in determining the location of fast aerodynamic targets, in other words, aircraft and cruise missiles.
The Konteyner radars are more intended for determining the location and tracking aerodynamic targets such as aircraft or cruise missiles.
Their operating principle is simple: The radiated signal is reflected from the ionosphere and permits it to see everything within 3,000
kilometers. This is pure physics. By way of illustration, during the tests of the Konteyner, our specialists saw in plain sight all of Western
Europe with all of the objects in its airspace,” a press service spokesman told the Agency.
In other words, the Voronezh radars and the Podsolnukh and latest Konteyner over-the-horizon radars, which are part of the overall missile
attack warning system (SPRN), determine the location of the targets, which reach outer space, and provide defense from aircraft and cruise
missiles.
We must add that right now the first Konteyner radar is on test-alert. It is located in the outskirts of the Mordovian city of Kovylkino. The
system permits the tracking and identification of military and civil aviation targets at a distance of up to 3,000 kilometers and at an altitude of
up to 100 kilometers, and also detects cruise missile launches.
The radar’s antenna field numbers more than 100 masts and the first Konteyner tracks the space from Poland, Germany, and the Baltic to
Turkey, Syria, and Israel on the northwestern axis. The complex’s capabilities are being increased so that the radar would be able to “see” all
of the aerodynamic targets, including aircraft with small dimensions.
Right now the following radar centers are part of the Russian missile attack warning system: “Murmansk” based upon a Dnepr radar;
“Pechora” based upon a Daryal radar; “Irkutsk” based upon two Dnepr radars; “Balkhash” based upon a Dnepr radar; “Baranovichi”
based upon a Volga radar; “Lekhtusi” based upon a Voronezh radar; and, “Armavir” based upon two Voronezh-DM radars. Furthermore,
today the Russian Navy operates three Podsolnukh over-the-horizon radars on the coasts of the Caspian Sea, the Sea of Japan, and the Sea of
Okhotsk.

“…the Konteyner [OTH Radar], in contrast to the Voronezh [radar], is not capable of looking into

outer space. These two types of radars supplement each other, while permitting them to obtain complete
information on airborne and space objects.”

Konteyner OTH Radar.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, https://function.mil.ru/news_page/world/more.htm?id=11873707@egNews, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russia Successfully Tests Satellite ‘Mothership’
with Two Interceptors
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpts
from Interfax-AVN and Izvestiya discuss Russia’s recent
experiment with a satellite ‘mothership’ (Kosmos-2521)
that has two smaller satellites attached to it. These smaller
satellites are reportedly capable of undocking from the mother
satellite, rendezvousing with another satellite, conducting
some type of assessment on it, and then returning to the
mothership. These inspector satellites could be used for
peaceful purposes, such as inspecting exteriors, refueling,
and repair of other satellites. They are reportedly intended
to diagnose problems in malfunctioning satellites, and
then transmitting the data to earth in order to determine if
there is a possible fix for the malfunction. The authors also
mention possible military purposes for these ‘interceptor’
satellites, such as signals intelligence and even destroying
other satellites. This idea may seem far-fetched, but Russia
was able to conduct satellite rendezvous operations that
AMOS-5 communications satellite.
resulted in the destruction of another satellite as early as
Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2011/i-3nJkm7n, CC 4.0.
1968 (Kosmos-252 rendezvoused with, and destroyed the
Kosmos-248 satellite). Russia’s experimentation with satellite ‘motherships’ and interceptors indicates that Russia may be intending to place
small interceptor satellites on its future satellites. These ‘motherships’ could be of any satellite type (navigation, reconnaissance, weather,
signals intelligence, etc.), only ejecting their interceptors in the event of hostilities. If this is the manner that Russia envisions the use of
interceptor satellite technology, Russia could gradually increase its on-orbit anti-satellite capabilities with each new military and civilian
satellite launch. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“In the event of a global conflict, it is extremely important to destroy the enemy’s satellites in order to
deprive him of communications, navigation, and the capability to conduct reconnaissance.”
- Military Expert, Valeriy Mukhin

Source: Sergei Valchenko, Nicholai Surov and Aleksei Ramm, “Россия послала на орбиту инспектора: Военные опробовали в
действии уникальный маневрирующий спутник опознания и перехвата (Russia Sends Inspector Into Orbit: Military Test Operations of
Maneuvering Identification and Intercept Satellite),” Izvestiya Online, 26 October 2017. https://iz.ru/662230/sergei-valchenko-nikolai-surkovaleksei-ramm/rossiia-poslala-na-orbitu-inspektora
Russia’s Space Troops have successfully tested a maneuvering military inspection satellite that is able to approach other orbiting satellites
and inspect them. Such satellites allow the functionality of foreign spy satellites to be determined and, when necessary, they can be
transformed into space interceptor satellites. In the opinion of domestic experts maneuvering inspection satellites will become an important
element in the Russian orbiting constellation and they will play the role of instruments of deterrence in the military space race…
As Izvestiya was told by the Ministry of Defense, during the testing of the controls of the maneuvering military satellite, ground and orbiting
means of communication, ballistic calculation methods and new software were tested. The capabilities of the Space Troops to automatically
undock the satellite from a platform, to remotely control its flight, to use on-board equipment (including means of observation), and to process
and transmit acquired data to the ground were confirmed…
…military expert Valeriy Mukhin told Izvestiya that inspection satellites are an important component of the orbiting forces of any space
power. “In the event of a global conflict it is extremely important to destroy the enemy’s satellites in order to deprive him of communications,
navigation, and the capability to conduct reconnaissance. Thus, the idea of creating such interceptors appeared,” noted the specialist…
According to Valeriy Mukhin the main mission of the orbiting “inspectors” is to establish the purpose of satellites placed in orbit by a
potential enemy. “Based on the external appearance of an object, its construction, and the disposition of its equipment, one can make
assumptions about its purpose,” explained the expert. “In addition, an inspection satellite can easily combine the inspection function with the
functions of an interceptor: it can approach, inspect, launch a missile, and depart.”
Mukhin stressed that satellite interceptors will be needed by Russia only in the event of a conflict, and there is ample work for the inspector
satellites during peacetime. “The ability of such a satellite to actively maneuver between orbits is essential, and this is precisely what is now
being developed by the military during the testing…Our possession of such a system will be a serious deterrence factor for potential enemies.
They will know that the Russian Federation can check whether or not the stated functionality of their satellites corresponds to reality.”…

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2017

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Russia Successfully Tests Satellite ‘Mothership’
with Two Interceptors
“…[satellite] inspections can be conducted for peaceful purposes -- external inspection of objects,
refueling and repair of satellites -- and for military purposes for a certain effect on spacecraft of a
potential or actual enemy.”

Source: “American Space Surveillance Assets Are Keeping an Eye on Russian Inspector Satellite,” Interfax-AVN, 1 November 2017.
..The Russian Defense Ministry announced on 30 October 2017, that it is conducting an experiment in outer space to examine a domestic
satellite by a small spacecraft previously launched from this satellite. “An inspector spacecraft has separated from the small spacecraft today
in a continuation of the experiment,” the announcement stated. The spacecraft’s inspection capability is understood to mean its ability to
maneuver in space to converge with designated space objects. Inspections can be conducted for peaceful purposes -- external inspection of
objects, refueling and repair of satellites -- and for military purposes for a certain effect on spacecraft of a potential or actual enemy…
It pointed out that a spacecraft platform developed for the RF Defense Ministry had been launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome on 23 June
2017. This satellite “is a platform on which different payload options can be accommodated,” the military reported. The Defense Ministry
announced on 23 August 2017 that an “inspector satellite” had separated on that day from the spacecraft platform launched in military
department interests from Plesetsk Cosmodrome on 23 June 2017. “A small spacecraft designed to inspect the condition of a domestic satellite
separated from this platform today. Subsequently it is planned to conduct a scientific experiment of having the small spacecraft examine the
satellite’s external appearance,” the Defense Ministry report disseminated on that day stated…
…the Kosmos-2521 spacecraft [with an orbital inclination of 97.88 degrees, apogee of 664 kilometers, and perigee of 554 kilometers]
separated from the Kosmos-2519 satellite platform. It returned to Kosmos-2519 on 26 October. There was no clarification as to whether or
not they had docked or were flying in the immediate proximity of each other. A new object had been noticed immediately after this -- NORAD
catalog number 42986, international number 2017-037E. According to the international cataloger, the spacecraft platform has the number
2017-037A, the Volga insertion stage 2017-037B, inspector spacecraft number 1 2017-037D, and inspector spacecraft number 2 2017-037E…
Thus, there were two inspector satellites aboard spacecraft platform Kosmos-2519.

Navigation satellite GLONASS-K.

Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2011/i-3nJkm7n/X2, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Lack of Investment in Railways Increases
Economic and Strategic Vulnerabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpts from an article in Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer discusses that at the height of
Soviet power between 1940-1970, Soviet planners envisioned large scale projects spanning the Caucasus, Lower Volga region, northwest, and
Siberia. These projects were deemed to be economically and strategically vital, but have been abandoned or postponed indefinitely. The author
keenly points out that the Arctic is considered a key region for economic and military reasons, but two rail projects (Northern Latitudinal
Railway and Trans-Siberian) that support the region have not been resourced. In addition, Russia has not resourced rail infrastructure projects
in vital areas of the Western and Southern Military Districts. These rail projects would support a number of contingencies to include conflicts
on the Western front (Ukraine/NATO), conflict with Georgia to the south, and the ability to rapidly respond to a variety of insurgency scenarios
in the North Caucasus. The author makes it clear that by not resourcing these railway projects, Russia’s military and economic security is being
negatively impacted.
The importance of rail transport for the Russian economy and military cannot be underestimated. Unlike the US military, the Russian
military regularly leverages rail assets to deploy and sustain forces. This sustainment would not only involve the movement of materials from
depots to the front, but would also likely involve the transport of materials directly to brigade and division logistic support areas, in tactical
situations. This may seem unrealistic to US logisticians, but not so for the Russian military in general, and Russian logisticians in particular.
The Russian Armed Forces will likely fight most conflicts near her borders, and in the former Soviet Union that has a well-developed rail
infrastructure. In order to effectively leverage this infrastructure, the Russian Armed Forces have dedicated military assets (Railroad Troops)
to support all aspects of military rail operations (rail operations usually have some role in most major operations). As can be seen in the
accompanying interview of Lieutenant General Anatoliy Lbov, the Southern Military District deputy commander in charge of logistic support,
rail is key for not only logistically supporting the Army, but also getting the Army to the fight. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The ever more complex military-political situation in the foreign countries bordering on Russia is

increasing the relevance and urgency of railroad projects in the Caucasus, in the Lower Volga region, in
the northwest, and in Siberia. As it is, the need is already high in the context of the economic development
of those territories and interregional economic ties.”

Exercise on erecting a floating railway bridge across the Volga (Yaroslavl Region).

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=44043@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

(continued)
56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Lack of Investment in Railways Increases
Economic and Strategic Vulnerabilities
Source: Aleksey Chichkin, “Министерство путей разобщения: Строительство железных дорог стратегического значения переносится
на неопределенный срок (The Ministry of Ways of Disconnection: The Construction of Strategic Railroads Is Being Postponed
Indefinitely),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 18 October 2017. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/39384
The ever more complex military-political situation in the foreign countries bordering on Russia is increasing the relevance and urgency of
railroad projects in the Caucasus, in the Lower Volga region, in the northwest, and in Siberia. As it is, the need is already high in the context
of the economic development of those territories and interregional economic ties. But the majority of such projects, elaborated from the late
1940s through the early 1970s, continue to be postponed indefinitely… It is superfluous to demonstrate the strategic importance of mainline
steel track and port-rail corridors for the strengthening of the country’s defense capability and, accordingly, ensuring its military-political
security. But Russia’s transport system is still riddled with substantial deficiencies. Suffice it to recall at least a few of the mothballed projects.
This construction [of the Northern Latitudinal Railway (SShKh)] began in 2014 and continued, albeit with interruptions, in 2015. But then it
was essentially halted, largely for financial reasons. Despite the fact that the Northern Latitudinal Railway constructed back in the late 1940s/
early 1950s was characterized even then as the overland complement of the Northern Sea Route…
The Trans-Polar Trans-Siberian was under construction -- including the stretch to Igarka-Noril’sk -- from 1947, but it was shelved in
early April 1953. Even though, let me emphasize, back at the turn of the 1940s/1950s experts had foreseen the main line’s military-strategic
importance, as also the inadequate transport support for the development not only of northern Siberia and the Far East but also their links
with the country’s other regions. The demand for the artery in question is dictated by the implementation of the major Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG) project on Yamal and by the growth in shipments via the Northern Sea Route...the Chum-Korotchayevo route is planned for no later
than 2023. Unless that deadline, too, is pushed back…
Today the need for them [rail projects] is even more urgent in light of the forthcoming and, moreover, sharp increase in traffic in the
direction of the Crimea bridge and congestion in the Novorossiysk port-railroad junction. But this is, after all, the stronghold of the Black
Sea Fleet. And transport blockages here threaten to have more than just economic consequences…In 2014, implementation of the project
was scheduled for the 2015-2017 timeframe, but this was subsequently deferred ostensibly for financial reasons to the period through 2030.
Although it is this artery that will enable blockages on entry to and exit from the eastern sector of the Crimea bridge to be averted and will
simultaneously increase the handling capacity of the peninsula’s entire port-railroad system. Not to mention the fact that this main line is
extremely vital for operational interaction between the Black Sea Fleet’s Sevastopol’ base and the fleet’s other facilities in the region. But
whereas the bridge will be commissioned within the next year or two, for the Trans-Crimea Railroad the best-case scenario is by 2030…
For economic and geopolitical reasons projects relating to a unified railroad network in the North Caucasus and with regard to that region’s
additional “bonding” with Povolzh’ye, the Russian Federation’s Central European part, and Transcaucasia remain no less urgent and
relevant. These projects are: Novorossiysk-Tuapse, southern Adygeya (Khadzhokh)-Sochi, the Azov port of Achuyevo-Slavyansk-na-Kuban’,
Sal’sk-Divnoye (Rostovskaya Oblast-northern Stavropol’), Cherkessk-Karachayevsk-Sukhum, Alagir-Tskhinval, Elista-Astrakhan’, and
Budennovsk-Kizlyar. But precise timeframes for the implementation of these projects, first drawn up in the first half of the 1950s/middle of the
1970s, have not yet been officially announced.
Let me recall once again that the Lower Volga region and the North Caucasus are border territories. Therefore, a developed railroad
and port network in these territories and the availability of interconnected outlets to other regions of the Russian Federation is a twofold
undertaking of a strategic order…
Linking the Lower Volga region borderlands with the North Caucasus is a no less problematic situation. At the moment there are two options
here: a Black Sea coast-focused long-distance route via Rostov-na-Donu and a railroad from Astrakhan’ to Derbent (and on into Azerbaijan)
along the shores of the Caspian. But, first, these main lines do not connect with each other; second, given this configuration vast territories of
the North Caucasus are deprived of additional and, moreover, the shortest outlets to Povolzh’ye, the Caspian Sea, and the country’s Central
European region…
Geostrategic and socioeconomic factors are closely intertwined in the country’s railroad-port system. In the Soviet period, it may be said,
they were relegated to the background, because the majority of the aforesaid regions were not border areas. But since 1991 there has been a
cardinal change in the geopolitical configuration. For this reason the elimination of the deficiencies on the railways cannot be postponed to
some remote future.

“Geostrategic and socioeconomic factors are closely intertwined in the country’s railroad-port system.
In the Soviet period, it may be said, they were relegated to the background, because the majority of
the aforesaid regions were not border areas. But since 1991 there has been a cardinal change in the
geopolitical configuration. For this reason the elimination of the deficiencies on the railways cannot be
postponed to some remote future..”

(continued)

OE Watch | December 2017

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Lack of Investment in Railways Increases
Economic and Strategic Vulnerabilities
Source: Sergey Belogrud, “’Качественно и в срок’ Материально-техническое обеспечение войск - процесс непрерывный (To a High
Standard and on Schedule: The Troops’ Logistic Support Is a Continuous Process),” Voyennyy Vestnik Yuga Rossii, 22 September 2017.
In the Russian Federation Armed Forces not very long ago, logistic support specialists rounded up the first half-year’s results. In the
collectives, the best servicemen and employees received encouragement. Our correspondent conversed with Lieutenant General Anatoliy
Lbov, the Southern Military District deputy commander in charge of logistic support, about what the district’s logistic support structures are
nowadays.
[Sergey Belogrud] Comrade Lieutenant General, please tell us about the district’s logistic support system. Can it be called, as in times
past, “rear services”?
[Anatoliy Lbov] The Southern Military District logistic support structures are a constituent part of the Russian Armed Forces’ logistic
support system. In 2010, during the reform process, the rear services and the technical component became amalgamated. So that, today,
our district’s logistic support is a well-coordinated organism that comprises the logistic support HQ and five directorates with attached
formations, military units, and organizations. And they perform all the assigned tasks according to their regular designation -- to a high
standard and on schedule, in any situational conditions. What is more, logistic support, in my view, is a constant and continuous process.
Every day we engage more than 20,000 personnel in providing the district’s troops with everything they need!
[SB] Anatoliy Vladimirovich, how do you evaluate the results of your men’s work in the first half-year?
[AL] Here it would be, as we say, a crime to complain. All the taskings, missions, and assignments that the state and the RF Defense Ministry
leaderships set before us have been fulfilled completely and to a worthy standard. I will say it straight -- the figures are impressive.
The railroad system moved 295 military echelons [a temporary formation for moving forces] (2,639 cars), and conducted 395 transports
(3,248 cars). 34,880 personnel were transported…Incidentally, 10,000 service personnel were conveyed by airplane, 4,120 of them by civil
aviation. The logistic support brigades’ automotive transportation carried more than 160,000 tons of miscellaneous freight. Vehicle journeys
numbered 32,000. The total distance covered by automotive delivery vehicles in the district was more than 24.2 million kilometers! The
auxiliary fleet’s ships organized the delivery of more than 1.3 million tons of miscellaneous cargoes to ships at sea…But what I have listed is
only the tip of the iceberg in terms of the overall work that was accomplished. I deliberately did not touch upon the organization of catering,
supplying clothing and personal gear, salvaging ammunition, using the barracks and housing fund, the buildings and engineer networks,
veterinary and sanitary supervision and much besides, without which the troops’ vital everyday activities are simply unthinkable.
[SB] The Russian Defense Minister recently appended the Order of Zhukov to the SMD Separate Railroad Brigade’s Combat Banner.
[AL] The formation’s service record comprises: building the Baykal-Amur main line, restoring railroad links in Chechnya and Abkhazia,
installing transfer crossings for the sea ports in Temryuk and Novorossiysk cities, clearing up the consequences of flooding in Krymsk
city, installing railroad track to the Armed Forces’ “Patriot” Park of Recreation and Rest at Kubinka, and executing other tasks of no
lesser importance for the Defense Ministry’s benefit. It was for this very reason that, when awarding the Order of Zhukov to the Railroad
Troops, General Sergey Shoygu noted that this award is a well-deserved appreciation of the high-level skills, courage, steadfastness, and
professionalism of the brigade personnel and of our district’s logistic support troops in general.

Exercise on erecting a floating railway bridge across the Volga (Yaroslavl Region).

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=44043@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Moving Armor through Marshes and Mire
OE Watch Commentary: European Russia is famous for its legendary “rasputitsa” [распутица]-literally the time of bad roads. This occurs
during the spring thaw and the August rains when cross-country mobility becomes close to impossible. Napoleon and Hitler both had bad
experiences with this natural mobility obstacle. Russians design their vehicles to function under these conditions by incorporating low ground
pressure, wide tracks or tires, raised ground clearance and occasionally auxiliary tracks or tires. Still, there is only so much that designers can
do against mud, mire, marsh and swamp-and Russia has much of each. To deal with this challenge, Russia is considering adding a temporary
road system [комплекс временных дорог- KVD] to their engineer
kit. As the accompanying article from Izvestiya discusses, the
system entails “a machine that in five minutes can roll out or roll up
again a 100-meter road made of metal panels so that armor can pass
over a peat bog up to two meters deep.”
This is not the first such system in their inventory, but much
of the earlier systems used wooden rolls or pierced steel plates
(PSP). This rugged aluminum roadway seems to be “on the right
track.” It can be quickly laid down and retrieved and stands up to
tracked vehicles. A video claims that the track is 50 meters long
and 4.6 meters wide. The system weighs eight tons and the track
can handle up to 60 tons. Interested readers can see how it works
at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQEUnlMAVws. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

KVD temporary roads construction vehicle.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog,http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Static-p3/i-T344Nmb/A, CC 4.0.

“Russia’s advanced T-14 Armata tanks, T-15 heavy infantry fighting vehicles, and other military hardware

will be able to overcome sandy banks and swampy and boggy terrain without stopping. This capability will
be provided by the multirole, mechanized, and rapid-deployment KVD temporary road system, a machine
that in five minutes can roll out or roll up again a 100-meter road made of metal panels so that armor can
pass over a peat bog up to two meters deep.”
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, Aleksey Ramm. “Iron Carpet To Be Laid for the Armata. Defense Ministry To Get Roll-Up Roads for Vehicles To
Cross Soft Ground and Swamp,” Izvestiya, 11 October 2017. http://iz.ru
Russia’s advanced T-14 Armata tanks, T-15 heavy infantry fighting vehicles, and other military hardware will be able to overcome sandy banks
and swampy and boggy terrain without stopping. This capability will be provided by the multirole, mechanized, and rapid-deployment KVD
temporary road system, a machine that in five minutes can roll out or roll up again a 100-meter road made of metal panels so that armor can
pass over a peat bog up to two meters deep.
The KVD is built on the chassis of the KamAZ-63501 quad-axle all-terrain truck. On its back is a winch with a roll of specially-processed,
polymer-coated aluminum panels, which an electrical motor rolls out as the vehicle proceeds and rolls back up in exactly the same way after
the column of heavy vehicles has passed. If 100 meters is not enough, the road can be extended without limit using additional sections. These
sections are joined to each other with special locks.
The aluminum road takes tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and other vehicles weighing up to 60 tons. It does not matter what is underneath:
wet sand, quagmire, or Arctic bog. During testing, a column of heavy vehicles went straight across a swamp that was two meters deep. The
road withstood 160 crossings by tracked vehicles and remained intact.
The KVD was created by TekhPromImport ZAO [closed joint-stock company] and was first shown at the Army-2017 exhibition and forum in
Kubinka near Moscow as part of the Engineering Troops display. The Defense Ministry …plans to employ the KVD as part of the latest PP2005M pontoon sets, which have been in service with the Russian Army since 2014.
TekhPromImport Technical Director Rashid Nurmukhamedov stated that “The machine has already undergone preliminary tests at Defense
Ministry training grounds. In November we start the final tests, after which the decision will be made as to whether it enters service. We hope
this will happen before the end of the year.”
Sergey Suvorov, a tank and armored vehicle expert…stated that this kind of equipment is essential for moving across soft terrain. “The first
thing that comes to mind is the Soviet Army’s Operation Bagration during the Great Patriotic War. The main aim was for tank columns to move
into the rear of the German Army. Back then they simply abandoned vehicles that got stuck in mud and carried on with the offensive, but that
will not happen with the KVD. This will also be particularly relevant when laying pontoon bridges across rivers.”
Suvorov noted that these “road-laying machines” will make working with pontoons much easier. “The current pontoon fleet is based on
KamAZ trucks. These trucks have to drive up to a bank and drop off a floating bridge section which weighs many tons into the water. But also,
and this is the most important part, lift it out again without getting stuck in the mire on the bank that heavy armor inevitably leaves behind.”
More than 30 armies in the world currently have mechanized rapid-deployment temporary road systems. The main producer of this technology
is the German company FAUN. The Trackway system that they developed also uses a spooling mechanism with coiled aluminum panels. It can
be deployed in under 10 minutes. A similar system can also be used to rapidly lay a runway for a field airstrip.
OE Watch | December 2017

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russian Military Says It Will Get Drone-Killer UAVs
OE Watch Commentary: Recent warfare has placed
increasing importance on the development and use of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Drones provide an
alternative to traditional technologies, are less costly, and
result in fewer casualties as they can be operated remotely.
Most drones are used for intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance, and some are equipped with large-scale
arms used for counterterrorism strikes. According to an
article in Izvestiya, a pro-Kremlin online Russian daily,
Russia has developed drones capable of smaller-scale,
more targeted attacks, specifically for downing other
drones. The authors dubbed this new UAV a “dronehunter.”
The Russian Defense Ministry told Izvestiya that the
new drone, capable of attacks on enemy UAVs as well
as ground targets, “is already being tested.” The drone
was first exhibited during the summer of 2017 “in the
restricted part of the... exhibition-forum ‘Army-2017’.”
Due to the secretive nature of its development, only the
basic features of the “drone-hunter” are publicly known.
It launches vertically without the use of a catapult,
allowing for launch with minimal equipment and space.
It is also small enough “to be carried by a small military
unit consisting of a few soldiers, and also to transport it
by motor vehicle.” This differs substantially from other
armed drones which are much larger, allowing for greater
maneuverability both on land and in the air, increasing the
range of possible uses and operations.
The authors report that the drone fires ammunition
which explodes prior to impact, striking “enemy drones
with fragments.” It is also equipped with “an optoelectronic system, which works day and night in any
weather” to detect the target, and can operate both
automatically and manually, adding to the versatility of the
UAV. End OE Watch Commentary (Johnson)

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Dmitriy Litovkin, “Минобороны получит убийцу
квадрокоптеров (The Ministry of Defense Receives Quadrocopter Killers),”
Izvestiya Online, 23 October 2017. https://iz.ru/657290/aleksei-ramm-dmitriilitovkin/minoborony-poluchit-ubiitcu-kvadrokopterov
The Russian military will get a fighter of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV).
It is a small flying drone, equipped with a firing weapon system and special
ammunition. The new drone can find in the air and destroy various UAVs,
including miniature ones. Also, a drone-hunter can fire on targets on the ground for example, personnel, shelters or enemy motor vehicles….
…As “Izvestiya” was told by the Russian Defense Ministry, the drone-hunter
is already being tested. Based on the results, a decision will be made on the
acceptance of the product for service. The main drone’s task is to search and
destroy the enemy’s UAV, primarily quadrocopters. The newly designed product
was presented for the first time at the end of the summer of this year. The dronehunter was exhibited in the restricted part of the exposition of the exhibitionforum “Army-2017”.
Little is known about this new product. This is a small flying machine. Unlike
most UAVs, it is launched into the air without a catapult, but starts vertically. The
size of the drone-hunter allows it to be carried by a small military unit consisting
of a few solders, and also to transport it by motor vehicle. Because of that,
drone can be quickly pre-positioned to protect troops from enemy drones. The
main “caliber” of a hunter-drone is a small arms weapons system with special
ammunition. The ammunition explodes near the target and hits the enemy drones
with fragments. If necessary, it can also open fire on ground targets including
personnel and equipment. The hunter-drone detects the target using an optoelectronic system, which works day and night in any weather.
This [drone] hunter can patrol and destroy targets in both automatic and
manual modes. In the first instance, the drone is given a patrol area or route.
After detecting targets, it asks the “land” for permission to open fire. In manual
mode, the operator independently controls the hunter and seeks targets….

“The drone-hunter is already being tested…The drone’s
main task is to search and destroy the enemy’s UAV, primarily
quadrocopters.”

Kenya Defense Force Cpl Ezekiel, assigned to the KDF Military Intelligence Battalion, launches an AeroVironment RQ-11 Raven.
Source: By Staff Sgt. Tiffany DeNault Combined Joint Task Force - Horn of Africa Image, http://www.hoa.africom.mil/image/20142/combined-joint-task-force-horn-of-africa-image , Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russia’s National Guard Expanding Mission
OE Watch Commentary: When the
Russian National Guard (Rosgvardiya)
was established less than two years ago, it
was widely reported that this new security
organization would focus on domestic
security (terrorism, organized crime,
transport security, border control, etc…).
It now appears that its mission may be
expanding. According to the first excerpt
from the main Russian Government
information agency, TASS, Rosgvardia’s
mandate has now expanded to “perform
tasks outside” of Russia. As there has been
evidence that Rosgvardia forces have been
deployed to Syria (Chechen security units
are allegedly subordinate to Rosgvardia),
this change may merely indicate that the
legislation has caught up with reality.

Source: “Росгвардия сможет выполнять возложенные на
нее задачи не только в РФ, но и за рубежом (Rosgvardiya
Will Be Able To Perform Tasks Not Only in Russia but Also
Abroad),” TASS, 27 June 2017. http://tass.ru/politika/4369080
Rosgvardiya will be able to ensure the security of Russia
not only inside the country but also abroad, the agency’s first
deputy director Sergey Melikov announced.

Emblem of the Russian
National Guard.

Source: Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
National_Guard_of_Russia#/media/File:National_
Guard_of_Russia_patch.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

The second excerpt (also from TASS) points out that Rosgvardia has
already been assigned a mission which is strictly speaking “outside” of
Russia: “to ensure security of the Crimean bridge.” This new bridge, which
is scheduled to open to auto traffic next year, will provide a physical link
between Russia and the Crimean Peninsula. As the excerpt points out,
“Rosgvardiya will set up a maritime brigade to ensure security of the
Crimean bridge.” With “ownership” of Crimea remaining a highly contested
issue, the Kremlin leadership has placed a high priority on guarding the
security of this vital link.
Rosgvardia is estimated to be 400,000 personnel and the force continues to
be equipped with the latest armaments. As the third excerpt from the centrist
Nezavisemmoye Voennoye Obozreniye reports, there are now plans for
Rosgvardia to create “rapid reaction forces in every federal district.” As the
Rosgvardia representative points out, “these forces will be capable of quickly
responding to an urgent situation, whether in peacetime or war.” While
domestic security will remain the primary focus of Rosgvardia, the evidence
suggests that this force will also be engaged in protecting Russian interests
abroad. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“By decision of the president, the National Guard Troops,
unlike the Internal Troops, will now have the possibility to
perform tasks outside our country. Such tasks can be assigned
to the troops. Hence, responsibility not only for the internal
security of our country, but also for security that will ensure
peace for our citizens, as the president said, on distant
frontiers,” Melikov stated at an official reception of graduate
officers.
“Today, together we must create a structure that will really
reliably protect and preserve the peace of our citizens,
be a guarantor of the constitutional rights of our people,
be a guarantor of peace and stability in our country and
worldwide,” Melikov stressed….
Source: “Russia’s National Guard to form maritime brigade,”
TASS, 25 October 2017. http://tass.com/defense/972458
Russia’s National Guard, also known as Rosgvardiya, will
set up a maritime brigade to ensure security of the Crimean
bridge, its director Viktor Zolotov said on Wednesday.
“For solving the tasks before Rosgvardiya on ensuring
security of the bridge passage through the Kerch Strait in the
Southern District of forces under creation we will have a new
formation, the maritime brigade,” Zolotov told the upper house
of parliament, the Federation Council.
The 19-km (12-mile) Crimean bridge is being built under the
federal program “Social and Economic Development of The
Crimean Region and the City of Sevastopol by 2020” with
budget financing only. It will be open to automobile crossings
in December 2018 and rail traffic in December 2019.

“Rosgvardiya will be able to ensure the security of Russia not only inside the country but also abroad…”

Source: Oleg Vladykin, “В Росгвардии будет кому реагировать на обострения обстановки (Rosgvardia will respond to those who
exacerbate the situation),” Nezavisemmoye Voennoye Obozreniye, 27 October 2017. http://nvo.ng.ru/nvoevents/2017-10-27/2_971_news.html
…Fundamentally important decisions have been made for the further development of Rosgvardia. First of all, we are talking about the
establishment of rapid reaction forces in every federal district. “In the next three years, the main efforts will be focused on creating in the federal
districts groupings of troops, capable of quickly responding to an urgent situation, whether in peacetime or war….”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094
OE Watch | December 2017

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Winning Over Hearts and Minds
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin leadership continues
to strengthen and impress with its international soft-power
initiatives. In October, the Kremlin hosted the annual Valdai
Conference which invites influential Russian experts, scholars,
and pundits from around the world to discuss pressing global
problems. In the same month, it also accommodated nearly
29,000 young guests from over 180 different countries during
the 19th World Festival of Youth and Students in Sochi. Besides
proving to the West that Russia cannot be isolated, these events
provide effective forums for the Kremlin to propagate its
narrative and influence the hearts and minds of foreign visitors.
President Putin spoke at considerable length during the Valdai
Conference, reminding the audience of Russia’s many grievances
against the West, and the US in particular. As the excerpted
transcript of Putin’s remarks from the Kremlin’s presidential
website demonstrate, he claimed that the US systematically
weakened Russia’s nuclear weapons inventory during the 1990s,
while it “limited itself to much more modest reductions of its
[own] nuclear arsenal.” He went on to state that a “critical mass
of problems is building up in global security,” suggesting that
this is caused by US decisions to “pull out of the Anti-Ballistic
Missile Treaty” or failing to comply with “the Convention on the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and international security.”
During the same week as the Valdai Conference, Putin
made repeated visits to the nearby World Festival of Youth and
Students, where he impressed upon the young audience Russia’s
commitment to the slogan of the festival, “For peace, solidarity
and social justice, we struggle against imperialism. Honoring our
past, we build the future!” While Putin was less bellicose toward
the US there, he did warn his young guests on the dangers of
genetic engineering. According to the second excerpt (also
from the Kremlin’s website), President Putin warned that such
technology could be exploited to create “a soldier, an individual
who can fight without fear or compassion, mercy or pain.” While
not specifically pointing at the US, according to Putin, such
developments “may be more terrifying than a nuclear bomb.”
Alongside modernizing its traditional military forces, over
the past several years, Russia has continued to strengthen its
global soft-power arsenal. Events like Valdai and the Sochi Youth
Festival provide the Kremlin leadership with platforms to win
over the hearts and minds of both influential pundits and future
leaders from around the world. A key theme within the Kremlin’s
soft-power arsenal has been to portray the West (and the US in
particular) in a negative light. With its extensive control over
the major Russian media, the Kremlin has already ensured that
its domestic audience has mastered this lesson. It now appears
equally determined to spread this message among foreign
audiences. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: “Meeting of the Valdai International Discussion Club,” Kremlin
Website, 19 October 2017. http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/55882
… The Americans have made – and please pay attention here, this is
not secret information, simply few are aware of it – 620 verification visits
to Russia to check our compliance with the agreements. They visited the
holiest of holiest of the Russian nuclear weapons complex, namely, the
enterprises engaged in developing nuclear warheads and ammunition,
and weapons-grade plutonium and uranium. The United States gained
access to all top-secret facilities in Russia. Also, the agreement was almost
unilateral in nature….
… Each step on the Russian side was closely monitored by American
specialists, at a time when the United States limited itself to much more
modest reductions of its nuclear arsenal, and did so on a purely goodwill
basis.
…A critical mass of problems is building up in global security. As is
known, in 2002 the United States pulled out of the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty. And despite being initiators of the Convention on the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and international security, they initiated that
agreement themselves, they are failing to meet their commitments. They
remain as of today the only and largest holder of this form of weapon
of mass destruction. Moreover, the USA has pushed back the deadline
for eliminating their chemical weapons from 2007 to as far as 2023. It
does not look proper for a nation that claims to be a champion of nonproliferation and control….
Source: “Сессия: Молодёжь-2030. Образ будущего (Youth 2030 The
Image of the Future Panel Session),” Kremlin Website, 21 October 2017.
http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/55890
The 19th World Festival of Youth and Students is held n Russia on
October 14 to 22. On the first day, an international student carnival was
held in Moscow, whereas the main events are hosted by the Olympic Park
in Sochi between October 15 and 22. More than 29,000 people from over
180 countries have participated in the festival…. The motto of the festival:
“For peace, solidarity and social justice, we struggle against imperialism.
Honoring our past, we build the future!”
Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon, friends, ladies and gentlemen….
…Genetic engineering will undoubtedly open up incredible opportunities
in pharmacology, new medicines, altering the human genome if a person
suffers from genetic diseases. All right, that is good. But there is another
part to this process. What does it mean? It means that humans acquire the
capability to get into the genetic code, which was created by nature or, as
religious people say, by Our Lord. What practical consequences can this
entail? It means – we can already imagine it – not so much theoretically,
it is already possible to create a person with the desired features. This
may be a mathematical genius, this may be an outstanding musician but
this can also be a soldier, an individual who can fight without fear or
compassion, mercy or pain.
You are aware that humankind may, and most probably will enter a very
complicated and very demanding period of its existence and development.
And what I have just said may be more terrifying than a nuclear bomb….

“… Each step on the Russian side was closely monitored by American specialists [to check compliance with
agreements on reductions of nuclear arsenal], at a time when the United States limited itself to much more
modest reductions of its nuclear arsenal, and did so on a purely goodwill basis.”
OE Watch | December 2017

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russian Narrative on Syria
OE Watch Commentary: When the Kremlin
intervened in the Syrian conflict in September
2015, it conveniently labeled all those who
were fighting against the Assad regime as
“terrorists.” Although both Russia and the West
found a common enemy in destroying forces of
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the
Kremlin regarded the more nuanced approach of
Western forces, whereby they supported moderate
anti-Assad forces, as naïve and short-sighted.
With the last of the ISIS forces in Syria now
nearly eliminated, the different objectives of the
Russian and Western-backed forces have come
into stark contrast. In the excerpted passages
from the Russian government’s main newspaper,
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, a senior Kremlin (and former
military) official, Viktor Bondarev, spells out the
current Russian perspective on Syria.
Bondarev begins by asserting that if all goes
“according to plan, by year’s end Syria will be
totally cleared of the terrorists.” He claims that
Russian forces have helped to destroy the ISIS
hydrocarbon-based economy within Syria which
has “led to the serious problem of …replenishing
their military-technical and human resources.”
Bondarev asserts, however, that even with this
loss of hydrocarbon assets, ISIS bandits will
continue to receive “assistance from the American
coalition,” and that this “is no longer a secret.” The
notion that Washington both created and continues
to support ISIS forces remains a popular and
oft-repeated theme in Kremlin-supported media.
In the article, Bondarev provides “documentary
confirmation” which purports to demonstrate “help
for the terrorists from the United States and its
allies.”
Bondarev goes on to claim that Assad’s removal
“is among the American State Department’s
foreign policy priorities” and that the US “adheres
to the principle of “the end justifies the means,”
whereby to achieve their objectives, the US is
willing to arm Syrian terrorists. He darkly suggests
that there are few prospects for “positive changes
in Russia-US cooperation on Syria” as exemplified
by the recent argument over which side was
responsible for the use of chemical weapons. He
confidently concludes that Russia is not responsible
for “stirring up this information war” over the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, but is rather intent
upon conducting “systemic, including preventative,
work to combat international terrorism all over the
globe.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“But is there hope of positive changes in Russia-US cooperation
on Syria? To be frank, not much…”
Source: “Viktor Bondarev, Chairman of the Federation Council Defense and Security
Council, former Commander in Chief of the Russian Aerospace Forces, “Сирия в
ожидании свободы. Терроризм только военными методами не истребить (Syria
Looking Forward to Freedom. Terrorism Cannot Be Destroyed by Military Methods
Alone),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 2 November 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/11/02/viktorbondarev-terrorizm-tolko-voennymi-metodami-ne-istrebit.html
…As of today, less than 5 percent of the country’s territory is under the control of
Islamic State… The Russian Armed Forces are currently implementing the concluding
phase of the struggle that began with the liberation of Ar Raqqah -- Islamic State’s
unofficial capital. This is an important, pivotal moment, not just militarily and politically
but also psychologically. If the operation is conducted according to plan, by year’s end
Syria will be totally cleared of the terrorists….
…According to Russian Defense Ministry figures, as of 1 November at least 200 oil and
gas deposits under Islamic State control, more than 180 oil refineries, more than 120
fuel-pumping stations, and about 4,000 gasoline tankers have been destroyed. All this
was achieved to a significant extent by Russian aviation. Another important aspect is that
we have managed to undermine Islamic State’s economy, which depends directly on the
sale of hydrocarbons…. This financial loss led to the serious problem that the fighters
are currently facing with regard to replenishing their military-technical and human
resources….
…After all, under a pretense of fighting Islamic State and the Al-Nusrah Front, the
United States together with its satellites has been trying for a long time to destroy Bashar
al-Asad’s regime, destroying in the process not only government troops but also civilians.
…The assistance that the American coalition has given to the Islamic State bandits
in Syria is no longer a secret…. There is documentary confirmation of such help for
the terrorists from the United States and its allies…. Here is another incontrovertible
argument indicating American aid to the terrorists. When Russian aviation began the
operation to liberate Dayr az Zawr in September, the US-led international coalition
sharply decreased the intensity of strikes against Islamic State in Iraq. It was at this time
that major terrorist forces were transferred to Dayr az Zawr from Iraqi border regions….
…The United States peremptorily declares that Bashar al-Assad must go. His overthrow
is among the American State Department’s foreign policy priorities. Meanwhile, it is well
known that the United States adheres to the principle of “the end justifies the means.”
The US has repeatedly demonstrated a readiness to cooperate with one “enemy” (in their
view) in order to destroy another. Apart from military, logistical, and medical help, the
US provides the fighters with assistance of a strategic nature….
…Of course, we should not foster any illusions about a sharp reorientation of the United
States onto the track of genuinely fighting the terrorists. But is there hope of positive
changes in Russia-US cooperation on Syria? To be frank, not much…. The US is again
waging war in the information space….
…Russia has studied the report on chemical attacks published by the States the other
day. What can be said about it? The investigation was one-sided, conducted from an
angle that suited Washington. All the crimes are blamed on government troops headed by
Bashar al-Assad. The assessments and conclusions show double standards. The document
does not even consider the Russian assessment of events….
But, as they say, “the show goes on.” For our part, we are not stirring up this
information war but concentrating our efforts on completing the operation to eliminate
terrorist groups in the Middle East and to conduct systemic, including preventative, work
to combat international terrorism all over the globe.

OE Watch | December 2017

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Restricting Social Media in the Military
OE Watch Commentary: Like people in most other countries,
Russians are increasingly connected to the Internet. As the brief
excerpt from the Russian media-monitoring site, Mediascope
points out, by early 2017, “87 million people, which accounted
for 71% of the total population” have regular access to the
Internet. While the Kremlin leadership has exerted considerable
control over major national media, it has only begun to impose
greater government restrictions over the Internet.
The second excerpt from the main Russian Government
information agency, TASS, describes new restrictions on posting
personal information for those serving in the Russian military.
According to the excerpt, “contract servicemen in the Russian
Army will be banned from posting information on the Internet
which could reveal where they are deployed and other details of
their service activity.”
This legislation is hardly surprising for those who monitor
Russian social media sites. Social media information posted
by Russian military personnel began to disappear shortly after
Russia’s armed aggression against Ukraine in mid-2014. Despite
protestations from the Ministry of Defense, both domestic and
foreign monitors of Russian social media sites had been able
to chronicle and document Russian military involvement in
Ukraine. Revelations regarding specific Russian military units
and personnel involved in the fighting (to include the downing
of Malaysian flight MH-17 in July 2014) helped to enforce these
social media restrictions. The excerpt obliquely refers to these
disclosures, stating “that social media resources are often used
“for geopolitical objectives, military-political objectives at
variance with international law, and also terrorist, extremist,
criminal, and other illegal objectives.”
As recent events have suggested, the Kremlin leadership
understands the power of unrestrained social media access.
Indeed, the TASS excerpt asserts that such information can “be
used by the special services of individual states and also by
various terrorist and extremist organizations to exert influence
by information and psychological means aimed at destabilizing
the domestic political and social situation.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Source: “Аудитория пользователей интернета в России в 2017 году
составила 87 млн. Человек (The audience of Internet users in Russia
in 2017 was 87 million people), Mediascope, 21 April 2017. http://
mediascope.net/press/news/744498/
According to Mediascope , the Internet audience in October 2016 - March
2017 reached 87 million people, which accounted for 71% of the total
population of the country. For the year, the Russian Internet audience,
according to Mediascope data, increased by 2%.
Source: “Минобороны запретит военнослужащим выкладывать селфи
и геолокацию в соцсетях (Defense Ministry To Ban Servicemen From
Posting Selfies and Geolocation on Social Media), TASS, 4 October 2017.
http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/4618154
Contract servicemen in the Russian Army will be banned from posting
information on the Internet which could reveal where they are deployed and
other details of their service activity. The relevant draft law has been posted
on the draft normative acts portal.
“Servicemen serving under contract are banned from posting information
(including photographic and video materials, geolocation data, and other
information) on the Internet information and telecommunications network
about themselves and other servicemen making it possible to discover which
department they belong to and information about their service activity or
the service activity of other servicemen and the activity of military units, the
text of the draft law prepared by the Defense Ministry says.
It is observed that the draft law extends among others to contract
servicemen who are foreign citizens.
The draft law’s explanatory note stresses that social media resources
are often used “to geopolitical objectives, military-political objectives at
variance with international law, and also terrorist, extremist, criminal, and
other illegal objectives.
In such cases information about the location and activity of other
servicemen could be used by the special services of individual states and
also by various terrorist and extremist organizations “to exert influence by
information and psychological means aimed at destabilizing the domestic
political and social situation.”
The planned date for the draft normative legal act to enter into force is
January 2018….

“The draft law’s explanatory note stresses that social media resources are often used to geopolitical
objectives, military-political objectives at variance with international law…”

OE Watch | December 2017

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Arctic Sea Monster
OE Watch Commentary: Much has been written over the
past several years regarding how Russia is building up and
strengthening its military presence in the Arctic. However, given
the harsh environmental conditions in the region, combined with
the lack of transport links, maintaining and resupplying forces
in the Arctic have presented considerable challenges. According
to the excerpted entry from the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya
Online, Russian military planners are now hoping to exploit the
“wing-in-ground effect vehicle (ekranoplan)” developed during
Soviet times “to deliver cargoes to remote bases” in the Arctic.

Source: S. Valchenko, N. Surkov and A. Ramm, “Россия построит
‘арктического монстра’ (Russia to Build ‘Arctic Monster’),” Izvestiya
Online, 27 October 2017. https://iz.ru/659793/sergei-valchenko-nikolaisurkov-aleksei-ramm/rossiia-postroit-arkticheskogo-monstra
A super-heavy transport-assault wing-in-ground effect vehicle
[ekranoplan] is being developed for the military. It will be able to land not
only on water like its predecessor, but also on land. In size the craft will be
comparable to the famous “Caspian Sea Monster” from Soviet times. There
are plans to use the craft in the Arctic and the Pacific Ocean for rescue
operations and to deliver cargoes to remote bases….

While the proposed designer for this project (Alekseyev
Design Bureau) already produces smaller types of ekranoplans,
the scale of the new project (“a length of 93 meters… a wingspan
of 71 meters,” with a weight “on the order of 600 tons”) will
rival the giant prototypes developed during the Soviet period.
According to the article, they have already named the proposed
project “Spasatel (Rescuer).” Should this project be fully funded
and constructed, it “will be able to transport up to 500 men with
weapons at a speed of 550 kilometers an hour… with a range
of several thousand kilometers.” It will also be “able to land not
merely on water, but also on a level, hard surface.” The article
asserts that “the Spasatel will greatly surpass conventional
assault ships” when it comes to mobility and that “wing-inground effect vehicles have no fear of mine barriers and enemy
torpedoes, and because of their low flight altitude they will be
hard to detect with radar.”

…AO [Joint Stock Company] “TsKB po SPK [Central Design Bureau for
Hydrofoil Vessels] imeni R.Ye. Alekseyev” is engaged in the development of
the wing-in-ground effect vehicle.

There is no question that modernizing Russia’s military
remains a top Kremlin priority. While the headline from this
article might suggest that Russia is well on its way toward
constructing this “Arctic Monster,” the details point out that
they have yet to even construct “a full-scale mockup,” and that if
all goes well, flight testing won’t begin until 2022 at the earliest.
In the interim, Russia will continue to strengthen its military
presence in the Arctic; effectively maintaining and resupplying
these forces, however, may limit their plans. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Izvestiya was told by this company that this work concerns the creation of
a base platform with the working name of “Spasatel [Rescuer].” At a length
of 93 meters and having a wingspan of 71 meters, the aerial vessel will
weigh on the order of 600 tons…. It is planned that the craft will take to the
air in 2022-2023 and it will complete testing in 2025.
It is proposed that the flight range of the Spasatel will be several thousand
kilometers, and the craft will be able to land not merely on water, but also
on a level, hard surface. To be able to do this it will be equipped with a
wheel chassis and a highly mechanized wing….
…The new wing-in-ground effect vehicle will be equipped with a ramp to
facilitate loading and off-loading of soldiers and equipment. It will be able
to transport up to 500 men with weapons at a speed of 550 kilometers an
hour. In its mobility the Spasatel will greatly surpass conventional assault
ships. Moreover, wing-in-ground effect vehicles have no fear of mine
barriers and enemy torpedoes, and because of their low flight altitude they
will be hard to detect with radar.

“A super-heavy transport-assault wing-in-ground
effect vehicle [ekranoplan] is being developed for the
military.”

(Soviet-Era) Ekranoplan A-90 Orlyonok.

Source: Sergey Rodovnichenko, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ekranoplan_A-90_Orlyonok.jpg, CC 2.0

OE Watch | December 2017

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Artic Aviation Practices Attack on Amphibious Landing
OE Watch Commentary: The duration of night and
day is not a constant unless one lives on the equator.
The duration of night and day vary greatly over the
poles. The midnight sun and polar darkness can stretch
to 24 hours. Arctic attack aviation needs to be able to
function effectively under either condition- and try to
avoid enemy return fire. The accompanying passage from
the Russian Defense Ministry discusses a recent exercise
during which the Northern Fleet Air Force and Air
Defense Combined Formation Composite Air Regiment
carried out flights in hours of darkness and practiced
destroying a naval detachment preparing to land an
amphibious assault force on an Arctic beach. As the
passage discusses, the pilots used illuminating munitions
capable of affecting night vision devices. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

Source: “Northern Fleet Pilots Prevent a Landing by a Simulated Enemy on the
Arctic Coast,” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 5 October 2017.
http://www.mil.ru
Crews of Su-24 aircraft of the Northern Fleet Air Force and Air Defense
Combined Formation [obyedineniye] Composite Air Regiment practiced bombing
on Lumbovskiy Range in Murmanskaya Oblast. The pilots were assigned
the mission of destroying a simulated naval detachment preparing to land an
amphibious assault force on an austere Arctic beach.
Bombing strikes were directed against both naval and shore targets simulating
a concentration of armored vehicles on shore and landing ships and fire support
ships in adjacent waters where the amphibious assault force landing was
conducted. The bombing was with practice munitions. In carrying out flights
in hours of darkness, the pilots used illuminating munitions capable of affecting
night vision devices. A total of up to eight Su-24 bomber crews were involved in
the exercise.

“Crews of Su-24 aircraft of the Northern Fleet Air Force and Air Defense Combined Formation
[obyedineniye] Composite Air Regiment practiced bombing on Lumbovskiy Range in Murmanskaya
Oblast. The pilots were assigned the mission of destroying a simulated naval detachment preparing to
land an amphibious assault force on an austere Arctic beach.”

Su-24 RF-92249, 47 Red.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Lipetsk-Aviation-Center/i-dHCwnC3/A, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2017

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Catalonia: Police Rebellion Deflates
OE Watch Commentary: The recent separatist kerfuffle in Catalonia
seemed dire, but perhaps more so than it actually was, in part because the
Catalonian police (referred to colloquially as the Mossos) had apparently
risen up against Spanish rule. When Catalonian separatist leadership failed
to renounce their independence declarations, the Spanish government, after
some meandering, asserted itself by withdrawing portions of Catalonian
governmental autonomy and taking over some Catalonian regional
government functions directly. Perhaps to the surprise of the Spanish
government, resistance from within the Mossos appears to have been anemic
at best, at least according to reports such as the accompanying reference.
The reference maintains that the removal of the two top Mossos cops, Josep
Lluis Trapero and Pere Soler was key to the ease with which suppression
of the rebellion within the Mossos proceeded. According to the reference,
the rebellion depended on approval and protection from the top. With the
removal of the two top cops, the official protection of separatist groups
within the police has disappeared, though such groups are still present.
Continued service within the Mossos is now to be conditioned on an oath
of absolute loyalty to Spain. Also, according to the reference, prominent
among other controls is the centralized monitoring of all internal electronic
communications. In any case, taming of the single largest organized
armed separatist entity by the Spanish crown seems to have unfolded with
remarkable ease and speed. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Carlos Cuesta, “Cataluña: se desinfla la rebeldía de los
Mossos (Catalonia: The Rebellion of the Mossos [Catalonian
Police] deflates),” OK Diario (Madrid), 4 November 2017.
https://okdiario.com/espana/cataluna/2017/11/04/mossoscontrol-interior-confirma-informes-filtrados-datos-desinflarebeldia-1482271/
Control. Daily internal controls and the monitoring of
communications by the intervening [of] Catalonian CTTI
[Catalonian Technological Central] have satisfied the Minister
of Interior…
This relates to conclusions made from early data obtained by
the Ministry and that back [the finding] that the withdrawal
of the upper leadership of the autonomous police, Josep Lluis
Trapero and Pere Soler, has been key to toppling a separatist
structure maintained and protected from above….
The third control, in spite of tending more towards
telematics, supposes a whole dissuasive mechanism for the
rebellious behavior of the Mossos. And it is that by way of
the Catalonian Technological Central (CTTI) it is possible
to follow all of the communications of the Catalonian police
agents…

“...the withdrawal of the upper leadership of the autonomous police... has been key to toppling a
separatist structure maintained and protected from above.”

Catalonian Squad Police (Mossos d’Esquadra) (2009 photo).

Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mossos_d%27Esquadra_unitat_de_Transit_tot_terreny_amb_trailer_de_moto.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2017

67

