community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #10
November 2017

ZAPAD
Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

VIEWS FROM THE
NEIGHBORHOOD

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
3
4
5
7
9
10
11
13
14
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24

A Russian Critique of “Zapad”
Polish Views of “Zapad”
Kazakhstan’s Parallel Military Exercise
Russia Takes Note of Conflicting Kazakh Exercise
Telephone Threats
China: Not So Concerned with “Zapad”
Turkish Perspectives on “Zapad”
It Wasn’t “Zapad” and It Wasn’t Coincidental
The Aerospace Troops Get a Ground Forces
Commander
The Future Looking Bright for the Russian Aerospace
Forces
Russia Trying to Increase the Number of ElectroOptical Satellites
Russia’s Counter to the “High Frequency Global
Communications System”
The Russian Military and the Russian Presidential
Election
The Russian Camouflage Regiment
Automating the Antitank Detection/Response Cycle
More on the August 2017 Arctic Riverine Exercise
Russia Capable of Spoofing GPS Signals?

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
25
27
28
29

Egypt’s Expanding Military
ISIS: Concealment and Deception
Saudi Arabia’s Tilt Toward Russia
The Syrian Conflict: A Syrian Kurdish Commander’s
Perspective
30 The Turkey-Russia S-400 Deal: Not a Done Deal

31 Iran Questions the Nuclear Deal as North Korea
Defies the West
32 Iran Sends University Instructors to the ‘Resistance
Front’
33 Iranian General: Iraqi Kurdish Referendum is Part of
US Plot

ASIA-PACIFIC

North Korea’s African Ties
Somalia’s Plea for Heavy Weapons
Somalia: Drought Benefits al-Shabaab
The Paradox of Increasing Democracy and
Decreasing Stability
38 Counterproductive Police Practices in Africa
39 Lassa Fever: West Africa’s Next Massive Epidemic?
40 An ISIS Faction in Africa... Low-Profile Propaganda

50 The Hulunhu: Another Step Forward for China’s Global
Military Expansion
51 China Casts a Heavy Hand in Exploration of Oil and Gas
52 PLA Attempts to Attract Higher-Quality Recruits
53 China: The J-20 Enters Official Military Service
54 China and Russia Donating Arms to the Philippine
Military
55 China Supports Duterte’s Drug War
56 ISIS Exploiting Crisis in Myanmar
57 The Maute Group in Mindanao: Who They Are and How
They Operate
58 New Group Presents Twist in Marawi Violence
59 Indonesian Foreign Fighters Return Home for
Assassination Missions
60 What’s in a Name?

LATIN AMERICA

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA

AFRICA
34
35
36
37

41 A Spanish Perspective on Catalonian Separatism
42 Spain and the Border Wall of Europe
43 LATAM, Catalonian Separatism and Organized
Religion
44 Demonstrations in Bolivia
45 The ‘Dark Web’: An Emerging Problem
46 Guatemala and Honduras Increase Cooperation
against Criminal Groups
47 Expanded Canal Provides Boost to Panama’s
Economy
48 China’s Economic and Strategic Moves in Latin
America
49 Mexican and Cuban Responses to North Korea’s
Nuclear Tests

61 India Discussing Defense Reforms after Doklam
Standoff
63 Behind the Joint Exercises of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization
64 Jamaat ul Ansar al-Sharia: The New al-Qaeda Threat in
Pakistan
65 An Indian Perspective on the Rohingya Crisis

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 10

November | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Zach Kelsay

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

		
Asia-Pacific

Fen Chen
Cindy Hurst
Spencer Shanks
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn
		
Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=45295@cmsPhotoGallery ,
CC 4.0.

Matthew Stein
Farhan Zahid

		
Russia, Ukraine

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER: TEXT BACKGROUND IMAGE: Zapad-2017:
Countersabotage training by Russian units (Borisovsky range).

Dodge Billingsley

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Kaitlyn Johnson

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
A Russian Critique of “Zapad”
OE Watch Commentary: Most of the major Russian media were unsparing in their praise while covering the recent Zapad 2017 military
exercises. Evening TV newscasts were filled with scenes of advancing armor, streaking aircraft, and exploding munitions. While the exercise
scenario was built around the need to defeat “a terrorist assault force” from an imaginary country near the Baltics, daily news reports
emphasized the growing strength of Russia’s conventional military and its ability to defend against Western military forces. This disconnect
between the exercise scenario and the actual conduct of military operations was broached in a recent interview with political analyst Stepan
Sulakshin in the Russian weekly, Sobesednik Online.
The interview begins with Sulakshin asserting that “the Zapad-2017 exercises – are
an extremely demonstrative political and geopolitical event,” not because they are
based in reality, but rather because “they demonstrate that degradation is occurring…
in the Russian military leadership as in the rest of the spheres of the country’s life.”
The expert criticizes the country’s political and military leadership for staging what
he describes as “really the picture of the Great Patriotic War.” He insists that these
conventional displays of firepower are not indicative of “future war” and not designed
to handle genuine terrorist threats. Instead of proclaiming that the West presents a
genuine military threat, Russian authorities state that “the formations in the field are
combating terrorists.”

“It was announced quite recently that
we are Europe and that our values are
the same as Europe’s, and now we are
demonstrating our military capabilities
to them on the border with Europe.”

Sulakshin points out the inherent contradiction in the current Kremlin approach: insisting that Russia is an integral part of Europe, while at
the same time “demonstrating our military capabilities to them on the border with Europe.” He posits that this incongruity might be explained
by domestic concerns over the “future presidential election” as the current “political regime [wants] to assert its right to existence.” Moreover,
he suggests that these exercises “are also attempting in part to frighten the West.” The article concludes with speculation as to why the
presidents of Russia and Belarus failed to meet during the course of the Zapad exercise, speculating that “personal relations are so strained” and
that this suggests “incompatibility.”
As the recently completed Zapad 2017 exercise indicates, there is no question that the Russian military continues to develop its conventional
warfare capabilities. However, as this article suggests, there are doubts among some observers whether these increased military capabilities will
address the actual threats Russia will face in the future. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: Oleg Ushakov, “Запад-2017: как Путин и Лукашенко попытались напугать Европу (Zapad-2017: How Putin and Lukashenko
Attempted To Frighten Europe),” Sobesednik Online, 19 September 2017. https://sobesednik.ru/politika/zapad-2017-kak-putin-i-lukashenkopopytalis-napugat-evropu
…What is the Russian Army, against whom are the RF and Belarus preparing to fight and why did Putin and Lukashenko not meet at one range?
Center for Scientific and Political Thought and Ideology General Director Stepan Sulakshin answered these and other questions of Sobesednik.ru:
[Sulakshin] The Zapad-2017 exercises – are an extremely demonstrative political and geopolitical event. First: they demonstrate that degradation
is occurring at those same rates in the Russian military leadership as in the rest of the spheres of the country’s life. They show us the battlefield,
tanks, and howitzers and this is really the picture of the Great Patriotic War. A future war will absolutely not be that…. The second factor. This
is simply some sort of mumbo-jumbo: the combined Russo-Belarusian formations repelled a terrorist assault force. Listen, it turns out that the
terrorists don’t have a “suicide belt” and not a gas canister, but aircraft and airborne troops. This is called not terrorists and not terrorism. And
where is the precise military doctrine? Where is the serious designation of the probable enemy and the preparation for actual threats? These are
Potemkin villages, which instill a sense of horror….
[Ushakov] But whom do we want to defeat using sheer numbers?
[Sulakshin] You know, we intend to beat the terrorists. This issue is bypassed in silence in the military doctrine. The Americans have precisely
designated the threats: the DPRK, Iran, and Russia. Therefore, military planning there is adequate, transparent, and intelligible both for the allies
and for the entire world. And what a load of rubbish is being communicated to the world from the Russian side – that the formations in the field are
combating terrorists? This is also evidence that we are not observing professional readiness for military threats by Russia.
…It is also alarming that a value platform, an ideological base, for which countries also fight, does not exist for Putin’s Russia. It was announced
quite recently that we are Europe and that our values are the same as Europe’s, and now we are demonstrating our military capabilities to them on
the border with Europe. From all appearances, these are the latest historical attempts of a totally incompetent political regime to assert its right to
existence. They are asserting this primarily to the Russian people in the period immediately preceding the future presidential election, and they are
also attempting in part to frighten the West….
…[Ushakov] With regard to the lack of a meeting of Putin and Lukashenko: if, as you said, they received “black marks” from the West, then why
did they not at least demonstrate that they are in agreement in front of the television cameras?
[Sulakshin] Apparently, the personal relations are so strained that this is already called “incompatibility”….

OE Watch | November 2017

3

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Polish Views of “Zapad”
OE Watch Commentary: Given their long, difficult history with Russia, many Poles
tend to regard their large eastern neighbor with fear and wariness. These concerns have
escalated since Russia’s armed aggression against Ukraine and the Kremlin’s continued
emphasis on military modernization. As the two accompanying excerpts from the popular
Polish newspaper Rzeczpospolita illustrate, these apprehensions were on full display during
(and after) the recent Zapad 2017 Russia-Belarus military exercise.
The first excerpt, published just as the exercise was getting under way, claims that
Zapad’s primary objective is “to frighten the societies in many counties of Eastern and
Northern Europe that fear an act of aggression.” Since improving and modernizing its
armed forces, “Russia has turned into a power that could intimidate anyone.” The author
claims that this psychological “battle over mind control….is the real war that Russia is
waging.” The author further asserts that Russia’s improved military status is also driven
by a desire to restore the prowess of the USSR, where the Kremlin’s “position is almost the
same as back in the times of the Soviet Union,” and that Putin wants to send the message
that “everyone is taking us seriously.” Moreover, this focus on defense preparedness has a
domestic aspect as it reminds the Russian population “that the West poses a real threat to
Russia, which is why he [Putin] should remain in office.”

Poland in Europe.

Source: MoukhametovR, via Wikimedia Commons https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Image_of_
Poland_in_Europe.jpg.gif CCA-SA 3.0.

“

The second excerpt was published as the Zapad exercises were ending and also claims that
Moscow wants to conceal its
the primary objectives “were chiefly political.” The author asserts that even though none
readiness for a war with NATO…
of the earlier threats of possible Russian aggression materialized, NATO countries must
remain vigilant in the future. The author warns that “the moral of the Zapad drill is simple: we should take into account an act of aggression on
the part of Russia at all times and prepare for it, regardless of whether the warnings of experts are justified or temporarily unfounded.” He goes
on to say that the more exercises are held, “the easier it will be in the future to conceal actual preparations for an act of aggression.” The article
concludes with a categorical statement: “Russia is an enemy and should be treated like one.” Considering their troubled history with Russia, and
given that Poland lies just to the West (Zapad) of any possible Russia-Belarus attack, these dire Polish reactions to the recently completed Zapad
military exercise are understandable. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

”

Source: Marek Kozubal, “Zapad, czyli jak przestraszyć świat (Zapad Drill, or How To Spook the World),” Rzeczpospolita, 15 September 2017. http://www.
rp.pl/Swiat/309149876-Zapad-czyli-jak-przestraszyc-swiat.html
Russian and Belarusian soldiers are countering an attack of infiltrators. In reality, this is a display of Russia’s game of appearances called
maskirovka….
…Undoubtedly, Russia has already achieved its goal with the help of Belarus. It has managed to frighten the societies in many counties of
Eastern and Northern Europe that fear an act of aggression. In the eyes of many of them, Russia has turned into a power that could intimidate
anyone. It has used this method for many months in order to win the battle over mind control. That is the real war that Russia is waging….
…The drill carries greater importance in [Russian President] Vladimir Putin’s domestic policy. He wants to tell Russian citizens, “Look,
our position is almost the same as back in the times of the Soviet Union, everyone is taking us seriously.” He also wants to show them that the
West poses a real treat to Russia, which is why he should remain in office….
Source: Andrzej Talaga, “Talaga: Rosja naszym wrogiem (Talaga: Russia Is Our Enemy),” Rzeczpospolita, 20 September 2017. http://www.rp.pl/Rzeczo-polityce/309199899-Talaga-Rosja-naszym-wrogiem.html
The Zapad 2017 exercises are coming to an end. The drill was not merely aimed at testing military skills -- its goals were chiefly political.
It was not a cover for a military operation against NATO or Ukraine or for occupation of Belarus but a virus released into NATO’s immune system.
The more exercises are held that allegedly serve as a prelude to a war, the easier it will be in the future to conceal actual preparations for an act of
aggression and the softer the public will be in the West, including in Poland.
The moral of the Zapad drill is simple: we should take into account an act of aggression on the part of Russia at all times and prepare for it,
regardless of whether the warnings of experts are justified or temporarily unfounded. Moscow wants to conceal its readiness for a war with NATO…
…When another drill is held at NATO’s borders, it will be therefore more difficult to formulate radical warnings. After that, they will not even
attract the interest of the public. And that is exactly the purpose. Media outlets and opinion leaders, also in Poland, were right in making warnings,
but they have unintentionally become a tool in Russia’s hybrid warfare….
…That is exactly how an attack on the Baltics and Poland could look. Maneuvers provide the best cover for an attack and will do so also in the
future. It pays for Russia to escalate tensions before every drill to prove repeatedly that the fears are unfounded and to strike when no one believes in
the warnings any longer.
That is not a scenario of a certain war but an option in which Moscow is investing forces and financial resources. The Zapad 2017 drill was not a
prelude to war and it may not serve as one in the following years, but Poland should always take this option into account. Russia is an enemy and
should be treated like one.
OE Watch | November 2017

4

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Kazakhstan’s Parallel Military Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces carry out a number
of field training exercises in a given year, but as the accompanying excerpted
news articles report, the recent Kazakh exercise “Karatau-2017” received
attention for its size and the fact that it took place around the same time that
Russia and Belarus carried out “Zapad-2017.” The accompanying articles
provide insight into Kazakh and Russian perspectives on Karatau-2017.
The first article from Inform Buro, a Russian-language news website in
Kazakhstan, reports on several notable things about Karatau-2017, including
that in the exercise’s scenario “two large illegally formed groups committed
an incursion through the border in the south and southeast” and that “Syrian
motives were involved in the exercise to some extent.”
Past exercises of Kazakh forces typically involved a scenario of combating
a terrorist group which crossed the border into Kazakhstan, but this one
also included a situation in which the group “not only captured territory and
populated areas, but destroyed military units” and “took small arms and
armored vehicles.” This additional aspect of the exercise scenario could be
related to Kazakh leadership watching what happened in Syria as the article
notes. However, it is worth remembering the incident in the city of Aqtobe
in June 2016, when a couple dozen men with alleged ties to a terrorist group
attacked a National Guard facility. The group killed three service members
and wounded several before a National Guard unit drove them off. Security
analysts and media in Kazakhstan thought the group attacked the National
Guard in order to seize weapons, but never confirmed this.
The Inform Buro article also notes some of the equipment used in the
exercise and how “the theater of military operations was controlled by
unmanned aerial vehicles, one of which was armed,” and how the Kazakh
forces “have new, tactically linked, radio systems…produced in Kazakhstan
under a joint venture.” This is in addition to Kazakh forces using “a modified
version of the ‘Arlan’ armored vehicle.” The use of the radio systems and the
Arlan armored vehicles show how the armed forces are utilizing a couple of
the locally produced pieces of equipment only a few years after production
started. The UAV mentioned is likely a variant of the Wing Loong acquired
from China a few years ago and the exercise marks one of the first times that
Kazakhs used it in an exercise for its offensive capabilities.
Lastly, the articles from Tengri News, a Kazakh government news
website, and Ratel, an independent Russian language website with news on
Kazakhstan, report on other exercises that took place around the same time
as Zapad-2017. Some Russian media believed the exercises were directed
against Russia, but as the articles note, the exercise in Atyrau involved a joint
effort to “eliminate the terrorists who had captured a worker’s village,” while
the exercise outside Astana took place “to check the readiness of the forces
and capabilities of the operational headquarters” of the capital. The exercises
do not appear to have involved a large number of personnel and focused
only on counterterrorism scenarios. Ultimately, while some in Russia saw
Karatau-2017 with alarm, the exercises from a Kazakh perspective is a
chance for the armed forces to prepare for various scenarios and test new
weapons and equipment. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: Bedenko, Grigoriya. “Стратегические учения
“Каратау-2017” (The strategic exercise “Karatau-2017”),”
Inform Buro, 23 September 2017. https://informburo.kz/stati/
strategicheskie-ucheniya-karatau-2017-fotoreportazh.html
The Armed Forces of Kazakhstan wrapped up the strategic
exercise “Karatau-2017” this week, the largest in the past several
years. The main feature of the exercise is that for the first time,
the tactic of combating a conventional enemy was reconfigured
with the use of new military equipment…The operational-strategic
exercise began on 12 September and according to the scenario,
two large illegally formed groups committed an incursion through
the border in the south and southeast…The main goal is check the
combat readiness of personnel. Also, reconnaissance forces had
to carry out a special operation…
The active phase of Karatau-2017 took place at two Kazakhstan
facilities: Matybulak in Zhambyl Oblast and at the Koktal training
site in the Zharkent area. The first is for training on the plain,
the second is for training combat training in the mountains. Tank
units and motorized rifle troops were transferred to areas where
the forces of the enemy are concentrated…
Lieutenant-General Murat Maikeev, Chief of the General Staff:
“…We used the usual and entirely new weapons. The theater of
military operations was controlled by unmanned aerial vehicles,
one of which was armed…
It is interesting that Syrian motives were involved in the exercise
to some extent…the potential enemy, numbering more than a
hundred, not only captured territory and populated areas, but
destroyed military units. Accordingly, they took small arms
and armored vehicles. In order to suppress the group, heavy
weapons, including anti-tank systems, were utilized. The fighting
started with artillery units, armed with howitzers, multiple rocket
launcher systems and air support. Units with armored vehicles
then conducted operations, finally knocking out the enemy in
hard to reach terrain…At the Koktal training site, reconnaissance
units used the Skylark UAV…We have new, tactically linked,
radio systems. These are produced in Kazakhstan under a joint
venture. (Also), there is a modified version of the “Arlan” armored
vehicle…In the future, we will increase the supply of these to
units…
Source: “В Атырауской области прошли учения “КаспийАнтитеррор-2017” (The exercise “Caspian-Antiterror-2017”
took place in the Atyrau Oblast),” Tengri News, 17 September
2017. https://tengrinews.kz/kazakhstan_news/atyirauskoyoblasti-proshli-ucheniya-kaspiy-antiterror-2017-326712/
The Regional Command “West” took part in the operationaltactical exercise “Caspian-Antiterror-2017”…according to the
aim of the exercise, special purpose units needed to coordinate
their actions and jointly eliminate the terrorists who had captured
a worker’s village and rescue hostages…

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

5

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Continued: Kazakhstan’s Parallel Military Exercise
“It is interesting that Syrian motives were involved in the exercise to some extent…the potential enemy,
numbering more than a hundred, not only captured territory and populated areas, but destroyed
military units.”
Source: “Антитеррористические учения проходят близ Астаны (An antiterrorism exercise is taking place near Astana),” Ratel, 16
September 2017. http://www.ratel.kz/kaz/antiterroristicheskie_uchenija_prohodjat_bliz_astany
An antiterrorism exercise is taking place near Astana – in the village of Koshy…The goal of the exercise is to check the readiness of the forces and
capabilities of the operational headquarters as part of an emergency response to indicators of terrorism in the areas near the capital…

БПЛА Wing Loong на военном параде в Астане. 7.05.2017 (The UAV Wing Loong at a military parade in Astana. 7.05.2017).
Source: by Kalabaha1969, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AWing_Loong_(3).jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

OE Watch | November 2017

6

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Russia Takes Note of Conflicting Kazakh Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: Since the annexation
of Crimea and its military involvement in southeast
Ukraine and Syria, even Russia’s closest neighbors
have expressed concern with the Kremlin’s more
assertive foreign policy and continued focus on military
modernization. Kazakhstan shares a 4,250-mile border
with Russia and ethnic Russians make up over 20% of
the Kazakh population. While on the surface, KazakhRussian relations remain strong, the excerpts from the
accompanying articles from Russia and Kazakhstan
suggest that tensions may be growing.
The first excerpt, from the Russian centrist daily,
Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, complains that Kazakh
military authorities dared to stage an international
exercise at the same time Russia was involved in staging
“Zapad-2017, which was being carried out by the Russian
Federation and Belorussia.” The article includes a quote
Russia-Kazakhstan Border.
Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kazakhstan_political_map_2000.jpg, Public Domain.
from a Russian military expert who labels the Kazakh
exercise as “troubling,” explaining that “at a time when Russia is concentrating its forces along a western strategic axis, a Kazakhstani strike
group appears in its rear. Why?” The article quotes another Russian source who bemoans the fact that Kazakhstan refused Russia’s offer “to
participate in a peacekeeping force stationed in the de-escalation zone in Syria…, while at the same time expressing a desire to cooperate with
UN forces under the auspices of NATO.”
The second excerpt, from a Kazakh source, addresses some of the negative accusations found in the Russian article. The author points out that
“Kazakhstan signed an agreement on military collaboration with the USA for 2018-22,” and reminds the reader of earlier preposterous Russian
charges regarding Kazakh international military contacts. The article goes on to point out that the author of the Russian article “was not even
interested in asking the opinion of the Kazakh side on this matter.” The Kazakh article includes a quote from a local expert who asserts that
“Russia considers partnership with Kazakhstan as its own complete domination in the region,” and that any independent move on the part of the
Kazakh military leadership “triggers a nervous reaction from Moscow.” Another Kazakh expert explains that this Russian “paranoia” may stem
from the “degradation of the expert community in [Russia]… and the replacement of analysis with propaganda.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Назарбаев поднял армию в ружье (Nazarbayev Calls Military Forces to Arms),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online,
13 September 2017. http://www.ng.ru/cis/2017-09-13/2_7072_nazarbaev.html
Kazakhstan, together with Sweden, Finland, Ukraine, and the NATO countries… abruptly brought its forces to their highest state of combat
readiness the day before the Russian Federation and Belorussia initiated their joint strategic exercises -- “Zapad-2017.” Kazakhstan’s Ministry
of Defense reported the start of operational-strategic exercise “Karatau-2017” in the eastern, southeastern, southern, and western regions of the
country, which is the first time such maneuvers have been launched in virtually the whole of the country and in such proximity to the borders of the
Russian Federation. The massive character of the exercises is also a first.
According to the Military Department of Kazakhstan, “more than 1,500 pieces of military equipment and more than 40 aircraft and helicopters
were involved in the operational-strategic exercise together with almost 10,000 military personnel. Naval vessels were also deployed in the
Caspian Sea.” Kazakhstan, as is generally known, is a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization and an ally of the Russian
Federation, though there are questions as to the reasons behind the exercises.
First, it is not known whether observers from Russian were invited to the exercises…. Second, the start of the operational-strategic exercise
“Karatau-2017” coincided for some reason with the start of similar maneuvers, namely, “Zapad-2017,” that were being carried out by the Russian
Federation and Belorussia….
“I do not think Kazakhstan has succumbed to the hysteria that Ukraine and the NATO countries have shown regarding the ‘Zapad-2017’
exercises, but its military activity in the Volga region and in the Caspian is troubling. At a time when Russia is concentrating its forces along a
western strategic axis, a Kazakhstani strike group appears in its rear. Why?” asked Colonel Eduard Rodyukov, a corresponding member of the
Academy of Military Science….
“There has been a longstanding tendency for Kazakhstan to distance itself from military cooperation with Russia,” notes military expert
Lieutenant General Yuriy Netkachev. In confirmation of this, he cites the fact that Astana refused Moscow and Ankara’s offer to participate in a
peacekeeping force stationed in the de-escalation zone in Syria. Kazakhstan did this while at the same time expressing a desire to cooperate with
UN forces under the auspices of NATO…

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

7

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Continued: Russia Takes Note of Conflicting Kazakh
Exercise
“The issue is that Russia considers partnership with Kazakhstan as its own complete domination in the region...”
Source: Vyacheslav Polovinko, “Оно нам НАТО? (Do you need NATO?),” Novaya Gazeta Kazakhstan Online, 17 August 2017. http://
eurasianews.info/politika/ono-nam-nato.html
Russian newspapers are actively focusing on Kazakhstan again… The publications are playing the same old tune that Russia’s
geographically and geopolitically closest partner is actually not that close ideologically, and it is uncontrollably being drawn to NATO.
Last week a report headlined “Pentagon is forming an anti-Russian frontier in Kazakhstan” by observer Vladimir Mukhin was published in
Nezavisimaya Gazeta. It talked about the completed “Stepnoy Oryol-2017” [“Steppe Eagle-2017”] military exercises where, as the author
emphasized, the Russian military was absent and all the training of the troops was done “exclusively according to the standards of the North
Atlantic Alliance”.
It seems that there is nothing wrong in the training itself, the publication said. However, Kazakhstan signed an agreement on military
collaboration with the USA for 2018-22. There are some biological centers in the country’s territory and nobody can say with certainty that
they are being used for peaceful purposes….
Besides, it is always dangerous when America is around the corner. Nezavisimaya Gazeta cited a military expert, Yuriy Netkachev, who
suggested that Kazakh soldiers were being influenced even mentally. “The USA is training Kazakh military servicemen at no cost, instilling its
own values and ideology in them. I am sure that the scheduled switch of the Kazakh alphabet to the Latin script has been organized with US
advisers. It is a clear provocation….At the same time, the publication was not even interested in asking the opinion of the Kazakh side on this
matter..
The director-general of the Central Asian foundation for the development of democracy, PhD Tolgonay Umbetaliyeva, easily discerns the
logic of Russia that is worried about “approaching NATO”. “The issue is that Russia considers partnership with Kazakhstan as its own
complete domination in the region,” the political expert said.… On the whole, Russia is irritated by Kazakhstan’s multi-vector [foreign] policy,
the expert suggested. Of course, it is not mentioned directly, but Astana’s any significant actions in relation to countries that are geopolitical
rivals for Russia triggers a nervous reaction from Moscow. …
…Over the last few years, their reaction has been close to paranoia, the director of the risk assessment group, Dosym Satpayev, noted. … But
Russia is picking on it time and time again, which is testament to the degradation of the expert community in the neighboring country and the
replacement of analysis with propaganda,” Satpayev added.

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
CELEBRATING 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | November 2017

8

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Telephone Threats
OE Watch Commentary: Even though the Kremlinsponsored media provided extensive coverage of the
Zapad-2017 military exercise, many Russians were more
concerned with a series of nation-wide telephone bomb
threats. Not surprisingly, some Russian analysts claimed
that this “telephone terrorism” was just another weapon
in the West’s “hybrid war” arsenal, directed at interfering
with the Zapad exercise. These allegations are examined
in the first brief accompanying excerpt from the centrist
news site, Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online.
The author begins by describing the scale of the bomb
threats, pointing out that one day alone, “people were
evacuated from more than 200 civilian facilities in Omsk,
Stavropol’, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, Magadan, Vladivostok,
Perm’, Kaliningrad, Krasnoyarsk, Yakutsk, and other
cities.” Rather than considering that these threats stem
from domestic sources, the author blames “foreign
forces” who allegedly want “to intimidate the population
and force the country’s security agencies to operate on
an emergency footing.” According to one source quoted
in the article, “the calls are coming from Ukrainian
territory.” Another expert suggests that “the bomb calls
are a new kind of hacker attack aimed at destabilizing the
situation in the country,” and will likely “peak in 2018
when the Russian presidential election takes place.”
The article points out that with modern technology, “it
is very difficult to determine where the call came from.”
Regardless, accusing foreign enemies, the author quotes
a “specialist in the sphere of cybersecurity,” who asserts
that “the mass bomb calls are an “element of hybrid war
by the West,” designed to “hinder the organization of
the Zapad-2017 joint strategic exercises.” This expert
points out that NATO has enhanced its cybersecurity
and communication assets and “that cyber wars are in
the front rank in the arsenals of the NATO strategists.”
The article concludes with the bold assertion that the
main objective of the US and NATO is “to undermine the
foundations of the Russian state system.”
The telephone bomb threats have continued since the
end of the Zapad exercise and according to the second
excerpt from the Russian daily, Kommersant, in early
October, the Federal Security Director claimed that
four Russian citizens living outside of the country were
responsible. While the perpetrators have yet to identified
or apprehended, Russian authorities will likely continue
to blame the West (Zapad) when domestic problems
occur. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…All the indications are that foreign

forces are involved in the attempts to
intimidate the population and force the
country’s security agencies to operate on
an emergency footing.”

Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Против РФ развязали гибридную войну: Накануне
учений ‘Запад-2017’ страну атаковали лжетеррористы (Hybrid War Unleashed
Against Russian Federation. Pseudo-Terrorists Attack Country Ahead of
Zapad-2017 Exercises),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 15 September 2017. http://
www.ng.ru/politics/2017-09-15/2_7074_war.html
The start of the Zapad-2017 Russian-Belarusian joint strategic exercises was
unexpectedly marked by the appearance of a real enemy -- telephone terrorism.
Calls about the planting of bombs at dozens of facilities throughout Russia proved
false. But they destabilized the situation in many cities, including Moscow. There
have as yet been no detailed explanations from the security agencies, except for
the fact that criminal proceedings have been instituted in relation to instances
of the threat of terrorism. The scale of the action is impressive. On Tuesday [12
September] alone, according to the media’s calculations, people were evacuated
from more than 200 civilian facilities in Omsk, Stavropol’, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk,
Magadan, Vladivostok, Perm’, Kaliningrad, Krasnoyarsk, Yakutsk, and other
cities….
…All the indications are that foreign forces are involved in the attempts to
intimidate the population and force the country’s security agencies to operate on
an emergency footing. RIA Novosti yesterday cited a source in the law enforcement
agencies who reported that “there is operational information confirming that the
calls are coming from Ukrainian territory.” At the same time many experts believe
that the telephone terrorists were operating with the help of numerous IP telephony
services. .. this makes it possible to call from any country anonymously over the
Internet. And it is very difficult to determine where the call came from….
…Some of the media cited Andrey Masalovich, a specialist in the sphere of
information security and a leading expert on competitive intelligence, who believes
that the bomb calls are a new kind of hacker attack aimed at destabilizing the
situation in the country. The expert believes that actions of this kind will intensify
in the near future. And they will peak “in 2018 when the Russian presidential
election takes place.” … A similar opinion is held by Reserve Lieutenant Colonel
Aleksandr Ovchinnikov, a specialist in the sphere of cybersecurity. He believes that
the mass bomb calls are an “element of hybrid war by the West.” The calls, the
expert suggests, were prompted by the special services of unfriendly states in order
to disrupt the operation of the local organs of power, the MVD [Ministry of Internal
Affairs], and other security agencies. The purpose of the attack, in his opinion, is to
hinder the organization of the Zapad-2017 joint strategic exercises….
…But the mass telephone operations by the pseudo-terrorists coincided with the
start of active maneuvers by NATO, Ukraine, and other countries near Russia’s
borders,” the expert points out. Ovchinnikov reminds us that a NATO cybersecurity
center [NATO Cooperative Cyber Defense Center of Excellence] operates in
Estonia, and the Alliance’s Strategic Communications Center [of Excellence] in
Latvia…. “we know that cyber wars are in the front rank in the arsenals of the
NATO strategists,” Ovchinnikov notes….
Previously Nezavisimaya Gazeta reported, citing authoritative sources, that after
the events of 2014 information and psychological operations subunits were deployed
in Ukraine with the support of the United States and NATO, their main objective
being to “undermine the foundations of the Russian state system.”
Source: Nickolai Sergeyev, “Минировали из-за границы (Mining from abroad),”
Kommersant, 5 October 2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3429981
Director of the Federal Security Service of Russia, Alexander Bortnikov, said
that organizers of the large-scale bomb-hoaxes of buildings throughout the
country have been established. We are talking about four Russians who are now
abroad.

OE Watch | November 2017

9

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
China: Not So Concerned with “Zapad”
OE Watch Commentary: The Zapad-2017
exercise has attracted attention from many
countries, causing particular unease and concern
among neighboring states. Chinese media coverage
on Zapad-2017, however, has been limited. The
collective perception on the exercise was that it was
a unique military exercise and that western media
was being “hysterical” about it, indicating “rising
insecurity in the Western hemisphere” regarding
Russia.
The accompanying article from a Chinese source
provides a good example. While it concedes
that Zapad is the largest exercise since the Cold
War between Russia and Belarus, it claims that
the exercise has been conceived “as a response
to the increase in military deployment of NATO
in Poland and the Baltic states.” It claims that,
“western media released another wave of hysterical
statements on the potential invasion by Russia.”
Zapad 2017.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12142199@egNews, CC 4.0.
It also claims that some analyses are “trying to drive a
wedge between China and Russia” because they suggest
that Russia’s “provocative actions” will jeopardize China’s economic gain in Eastern and Middle Europe. However, Beijing seemed to have
no concerns with the matter, suggesting that the “invasion theory fabricated by European media is extremely unlikely to come true.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Chen)

“Despite the fact that Belarus has set the exercise site further from its border, western media released
another wave of hysterical statements on the potential invasion by Russia. Some media [are] even …
trying to drive a wedge between China and Russia.... Let it be clear that the ‘invasion theory’ fabricated
by European media is extremely unlikely to come true. Their paranoid statement will only reveal the rising
insecurity in the West hemisphere.”
Source: “俄罗斯与白俄冷战后最大军演登场，一带一路受影响? (Russia and Belarus jointing force in the largest exercise since the Cold
War, will it affect the OBOR?),” Phoenix International Think Tank, 6 September 2017. http://pit.ifeng.com/a/20170906/51889157_0.shtml
Russia and Belarus will conduct the “Zapad-2017” joint exercise in mid-September. Involving 12,700 troops, it is the largest scale military
exercise by Belarus after the Cold War era. Rolling out against the backdrop of the U.S. secretary of Defense Mattis attending the Ukrainian
Independence Day parade during his first official visit to Ukraine, the exercise has been conceived as a response to the increase in military
deployment of NATO in Poland and the Baltic states. Despite the fact that Belarus has set the exercise site further from its border, western
media released another wave of hysterical statements on the potential invasion by Russia. Some media even argued that Russia’s “provocative
actions” will jeopardize China’s economic gain in Eastern and Middle Europe, trying to drive a wedge between China and Russia.
... Belarus has ... become an increasingly important part of China’s Eastern Europe trade. Belarus started soliciting infrastructure
investment from China since 2013 in order to avoid the terms in European loans, while China was seeking agricultural import from Belarus
just like it did from Ukraine. Moreover, Belarus has lowered its economic risk as a result of the devaluation of the Rubi by its trade with
China, the driving force of its trade growth.
Let it be clear that the “invasion theory” fabricated by European media is extremely unlikely to come true. Their paranoid statement will
only reveal the rising insecurity in the Western hemisphere. As China, we will collaborate with all parties and push for a peaceful solution of
Ukraine’s issues.

OE Watch | November 2017

10

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Turkish Perspectives on “Zapad”
OE Watch Commentary: Turkish media coverage of Zapad
2017 has not been extensive, and has largely focused on three
aspects of the exercise: controversy surrounding troop
numbers, the scenarios of the exercises, and whether NATO
should be worried or not. The general consensus appears to
be that Russia is sending an aggressive message to the West
and that NATO should be worried, given the geopolitical and
military trends in the region.
The first accompanying passage, written by Dr. Can
Kasapoğlu, a defense analyst at an Istanbul-based think-tank,
and published in Turkey’s state-run Anadolu news agency,
provides a good summary of the main issues covered in
the Turkish press. The analyst focuses on the controversy
surrounding troop numbers and lack of transparency as one
of the problems with the exercise. He continues to discuss the
problematic nature of the scenarios, which claim to be focused
on “anti-terrorism.” Kasapoğlu notes that it is not realistic
to claim a focus on “anti-terrorism,” when the instruments
involved in the exercises include “SS-26 Iskander tactical
ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads, strategic
bombardment planes, wide ranging amphibious elements, many
tanks and elite air landing units.”
He concludes by saying that NATO should be worried based
on an analysis of the geopolitical and military trends in the
region, especially regarding Russia. Regarding geopolitical
trends, he points out that “NATO member countries in the
region are limited in their capacity to continue existing without
the alliance’s capabilities.” However, Kasapoğlu claims that
the main concern to NATO is the fact that Russia maintains
the upper hand in tactical nuclear weapons, and the huge
progress Russia has made in anti-access/area-denial concepts.
Considering how far Russia has come since the 1990s, he points
out that NATO should be concerned about what Russia may do
if it senses a vulnerability in the defense of the Baltic region in
the 2020s or 2030s.
The second accompanying passage from the pro-government
Yeni Safak similarly reports on NATO announcements that
Zapad may be taking place with a higher number of soldiers
than reported, reminding that the same thing happened with
Zapad 2009 and 2013. It also features a NATO official’s
statements that indicate that Zapad is a reflection of Russia’s
“recent, more aggressive behavior.”
The third accompanying passage, from the Moscow-based
Sputniknews (in Turkish), appears to be Russia’s attempts to
counter these views in Turkey. The article claims that “the West
has been instigating hysteria against Russia due to the exercise.”
It claims double standards against Russia and notes, “while the
West has been criticizing Zapad-2017, NATO and its allies have
stepped up their presence on the Russian border...” It should
be noted that Sputniknews was established by the Russian
government-controlled news agency Rossiya Segodnya. End
OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Should NATO really be worried? The answer to this
question is ‘yes’.”
Source: Dr. Can Kasapoğlu, “Zapad tatbikatı: NATO gerçekten
endişelenmeli mi? (The Zapad Exercise: Should NATO really be
worried?),” Anadolu Ajansi (Anatolian Agency), 15 September 2017. http://
aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/zapad-tatbikati-nato-gercekten-endiselenmelimi/910945
Regarding Russia’s exercises, the concerning aspect from the perspective
of the security of NATO and Europe, is the fact that the exercises are
far from transparent... The most important problem is the fact that both
Moscow and Minsk have shown the participant numbers to be below
13,000... By doing so, they circumvent the Viyana Document that allows
OSCE to monitor the exercises. This document foresees a more stringent
reporting and monitoring requirement for exercises with over 13,000
participants. In fact, the Zapad 2013 exercise had a similar transparency
problem, and it was followed by Moscow’s hybrid intervention into Crimea
and then eastern Ukraine...
Another serious problem with Russian exercises in general and Zapad
in particular is their scenarios. Officially, many of the military activities
around Zapad are characterized as “anti-terror operations.” On the other
hand, the Russian Armed Forces’ anti-terror instruments include SS-26
Iskander tactical ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads,
strategic bombardment planes, wide ranging amphibious elements, many
tanks and elite air landing units. Therefore, it is not realistic to say that
Zapad, which has amassed a force as big as one that could invade a midsize country, on the borders of the Baltic and Poland, is an anti-terror
exercise...
Should NATO really be worried? The answer to this question is ‘yes.’
This is [due to] geopolitical and military trends.... [As for geopolitical
trends]... There is a serious discrepancy between political maps and
strategic cultural maps within the old Soviet geography; and NATO
member countries in the region are limited in their capacity to continue
existing without the alliance’s capabilities. [As for military trends]...
The Russian Armed Forces’ bad performance in the 1994-1996 RussianChechen war had raised questions about whether “the disintegration of the
Soviets are continuing.” Twenty years later, the same Russia has annexed
Crimea, without a single casualty. With its tracking/surveillance missiles
fired from the Caspian Sea, it was able to fly over Iranian, Iraqi and Syrian
airspace, shoot its targets... and change the outcome of the Syrian war with
a relatively small force...
The main concerning question
Moscow’s goal now is to equip at least 70% of it armed forces with
modern equipment by the early 2020’s, and employ about 500,000
professional soldiers in addition to its serviceman. Let’s not forget that
Russia maintains the upper hand in tactical nuclear weapons (both in
terms of numbers and function); and has made huge progress in A2/
AD (anti-access/area denial) concepts, which limit the enemy’s ability to
maneuver. What would Moscow, which has made such progress from the
early 1990’s to the late 2010’s, do if it senses a vulnerability in the defense
of the Baltic region in the 2020’s or 2030’s? The second issue that should
concern NATO is related to pessimistic answers to this question.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

11

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Continued: Turkish Perspectives on “Zapad”
“...it is not realistic to say that Zapad, which has amassed a force as big as one that could invade
a mid-size country, on the borders of the Baltic and Poland, is an anti-terror exercise.”
Source: “NATO: Rusya agresif bir mesaj veriyor (NATO: Russia is
sending an aggressive message),” Yenisafak.com.tr, 19 September
2017. http://www.yenisafak.com/dunya/nato-rusya-agresif-birmesaj-veriyor-2795922
NATO has announced that ZAPAD 2017, Russia’s joint military
exercise with Belarus may be taking place with a higher number
of soldiers than officially reported. In his statement, a NATO
official said, “In a July NATO-Russia Council [meeting], NATO
and Russian officials informed each other about military exercises.
Russia said that ZAPAD 2017 would have less than 13,000 soldiers.
But we think that the number of soldiers participating in the exercise
is much higher than officially reported.” The official reminded that
the same situation had taken place in the 2009 and 2013 ZAPAD
exercises, which is being repeated with ZAPAD 2017.
“ZAPAD 2017 is sending an aggressive message”
The NATO official said, “ZAPAD 2017 is consistent with Russia’s
recent, more aggressive behavior. Russia continues to increase
its defense budget and its military presence on our borders.” The
NATO official who highlighted that Russia’s actions in Ukraine
clearly reveal its tendency to use military force against its
neighbors, said “ZAPAD 2017 has a military goal. And the exercise
deliberately sends an aggressive message.”

Source: “Gerçekler histeriye karşı: Zapad-2017 tatbikatı hakkında
bilinmesi gerekenler (Facts vs. hysteria: Facts about Zapad-2017 that
must be known),” TrSputniknews.com, 15 September 2017. https://tr.
sputniknews.com/analiz/201709151030160612-gercekler-histeriyekarsi-zapad2017/
Yesterday, Russia, along with Belarus, launched its largest exercises
in recent years, Zapad 2017, with the participation of 12,700 soldiers.
While the West has been instigating hysteria against Russia due to the
exercise, Sputnik gathered the facts...
The exercise is being used as a tool to instigate anti-Russian
hysteria...
Double Standards
While the West has been criticizing Zapad-2017, NATO and its allies
have stepped up their presence on the Russian border... Sweden is
conducting its largest exercise in 20 years. Furthermore, its troop
numbers are much higher than Zapad and its goal is to prepare for a
‘Russian attack.’ In the summer months, NATO conducted 18 different
exercises in different parts of Europe. According to US General
John Healy, 40,000 troops took part in these exercises. Meanwhile,
Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria participated in the US-led ‘Saber
Guardian’ 2017 which include 25,000 troops and 22 allies.

Zapad 2017: Iskander-K Tactical Ballistic Missile System launched a missile during active phase of drills (Leningrad Region).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=45272@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | November 2017

12

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
It Wasn’t “Zapad” and It Wasn’t Coincidental
OE Watch Commentary: As reported in the last OE
Watch, the Northern Fleet conducted a major cruise and an
exercise prior to Zapad. They then began another exercise
that ran concurrently with Zapad, but was not part of Zapad
according to the Ministry of Defense. Whatever it was,
it was impressive. After a busy training summer, Arctic
air, ground and naval forces rolled out yet another set of
exercises and muscle-flexing to demonstrate the Russian
High Command’s ability to command and control several
major exercises at once. The accompanying articles discuss
this exercise. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Officially, the [exercise]… is not a part
of... Zapad-2017. Training scenarios,
however, are similar to... stopping an enemy
attack from the west.”

Source: “Motorized Rifles From the Northern Fleet’s Arctic Brigade land on
Golomyannyy Island in the Severnaya Zemlya Archipelago,” Ministry of Defense of
the Russian Federation, 28 September 2017. http://www.mil.ru
For the first time in modern Russian history, personnel and equipment of the
Northern Fleet’s Arctic Motorized Rifle Brigade landed from the large landing
ship Kondopoga on Golomyannyy Island in the Severnaya Zemlya Archipelago.
The landing was carried out using a ramp lowered onto the beach. Following
the landing, the Arctic Motorized Rifle Brigade’s subunits used four MT-LBV
multipurpose armored vehicles equipped with large-caliber Kord machine guns
to rehearse several procedures involved in raids on unfamiliar terrain in the
Arctic….
…Once ashore from the landing ship, the Arctic motorized rifles, supported
by assault naval infantry groups from the major antisubmarine ship
Severomorsk,… established a beach head. After a target range was set up, the
motorized rifle troops conducted live firing from assault rifles, machine guns,
mortars, and grenade launchers….

Source: Atle Staalsen, “Russia engages in Military Exercises near Norway,” The Independent Barents Observer, 20 September 2017. http://www.rcinet.
ca/eye-on-the-arctic/2017/09/20/russia-engages-in-military-exercises-near-norway/
The Northern Fleet, Russia’s most potent Naval force, is unfolding a series of exercises which fully coincide with the major ongoing drills
in the Baltic region. On Monday, a number of Northern Fleet units took part in drills on the Sredny Peninsula, a piece of land located only
few kilometers from the Norwegian border. From the local shooting range of Pumanki, naval infantry conducted a series of coastal defense
exercises, including the landing of forces and the shooting of missiles….
According to the Northern Fleet, in the course of the drills, Su-24 fighter jets and Mi-8 helicopters simulated combat along with more
than 600 men and eight 8×8 wheeled amphibious armoured BTR-80 personnel carriers…. Noise was massive as 122mm self-propelled 2S1
howitzers … rolled along the Arctic beaches accompanied by fires from 82mm mortars and Bal mobile coastal missile systems….The training
scenario included the attempted intrusion into the area by enemy forces and subsequent fighting…. In a second phase of the training, the
Northern Fleet forces entered the fighting.... With heavy air support, the enemy attack was halted...
The exercise came after a major flotilla of Northern Fleet vessels set out on 15 September from Severomorsk…and moved into the
Barents Sea, not far from the maritime border to Norway. At the same time, Russian Armed Forces unfolded their major joint training «
Zapad-2017»…. Concern from neighboring Sweden and Finland has been growing. As a response, Sweden began its Aurora 2017, an exercise
which simulates an attack on the Nordic country and the response of forces from nine countries. The exercise is the biggest in Sweden in
years. Finnish forces are also taking part.
Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Cruise Missiles criss cross the Barents Sea,” The Independent Barents Observer, 21 September 2017. http://www.rcinet.ca/eyeon-the-arctic/2017/09/21/cruise-missiles-crisscross-the-barents-sea/
Officially, the massive bombardement at land and sea that has taken place on the Kola Peninsula and in the Barents Sea … is not a part of
the exercise Zapad-2017. Training scenarios, however, are similar to what takes place along the borders to the Baltics in the south; stopping
an enemy attack from the west.
In fact, the war-game scenario reminds one of Operation Barbarossa, Hitler-Germany’s attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941, with
divisions moving in from Poland through the Baltic én route to Leningrad and Moscow. Simultaneously with divisions attacking the Kola
Peninsula from Kirkenes in Norway through the Fisherman Peninsula and Litsa area énroute towards Murmansk.
Yesterday, the Barents Observer reported on massive firing by Northern Fleet naval infantry and air force combat actions. Now, Russia’s
Ministry of Defense reports more on the war games in the Barents Sea.
Five cruise missiles were launched from different warships towards targets on land and sea. The first launch came from the Teriberka area
north of Murmansk where the Bastion coastal missile system launched and hit a target 400 kilometers away. Then, a massive missile attack
was launched against a ‘group of enemy vessels’. The cruise missiles were launched from the heavy missile cruiser Pytor Velikiy as well as
from the two nuclear-powered Oscar-II class submarines Voronezh and Orel. The Defense Ministry reported that the distance from launch
vessels to targets was between 200 and 300 kilometers…and that the missiles were Granit anti-ship cruise missiles. Finally, Russian missiles
were launched from the destroyer Admiral Ushakov towards a convoy of ‘enemy landing vessels.’ Here, the supersonic anti-ship cruise
missile Moskit was used.
The Ministry stated that all the areas of missile firings were closed off to civilian shipping. In total, more than 20 warships took part in the
Barents Sea exercise, in addition to 10 diesel- and nuclear-powered submarines, about 20 support vessels and up to 30 aircraft. More than
5,000 soldiers took part in the exercise….
OE Watch | November 2017

13

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
The Aerospace Troops Get a Ground Forces Commander
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Aerospace Forces (VKS, Воздушно-Космические Силы), was
formed on 1 August 2015 by merging the Russian Air Force and the Russian Aerospace Defense Forces
in an attempt to place the responsibility for air, space, and missile defense under a single commander.
The VKS now consists of three main commands, the Air Force (VVS), Space Forces, and Air Defense
and Anti-Missile Forces. The accompanying articles from Gazeta.Ru and Izvestiya discuss a leadership
change at the VKS.
The former VKS Commander-in-Chief, Colonel General Viktor Bondarev, vacated the position due to
being appointed to the Federation Council. Interestingly, instead of appointing a pilot, space officer, or air
defender as the VKS Commander-in-Chief, the Russian leadership has chosen a Ground Forces officer for
the position. The future VKS Commander-in-Chief, Colonel General has had a distinguished career. He
graduated from the Omsk Higher Combined-Arms Command School in 1987, and subsequently from the
M.V. Frunze Academy and the General Staff Military Academy. Colonel General Surovikin had several
high profile staff positions and commands including the 201st Motorized Infantry Division in Tajikistan,
and the 42nd Guards Motorized Rifle Division in Chechnya, Eastern Military District. Most recently he
commanded the Russian forces in Syria, effectively integrating ground forces, aviation, air defense, and
space assets. In addition, Colonel General Surovikin was also involved in setting up the Russian Military
Police Corps, which has reportedly performed well in Syria.
Although senior officers in the Ground Forces, Naval Infantry, and Airborne occasionally “switch
services,” this is the first time a Ground Forces officer has been appointed to an aviation and strategic
air defense position since Soviet times. A Ground Forces officer serving as the VKS Commander-inChief may seem odd and is an abhorrent idea to most Russian Air Force pilots, but the few Soviet Ground
Forces officers that served in senior aviation and strategic air defense positions were quite well regarded
by the troops they lead. The appointment of Colonel General Surovikin may have something to do with
the very different communities that the VKS consists of. There was some concern that if a pilot, space
officer, or air defender was appointed as the VKS Commander-in-Chief, the other communities would
suffer due to institutional bias, as these communities have little interaction and there has been a history of
predatory behavior (in terms of resourcing) when these officers obtain positions of authority over the other
communities. (continued)

Sergey Surovikin.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://structure.mil.ru/
management/info.htm?id=11854308@SD_Employee, CC BY 4.0.

“Colonel General
Sergey Surovikin,
commander of the
Russian Grouping in
Syria, will be appointed
Commander-in-Chief of
Aerospace Forces (VKS)
in the near future.”

Source: Mikhail Khodarenok: “Генеральская смена: что ждет нового главу ВКС (General Replacement: What Awaits the New Commanderin-Chief of the Aerospace Forces),” Gazeta.Ru Online, 22 September 2017. https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2017/09/22/10902470.shtml
Colonel General Sergey Surovikin, commander of the Russian Grouping in Syria, will be appointed Commander-in-Chief of Aerospace
Forces (VKS) in the near future, RIA Novosti reports with reference to two sources in the Russian Federation Defense Ministry…”Colonel
General Surovikin will begin duties as VKS Commander-in-Chief in October of this year,” the Agency writes. The military department
clarified that this information already has been communicated to Aerospace Forces leadership personnel….
…Previously some publications examined possible candidates who would be proposed for the VKS Commander-in-Chief slot being vacated.
Named among them were Lieutenant General Igor Makushev, chairman of the Defense Ministry Scientific-Technical Council, and Space
Troops Commander Colonel General Aleksandr Golovko. That said, Col Gen Surovikin was considered the least likely candidate to fill the
VKS Commander-in-Chief post…
According to Gazeta.Ru information, the appointment of the new VKS Commander-in-Chief is far from the final one of a series of similar
reshufflings. In the near future it is quite possible that a new CINC Ground Troops also will be appointed. Such appointments largely are
connected with the fact that a considerable number of Armed Forces senior-grade officers are at an age close to the maximum of being on
active military service. So the wave of reshufflings and advancements in branches of the Armed Forces and the Defense Ministry central staff
simply is inevitable.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

14

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Continued: The Aerospace Troops Get a Ground
Forces Commander
In contrast, a Ground Forces commander would have no ‘loyalty’
to any of these communities. In addition there is a belief that a
combined arms commander would have more of a holistic view of
running the VKS due to his combined arms experience. In order to
be effective, a combined arms commander must view all elements
of the combat arms branches (motorized rifle, tank, artillery, and
air defense) and specialty branches (engineer, electronic warfare,
signal, MTO, NBC defense) equally in terms of effective execution
of assigned combat and operational missions. They cannot “have
a soft spot,” for any particular branch of arms, as this would be
contrary to the combined arms concept. Perhaps Colonel General
Surovikin’s appointment is intended to bring this sort of combined
arms thinking to the VKS. There are some fundamental differences
between Surovikin’s combined arms experience and his new duties
as VKS Commander-in-Chief. A combined arms commander
controls his forces in tactical circumstances, while the service
branch Commander-in-Chiefs have no little or no operational
Russian aerospace forces emblem.
Source: Russian government, Ministry of Defence via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Russian_aerospace_forces_emblem.png,
Public Domain.
control of the forces. The operational control of most VKS assets
belongs to the respective Operational-Strategic Command (OSK)
commanders; Long-Range Aviation (DA) and Military Transport Aviation (VTA) are operationally controlled by the VKS Commander-inChief, but their employment is directed by the General Staff. In short, Colonel General Surovikin will have to adapt his combined arms
tactical approach to tackle some very different institutional problems if he is to be successful as the new VKS Commander-in-Chief. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Dmitriy Litovkin, Nikolay Surkov, and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “У Воздушно-космических сил появился шорт-лист
(Aerospace Forces Shortlist Has Emerged),” Izvestiya Online, 30 August 2017. https://iz.ru/638261/aleksei-ramm-dmitrii-litovkin-nikolaisurkov-evgenii-andreev/u-vozdushno-kosmicheskikh-sil-poiavilsia-short-list
The Ministry of Defense has chosen the primary contenders for the post of Aerospace Forces (VKS) commander in chief…
Lt. Gen. Igor Makushev was born 6 August 1964 in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy. He graduated in 1985 from the Chernigov Higher Military
Aviation School for Pilots, and in 2006 from the Military Academy of the Russian Federation Armed Forces General Staff. He has a reputation
as an experienced fighter pilot and combat commander. Makushev has climbed all the steps of his career ladder -- from pilot to deputy
commander of an air army. He has the qualification category “military pilot-expert marksman” and has logged in excess of 3,000 hours. As
deputy commander of the 16th Air Army he took part in the peace enforcement operation against Georgia in August 2008. Igor Makushev
came to the notice of the general public when at briefings in the summer of 2014 he presented the Russian military department’s position in
connection with the loss of the Malaysian Boeing 777. In his current position Gen. Makushev is tasked with providing scientific validation for
prospective areas of the growth, development, training, employment, and support of the Armed Forces…
In contrast to Makushev, the second candidate has emerged not from among airborne personnel but from the space forces. Col. Gen.
Aleksandr Golovko was born 29 January 1964 in Dnepropetrovsk. He graduated from the Kharkov Higher Military Engineer Command
School for Missile Troops (1986), the F.E. Dzerzhinskiy Military Academy (1996), and the General Staff Military Academy (2003). During the
period 1986 through 2001 he served in different command and engineer positions with military units of the G.S. Titov Main Test Center for
Spacecraft Testing and Control (GITsIU KS). In 2007 he took charge of the GITsIU KS, and he became chief of the Plesetsk Space Center in
2011. In December 2012 Golovko was appointed commander of the Aerospace Defense Troops…
Sergey Surovikin graduated from the Omsk Higher Combined-Arms Command School in 1987, and subsequently from the M.V. Frunze
Academy and the General Staff Military Academy. He has progressed through all the stages of an officer’s career. In the 1990s he served
in Tajikistan with the 201st Motorized Infantry Division, and in the 2000s he commanded the 42nd Guards Division in Chechnya. In 2012
he headed the Russian Federation Defense Ministry’s working party on the establishment of the military police. Surovikin was appointed
commander of the Eastern Military District in October 2013. The reason for the advancement of Surovikin’s candidacy for the post of
Aerospace Forces commander in chief was the fact that he had commanded the troop grouping in Syria, where he had been able to effectively
integrate ground forces, aviation, PVO [air defense] assets, and the space grouping within a single system.

OE Watch | November 2017

15

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
The Future Looking Bright for the Russian
Aerospace Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Most mainstream Russian military professionals believe that aerospace (air and space) are a now a theater of military
action (TVD). In the Russian view, the aerospace TVD has become a theater of military operations on par with ground and naval TVDs. The
2015 consolidation of the Aerospace Defense Forces and Air Force into the Aerospace Forces (VKS) is likely one consequence of this thinking.
The VKS is now a single, unified command for air, space, and missile defense that is intended to integrate both offensive and defensive assets.
The accompanying article from Interfax describes how Russia is not just making organizational changes to more successfully compete in the
aerospace TVD, but is also increasing her number of modern aircraft. According to Interfax, the Russian Ministry of Defense has procured more
than 50 aircraft in 2016, and will procure over 70 aircraft in 2017.
Russia’s proposed State Armament Program (GPK) for 2018-2025 envisions the delivery of some
400 aircraft per year. This number seems incredibly large given recent aircraft procurements
and the current state of Russian finances. It is important to note that the GPK provides arms for
all branches of service in the Ministry of Defense, and the other Russian militarized security
services (National Guard, Border Troops, etc.). This number also likely includes major aircraft
refurbishments such as for the Tu-160, Tu-22M3, etc. Although it is very unlikely that Russia will
procure 400 new aircraft, Russia will still likely procure many new aircraft. The accompanying
article from Izvestiya explains that Russia will increase the number of flight officers that aviation
academies are producing. Russia’s two main aviation academies could churn out as many as 1,000
air crewmen per year. Russia is also interested in increasing qualitative aspects of hands-on aviation
training, increasing the number of flight hours for graduates from 60 hours to 90 hours. This
institutional change appears to confirm VKS beliefs that they will be receiving many more aircraft
in the next few years.
Russia may procure a few expensive new aircraft, but the vast majority of Russian aircraft
purchases will be of the more affordable varieties, that are a fraction of the cost of comparable
Western aircraft. Although the numbers are murky, top US fighters such as the F-22 and F-35 cost
between $80-$130 million, while many Russian fighters are in the $30-$50 million dollar range.
(The Su-25K ‘Frogfoot’ ground attack aircraft is a relative bargain, costing only $11 million.)
While pundits will be quick to point out that these cost difference are more than made up for by the
capability advantages of the Western aircraft, it should be noted that Russia has also heavily invested
in relatively cheap electronic warfare technologies to defend aircraft against air-to-air missiles and
air defense systems to deny air space. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: “Russian Defense Ministry to
procure over 70 aircraft, more than 40
anti-aircraft missile systems by year end,”
Interfax, 11 August 2017.
The Russian Defense Ministry will procure
over 40 anti-aircraft missile systems and
more than 70 aircraft by the end of this
year, Aerospace Forces Commander Col.
Gen. Viktor Bondarev said.
“In all, units of the Aerospace Forces will
receive another 70 aircraft, more than 40
anti-aircraft missile complexes, and about
70 radar systems by the end of this year,”
Bondarev told the newspaper Krasnaya
Zvezda in an interview.
Last year, the Aerospace Forces received
about 50 aircraft, among them Sukhoi
Su-34, Su-35S and Su-30SM, as well as
Yakovlev Yak-130, Kamov Ka-52 combat
helicopters, and Mil Mi-8AMTSh and Mi8MTV-5-1 transport helicopters, he said…

Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm, “Подготовку летчиков пустят на поток (Flight Crew Training to Be Stepped Up),” Izvestiya
Online, 2 October 2017. https://iz.ru/645337/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm/letchikov-budut-gotovit-tysiachami
The Russian Federation Air and Space Forces have sharply increased the volume of flight personnel training. In the next five years higher military
educational establishments will be producing hundreds of pilots every year. In parallel the military is promising to increase the intensity of flight
training by 50 percent. The demand for pilots has increased in connection with the formation of new units and purchases of new aviation equipment.
As Izvestiya was told at the Air and Space Forces High Command, the number of pilot school graduates could reach 1,000 a year within the next
five years. The number of graduates at the Krasnodar College alone, which is the main Air Force training center, is set to increase sharply -- from
25 to 600 a year. Earlier this year Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu told State Duma deputies that the Air and Space Forces were 1,300 flight
personnel short. At the same time the head of the military department stated that this problem will be resolved by as early as 2018.
Currently the training of flight personnel for the Air and Space Forces is handled by only two training establishments: the Krasnodar Higher
Military Aviation Pilots College Named for Hero of the Soviet Union A.K. Serov and the Air Force Academy Named for Professor N.Ye. Zhukovskiy
and Yu.A. Gagarin military scientific training center. The Krasnodar College brings together under its roof several training centers across the
country where pilots are trained for all types of combat aircraft. The military scientific training center’s branches in Syzran and Chelyabinsk train
helicopter pilots and navigators.
In 2017 a total of just over 60 people graduated from the Krasnodar College, whereas in previous years the number of pilots graduating did not
exceed even 30 or so. By as early as 2018 the number of graduates will reach 600. Syzran and Chelyabinsk will add an extra several hundred
experts.
The intensity of flying training is also being increased. Under the new plans, graduates’ flying hours will increase by half -- from 60 to 90 hours
a year. This will be achieved, in particular, because the students will start flying after only their second year. The appearance in colleges of new
equipment -- Yak-130 aircraft, which will replace the well-obsolete Czechoslovak L-39s -- will also be a big help.
The increased demand for new pilots is linked to the intensive utilization of military aircraft, which, according to the command, are the first to go
into battle in modern conflicts, and the formation of new air units in the Russian Federation. Under the new State Armament Program (GPK) for
2018-2025 the Air and Space Forces will take delivery of something like 400 aircraft a year…

OE Watch | November 2017

16

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Russia Trying to Increase the Number of
Electro-Optical Satellites
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article from
Izvestiya discusses the need for more electro-optical satellites to
support ongoing and future Russian military operations. Russia
has had to enact a number of stop-gap measures to support the
space-based ISR collection for the Syrian campaign including: using
platforms with less than optimal resolution, changing the flight paths
of ISR platforms, and relying on civilian and/or commercial spacebased ISR platforms to meet operational requirements.
A partial solution to this problem is the 14F156 Razdan electrooptical satellite series. These satellites will be in a low-earth orbit
(LEO) and have a lens with a size of over two meters, giving the
system a spatial resolution of approximately 30 centimeters. In
addition to the primary electro-optical payload, produced at the
Zverev Plant in Krasnogorsk, the satellite will likely carry additional
payloads, such as for communications, missile-warning, or signals
intelligence.
Perhaps the most interesting capability of the system is its ability
to transmit the raw imagery data to ground stations. Typically,
Russian imagery from satellites was not transmitted via radio
transmission, but was instead ejected from the satellite in a capsule,
which had to be retrieved after entering the atmosphere. The
last such satellite (Kobalt-M series) was launched as recently as
June 2015. (Kobalt satellites were put into orbit once a year and
operated in space for about three months.) Russia has used imagery
reconnaissance satellites (Yantars and Arakses series) capable of
transmitting data via ground station, but they were a rarity and had
major technical limitations. Clearly, the long times between when
the imagery was captured to when the imagery was provided to the
end user prevented the imagery’s use for most tactical applications.
The rapid development of digital imagery technologies, computers,
and electronics in the last 10 to 15 years has enabled Russia to revisit
the concept of quickly transmitting imagery data from satellites to
ground stations. The Razdan will reportedly be capable of high
bandwidth transmissions to ground stations, or possibly crosslinking
to another satellite for transmission to ground stations.
The addition of the new 14F156 Razdan satellites will increase
Russian ISR capabilities, but given the size of the current electrooptical fleet and LEO satellite life spans, the launch of three
Razdan satellites will not likely give Russia the needed quantity
of high spatial resolution satellites, capable of supporting tactical
requirements, as needed. Considering Russia’s excellent capability
to launch satellites, it is possible that Russia will transition from a
strategy of infrequently launching a few very large and expensive
satellites, to frequently launching smaller, lower flying satellites
with a much shorter life span, as mentioned in the last few sentences
of the Izvestiya excerpt. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Anton Lavrov, “Сверху видней: о необходимости наращивания
группировки спутников оптической разведки (Visible From Above:
The Necessity to Strengthen the Optical Reconnaissance Satellite Array),”
Izvestiya Online, 22 September 2017. https://iz.ru/645741/anton-lavrov/
orbitalnaia-gruppirovka-otpravilas-na-voinu-v-sirii
Reconnaissance played a huge role in the recent operations for the
liberation of Palmyra and the unblocking of Deir-ez-Zor. It was able to
uncover the militants’ defensive system and quickly detect their mobile
groups. Since our military has no strategic reconnaissance drones
available to it as yet that would hover continuously over the battlefield,
a large burden was placed on the Aerospace Forces (VKS) satellite
array. From the very beginning of the Syrian operation the Ministry of
Defense has engaged no fewer than 10 private and civilian satellites for
reconnaissance there. To do this, it even had to change the orbits of some
of them to optimize the opportunities to monitor that part of the world.
What does the Russian Defense Ministry have in orbit? Its satellite array
consists of about 80 units. It is the second largest in the world after the
US grouping. But most satellites have a communication role.
In the fight against terrorists and militants, radar reconnaissance or
electronic eavesdropping satellites such as the Kondor and Lotos-S, and
even the Bars-M mapping satellite, have a very limited application. The
bulk of the work falls on optical, imagery reconnaissance satellites…
Now the main resource of the Ministry of Defense for imagery
reconnaissance is two Persona satellites. They are big, heavy machines
with powerful telescopes aimed at the Earth. Image resolution is around
one meter per pixel. That is inferior not only to US reconnaissance
satellites, but also many commercial Earth remote sensing satellites.
However, such features do enable them to be used to detect small targets,
down to tracking individual vehicles and identifying their type. And, most
importantly, the pictures can be ordered, received and processed in the
shortest possible time…
The experience of the Syrian operation has forced the Defense Ministry
to press ahead with the creation of new optical reconnaissance satellites
in the Razdan series. Its image resolution is expected to be brought to 30
centimeters per pixel, which is three times better than current Russian
military and civilian satellites. The first Razdan is due to go into orbit
in 2019, and another two before 2025…The number of heavy military
and civilian imagery reconnaissance satellites is to be doubled by 2025,
while the quality of their pictures will be greatly improved. This is
unlikely to be sufficient to fully meet defense requirements, however, and
the solution may be lighter satellites. Thanks to modern technologies,
their efficiency will be no worse than that of the heavy machines of the
previous generation, while the cost of production and launch of one such
reconnaissance satellite is significantly lower…

OE Watch | November 2017

17

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Russia’s Counter to the “High Frequency Global
Communications System”
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article from
Krasnaya Zvezda discusses Russia’s Murmansk-BN, an Electronic
Warfare (EW) system designed to counter High Frequency (HF)
radio communications. According to the press officer of the RadioElectronic Technology Concern (KRET): “The national strategic
EW system (The Murmansk-BN) being developed with the active
participation of KRET is an asymmetrical response to the concept
of ‘network-centric combat command and control based on an
integrated information and communications environment’ being
implemented in the US and NATO member states’ armed forces.
The development of this EW system can be described as the
realization of the concept of network-centric defense. It is primarily
designed to be effective against short-wave systems, such as the US
High Frequency Global Communications System, which provides
communications between all defense department command-andcontrol agencies, aircraft and ships of the US and its NATO allies.”
The Murmansk-BN can reportedly disrupt communications
Unannounced combat readiness inspection of EW centre finished at the Northern Fleet.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12066395@egNews, CC 4.0.
up to 1,900-3,100 miles, by intercepting enemy short-wave radio
communications, analyzing them, and then jamming them throughout the entire frequency band, thereby preventing EW mitigation tactics such
as frequency tuning. (The HF band is a major part of the shortwave band of frequencies, so communication at these frequencies is often called
shortwave radio.) Unlike most Russian EW systems that usually consist of just one or two vehicles, the Murmansk-BN consists of seven KamAZ
trucks, weighing up to 35 tons. The four antenna mast vehicles each reach a height of 100 feet. This massive system takes up to 72 hours to
deploy and occupies an area of a quarter square mile. The Murmansk-BN can be found in Russia’s EW Brigades. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“The Murmansk-BN is designed to detect short-wave radio communication lines in the adversary’s

strategic and operational echelons of command and control and for the technical analysis and electronic
jamming of detected targets.”
Source: Yuriy Avdeyev, “Под защитой «Мурманска» (Under the Protection of ‘Murmansk’),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 25 September 2017.
http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/item/34531-pod-zashchitoj-murmanska
Questions pertaining to the detection and suppression of electronic targets located at a distance of up to 4,000 kilometers were rehearsed for
the first time. The specialists of Central Military District’s electronic warfare troops, in conjunction with units from other military districts,
rehearsed the infliction of an electronic strike on the communications and command-and-control systems of the hypothetical anniversary’s
strategic force grouping…
Deliveries of these complexes to the troops began two or three years ago, and after commissioning, they began to be used to perform combat
training tasks.
The Murmansk-BN is designed to detect short-wave radio communication lines in the adversary’s strategic and operational echelons of
command and control and for the technical analysis and electronic jamming of detected targets. The complex’ antennae segment is mounted
on four telescopic struts with a height of around 32 meters. The system operates in the entire shortwave band and can jam several dozen radio
frequencies simultaneously. At the same time, the target-seeking speed is several times higher by comparison with previous systems of this
kind.
Specialists name the complex’ mobility as another fairly important advantage. The Murmansk-BN is housed in seven motor vehicles. It
possesses the ability to be deployed on virtually any terrain to which it can be delivered. Its autonomy of operation is ensured by powerful
diesel generators...It would not be superfluous to mention an extremely important feature of the work of electronic warfare units. On the plane
of command, they all operate in an integrated fashion and in conjunction with other branches of the forces and combat arms.
This is why, although Murmansk-BN played the leading role in the exercises that have just ended, there were also other complexes of the
combined electronic warfare unit operating in its support, albeit with a number of restrictions

OE Watch | November 2017

18

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
The Russian Military and the Russian Presidential Election
OE Watch Commentary: Russian presidential elections are scheduled for 18 March 2018 (which happens to be the 4th anniversary of Russia’s
annexation of Crimea), and while he has yet to announce his candidacy, the overwhelming consensus is that Vladimir Putin will be elected to his
fourth (and presumably final) term as the Russian Commander in Chief. As in other countries, the Russian military prides itself on remaining outside
of politics. Nevertheless, a recent article by retired General L. Shevtsov in Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer (VPK, Military-Industrial Courier) dealt
with Russian politics and the upcoming presidential election.
Shevstov begins by asking why the Soviet state did not collapse in 1941 when it was under great military pressure, yet fell apart in 1991 when it
was not at war and was even armed with nuclear weapons. His answer: great leadership under Stalin and incompetent leadership under Gorbachev.
Shevstov insists that given Russia’s autocratic tradition, the country must have a strong leader if it is to survive and thrive.
While Shevtsov does not specifically name Vladimir Putin as a “great leader,” reading between the lines, it is clear that he rates Putin nearly as
high as Stalin. Looking at Russian history, he goes on to warn that unless a successor is groomed early on, the great leader is often followed by the
mediocre (or worse). He insists that the current leadership should consider
“who will be in charge soon or in six years? This issue is important even
for people far from politics.” He encourages all Russians to shake off their
political apathy and do their civic duty by voting in the upcoming election.
Although Shevtsov remarks that “in Russia, the replacement of the
leading person is comparable to a large or small revolution,” at this point,
there is little doubt that Putin will remain Russia’s leader. In Russia’s current
top-down system of presidential politics, the leader is chosen beforehand,
while the people go through the democratic ritual of casting a ballot. In such
a faux-democratic model, high voter turn-out is interpreted as a legitimizing
factor. If Shevtsov’s sentiments are shared by other senior military leaders,
President Putin can rely upon solid support from those in uniform in the
upcoming presidential “election.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

President Putin and Chief of General Staff V. Gerasimov observing Zapad
exercise, Leningradskoye Oblast, 18 Sep 2017.
Source: President of Russia, http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/55644/photos/50390. CC BY 4.0.

“Our country, as history shows, can only be successfully managed by a man of outstanding abilities and, most
importantly, one who places the idea of great state power over all other considerations, including personal ones…”
Source: Leontiy Shevtsov, “Случайная власть (Accidental Authority),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 11 September 2017. http://vpknews.ru/articles/38873
…The USSR - a nuclear power with powerful aircraft - collapsed in 1991 without armed intervention, which, according to the Russian president, was
the main tragedy of the 20th century. The conclusion is that there are other reasons. But all of them, let the political scientists have different views on
this score, derived from the main one - the lack of a worthy professional leadership of the state, the responsibility and power of the first person….
In Russia, the replacement of the leading person is comparable to a large or small revolution, depending on the scale of the personality of the leader
and his deeds. This is our mentality.
Our country, as history shows, can only be successfully managed by a man of outstanding abilities and, most importantly, one who places the idea of
great state power over all other considerations, including personal ones….
… Is it possible to compare the potential of the Soviet Union in 1941 and 1991, especially the military one. These are incomparable indicators. A weak
country of the 1941 model, being in political and economic isolation (then the word sanctions were not reprimanded), defeated the world’s strongest
army, while the mighty Russia of 1991 with nuclear weapons lost the cold war.
The reason is obvious: in 1941, the head of state was a person who managed to rally and organize the Fatherland for struggle, and not the mediocre
and the talkers, who, while adoring their posts, betrayed and disgraced the country….
…As a rule, everything happens approximately according to the following scheme. One gets a ravaged country and at the expense of talent, decency,
power, inhuman sacrifice makes the impossible - raises the Fatherland to the proper height. Then comes a man of average ability, but thanks to the
state made before him, he keeps it afloat, which gives his associates a reason to talk about the greatness of the “successor”… And the third comes. As
a rule, mediocrity, an unprincipled individual, which completes the collapse….
…In the battle for the preservation of Russia as a power, we have almost emerged militarily on the scale of the Soviet Union, and in the economic
sphere, after many years of decline, progress has been made. And these are the two most important indicators of a great country. But another
important period is coming - the election of the head of state.
...And the people ask themselves: who will be in charge soon or in six years? This issue is important even for people far from politics.
…We want to have a strong personality at the head, who should provide us and our descendants with a decent life, and care for the welfare of the
state. But, unfortunately, a good third or even more of the population avoid participation in the electoral process, referring to busyness on household
plots, preferring watching TV and lying on the couch to fulfilling their civic duty. That is, we demand responsibility from the first person, yet we
ourselves do not fulfill elementary duties, we refuse constitutional rights….
…Of course, very much is determined by the first person who has served the established term and must transfer power to another…. Hence one of
the most important tasks facing the first person is to take care of the successor or successors…
OE Watch | November 2017

19

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
The Russian Camouflage Regiment
OE Watch Commentary: Deception (maskirovka) remains a key component in Russian military operations. The brief excerpt from the proKremlin news source Izvestiya describes how the Russian Defense Ministry has recently finished reconstituting the “45th Separate EngineerCamouflage Regiment” which has been designed to “make important military and social facilities invisible to satellites, reconnaissance aircraft,
and unmanned air vehicles
[UAV].”
The unit’s headquarters are
situated in Vladimirskoye Oblast,
with subordinate units located
in the Western Military District.
Alongside the unit’s abilities to
quickly camouflage key military
facilities, the unit also has the
capability of deploying a complete
arsenal of “inflatable models of
tanks, guns, infantry fighting
vehicles, PVO [air defense]
systems, and other weapons
systems.” These decoy weapon
systems are designed to not only
confuse the enemy, but to also
force him to expend intel and fire
assets to identify and destroy.
Even though the regiment just
Inflatable S-300 TEL mockup.
Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/45thIMASP/ CC BY-SA 4.0.
completed its reconstitution in
June 2017, “its units took an
Soldiers in just a few minutes can deploy decoys of artillery and missile
active part in the recently concluded
systems and even build a dummy airfield.
Zapad-2017 military exercise.”
Although the article does not provide specific information regarding electronic warfare (EW) assets, it suggests that this unit is capable of
camouflaging the electronic signature of deployed units. Indeed, the article claims that the unit is equipped with “special devices that make it
possible to seriously reduce the effectiveness of optical and radar reconnaissance systems.” It appears that the Russian military continues to
expand and develop both its EW and camouflage capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“

”

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “Минобороны вернуло «надувной» полк (Defense Ministry Restores ‘Inflator’
Regiment),” Izvestiya Online, 22 September 2017. https://iz.ru/634072/aleksei-ramm-evgenii-andreev/minoborony-vernulo-naduvnoi-polk
The Russian Defense Ministry has restored a unique military unit; the 45th Separate Engineer-Camouflage Regiment will make important
military and social facilities invisible to satellites, reconnaissance aircraft, and unmanned air vehicles [UAV]. Soldiers in just a few minutes
can deploy decoys of artillery and missile systems and even build a dummy airfield. To do this, the regiment’s arsenal includes inflatable
models of tanks, guns, infantry fighting vehicles, PVO [air defense] systems, and other weapons systems. Because of the unusual equipment,
the 45th Regiment has been nicknamed the “inflator” regiment by the military.
According to experts, modern reconnaissance equipment has a unique capacity to obtain information. And its capabilities only increase with
every year. So it is very important to conceal our troops and facilities in a timely and effective way.
Izvestiya was told by the Defense Ministry that the regiment’s formation was completed in June of this year. Now the 45th Camouflage
Regiment had already taken part in several events. In particular, its units took an active part in the recently concluded Zapad-2017 military
exercise.
…The unique regiment, in addition to inflatable models, was equipped with modern engineering vehicles. The arsenal of the 45th Separate
Engineer-Camouflage Regiment also includes special devices that make it possible to seriously reduce the effectiveness of optical and radar
reconnaissance systems.
The regiment’s units can disguise both the positions of their own troops and headquarters and complex technical facilities. For example, the
deployment placements of tactical missile systems, anti-aircraft missile systems, and radar stations. The 45th Separate Engineer-Camouflage
Regiment can also conceal social facilities from surveillance. This list includes bridges, roads, power plants, etc.
Yet another task for the unique military unit is the creation of fake positions of arms and military equipment and military facilities. This is
resolved not only through the use of inflatable models of equipment. Regimental personnel carry out excavation and construction work to
restore technical buildings, runways, roads, and other facilities….
OE Watch | November 2017

20

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Automating the Antitank Detection/Response Cycle
OE Watch Commentary: Previous editions of OE Watch have discussed
Russian artillery efforts to reduce their detection/response cycle to nearreal-time at the tactical (reconnaissance fire system) and operational
(reconnaissance strike system) levels. The antitank mission is also a part
of the Russian artillery mission. One of the four artillery battalions in the
Russian maneuver brigade is an antitank battalion. The accompanying
passage from Izvestiya discusses a new automated command and control
system for antitank subunits.
This new command and control system (PTRK) appears to be the Russian
effort to bring the reconnaissance fire system to antitank artillery systems.
The brigade antitank artillery battalion has a battery of six MT-12 Rapira
antitank cannon and two anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) batteries of six
each 9M123 Khrizantema or 9P162 Kornet-T tank destroyers. The MT12 cannon fires a 100mm round or ATGM. The antitank platoon of the
Artillery units of the Western MD repelled attack of tanks of the simulated enemy.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, Website, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12104185@egNews, CC 4.0
motorized rifle battalion has nine Metis launchers and every motorized
rifle squad has the ubiquitous RPG-7 antitank grenade launcher. Evidently the PTRK will not be tied into the rifle squad, but pretty much with
all other antitank weapons. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Russian military will receive a unique defense system against tanks, self-propelled guns, and

other armored vehicles. This automated system commands and controls antitank missile systems in real
time. The innovation detects and classifies targets and determines their direction of travel and speed.
Then it selects which PTRK can most effectively destroy the enemy armored vehicle, and transmits the
targets’ coordinates to the selected crews. In the experts’ words, this innovation will actually become an
insurmountable obstacle on the path of an enemy armored vehicle.”
Source: Alexi Rahm, “Sheltering the Russian Infantry with an Antitank Wall. The Latest Automated Command and Control System will create
a Smart Echeloned Defense,” Izvestiya, 2 October 2017. http://iz.ru
A Ministry of Defense representative stated … that the fundamental decision for the development of the new automated command and control
system (Автоматизированная система управления-ASU) for antitank subunits has already been made. Now, they are determining which
elements will be included in the new ASU.
This… innovation will permit the creation of an echeloned intelligent antitank defense system. It will merge the weapons of the motorized
rifle battalions with the antitank tank batteries and battalions of the regiments, brigades, and divisions. The automated command and control
system determines the armored approach routes – sectors of terrain, which are suitable for enemy armored vehicle movement. Data … from
ground units and subunits and also from unmanned aerial vehicles provides information about the discovery of tanks, armored vehicles,
armored transport vehicles, and self-propelled artillery. The system determines their routes of advance and automatically rank orders
these targets based upon their immediate threat. Then, the automated command and control system compiles a target destruction plan and
transmits their coordinates to the antitank weapons crews.
Khrizantema long-range antitank missile systems will be part of the “antitank wall’s” first line of defense. These unique systems are
equipped not only with optical-electronic instruments but also with radar. The Khrizantema systems are capable of destroying targets during
the day and at night under any weather conditions at a range of up to 6,000 meters.
Later on, Kornet and Shturm-S antitank missile systems will engage the tanks, armored infantry vehicles and self-propelled artillery. These
systems easily destroy targets at ranges up to five kilometers. Metis short-range antitank systems will complete the defeat of the enemy in
close combat when the armored targets come within two kilometers of our troops’ positions.
“The experience of contemporary wars and military conflicts shows that armored vehicles have not lost their significance,” Military
Historian Aleksey Khlopotov stated…. “Tanks, armored infantry vehicles, and armored transport vehicles are capable of conducting
decisive maneuvers, breaching a defense, and conducting raids within the depth of the defense. As during the years of the Second World War,
combating armored vehicles remains a priority task of weapon systems development. The Russian Army has a serious arsenal of antitank
weapons. But they were not fully integrated into an automated, integrated antitank system. The new automated command and control system
will permit us to create an insurmountable obstacle on the path of enemy armored vehicles.”
The Russian Armed Forces are paying close attention to the development of state-of-the-art command and control and weapons control
systems. A special place is allotted to the description of the capabilities of combined-arms subunits in the Asymmetric Warfare Group’s
Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook report that was recently published by the Pentagon. In particular, the American experts note
that Russian artillery and antitank weapons are capable of finding and destroying targets in real time thanks to automated command and
control systems and unmanned aerial vehicles.
OE Watch | November 2017

21

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
More on the August 2017 Arctic Riverine Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: The 80th
Arctic Motorized Rifle Brigade and the 61st
Naval Infantry Brigade have conducted
another riverine amphibious landing from
large amphibious ships at the Dudinka river
port. The accompanying passage from
Krasnaya Zveda, the official newspaper of
the Russian Ministry of Defense, discusses
this large-scale Arctic riverine exercise.
Amphibious assault landings are
complex, and require coordinating air and
shipborne fires while moving vehicles and
personnel to shore in a coordinated manner.
Riverine landings add to the complexity of
the mission due to the current of a major
river moving sideways against the landing
ships as they try to beach and offload.
The riverine portion of this operation
involved sailing from the Arctic Ocean
up the powerful Yenesei River to conduct
Joint amphibious exercise held on the Taymyr.
Source: Russian Minsitry of Defense, http://eng.mil.ru/en/structure/forces/navy/news/more.htm?id=12139155@egNews, CC BY 4.0.
a landing at the river port of Dudinka,
followed by a march to a training area for ground combat exercises. Dudinka is the river and rail port that connects the major industrial center
of Norilsk with Russia and is vital to the Russian economy. This exercise is similar to the 2015 exercise, but it involved more men and material
and the complicating factor of a mined beach head. The Northern Fleet is fast becoming an expert on large-scale Arctic riverine exercises. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Laptev Sea Map.

Source: by NormanEinstein via Wikimedia Commons, https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Igarka#/media/File:Laptev_Sea_map.png, CC BY-SA 3.0.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

22

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Continued: More on the August 2017 Arctic
Riverine Exercise
“Summing up preliminary results of the joint exercise, Northern Fleet Commander Vice Admiral Nikolay
Yevmenov called it an unusual event for Northern Fleet, noting that a high level of coordination among
participants succeeded in executing joint assigned missions.”
Source: Olga Chernysheva: “Battle in Medvezhka Estuary: Northern Fleet Personnel Once Again ‘Won Back’ the Heart of the Arctic –
Taimir,” Krasnaya Zvezda, 29 September 2017. http://www.redstar.ru
The joint exercise to protect important industrial facilities on the Taimir Peninsula was a striking episode in Northern Fleet combat training. It
was the second time that Northern Fleet personnel had performed combat training missions there. Compared with 2015, the event was larger in
scale: involving almost twice the number of personnel and combat equipment and, for the first time, employing self-propelled and rocket artillery.
Northern Fleet ships and support vessels, ground troops and naval infantry subunits, Northern Fleet Naval Aviation, as well as airborne
subunits from the Central Military District took part in this exercise. Two thousand servicemen and 200 major pieces of military equipment,
including Su-24 bombers, wheeled and tracked fighting vehicles, as well as the Grad multiple-launch rocket system [MLRS] deployed, enabling
crews to improve their tactical expertise during the training.
This was the sixth Arctic deployment in succession in which Northern Fleet surface forces have taken part. The detachment included large ASW
ship Severomorsk, large landing ships Kondopoga, Aleksandr Otrakovskiy, and Georgiy Pobedonosets, as well as support vessels: tanker Sergey
Osipov, rescue tug Pamir, and the mooring lighter KIL-164. The detachment of ships and vessels sailed some 1,900 nautical miles on the transit
from Severomorsk.
In connection with renovation of the Noril’sk airport runway, maritime transport was the primary method of delivering subunits, arms, and
special equipment…. Northern Fleet ships and vessels transported personnel and everything necessary….
The exercise was launched at Dudinka and then shifted to Noril’sk. Northern Fleet ships arrived [at the river port of] Dudinka on 18 August to
take part in a tactical exercise with the landing of an amphibious assault force on an austere Yenisei River beach.
The first simulated battle took place on 21 August. According to the scenario, terrorists had mined the shore in the vicinity of Dudinka and
captured an important industrial facility. A joint force of Northern Fleet forces supported by aviation and Spetsnaz of the Central Military
District had to retake it in order to support the amphibious assault force landing, and its subsequent advance into the interior of the peninsula.
Combat began with the delivery of an airstrike against terrorist positions and infiltration of Spetsnaz teams into their rear to adjust gunfire from
the ships. On receiving target designations, gunners of the large ASW ship Severomorsk opened fire against reinforced enemy positions on shore.
After that, ship-based helicopters delivered teams of military engineers to the beach. The engineers cleared approaches to the beach through the
mines and prepared a site for unloading equipment, marking it with signal flares. Naval infantrymen who had disembarked onto fast boats from
aboard the Severomorsk supported the engineers’ work. After preparing a position for the landing of the amphibious assault force equipment,
landing ships Georgiy Pobedonosets, Kondopoga, and Aleksandr Otrakovskiy approached the shoreline one after the other. Over 30 pieces of
wheeled and tracked equipment of the naval infantry, the Arctic Brigade, and the Airborne … disembarked onto the austere beach.
Now, according to the scenario, the theater of combat subsequently shifted inland to Noril’sk. The assault force had to make a 100 kilometer
march across the Taimir Peninsula. Tracked vehicles were loaded onto railroad flatcars and accompanied by security subunits which had been
formed from Northern Fleet naval infantry.
The active phase of the Northern Fleet and Central Military District joint exercise began on 28 August in the northern part of Krasnoyarskiy
Kray in the vicinity of Chernaya Mountain and Yergalakh Mountainin in the foothills of the Plutorana Plateau. The joint force had to protect the
main industrial hub of the Arctic region.
Main fighting took place in the vicinity of facilities of the Noril’sk Nikel enterprise, near facilities located a short distance from the city in the
estuary of Medvezhka River. According to the scenario, Northern Fleet reconnaissance and assault landing personnel discovered several teams
of commandos here. They called in an artillery strike on the enemy concentrations. Grad MLRS batteries and 2S1 self-propelled howitzers
moved up to the firing line.
Under cover of artillery, Northern Fleet Arctic Brigade and airborne troops advanced to the enemy positions. Their mission was to surround
and destroy the enemy commandos. Su-24 bombers and Northern Fleet Naval Aviation helicopters provided fire support from the air.
On 30 August, having made a short forced march in the reverse direction, subunits of naval infantrymen, soldiers of the Arctic Brigade and
a paratrooper company task force began loading equipment onto the large landing ships moored at Dudinka. A total of over 50 pieces of
equipment took part in the forced march: Rys armored cars, armored personnel carriers, MLRS on Ural truck chassis, and Army all-terrain
vehicles.
Summing up preliminary results of the joint exercise, Northern Fleet Commander Vice Admiral Nikolay Yevmenov called it an unusual event for
Northern Fleet, noting that a high level of coordination among participants succeeded in executing joint assigned missions. This was one of the
main objectives of the exercise.
OE Watch | November 2017

23

RUSSIA, “ZAPAD” MILITARY EXERCISE
Russia Capable of Spoofing GPS Signals?
OE Watch Commentary: For many years now, militaries
around the world have utilized satellite jamming technology
to interfere with GPS signals, forcing foes to temporarily
utilize less reliable technologies instead. According to a recent
article in Moscow Life, a pro-Kremlin news website known
for its access to security services sources, Russia has recently
developed new technology which takes GPS interference one
step further.
The new technology alters GPS signals rather than
terminating them altogether. This strategy allows the
interference to go undetected for longer periods of time, causing
pilots and captains to rely on the hacked signals rather than
reverting to other means of assessing their locations. The
author claims that Russia tested the technology on 22 June off
of Russia’s Black Sea coast near Novorossiysk. At that time, a
“foreign vessel” notified the US Maritime Administration of a
malfunction in the navigation system, causing the equipment
to suggest the vessel was located “dozens of kilometers
inland, near Gelendzhik airport” outside Novorossiysk. After
equipment checks showed no malfunction, the author reports,
the captain contacted nearby vessels. “On at least 20 vessels,
the automatic identification system showed exactly the same
location as his -- deep inland. So the chances of it being a
random glitch are zero.”
According to the author, a similar pattern of GPS spoofing
was previously detected by Pokemon Go players in Moscow.
The popular game, played on a cell phone, requires the use of
GPS coordinates. Players outside the Kremlin experienced
a sudden and dramatic shift in the location of their GPS
readouts. The author again related the coordinate shift to an
airport, referencing the change as “some distance away towards
Vnukovo airport.”
The author indicates that this new GPS spoofing technology
could have major implications for the security of the Kremlin,
preventing attacks by GPS-guided munitions, though “inertial
guided munitions do retain a precision capability in such
conditions.” It could also inhibit bombing attempts, causing
adversaries to believe they are on target while Russian GPS
manipulation leads them off course.
The author notes that “experts are predicting that nonWestern countries with sophisticated military technology will
go down the road of GPS spoofing,” pointing out the dangers
of replication by terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria. He notes that “misdirecting GPS signals in the
English Channel or some other narrow and busy strait would
be enough to cause a large number of ships to collide or run
aground.” End OE Watch Commentary (Johnson)

“This kind of scheme has significant advantages over
jamming: if the spoof satellite signal goes undetected, the
enemy will launch its missiles and drop its bombs fully
believing that they are on target and will not try to use
alternative homing systems. The munitions will go ‘offcourse.”
Source: Andrey Borisov, “СМИ: Россия испытала секретную систему
борьбы с западной GPS (Media: Russia Tests Secret System To Counter
the West’s GPS),” Moscow Life, 11 August 2017. https://life.ru/1034673
Satellite jammers are already familiar, but this new development differs
in that it fools GPS receivers by tampering with the signal….More than 20
different ships in Russia’s Black Sea coastal waters suddenly discovered
that their receivers all thought they were in the same place: dozens of
kilometers inland, near Gelendzhik airport. This happened 22 June but has
only now emerged….
A foreign vessel near Novorossiysk notified the US Maritime
Administration 22 June 2017 that its GPS navigation system had located
it 32 kilometers inland. The captain checked the equipment and when it
appeared to be in working order contacted 20 other vessels in the vicinity
to find out if he was alone in having this issue. On at least 20 vessels, the
automatic identification system showed exactly the same location as his
-- deep inland. So the chances of it being a random glitch are zero. The
report is still undergoing expert evaluation but the most likely conclusion is
already obvious: Russia is testing a hitherto purely theoretical weapon that
fools an enemy’s GPS.
For a long time the only way of countering GPS -- without which the
precision of NATO air, artillery, and missile strikes will inevitably suffer
-- has been to block the signal from the relevant satellites. But in recent
years the United States has developed a number of systems that make the
signal usable against even powerful jamming. And even if the signal can be
obscured, GPS receivers immediately notice. Experts are predicting that
non-Western countries with sophisticated military technology will go down
the road of GPS spoofing.
This kind of scheme has significant advantages over jamming: if the spoof
satellite signal goes undetected, the enemy will launch its missiles and
drop its bombs fully believing that they are on target and will not try to
use alternative homing systems. The munitions will go “off-course.” GPS
inaccuracies can also lead NATO aviation astray.
Large-scale signal distortions have been detected in the past near the
Kremlin, where people trying to play Pokemon Go were “transported”,
according to their GPS readouts, some distance away towards Vnukovo
airport. Ways of fooling the signal like this mean that an attack on the
Kremlin with GPS-guided weapons is unrealistic. Although inertial guided
munitions do retain a precision capability in such conditions.
…Western experts are voicing fears that similar systems could also in
theory be created by terrorist groups like Islamic State. Misdirecting GPS
signals in the English Channel or some other narrow and busy strait would
be enough to cause a large number of ships to collide or run aground….

OE Watch | November 2017

24

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt’s Expanding Military
OE Watch Commentary: Egypt has ranked among
the top global arms importers since the election of Abdel
Fattah Sisi to the presidency in 2014. The shopping
spree has not been without controversy, especially given
Egypt’s economic difficulties. How can the Egyptian
military spend lavishly on weapons amidst widespread
deficits, poverty, and inflation? The question has been on
the minds and lips of many Egyptians over the past several
months. The accompanying passages provide insight into
this debate.
According to the first accompanying passage there are
several good reasons for Egypt to amass weapons. The
author, a prominent Egyptian columnist, relays a series of
explanations and answers, including the need to defend
Egyptian national security against potential threats along
its borders. These growing threats include anarchy in
Libya, deteriorating relations with Sudan, insurgency in
the Sinai, the Nile water conflict with Ethiopia, traditional
enmity with Israel, and potential claims on Egypt’s
Mediterranean gas deposits by Greece, Cyprus, Israel and
Turkey.
A different line of argument holds that Egypt is
importing weapons for offensive rather than defensive
purposes. This view is illustrated by the second
accompanying passage, written by an Egyptian political
researcher who specializes in the country’s foreign policy.
The argument holds that the weapons purchases will
help Egypt project military power regionally in order to
reverse years of decline amidst a rapidly changing strategic
landscape. According to the author, Egypt’s military
leaders believe that “only military prowess will enable
Egypt to maintain its traditional political leverage and to
avoid being swept away by the rapid reconfigurations of
power in the region.”
Concurrent with the stockpiling of expensive new
weapons systems, since 2014 the Egyptian military has
deepened and expanded its stake in the Egyptian economy.
As summarized in the third accompanying excerpt, from a
Qatari-sponsored daily published in London, the military’s
economic activities continue to expand, particularly in
infrastructure and to new sectors such as cinema. On the
44th anniversary of the October 1973 war, the military
announced that it was-- for the first time-- entering the
film industry by teaming up with prominent screenwriters
and filmmakers to sponsor three movies based on the
October War.

Source:
‫هل يحتاج الجيش املصري إلى الرافال وامليسترال والغواصات؟‬
Imad al-Din Hussein. “Does the Egyptian Military Need the Rafale, Mistral and
Submarines?” Deutsche Welle (Arabic), 7 September 2017. https://goo.gl/
YPfejZ
On the western border, which is around 1,200 kilometers long, there is no
central Libyan government or unified army able to control the border… the
Sudanese border is also still inflamed… and becoming more dangerous as
relations between Cairo and Khartoum deteriorate… everyone knows the
eastern border’s dangers given ISIS activity… Israel… remains the main enemy
in Egyptian military doctrine both new and old, something which should not
be forgotten… another challenge is securing Egypt’s share of the Nile waters,
following Ethiopia’s insistence on building the Renaissance Dam… another
important challenge is the secret struggle over Mediterranean gas reserves
between Egypt, Greece, Cyprus, Israel and Turkey…
Source: Nael Shama. “Egypt’s Power Game: Why Cairo is Boosting its Military
Power,” Pambazuka News, 14 September 2017. http://www.pambazuka.org/
democracy-governance/egypt%E2%80%99s-power-game-why-cairo-boostingits-military-power
Sisi is following in the footsteps of his predecessors. His decision to boost
Egypt’s military strength is driven by his knowledge that his country has limited
room for maneuver, and that its frail economy cannot eliminate its dependence
on the largesse of wealthy Arab states, let alone compete with their economies.
Only military prowess will enable Egypt to maintain its traditional political
leverage and to avoid being swept away by the rapid reconfigurations of power
in the region… The Egyptian president admitted that he did not purchase vast
amounts of arms for defense purposes, but to project Egypt’s power in the
Arab world… In a region that is in a state of great flux and challenge, Sisi’s
power gamble may fail to produce the desired results. Also, given Egypt’s huge
economic troubles, it stands to reason that his stupendous spending on arms is
grossly irrational.
Source:
‫الجيش املصري يتوغل في االقتصاد تزامن ًا مع احتفاالت نصر أكتوبر‬
“The Egyptian Military Penetrates the Economy While Celebrating the ‘October
Victory’,” al-Quds, 7 October 2017. http://www.alquds.co.uk/?p=803887
The 44th Anniversary of the October 1973 war coincided with the Egyptian
military penetrating further into the national economy… and the expansion of
the activities of the Egyptian Military Institutions to new sectors such as cinema.
The conclusion of 84 new projects overseen by the Armed Forces’ Engineering
Authority was also recently announced… there will be many new major projects
this year overseen by the armed forces, including the biggest conference and
expo center… Since Abdel Fattah Sisi became Egypt’s leader, the military’s
economic activities have expanded, especially in infrastructure. Sisi has relied
on the Armed Forces’ Engineering Authority, one of the army’s branches, and
tasked it with building the new Suez Canal, hundreds of low-income homes, as
well as laying down the basic infrastructure for the new Egyptian capital, which
the Egyptian president announced would be built east of Cairo.

How close to reality is the image of strength and competence projected by the Egyptian Armed Forces? Critics might point to how in
August 2017 the Iraqi Army considered cancelling an order for Egyptian weapons and ammunition due to concerns about poor quality, as
relayed in the fourth accompanying passage. The more common critique centers on the Egyptian military’s inability to resolve the situation
in the Sinai as proof of a venal institution more interested in money and politics than in securing the national interest (Also see: “Dueling
Perspectives on the Egyptian Army,” OE Watch, Jan-Feb 2017). End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

25

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Egypt’s Expanding Military
“… Only military prowess will enable Egypt to maintain its traditional political leverage and to avoid being
swept away by the rapid reconfigurations of power in the region…”
Source:
‫العراق يراجع صفقة تسليح مع مصر لهذه األسباب‬
Ahmed al-Naimi. “Iraq Reconsiders Weapons Deal with Egypt for these Reasons,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 10 August 2017. https://goo.
gl/8xFQnM
A prominent Iraqi official in Baghdad said on Thursday that Iraq is embarking on a comprehensive reconsideration of the weapons deal
signed with Egypt last year, which calls for Iraq to be provided with ammunition, medium and light weapons, and armored vehicles. The
reasons are related to the poor quality of the weapons and the vehicles not functioning. This comes on the heels of an Iraqi Defense Ministry
report discussing the flimsiness of the vehicles recently received by the Iraqi Army and problems with some of the medium weapons, especially
shoulder-fired missiles…

Egyptian Navy’s new S42 submarine and Gowind 2500 corvette arriving in Alexandria, Egypt.

Source: Egyptian Defense Ministry via Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/EgyArmySpox/photos/a.219625808168409.52727.217455035052153/1160372327427081, Public Domain.

OE Watch | November 2017

26

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
ISIS: Concealment and Deception
OE Watch Commentary: Concealment and
deception are fundamental elements of the fighting
doctrine of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).
Their importance is highlighted by the accompanying
excerpt, taken from the September 2017 issue of
ISIS’s weekly Arabic-language newsletter al-Naba
(Issue #97). The article, entitled “How to Fight under
the Eyes of the Crusader Aircraft,” argues that with
proper training and planning, ISIS fighters should be
able not only to elude US precision airstrikes but turn
them into “a major vulnerability that will paralyze
the enemy’s own ability to fight or at least reveal the
position of enemy fighters.”
To make his argument, the anonymous author begins
by emphasizing the importance of concealment.
In a battlefield with highly precise armed UAVs
hovering overhead, he cautions, “your main goal
is to conceal your position. This is the starting
point for contemporary fighting.” With proper
cover, he continues, an ISIS fighting group can
focus on exploiting the vulnerabilities of enemy
units, particularly their light armaments, limited
ammunition, and poor training in concealment.
“The mujahideen’s greatest mistake,” he notes, “is
to deal with them [special forces] as if they were
a strike force, when in fact they are a feeble force
used by the Crusaders as fish food.” They carry light
weapons in order “to provoke the mujahideen and
draw them into battle” but “their true weapons are
their communications equipment and laser guidance
systems.”
According to the author, mastering the
“reconnaissance by fire” ruse (“firing before knowing
the enemy’s location in order to prompt a response that
reveals his position”) is “the key to modern fighting.”
ISIS fighters should not fall for this ruse and instead
employ it regularly; rather than fire, ISIS fighters can
use small, cheap surveillance UAVs to make enemy
units “emerge from their burrows and fire toward the
miniature UAV, which is recording them and all their
weapons.” Once the enemy force has revealed itself,
concealed ISIS fighters can plan accordingly.
Concealment and deception are and will remain
fundamental battlefield concepts for ISIS. Their
mastery is considered essential, as summarized in the
fundamental rule outlined by the author: “The enemy’s
goal is to know your position, the mujahideen’s goal
is to strike the enemy without revealing his position.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… They [special forces] are a feeble
force used by the Crusaders as fish food.
Mujahideen must never eat this food…”

Source:
‫كيف تقاتل تحت أعني الطائيرات الصليبية؟‬
“How to Fight under the Eyes of the Crusader Aircraft,” al-Naba, 14 September 2017.
Available at: http://jihadology.net/2017/09/14/new-issue-of-the-islamic-statesnewsletter-al-naba-97/
It is beautiful to watch the enemy searching for you everywhere like a madman, as
you hide holding your ground… [After US warplanes became active in Syria and
Iraq] the mujahideen developed their fighting methods and began camouflaging
weapons, vehicles and tanks to some degree, while still deploying and employing them.
This did not occur at the required level, but nonetheless decreased losses clearly,
praise God. Soldiers also began training in new tactics to fight in the presence of
Crusader aircraft. Some fighting groups mastered these techniques, while others did
not train in them as required… the high-precision Crusader aircraft can be turned
into a major vulnerability that will paralyze the enemy’s own ability to fight or at
least reveal the position of enemy fighters… losses occurred at the time mainly due
to poor understanding of the functioning and capabilities of the Crusader aircraft…
for surveillance aircraft and precision targeting, the first step for the enemy to know
your position; the targeting comes after. Therefore, your main goal is to conceal your
position. This is the starting point for contemporary fighting… The special forces
deployed by the apostate PKK and the Crusaders are by no means a fighting force,
but rather exclusively a force to direct airstrikes. Its goal is to call in airstrikes,
informing them exactly where strikes should take place. Therefore, these forces carry
only light arms; their true weapons are their communications equipment and laser
guidance systems. The main function of their weapons is to provoke the mujahideen
and draw them into battle. The apostate forces always make deceptive advances, and
fire only to get the mujahideen to come out of their hiding place in order to fire back.
This then allows aircraft to track and target the mujahideen, or the apostates can
provide the necessary data for the airstrike. A member of these forces were recently
captured and he only had two magazines worth of ammunition for his rifle. When
asked about this he said that he did not fight, but rather advanced only in order to
specify the location of mujahideen, a task which did not require much ammunition.
This is not a strike force. Thus, the mujahideen’s greatest mistake is to deal with
them as if they were a strike force, when in fact they are a feeble force used by the
Crusaders as fish food. Mujahideen must never eat this food. The best way is to not
reveal your position to the enemy until the enemy is within confirmed fire range. Only
then should the mujahideen fire and target them, and then quickly change location…
The enemy fighting technique we described is called “reconnaissance by fire,” which
means firing before knowing the enemy’s location in order to prompt a response that
reveals his position. The mujahideen fighting in modern wars must understand this
deception well, for understanding it is the key to modern fighting…. Knowing your
enemy’s position is the first and most important piece of military intelligence to have.
There is no successful military operation without this step… The soldiers of the Islamic
State sent small Styrofoam surveillance UAVs toward enemy positions. They were then
lowered so that enemy soldiers could hear them. This was enough to know everything
about enemy weapons in the area, and through the images we could see their weapons
and positions and other intelligence to prepare for the subsequent raid or prepare to
fend off the enemy force being surveilled. This type of reconnaissance does not require
firing at the enemy, but rather making him feel threatened. The apostates will emerge
from their burrows and fire toward the miniature UAV, which is recording them and all
their weapons. The types of weapons can be determined by their sound and analysis of
their fire. This plan will not fail even if the enemy knows it, since its soldiers are mostly
not trained in concealment and do not know how much it harms them to give away
their weaponry and position in the battlefield. If you, brother mujahid, are familiar
with this type of battlefield deception, you should not repeatedly fall into this old trap
and follow the golden rule when dealing with aircraft or any precision weapon: “The
enemy’s goal is to know your position, the mujahideen’s goal is to strike the enemy
without revealing his position” … Remember this rule: ‘They do all they can to know
your position, so do all you can to hide from their view.’
OE Watch | November 2017

27

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Saudi Arabia’s Tilt Toward Russia
OE Watch Commentary: Saudi Arabian King Salman’s recent visit to Moscow was
the first ever such visit by a Saudi monarch. It resulted in unprecedented agreements on
weapons purchases and collaboration in the energy sector. Many local observers agree
that the visit is a response to changing regional conditions, including Russian activism
and American “retreat” and “indecision.” The reactions of three prominent columnists
writing in Saudi Arabia’s two most widely circulated regional newspapers (al-Hayat
and al-Sharq al-Awsat) are excerpted alongside this commentary. The broad narrative
shared by the pieces and other commentary from the region is that the meeting was
made possible by a confluence of interests amidst changes in the regional order.
The author of the first accompanying passage concludes that the visit conveys an
important message: “Saudi foreign policy is pragmatic and ultimately not held hostage
by its partnerships and alliances, even with the United States.” Russia seeks to end
the Syrian conflict, which according to the author requires Saudi cooperation. Having
obtained the cooperation of Iran and Turkey (via the Astana negotiations), Russia
needed “the third power in the Syrian crisis and the region” to come on board. Despite
being long beholden to the idea of toppling Bashar al-Assad and the regime that
sustains him, the Saudi government
…Saudi Arabia and Russia need
appears to convey flexibility in this
matter by meeting with the Russian
one another under the current
president.

“

regional and global conditions…”

The second passage, written by
the editor-in-chief of al-Sharq al-Awsat, highlights the meeting’s economic angle. Prior
Saudi-Russian negotiations to stabilize oil prices were “more than encouraging” and
set the stage for this meeting. Saudi entreaties are natural, given that Russia is now “the
sole and necessary entry point to a solution in Syria.” Economics and geopolitics are
intimately linked for both countries, the author argues, claiming that “Putin’s Russia
realizes that the economy will be the strongest general in the future wars.”
Perhaps most notable in the meeting were the various purported military contracts
signed, including a potential sale of S-400 missile defense systems to Saudi Arabia and
agreements for Saudi indigenous production of Russian weapons. The author of the
third accompanying article, a well-connected columnist and former editor of al-Sharq
al-Awsat, emphasizes that Saudi diversification in its weapons procurement is meant to
“avoid repeating the situation [Saudi Arabia] went through two years ago in Yemen,” in
reference to pressures against arming Saudi Arabia for its war in Yemen. Echoing the
sentiments of the first passage, the author notes how turning toward Russian arms is in
part a way to “free Saudi Arabia from American pressure.” Saudi Arabia, he argues,
is threatened by Iranian encirclement like never before, and American commitment to
defending Saudi Arabia may have too many strings attached for the kingdom’s comfort.
While Russia’s priority may be obtaining a settlement to end the Syrian conflict,
Saudi priority is to do the same in Yemen. One issue worth tracking in the near future
is whether Russia will diplomatically wade into the Yemeni conflict on Saudi Arabia’s
behalf. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Russian and Saudi FMs Sergey Lavrov and Adel Al-Jubeir.
Source: Russian Foreign Ministry, https://www.flickr.com/photos/mfarussia/23664121838/, CC 2.0.

Source:
‫الرياض وموسكو ما الذي حصل؟‬
Khalid al-Dakhil. “Riyadh and Moscow: What Took
Place?” al-Hayat, 8 October 2017. https://goo.gl/
X9JjXv
What is new and proof of what the visit may represent
is that for the first time they discussed bilateral
military and technical cooperation… Saudi Arabia and
Russia need one another under the current regional
and global conditions. Russia needs Saudi Arabia to
strengthen Moscow’s new role in the region, via the
Syrian door, and its attempts to fill the gap left by
American retreat… Russia obtained the cooperation
of Iran and Turkey. Cooperation from Saudi Arabia,
the third power in the Syrian crisis and the region,
was all that was missing… American retreat and the
sharp Arab divisions regarding regional affairs, Syria
included, meant that Riyadh could not afford to clash
with Russia, as this would isolate it regionally and
internationally. Under these circumstances it was
necessary for Saudi Arabia to reach an understanding
with Russia regarding Syria and other important
topics…One might naturally say that Saudi Arabia
delayed in taking steps toward Russia…. A continuation
and deepening of the trend that began with the king’s
visit would reflect the extent of the qualitative change in
bilateral relations, particularly in Saudi Arabia… The
most prominent message conveyed by the king’s visit
to Russia was that Saudi foreign policy is pragmatic
and ultimately not held hostage by its partnerships and
alliances, even with the United States.

Source:
‫ما بعد موعد الكرملني‬
Ghasssan Charbel. “What Comes After the Kremlin Meeting,”
al-Sharq al-Awsat, 6 October 2017. https://goo.gl/DjECsK

Source:
‫السعودية سياسة التس ّلح‬
Abdul Rahman al-Rashed. “Saudi Arabia: The Politics of Arming,”
al-Sharq al-Awsat, 10 October 2017. https://goo.gl/2rkdv6

Russia transformed two years ago by virtue of its military intervention
in Syria, becoming a prominent daily player in the Middle East theater
to the extent of emerging as the sole and necessary entry point to a
solution in Syria. Russia is a permanent member of the Security Council
and has the power to bring down resolutions by veto… Russia is also
a nuclear power… Saudi-Russian cooperation to stabilize oil markets
was more than encouraging… There needed to be a new proximity in
bilateral relations despite disagreements regarding Syria… Putin’s
Russia realizes that the economy will be the strongest general in the
future wars…

The situation reaches a never-before seen level of foreign
threat against the kingdom, due to two factors: the Iranian threat
increasing and American commitment to defend it decreasing…
The military purchases from Russia are not to replace American
weapons or distance itself from the US, as some wish to interpret
this… buying Russian and Chinese weapons will free Saudi Arabia
from American pressure. If ammunition is no longer provided or
its weapons are forbidden from use in a future war, Riyadh will
have other options… a diversity of sources will avoid repeating the
situation it went through two years ago in Yemen.
OE Watch | November 2017

28

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Syrian Conflict: A Syrian Kurdish
Commander’s Perspective
OE Watch Commentary: Amberin Zaman, a highly respected
Turkish journalist, recently conducted the first-ever interview with
Mazlum Kobane, the chief commander of the Syrian Democratic Forces
(SDF) in Syria. The interview was published in Al Monitor, a news
site which features reporting and analysis by prominent journalists
and experts from the Middle East and North Africa. The interview,
parts of which are excerpted here, reveals the Syrian Kurdish
commander’s perspective on a number of important issues related
to the Syrian conflict, the fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) and Syrian Kurds’ views on the future of Syria. The
group has been fighting ISIS in Syria, and most recently captured
Raqqa, the self-styled ISIS capital.
While the SDF is a multi-ethnic coalition of Arabs, Kurds and
others, it is predominantly made up of fighters from the armed
wing of the Syrian Kurdish Democratic Union Party (PYD). In
November 2013 the PYD declared the establishment of an interim
autonomous administration in Syria’s Kurdish northeast. The move
was the first step of a three-part plan announced earlier, which also
foresaw an eventual constitution and elections. In January 2014 the
PYD declared the ‘Democratic Autonomous Government of Western
Kurdistan,’ made up of three autonomous ‘cantons,’ each with its
own administration: Cizre in the east on the Iraqi border, Kobane in
the center and Afrin in the westernmost part of Syria (collectively
known as Rojava). The international community does not recognize
these entities. However, with the example of the autonomous Iraqi
Kurdish Region next door, the idea of the Syrian Kurdish cantons
uniting and creating a new Kurdish entity in Syria, similar to the
Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in Iraq, is likely to be a hotly
debated topic within the broader question of the future of Syria. In
the long term, the PYD’s primary focus is thought to be to unify the
Kurdish cantons in northern Syria under its governance, in other
words, an autonomous Rojava within a decentralized Syria.
It is in this context that the commander’s comments are significant.
As the excerpted passages point out, he sees the Syrian regime
as a reality that is here to stay, pointing out that he sees “no sign
that [Assad] is on his way out.” As such, he notes that the group’s
essential objective is “to negotiate with the central government and
get a certain status for the areas we liberated. If required, we are
ready to engage in dialogue with the central government on this.”
When asked about his views on the independence referendum in the
Iraqi Kurdistan Region, he says that, “All the Kurds dream of uniting
the four parts [in Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria] and to establish an
independent Kurdistan. That is the goal. But there are also realities.
… Let me be perfectly clear: Our aim is to establish a federal system
in Syria, to remain part of Syria.”
The commander also discusses the difficulties of fighting ISIS,
such as their use of civilians as human shields, and their widespread
use of planting landmines. Looking beyond Raqqa, he notes that
the move for Deir ez-Zor has begun, upon a request of the people of
Deir ez-Zor, whom he says are a fundamental component of the SDF
as well. As for the future of ISIS, he points out that “once defeated
militarily, [ISIS] will return to guerrilla warfare — its favorite form
of war.” End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Let me be perfectly clear: Our aim is to establish
a federal system in Syria, to remain part of Syria.”
Source: Amberin Zaman, “Syrian Kurdish commander: We’re ‘ready
to engage’ with Damascus,” Al Monitor, 26 September 2017. http://
www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/09/turkey-kurdishcommander-says-us-should-stay-in-syria.html#ixzz4v8bo4ehB
Al-Monitor: ... You Kurds have been fighting IS alongside the coalition
beyond your own areas, sacrificing your lives. Yet the United States
and the international community refuse to recognize the Democratic
Federation of Northern Syria, which brings together all the ethnic and
religious groups in the region, including the Kurds. So how far are you
prepared to go in sacrificing your lives while they withhold political
support from you and refuse to recognize a status for you or have
diplomatic ties with you?
Kobane: We, the Kurds, liberated our areas from the regime first —
without much loss of life. I’m talking about 2012. Our intention was
to stay away from the war between the regime and the opposition and
to develop, strengthen and defend our own areas. But the areas we
liberated came under attack [by] the groups known as Jaish al-Hour,
then [Jabhat Fattah al-] Nusra and now [IS]. And all those attackers
were our neighbors. Most of the attacks came from Raqqa and Deir ezZor. So, we were forced to fight to defend ourselves. That’s the essential
reason why we are currently fighting in Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. How
far this will go on is an important question. … We know, however, that
[IS] will be defeated militarily in Deir ez-Zor. Yet this doesn’t mean that
terrorism will be over in Syria, and this will require the war to continue.
Once defeated militarily, [IS] will return to guerrilla warfare — its
favorite form of war.
The regime is a threat to us at present. There are also the Shiite groups
aligned with the regime, which are a threat to us as well. We don’t want
to fight with anyone, but we will defend ourselves. If the regime and its
allies launch an operation against us, it will affect not only us, but ...
will lead to a fresh wave of chaos and instability in the region. But yes,
one has to come to terms with the current regime. The Syrian regime is
a reality. Militarily, the regime has won a victory against the opposition
— the opposition other than us, I mean — at least in the areas it is
currently present. And looking at things objectively, the regime is here
to stay...
I see no sign that he [Assad] is on his way out at present.
.... Our essential objective is to negotiate with the central government
and get a certain status for the areas we liberated. If required, we are
ready to engage in dialogue with the central government on this...
Al-Monitor: When you consider what is happening in northern Iraq,
what kind of conclusions do you draw with regard to your own position?
The United States has put in a lot of effort to stop the referendum on
independence from being held. How do you evaluate this?
Kobane: We support the independence referendum in Iraqi Kurdistan.
All the Kurds dream of uniting the four parts [in Turkey, Iran, Iraq and
Syria] and to establish an independent Kurdistan. That is the goal.
But there are also realities. … Let me be perfectly clear: Our aim is to
establish a federal system in Syria, to remain part of Syria.
OE Watch | November 2017

29

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Turkey-Russia S-400 Deal: Not a Done Deal
OE Watch Commentary: In February 2017, Turkey’s Defense
Minister had announced that Turkey was searching for systems to
protect itself against missile and air attacks and that Russian S-400s
were a leading contender, adding that significant progress had been
made in talks with Russia. In early July, he said that technical
discussions with Russia were complete and that the sides were now
discussing financing options. Things seemed to be moving forward
when President Erdoğan declared in September that Turkey had sent
a deposit to Moscow as part of the deal. Since then, however, there
have been reports about disagreements on the issue of technologysharing, which is non-negotiable for Turkey. The accompanying
passages from Turkish sources discuss some uncertainties regarding
the Turkey-Russia S-400 deal, raising questions as to whether it
will go through. One thing is for sure: In contrast to much of the
international reporting on the issue, the deal is not final.
The first passage points out the lack of information and lingering
issues surrounding the deal, including the amount of the deposit that
was paid, the total value of the deal, where the missiles would be
deployed and whether technology-transfer is part of the agreement.
The author, a veteran Turkish columnist and foreign policy expert,
asks whether the S-400s, which “promise neither a technology
transfer, co-production, nor national software codes” will be the
answer to Turkey’s needs. He goes on to answer the question by
noting, “We don’t know, we don’t have enough information, we are
not given this information.” Other analysts have echoed similar
confusion, particularly why a deposit was made before the issue of
technology-sharing was ironed out.
The second passage indicates that the hurdles regarding the
technology transfer issue have not been overcome, despite
statements about the deal, and despite the fact that a deposit has
been made. The passage references a Russian source saying
that they have no plans to give any electronic codes or internal
regulations regarding the systems. The source continues by saying
that “We will not abide by the Turks’ request to see the internal
mechanisms of the S-400 system. Inside the systems, there will
be a Russian-made radar system that indicates whether an item
belongs to an enemy or to your own country. The Turks asked us to
give them the passwords and control. But we refused.” The third
passage reports on the Turkish Foreign Minister saying that the deal
may be cancelled if the technology-transfer hurdle is not overcome.
Turkey’s search for a long-range air and missile defense system
is not new. Previously, in late 2013, Turkey had announced its
decision to start talks with a Chinese firm to co-produce such a
defense system. The contract was awarded to the China Precision
Machinery Export-Import Corporation (CPMEIC), a company that
was under sanctions for violating the Iran, North Korea and Syria
Nonproliferation Act. Furthermore, NATO members had expressed
concern and warned of compatibility issues between the Chinesemade system and NATO systems. In November 2015, Turkey
cancelled the deal with China and declared its goal to develop its
own air defense systems with its own resources. It would not be
surprising if the deal with Russia ends up cancelled as well. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“[Turkish Foreign Minister] Çavuşoğlu said that if an

agreement is not reached on the issue of joint production,
a deal could be made with a different country...”
Source: Murat Yetkin, “Vergilerimizle alınacak S-400’ler bir depoda
paslanmasın da (The S-400’s which will be paid for with our taxes
[should] not rust in a depot),” Hurriyet.com, 6 October 2017. http://
www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/murat-yetkin/vergilerimizle-alinacak-s400ler-bir-depoda-paslanmasin-da-40601357
“President Erdoğan recently announced that a deposit had been made
for the [S-400] air defense missiles. But there is no clarification about
how much this deposit is, or what the total amount to be paid is, or when
the [missiles] will be delivered and where they will be deployed. There
is only a guess by defense sources that it is around $2,5 billion...
[Regarding Turkey’s need for missile defense], can the S-400’s which
may be delivered within two years, but promise neither a technology
transfer, co-production, or national software codes, be the answer? We
don’t know, we don’t have enough information, we are not given this
information.”
Source: “Gazeta.ru: Rusya S-400 sistemlerinin kodunu Türkiye’ye
vermeyecek (Gazeta.ru: Russia will not give the S-400 system codes
to Turkey),” Sputniknews.com, 2 October 2017. https://tr.
sputniknews.com/rus_medyasi/201710021030395789-rusya-s400kod-turkiye-vermeyecek/
A source reported as close to the S-400 talks between Russia and
Turkey said in an interview with Gazeta.ru that, “We will not give the
electronic codes and internal regulations regarding the S-400 systems
to Turkey. According to the deal, only we will conduct technical
maintenance. They will not open up the systems”....
The source continued as follows: “We will not abide by the Turks’
request to see the internal mechanisms of the S-400 system. Inside
the systems, there will be a Russian-made radar system that indicates
whether an item belongs to an enemy or to your own country. The
Turks asked us to give them the passwords and control. But we
refused.”
Source: “Çavuşoğlu S-400’ler hakkında konuştu (Çavuşoğlu spoke
about the S-400s),” Cumhuriyet.com.tr, 10 October 2017. http://www.
cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/turkiye/841615/Cavusoglu_S-400_ler_
hakkinda_konustu.html
“[Turkish Foreign Minister] Çavuşoğlu said that if an agreement is not
reached on the issue of joint production, a deal could be made with a
different country.”

“Can the S-400s which may be delivered within two

years, but promise neither a technology transfer, coproduction, or national software codes, be the answer
[for Turkey’s need for missile defense]? We don’t
know, we don’t have enough information, we are not
given this information.”
OE Watch | November 2017

30

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Questions the Nuclear Deal as North Korea
Defies the West
OE Watch Commentary: Hossein
Shariatmadari, the editor of the Islamic
Republic’s flagship Kayhan newspaper, is
appointed directly by Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei; both Iranians and outside analysts
often read his comments to gain insight
into the Supreme Leader’s thinking. In the
excerpted remarks—covered by various Iranian
newspapers—Shariatmadari offers an analysis
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), the so-called Iran nuclear deal.
Always a critic of the JCPOA and any nuclear
agreement, Shariatmadari has doubled down on
his opposition as debate about the agreement’s
recertification, inspections, and Iran’s other
activities increases at the International Atomic
Energy Agency and in Western capitals.

“Iran, which has far greater authority [than North Korea], can stand
up against America.”

In the accompanying excerpts, Shariatmadari
cites North Korea’s increasing nuclear defiance
and compares the power of North Korea
unfavorably to Iran. The Iran-Iraq War (19801988) was a formative period for the Islamic
Republic and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps (IRGC). Shariatmadari—embracing
Kayhan editor Hossein Shariatmadari warns against the penetration of the enemy after the Joint
the widespread Iranian belief that the Iraqi
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) for students.
Source: Tasnim News Agency via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AHossein_Shariatmadari_in_University_of_Tehran.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.
invasion was an American-initiated plot from
the start—argues that even when Iran was
in such disarray, the “arrogant powers” were unable to make inroads against the Islamic Republic and, therefore, with Iran many times more
powerful now, the United States would be hard-pressed to extract any penalty on Iran, even if Iran walked away from the deal. Therefore, he
suggests, it is not in Iran’s interest to agree to any renegotiation of the agreement, let alone abide by its commitments, given that Iran has gotten
nothing from the nuclear deal (sanctions relief notwithstanding).
This does not mean that Iran is preparing to walk away from the JCPOA, but it does suggest that the North Korea example looms large over
at least some quarters of Iranian thinking as it does with American policymakers, albeit to the opposite ends. While some non-proliferation
experts see the JCPOA as a means to prevent “another North Korea,” some Iranian hardliners close to Khamenei ask themselves why Iran
should be constrained by a nuclear agreement when North Korea, a country with a smaller population and weaker economy, managed to defy
the West. The true resonance of this argument will likely emerge among a broader array of Iranian policymakers should more active debate turn
toward constraining Iran’s ballistic missile development. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Moshekel-e Asli Amrika ba Eqtedar Rozafzun
Mellat-e Iran Ast (America’s Basic Problem is the Growing
Authority of the Iranian Nation),” Fars News Agency, 19
September 2017. http://www.farsnews.com/13960628001718

Source: “Shariatmadari: Amrika Aqabeh-e Estategik Khod ra dar Montaqeh
az Dast Dadeh Ast (Shariatmadari: America’s Strategic Blockade in the
Region has lost),” Islamic Student News Agency, 19 September 2017.
https://goo.gl/Yr4Xys

Shariatmadari added: “North Korea, which in comparison
to Iran lacks the authority of popular support for the
government, is acting contrary to America’s demands [and
gets away with it].. Therefore, Iran which has far greater
authority, can stand up against America.” He stated further,
“All the empty American threats show that today they have no
military capability to deal with Iran. Trump knows that Iran is
greater than North Korea, and that it is not possible to scare
[our] people with the empty shadow of war.”

Shariatmadari, in reference to those who say the JCPOA was negotiated
with Iran’s authority, and that they had agreed to the JCPOA, reiterated,
“What is the benefit of the JCPOA that today they talk about supplementing
the JCPOA? It is true that it is beneficial for the United States but not for
Iran. We have only given concessions in the JCPOA, but speaking about
the abolition of sanctions, if the JCPOA does not lift sanctions, it does not
heal the pain. I reviewed the text of the agreement, and there was, in fact,
nothing special. We gave nuclear concessions to the enemy, but sanctions
are still in place, and today it is heard that even if America leaves the
JCPOA, we will not leave the JCPOA. Why should we not get out?”
OE Watch | November 2017

31

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Sends University Instructors to the
‘Resistance Front’
OE Watch Commentary: The Syrian civil
war appears to be slowing if not winding
down. The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) has suffered a number of defeats. Both
Russia’s and Iran’s unwavering support for
Bashar al-Assad’s regime coupled with the
apparent Saudi and Turkish willingness to
scale back support for the Syrian opposition
bolsters Assad’s power relative to his
opponents. Assad’s perseverance in the
Syrian civil war means that the balance of
power will not change—Syria will remain in
the Arab ‘rejectionist’ camp as it was before
the outbreak of the conflict, tied more to
Tehran and Moscow and hostile both to the
West and broader efforts to achieve ArabIsraeli peace.
Beyond the sheer flow of refugees
the conflict generated, one of the most
lasting legacies of the civil war will be the
experience-hardened troops and militias
have received on the battlefield. A generation
after Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon,
Hezbollah fighters have received a trial by fire
and trained a new generation in asymmetric
warfare. Those who have survived the Syrian
war and returned to Lebanon have gained
experience that augments their lethality in any
future conflict. Iran, too, has recognized the
importance of battlefield experience for its elite
units. In the excerpted article from a news site
affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps (IRGC), a brigadier general who heads
training at the Imam Hossein University, the
IRGC’s premier university, discusses sending
commanders and teachers to the ‘resistance
front,’ a reference not only to Syria and Iraq,
but potentially also to Lebanon and Yemen.
The aim is to enable them to gain frontline
experience in the insurgencies and military
campaigns Iran is running.

“We deployed a number of commanders... to proxy battle fields.”

Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps cadets drill at Imam Hussein University, Tehran.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://farsi.khamenei.ir/photo-album?id=12573#i[gallery]/11/, Public Domain.

Source: “‘Azam Marbiyan-e Daneshgah Afshari Sepah beh ‘Junbeh-e Moqavamat’
(Deployment of Trainers from IRGC University to ‘Resistance Front’),” Tasnim
News, 12 September 2017. https://goo.gl/VKehgd
The Imam Hossein University Office Training Center was established in 1986 with
the mission of training the forces of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps... and
has from that time played a significant role in training forces for various IRGC units
and missions.
Brigadier General Hamid Abazari…has been in command of the college for about
11 years and also the IRGC Marines’ training centers, and currently he serves both
as the deputy commander of Imam Hossein University and commander of the Jihadi
training for the university faculty, and is responsible for the training all officers
receive when they enter the IRGC. We talked with General Abazari about different
topics relating to this university.
Abazari: Imam Hussein University is the primary university for the Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps and is responsible upon the arrival of IRGC officers
with their familiarization with the mission of guardianship… From the day the
Revolutionary Guards participated in the Holy Defense [Iran-Iraq War] with a few
thousand individuals, until today when it has given nearly 40,000 martyrs, it is clear
that the Revolutionary Guards are willing to sacrifice to defend the revolution….

Presumably, those who survive front line
We deployed a number of commanders and teachers of Imam Hossein University to
deployments—as of May 2016, Iran has
the resistance front to become familiar with proxy battlefields. Some of them were
already lost 1,000 citizens fighting in Syria
deployed to this mission once and others on several occasions. And this has had a
according to the same news portal—will
great impact on the quality of their work and training.
return to the Imam Hossein University to teach
lessons learned and new tactics to a generation
of new officers. From a tactical standpoint, this might signal broader changes in the IRGC ground forces as they update training and
tactics that had not significantly changed since Iran’s last protracted, active conflict in the 1980s. From a diplomatic standpoint, Brigadier
General Abazari’s comments belie frequent Iranian statements downplaying their direct military involvement in many regional civil wars
and insurgencies. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
OE Watch | November 2017

32

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian General: Iraqi Kurdish Referendum
is Part of US Plot
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian government
remains broadly antagonistic to the 25 September
2017 referendum in the Iraqi Kurdistan Region (IKR)
calling for independence. In the wake of the vote—in
which Kurds overwhelmingly voiced their desire to
break away from Iraq and form their own state—
the Iranian government has redoubled its efforts to
isolate the region and force the Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) to reverse its stance.

“America benefits from crisis in the world.”

In the excerpted article, published by a news
agency close to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps (IRGC) and Iran’s security services, Brigadier
General Fathollah Jafari, a senior advisor to the
commander of the IRGC, argued that the referendum
was part of a plot by the United States and Israel
to fracture not only Iraq but also to encourage
separatism more broadly. While Jafari’s description of
US policy runs contrary to statements by the White
House, State Department, and Pentagon which had
all publicly opposed the referendum and urged the
Kurdish government not to push forward with it—it
reflects the paranoia of the Iranian government toward
The oil-rich city of Kirkuk, disputed by both the Iraqi central government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government
ethnic nationalism more broadly and highlights the deep
Source: Michael Rubin.
hostility within Iran’s military that will undercut any
Source: “Amrika az Basij-e ‘Amumi Iraniyan Vahameh Darad (America is Afraid of
significant rapprochement with the United States or
the Popular Basij),” Mehr News Agency, 4 October 2017. https://goo.gl/z47MPp
moderation toward Israel.
“Referendum in the Kurdistan region is very dangerous and can have unpredictable
Iranian unease at Kurdish separatism rests upon
consequences for the regional states and the Kurds themselves. Of course, if we look
Tehran’s fears that Iraqi Kurdish separatism could
behind the scenes, we see the presence of the Zionist regime itself which has the goal
create a precedent for Iranian Kurds to demand a
of opening an embassy in the Kurdistan Region… America benefits from crisis in the
similar referendum or, even absent such a vote, work
world, especially in West Asia, and the more countries there are in the region, the less
more generally toward a break with Iran. The fact
power those countries hold. Such separatism is in the interests of the United States
that Iranian Kurds celebrated the vote inside major
and in line with its goals, and if these countries disintegrate, it will certainly help
Iranian Kurdish cities after the Iraqi referendum only
America achieve its goals.”
augmented the concern of Iranian security services.
Indeed, the IRGC and Ministry of Intelligence
cracked down publicly on those cheering on Iraqi Kurds. According to Iranian Kurds, this resulted in dozens of arrests.
The concern for the IRGC, however, reflected in the vociferousness of Jafari’s statement, is likely based on Tehran’s worry that ethnic
separatism may not only be limited to Iranian Kurds. Ethnic Persians may be a slight majority in Iran, but the country remains incredibly
ethnically diverse. The Iranian leadership fears that Iran could face a potential upsurge in separatism among the Azeris, Baluch, Iranian Arabs,
and other groups. While not all ethnic minorities in Iran are separatist, political upheaval and weak central governance have often sparked
resurgences of separatism. While the Iranian central government remains strong, Kurdish separatism combined with a looming transition at the
top of the Islamic Republic as the aging Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei faces his own mortality, suggests that a perfect storm for Iran could be
on the horizon.
Jafari did not only speak about Kurdish separatism but also suggested that the United States was more broadly embracing a strategy of
fracturing regional states. This reflects a belief among Iranian hardliners that the United States and its allies seek to divide Iranian client states
such as Syria (where the Kurds also have declared an autonomous region) and Yemen, where South Yemeni separatism is once again looming
large. If they can depict themselves as fighting broader US and Israeli strategy in countries like Syria and Yemen, they can better justify their
continued expensive investment in supporting pro-Iranian proxies in Syria and Yemen. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

OE Watch | November 2017

33

AFRICA
North Korea’s African Ties
OE Watch Commentary: While much of the world looks to tighten sanctions on
North Korea in order to get Kim Jung Un to freeze or abandon his nuclear weapons
program, several African countries are under investigation by the UN for continuing to
trade with the regime. As the accompanying article details, Tanzania, Uganda, Angola,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Mozambique, Botswana, Benin and
Zimbabwe may have violated Security Council Sanctions. This trade, estimated at $100
million per year, may sound relatively small, but is actually quite significant given North
Korea’s difficulties in obtaining foreign currency.
There is a long history of forged ties between the DPRK and Africa…literally forged.
Enormous bronze statues of African leaders and events, manufactured by the North
Korean factory Mansudae Overseas Projects, dot the continent; their artistic style often
more Stalinesque than statuesque. The company has, however, constructed more than
just monuments. In Namibia, it erected four large buildings, in return for which Namibia
invested $100 million in projects in North Korea (since 2002), including ammunition
factories. Under fire for purportedly violating UN sanctions, Namibia vowed to uphold
these measures in the future, but added that its warm diplomatic relationship with
Pyongyang would continue.
The ties between North Korea and Africa go back even further than the continent’s
use of North Korean construction capabilities; all the way back to the Cold War when
North Korea was looking for allies. The support it lent to African liberation movements
that were seeking to overthrow their colonial rulers brought it those friends. Diplomatic
and cultural links, as the article states, helped reinforce those ties in the 1960s, 70s, and
80s. Additional support such as selling military radio equipment to Eritrea and weapons
to Mozambique, as well as reportedly organizing military training for Angola and
Uganda, further strengthened the bonds. With Africa representing about a quarter of UN
membership, North Korea’s past and continuing efforts to foster positive relations on
the continent could help it overcome difficulties in that world body.

North Korea’s Mansudae Overseas Projects constructed
Senegal’s African Renaissance Monument.

Source: Jessykoffi/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Senegal-La_renaissance.jpg,
CC BY-SA 3.0

“Despite UN sanctions against North
Korea, a number of African countries

North Korea’s use of shell companies, including banking and financial services,
share a cozy trade relationship with the
coupled with African companies’ willingness to deal with the rogue state, especially
because North Korea asks fewer questions regarding business practices than Western
pariah state. Old alliances dating back
trading partners, has enabled it to operate on the continent despite sanctions being
to Cold War times have persisted - and
in place. Measures to counter this bypass, including better training of customs
officials to enable them to detect prohibited items at airports and seaports, have been
remain important even today.
recommended. Additionally, as the article details, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo
Abe is calling for increasing pressure on Africa to implement the sanctions. However, at the present time it is unclear whether certain African
countries, which have benefitted from previous relations with North Korea, are going to continue their friendship and surreptitious trading
with the nation whose nuclear saber rattlings have so many concerned. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

”

Source: Martina Schwikowski, “Africa: North Korea’s Loyal Partners in Africa,” Deutsche Welle, 9 September 2017. http://www.dw.com/en/
north-koreas-loyal-partners-in-africa/a-40625173
Despite UN sanctions against North Korea, a number of African countries share a cozy trade relationship with the pariah state. Old
alliances dating back to Cold War times have persisted - and remain important even today.
Pyongyang’s presence in Africa is impossible to ignore. In many countries, bronze statues in the monumental style are reminiscent of the
bonds of communism that once linked the continent to North Korea.
“We’re seeing some countries around the world, not just in Africa - and whether knowingly or unknowingly - providing banking and financial
services to North Korean companies and individuals that are known to be affiliated with the regime,” he [Daragh Neville of the British think
tank Chatham House] said.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has called for pressure on African states to be stepped up to ensure the latest sanctions, imposed earlier
this month, aren’t flouted. The measures now include caps on oil supplies to North Korea and a ban on textile exports. African countries must
abide by these measures, Abe said. Observers, however, warn these words may fall on deaf ears.

OE Watch | November 2017

34

AFRICA
Somalia’s Plea for Heavy Weapons
OE Watch Commentary: In a recent speech before the United Nations General Assembly,
Somalia’s Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khaire asked for several things: debt relief so his country,
which was without a functioning central government for 25 years, could move forward in areas
such as protecting human rights and providing education; continuous and predictable funding
for AMISOM, the African Union Mission to Somalia, which has been battling al-Shabaab,
the terrorist group that poses an existential threat to the nascent government; and support for
needed reforms. But perhaps his most important request, best characterized as a plea in light
of the planned withdrawal of AMISOM troops, was a lifting of the arms embargo so that the
Somali national forces could obtain the heavy weapons necessary to defeat al-Shabaab. The
accompanying article from a Somali source discusses this plea.
Recent news reports testify that al-Shabaab is still a powerful force capable not only of attacks
on individual soft targets but also military bases, even though they are weaker and control less
land than at their peak. This is despite the decade-long presence of AMISOM in Somalia. The
fear is that, once AMISOM fully withdraws, the Somali military may not be able to continue the
momentum; and al-Shabaab could actually re-conquer territory it had lost, perhaps including
Mogadishu, Somalia’s capital.
The arms embargo dates all the way back to 1992. The previous year, a coalition of clans
ousted the country’s increasingly unpopular president, Siad Barre. With the ensuing civil war,
Security Council Resolution 733 established the embargo as an attempt to limit the amount
of arms flowing to the rival warlords. Future resolutions partially lifted the embargo so that
Somali government forces could receive weapons, but restrictions remain. For example, several
categories of equipment require approval from the sanctions committee on a case-by-case basis.
The embargo was scheduled to run out in late 2016 but was extended for another 12 months
to 15 November 2017. Thus, it will soon be known whether Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khaire’s
plea to end the embargo will be answered or if Somalia’s quest for heavy weapons will have to
wait for perhaps another year. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: “Somalia Seeks Easing of Arms
Embargo in Effort to Defeat al-Shabab,”
Shabelle News (Somalia), 23 September
2017. http://radioshabelle.com/somaliaseeks-easing-arms-embargo-effort-defeat-alshabab/
The Somali government has repeated its
plea for world leaders to lift an international
arms embargo, as the aid-dependent Horn
of Africa nation continues to struggle with
security threats from al-Shabab terrorist
group.
The Somali government appeal for the
lifting of its arms embargo comes nearly two
weeks after the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in the country, known
as UNSOM, called for practical support
and political encouragement to the Somali
leadership.
“To ensure the sustainability of such gains,
we focused on strengthening the military
capability of our national security forces,
however, the arms embargo imposed against
Somalia is a severe limitation towards this
objective,” [Somali Prime Minister] Khaire
told the U.N. assembly.

“The Somali government has repeated its plea for world leaders to lift an international arms embargo, as the aiddependent Horn of Africa nation continues to struggle with security threats from [the] al-Shabab terrorist group.”

M47 Patton in Somali desert (2007).

Source: Carl Montgomery, via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ruined_tank_in_Hargeisa,_Somaliland.jpg , CC BY-NC 2.0.

OE Watch | November 2017

35

AFRICA
Somalia: Drought Benefits al-Shabaab
OE Watch Commentary: It is known that changing weather
patterns may lead to conflict, as might happen when drought
forces people from one tribe to leave the pastures they traditionally
use for their animals and encroach on land with people from a
different tribe. But sometimes the links between conflict and the
change in climate – the weather over a long period of time - can be
exaggerated. The accompanying article suggests that this may be
the case with Somalia, where the noticeable links between drought
and conflict are due to another factor: governance. Specifically,
the overlooked factor is the lack of a strong central government
to manage the food insecurity brought on by drought, which alShabaab uses to its advantage.
Following the collapse of the central government in 1991 when
President Siad Barre was ousted, there have been at least seven
periods when droughts and food insecurity coincided. Several of
these were also times of famine, which the UN defines according
to certain metrics such as the amount of malnutrition and hunger
as well as the number who die. The other periods were food crises,
not as severe a situation as famine but acute malnutrition can still
be present.

A malnourished child in a Medicins Sans Frontieres treatment tent.

Source: DFID - UK Department for International Development/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:A_malnourished_child_in_an_MSF_
treatment_tent_in_Dolo_Ado.jpg, CC BY 2.0

“In other words, al-Shabaab takes advantage of the

hunger and desperation caused by drought. In this way,
climate worsens the conflict by giving al-Shabaab more
manpower.”

The last food crisis began in 2016, extended into this year, and
verged on famine. In a country where so many livelihoods revolve
around rainfall, both years saw significantly less precipitation, and
as a result harvests were significantly lower for those years. Pastures were also markedly impacted so large numbers of livestock died. Currently
the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimates that over 3.1 million people require urgent humanitarian assistance.
Meanwhile al-Shabaab has taken advantage of the situation to seek new recruits just as it did during the 2011/12 drought. With no money to
purchase food, salaries offered by the terrorist organization are a strong incentive to join. Additionally, al-Shabaab generates good will among
farmers by building irrigation canals, enabling them to grow food on the previously parched soil. Furthermore, by keeping humanitarian aid
agencies out of areas they control, al-Shabaab can look like the only one taking care of the local people. Thus, while drought may be bad for the
Somali people, it is good for al-Shabaab.
While climate change may have contributed to the most recent drought, the famine and conflict that have ensued could more rightly be
blamed, as the article relates, on poor governance. To prove that point the author turns to history, specifically the 1973 – 1975 drought when
20,000 people died, approximately 1% of the population. However, the toll would have been much higher if not for the fact that back then there
was a strong central government which was able to reduce the impact of the natural disaster.
With a new Somali President in office there is hope that a strong government can once again effectively deal with drought in order to avert
the famine and conflict that often grows out of it. As the climate is expected to get hotter in the ensuing years, the President may have many
opportunities to do so. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Hakim Abdi, “Somalia conflict and famine: the causes are bad governance, not climate change,” The Conversation (South Africa), 4
October 2017. https://theconversation.com/somalia-conflict-and-famine-the-causes-are-bad-governance-not-climate-change-84166
The link between climate change and violent conflict is a complex one. In specific circumstances changing weather patterns may lead to
conflict… But the links are often exaggerated and oversimplified.
Somalia is a case of subtle connections between drought, food insecurity and conflict. Understanding these connections better – and
identifying other relevant factors – could help prevent suffering in [the] future...
In southern Somalia, the militant group al-Shabaab controls large areas including key agricultural areas. The group relies on a variety of
tactics to get new recruits and solidify its presence. For example, in one area it builds canals to make local farmers less dependent on rainfall,
thus cultivating goodwill and getting recruits...
At the peak of the 2011/12 drought, al-Shabaab was reported to have sabotaged the relief effort by restricting access to humanitarian
agencies. This made the situation worse for people affected by the drought. Bruno Geddo of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in
Somalia believes food insecurity plays into al-Shabaab’s hands...
In other words, al-Shabaab takes advantage of the hunger and desperation caused by drought. In this way, climate worsens the conflict by
giving al-Shabaab more manpower.
OE Watch | November 2017

36

AFRICA
The Paradox of Increasing
Democracy and Decreasing Stability
OE Watch Commentary: There has been recent progress on the
democracy front in several African countries. The Gambia’s autocratic
president Yahya Jammeh was forced to leave following an intervention
by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), a
15-member regional union of West African countries; Ghana’s long-time
president Mahama stepped down after losing an election; and in Kenya,
for the first time ever, the judiciary overturned the election of a sitting
president due to irregularities and allegations of fraud. Nevertheless,
as the accompanying article notes, despite these positive developments,
the presence of serious underlying problems raise questions about how
extensive Africa’s democratic gains really are.
While the optics in some countries may be one of increasing multiparty
politics, the reality is sometimes quite different, as evidenced by the arrest
of Ugandan opposition leader Kizza Besigye, the crackdown on Kenyan
opposition protests, and other democracy-weakening interventions. As the
article points out, “the expansion of multi-party politics [in Africa] has
often gone hand-in-hand with political and economic exclusion,” which
ultimately “increases the risk that political grievances will develop into
instability.”

“Instrumentally, the combination of economic

and political exclusion increases the risk that
political grievances will develop into instability.”
In terms of economic exclusion, it seems that although the level of absolute
poverty in Africa has declined, the gap between rich and poor, which is
defined as relative poverty, has increased. The Human Development Index
(HDI), which is a composite statistic of life expectancy, education, and
per capita indicators, reveals that every country in Africa now has worse
inequality than it did in 2010. A disproportionate share of the burden of this
rift between the haves and have-nots has fallen on women.
Rising income inequality in Africa often is frequently found in conjunction
with rising political exclusion and inequality, which is also noticeable with
regards to gender. While some African countries have a significant number
of female legislators, including Rwanda which actually leads the world in
this metric, others such as Angola, Nigeria, and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have very few. Additionally, in some countries certain minorities
are politically marginalized. Because of these and other issues, one think
tank has found the quality of civil liberties in Africa has declined every year
for ten years.
Interestingly, the countries with authoritarian governments are doing better
on the HDI than the democracies, with three of the continent’s most secure
democracies – Botswana, Namibia and South Africa – having some of the
worst income inequality not just in Africa but in the world. Thus democracy
is not helping the poor, or at least not as much as the wealthy. As the article
notes, this economic inequality coupled with political exclusion could
explain the paradox of increasing democracy and decreasing stability. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Yahya Jammeh, Former President of the Gambia (2014).

Source: Amanda Lucidon/ White House, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Yahya_Jammeh.png, Public Domain.

Source: Nic Cheeseman, “Democratic breakthroughs in
Africa: time to celebrate but worries still linger,” The
Conversation (South Africa), 14 September 2107. https://
theconversation.com/democratic-breakthroughs-in-africatime-to-celebrate-but-worries-still-linger-84067
It’s true that more elections are now being held than
at any time in human history. But recent highlights in
Gambia, Ghana and Kenya mask a problematic reality,
namely that the expansion of multi-party politics has often
gone hand-in-hand with political and economic exclusion.
Over the past five years, the level of political repression
and economic inequality has increased in Africa.
The combination of political and economic exclusion in
Africa is important for intrinsic and instrumental reasons.
Intrinsically, democracy is failing to deliver if it is not
helping the worst as much as the best off. Instrumentally,
the combination of economic and political exclusion
increases the risk that political grievances will develop
into instability.
More worryingly, there is no evidence that democracies
are performing better than authoritarian systems on this
issue. If anything, the reverse is true. Indeed, one of the
most intriguing paradoxes of African democracy is that it
is those countries that are most democratic that are most
unequal.

OE Watch | November 2017

37

AFRICA
Counterproductive Police Practices in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: According to authors
in a number of African countries, one of the very
institutions expected to combat extremism may
be making it worse. As the accompanying article
describes, many African police forces are known for
their brutality and arbitrary arrests. They are accused of
generating more fear among the populace than terrorists
do. These counterproductive tactics may be driving
people into the very arms of the insurgents the police
are trying to eliminate. As the article points out, one
study of over 500 jihadists- mainly from Kenya, Nigeria
and Somalia- “found that in over 70 percent of cases
‘government action,’ including the killing or arrest of
a family member or friend, was the tipping point that
prompted them to join.”
“Nigerian mobile police with vehicle. Are police tactics in some African nations counterproductive,
To understand why so many African police forces are
pushing people to join terrorist organizations?”
accused of corruption and/or human rights abuses, one
Source: Sawa2, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nigerian_Mobile_Police_with_Vehicle.JPG, CC BY-SA 3.0.
must look at their history. These forces were established
Undermanned, underfunded, underwhelming: African police
by colonial powers to control the local population
before their nations gained independence. However,
forces struggle to contain regular crime, and they are even further
once they did gain independence, the role of the police
force did not greatly change and their numbers did not
out of their depth when it comes to tackling violent extremism.
significantly increase, resulting in markedly low ratios
of police to populace. The UN recommends 300 officers to every 100,000 people, but across Africa the ratio is far worse. In Kenya it is 203, in
Nigeria it is 187, and in Mali, which is struggling with an Islamist insurgency, a paltry 38.

“

”

Many police forces are also notoriously underequipped. Even the most basic of necessities, such as pens and paper, let alone fuel, vehicles and
forensic lab items, are frequently in short supply. This dearth of equipment along with problems in the criminal justice system contribute to some
of the continent’s appalling conviction rates. In South Africa, murder cases end in a conviction only 10 percent of the time, which is still better
than the rate for crimes of sexual violence, which is 4 to 8 percent. Police forces sometimes resort to torture in order to force confessions.
As for corruption, many of the police are poorly paid and looking for ways to supplement their meager salaries. It would be unfair to solely
blame the police however, for corrupt governments breed corrupt cops. As the article relates, without reform at the top it is difficult to expect
reform among the police. Unfortunately, repeated reform efforts have generally had little impact because without buy-in from higher government
officials, any improvements are almost bound to be only transitory. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Obi Anyadike, “Unfair cop – why African police forces make violent extremism worse,” IRIN, 28 September 2017. http://www.
irinnews.org/analysis/2017/09/28/unfair-cop-why-african-police-forces-make-violent-extremism-worse
Undermanned, underfunded, underwhelming: African police forces struggle to contain regular crime, and they are even further out of their
depth when it comes to tackling violent extremism.
Traditional policing – far too often based on brutality and arbitrary arrest rather than proper detective work – can create more fear of the
security services than the insurgents and is clearly counter-productive...
A new UNDP study based on interviews with more than 500 jihadists – drawn mainly from Kenya, Nigeria, and Somalia­– found that in over
70 percent of cases “government action”, including the killing or arrest of a family member or friend, was the tipping point that prompted
them to join...
In Nigeria, torture has become such an integral part of policing that many stations have an informal torture officer, according to a 2014
Amnesty International report.
Reform is admittedly difficult to tackle in the middle of an insurgency. The priority of governments and their international partners is for
harder-hitting security services, not the soft power of [preventing violent extremism]. What that can mean in practice is squads of men who
are simply more proficient at harming their fellow citizens and extracting rents.

OE Watch | November 2017

38

AFRICA
Lassa Fever: West Africa’s Next Massive Epidemic?
OE Watch Commentary: Following the 2013 – 2016
West African Ebola epidemic, another viral hemorrhagic
fever is now threatening the same region. Lassa fever
has been reported in an increasing number of locations
in Nigeria, sparking fears, as the accompanying article
notes, the disease could so overwhelm the public health
infrastructure that it becomes an international concern.

“A new outbreak in 19 Nigerian states and in Lagos city – the
most populated city on the continent – has sparked fears that the
disease will get out of control and result in a public health event
of international concern.”

Initially Lassa fever is transmitted when people come in
contact with the urine or feces from an infected rat. After that,
direct person to person contact further spreads the virus. Of
the approximately 100,000 to 300,000 West Africans infected
annually, 80% remain asymptomatic. However, in the other 20%,
after an incubation period ranging from six to 21 days, symptoms
appear, often starting with fever, headache, and weakness, and
then progressing to multi-organ failure. In severe cases there can
be bleeding from the mouth, nose, and other orifices. According
to the World Health Organization, in those cases which are fatal,
death usually occurs within 14 days from the onset of symptoms.
While infected women in their third trimester of pregnancy and/
or their fetuses have a mortality rate of 80%, the overall death rate
from Lassa fever is usually only 1%. During epidemics, however,
the mortality rate can climb significantly, and as the article notes,
the incidence of the disease is on the rise, including outbreaks
throughout the year instead of their usual previous occurrences
limited mostly to the dry season.

“The virus that causes Lassa fever along with some cellular debris. The disease
has increased markedly in West Africa.”

Several possible reasons have been put forth to explain this
Domain.
disease’s latest outbreak, including unplanned urbanization and
problems with sanitation and garbage disposal which can lead to a proliferation of rats. Lagos, Africa’s largest city, is perhaps unsurprisingly
one of the locations of the recent outbreak. As a megacity it suffers from rapid, disjointed urbanization; waste disposal issues; and a problem
it shares with the rest of the country: poor disease surveillance. Making matters even worse, Lassa fever can be difficult to differentiate,
especially in its earliest stages, from many of the other diseases found in West Africa, including malaria, typhoid, and influenza. At times it
can even resemble Ebola.
Source: C.S. Goldsmith/CDC/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lassa_virus_virions_TEM_8699_lores.jpg, Public

Lassa fever has not reached the point where a massive international response, as happened with the Ebola epidemic, is in the works.
Though both can result in a gruesome death, Ebola has a much higher mortality rate, making its outbreaks especially fearsome. Additionally,
while Lassa fever is on the rise, there have always been a significant number of symptomatic infected individuals in the region. With Ebola,
on the other hand, the numbers are usually quite small, so any increase above that baseline is more noticeable. Still, with the number of
Lassa fever infections continuing to climb, the fear expressed in the accompanying article that the disease may get out of control - thus
requiring international assistance once again to tame an epidemic caused by a hemorrhagic virus - is quite understandable. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Oyewale Tomori, “Lassa fever will keep ravaging Nigeria unless better surveillance is put in place,” The Conversation (South
Africa), 21 September 2017. https://theconversation.com/lassa-fever-will-keep-ravaging-nigeria-unless-better-surveillance-is-put-inplace-83847
Lassa fever was first discovered nearly 50 years ago in Nigeria. Since then, it has been reported in other West African countries including
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. There is also evidence of Lassa fever presence in southern Mali, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana,
all of which share a similar tropical wooded savanna ecological zone. But there is still no vaccine against the disease. A new outbreak in 19
Nigerian states and in Lagos city – the most populated city on the continent – has sparked fears that the disease will get out of control and
result in a public health event of international concern.
It is clear that outbreaks are becoming more widespread in Nigeria. Between 1969 and 2008, Lassa fever cases were reported in only six
to seven of Nigeria’s 36 states. But between 2009 and 2015 this doubled to between 10 and 14 states reporting outbreaks. In 2016 at least 26
states reported cases and at least 18 states have reported outbreaks so far this year.
The biggest issue is that Nigeria has failed to sustain any reliable disease surveillance system.
OE Watch | November 2017

39

AFRICA
An ISIS Faction in Africa... Low-Profile Propaganda
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 October, four
US servicemen were killed in a militant ambush in
Niger. The next day, a faction of the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), under the leadership of
Abu Walid al-Sahrawi claimed the attack through
a French-language article on alakhbar.com. The
accompanying passages from African sources
provide insight into this faction, which appears to
operate in the border axis between Niger, Burkina
Faso and Mali.

“Daesh can be considered to be using the recognition of this group
as a media operation intended to make believe that its dislocated
Caliphate ([in] Syria / Iraq) is global and flourishes on other lands,
notably on the borders of Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso.”

The French-language article from Senegal’s
dakaractu.com discusses that the faction had
previously claimed two attacks through alakhbar.
com and one through al-Jazeera, so it would not be
out of the ordinary for the faction to claim the attack
on US special forces through alakhbar.com again.
The group is described as small and having a limited
operational capacity, with only two small armed
attacks and one suicide bombing to its credit. The
faction is also an outcast among al-Qaeda militants
in the Sahel because Sahrawi was formerly with alQaeda and his decision to defect and join ISIS was
Armed Islamist fighters race near the Mauritania-Mali border on May 21st.
rejected by his former al-Qaeda comrades-in-arms.
Source: Jemal Ould Mohamed Oumar via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Armed_Islamist_fighters_race_near_the_Mauritania-Mali_
border_on_May_21st.jpg, (CC BY 2.0 0).
However, the faction’s one niche is operating in the
border axis between Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali, which is where al-Qaeda is less active and may be why Sahrawi has greater mobility and
operational capacity there.
One of the inconsistencies between the attack and the analysis in the article is that the article argues that ISIS was using Sahrawi’s faction to
portray that it had a global caliphate. However, the claim of the attack through alakhbar.com was a very low-profile form of propagating news
of the attack. One might expect ISIS to advertise the attack on its various social media accounts but this did not happen in the days after the
attack. The article nonetheless recalls that ISIS hesitated to grant recognition to al-Sahrawi after he pledged loyalty to ISIS in 2015. Therefore,
even despite what appears to be a landmark attack for al-Sahrawi’s faction, ISIS may still have reservations about claiming an attack on his
faction’s behalf. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
Source: “l’Etat islamique serait dernier l’attaque sur la frontière Niger- Mali (The Islamic state did the last attack on the Niger-Mali border),”
alakhbar.com, 5 October 2017. http://www.fr.alakhbar.info/12900-0--lEtat-islamique-serait-dernier-lattaque-sur-la-frontiere-Niger--Mali.html
The branch of the Islamic State in the Sahel would have been behind the attack on the Niger-Mali border, which cost the lives of... U.S special
forces soldiers and five other Nigeriens, local sources confirmed to alakhbar.
The command of U.S forces in the zone confirmed that his troops were victims in the ambush.
Source: “Un Califat Islamique au Sahel à l’horizon 2025: surenchère ou réalité sur le terrain?” (An Islamic Caliphate in the Sahel by 2025:
Bidding or reality on the ground?),” dakaractu.com, 6 September 2017. http://www.dakaractu.com/Un-Califat-Islamique-au-Sahel-a-lhorizon-2025-surenchere-ou-realite-sur-le-terrain_a138080.html
To add to the jihadist factionalism in the Sahel, a group was set up in May 2015 but this time under the banner of Daesh under the name of
Islamic State in the Grand Sahara (EIGS). The organization was recognized a year later after much hesitation by the central leadership of
Daesh in October 2016. This group which is responsible for several attacks against the Burkinabe and Niger security and defense forces is a
dissident wing of al-Mourabitoune under the leadership of a certain Abu Walid al-Sahrawi.
The group has a small size and limited operational capacity (two small arms attacks and one suicide bomb attack) and could not topple the
entire al-Mourabitoune group. Moreover, the entire Salafist and jihadist leadership of the subregion condemned the position of this group and
rejected any jihadist concept based on the Daesh model. For the moment Daesh can be considered to be using the recognition of this group as
a media operation intended to make believe that its dislocated Caliphate (Syria / Iraq) is global and flourishes on other lands, notably on the
borders of Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso.

OE Watch | November 2017

40

LATIN AMERICA
A Spanish Perspective on Catalonian Separatism
OE Watch Commentary: The opinions expressed in the accompanying references
are representative of a slice of Spanish intellectual perspective that bemoans the
Catalonian separatist movement. However, this perspective is also critical of the
response to the movement from the Spanish federal government led by Mariano
Rajoy.
According to this perspective, as the first passage demonstrates, recent referendum
attempts were designed and led by the Spanish far left, especially including the
Podemos party, other Marxist parties and elements self-identifying as anti-fascist.
According to the author, the left and their journalists define fascist as anybody who
adheres to Spanish nationalism or unity.
The recently attempted vote or referendum on Catalonian separation was on its
face illegal according to Spanish law, although many voices internationally are
calling it an expression worthy of protection as free speech. It should not surprise if
much of the intention of Spanish leftist leaders was to provoke an overreaction on
the part of the current Spanish administration. They perhaps succeeded in that most
early reportage seems to be about Spanish police and military suppressing voters and
arresting people, rather than about the nature and purpose of the separatist actions or
the actions’ organizers. The authors of the second and third accompanying references
apparently feel that the government of Spain, while clumsy in its repression of the vote
itself, has not been assertive enough regarding the attributed leftist leadership, or clear
enough regarding the leaders’ goals.

Map of Spain with Catalonia highlighted.

Source: Mutxamel, subido por Rastrojo via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Localizaci%C3%B3n_de_Catalu%C3%B1a.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0.

“To discredit adhesion to Spain as

fascist is a well-worn foulness.... The
harmful intention seeks to discredit all
adhesion to the Spanish Nation...”

The European Parliament, meanwhile, has been supportive of the Spanish government in its attitude toward Catalonian independence. Podemos
and the Spanish left generally favor permissive migration to Spain (or to Catalonia), so some of this political conundrum might be illuminated by
issues like the storming by sub-Saharan migrants of the border fences in Ceuta and Melilla. Designated ‘autonomous cities,’ (but of long Spanish
pertinence) Ceuta and Melilla lie within the European Union, but on the North African coast. (See separate article, “Spain and the Border Wall of
Europe,” in this issue of OE Watch). The question of migration and of Islamic presence in Spain may be a columnar part of the issue of Spanish unity
and disunity. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: “Hermann Tertsch, “Confundirse de enemigo (Confusing oneself as to the enemy; getting the enemy wrong),” ABC and Periodismo
Sin Fronteras, 1 October 2017. http://www.periodismosinfronteras.org/independencia-de-cataluna-confundirse-de-enemigo.html
“To discredit adhesion to Spain as fascist is a well-worn foulness. Now, a century since the Bolshevik Revolution, the Spanish communists,
in the Podemos [(Together) We Can] Party and the UI [United Left] are celebrating the hundred years…Their journalists know what they are
doing. Looking among the thousands of demonstrators for the dozen or so kids who give them what they want with the flag of the eagle [of the
Falangists] and falangist songs…. In order to again make very clear that Spanish patriotism is fascist, francoist…The harmful intention seeks
to discredit all adhesion to the Spanish Nation. By way of nationalist agitation of nineteenth-century invention, done precisely in order to
destroy the common secular nation.”
Source: Marisa Cruz y Luis Ángel Sanz, “Rajoy continúa indeciso mientras Puigdemont impulsa la rebelión (Rajoy remains indecisive while
Puigdemont launches the rebellion),” El Mundo, 2 October 2017. http://www.elmundo.es/espana/2017/10/02/59d27a82e5fdea6c498b45b9.html
“…In Monclava [White House equivalent] all possibilities are being studied, but so far no decision taken as to the advantages of one
or another…The PSOE [largest left opposition party] contemplate the hypothesis that Puigdemont [Carles Puigdemont, President of the
Catalonia Administration and face of the independence push] make a ‘testimonial declaration of independence’ without juridical effect, and
immediately afterwards convoke some autonomous elections, although he might want to call them an ‘constituent expression’, but according
to law. Socialist sources assure that that scenario [in which the Spanish President meets with all parties including separatists to negotiate a
way to allow for an independence referendum] would be the ‘least bad.’”
Source: Rosa Cuervas-Mons, “Cataluña revolucionada por una minoría radical y exaltada (Catalonia revolutionized by a radical impassioned
minority),” La Gaceta, 3 October 2017. https://gaceta.es/espana/
“And, speaking of the State…Where is the State? Why is the Interior Minister, who regaled such fine words this Monday during Police Day,
not in Barcelona supporting his officers? Why did [Spanish Prime Minister] Mariano Rajoy -- with more than sufficient evidence of the
disloyalty and disobedience of the Catalonian government and its autonomous police, not apply Article 155 [article of the Spanish constitution
that allows the central government to intervene in order to make an Autonomous Community follow the law when other means of control are
exhausted] and take control of an Autonomous [Community] that has moved onto the dangerous path of revolution?”

OE Watch | November 2017

41

LATIN AMERICA
Spain and the Border Wall of Europe
OE Watch Commentary: The Spaniards have faced migration
challenges, including violent problems, on and off for two millennia,
give or take a century or two. It is hard for Spaniards and other
historians not to want to set some of today’s current events in
historical context. The accompanying passages provide insight into
unconsidered aspects of Spain’s internal debate on migration, the
Spanish left and Islamic presence in Spain.

“...regarding refugees ... everything possible is done
so they do not come.”

The first accompanying reference outlines a connection between the
organized Spanish political far left (the Spanish seem quite familiar
with left-right identifications) and Islam (and perhaps with Islamists).
It personifies the phenomenon through the intellectual and activist
journey of a Spaniard named Raul Gonzalez, who “formed part of
Podemos [far left Spanish political party] and ... integrate[d] himself
into its Muslim circle.”
The second reference is a long article examining the phenomenon
of immigration into Europe through Spain, especially via penetration
into the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla on the African
continent. The article goes into some depth about the paradoxes
and ambivalences of the Spanish regarding immigration. Part of
the puzzle: The European Union is generally in favor of permissive
migration, Spain benefits from membership in the Union, but the
majority of Spaniards do not want open borders, fearing the loss of
Spanish cultural identity, not to mention violent terrorism.

“Mapa_del_sur_de_España (Map of the south of Spain)” circa 2007.
Source: Anarkangel via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ceuta-melilla.png, CC BY SA 3.0.

Source: Daniel Verdú, “El círculo islámico de Podemos (The Islamic
Circle of Podemos),” El País, 22 January 2015. https://politica.elpais.
com/politica/2015/01/22/actualidad/1421956567_088774.html
“A group of Spanish converts created a Muslim branch in the party
… The Transition on track and the dictator on his death bed, it seemed
to Madridite Raúl González that what he would see next would be no
more than a color version of Francoism. A Communist and social
actionist, he did not care to integrate himself into that system and began
to ask himself about the meaning of life. He read all about spirituality
and ended up finding the answers he sought in the Koran. He got a
scholarship in 1989 and went off to study Islamic theology in Qom
(Iran). He became a Rouhani (religious person), returned, became a
translator and was still able to spend another period of time in Iran.
Raul, also known as Yafar Abdellah, today directs the NGO Muslims
for Peace…. But that chronic dissatisfaction injected during the time
of Franco also brought him to form part of Podemos [far left Spanish
political party] and to integrate himself into its Muslim circle, consisting
today of some 70 members (the majority Spanish converts to Islam) who
communicate with each other through a closed Group on Facebook….”

The third reference alludes to some recent events in which the
European Parliament human rights office called on Spain to stop
its restrictive immigration practices in Ceuta and Melilla. It is a
call from a Spanish leftist spokesperson to the European Union to
pressure Spain to allow easier entrance. Therein lies a connection
of Islamic interests with the Spanish left. (See separate article, “A
Spanish Perspective on Catalonian Separatism,” in this issue of
OE Watch.) While migration is a knotted problem for the Spanish
government, it is not for the Spanish far left parties. They favor
permissive flow of peoples into Spain. As a nation, Spain spent some
time forcibly migrating Caliphate-oriented peoples out of Spain.
Spaniards are not unified on the question of keeping them out, a
disunity that is now being tested. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)
Source: Iñigo Domínguez, “España no es país para refugiados (ni quiere serlo) (Spain is not a country for refugees (and does not want to be
one)),” El País, 30 April 2016. https://politica.elpais.com/politica/2016/04/28/actualidad/1461845259_323652.html

“It is a day of travel for a select group finally allowed to travel to the peninsula, in a ferry that sets off at midnight and arrives at Malaga
the next morning. In the line everyone is contented, dressed in their best clothing and taking photos. It is a Group of 66, but probably many of
them will not stay in Spain. Because they are not attracted by the minimum minimum. It does not stop being curious that few want to come
ask for asylum to live in one of the premier tourist destinations in the world. But it is that regarding refugees the idea is reversed: everything
possible is done so they do not come.”
Source: “Albiol pide a la UE que obligue a España a “acabar con las devoluciones en caliente” en Ceuta y Melilla (Albiol asks the EU to
require Spain to ‘stop the immediate returns’ in Ceuta and Melilla),” Ceutaldia.com, 3 October 2017. http://www.ceutaldia.com/articulo/
politica/albiol-pide-ue-obligue-espana-acabar-devoluciones-caliente-ceuta-melilla/20171003200508167147.html
“The spokesperson for United Left [Spanish far left political party] to the European Parliament, Mariana Albiol, urged the chargé of the
European Immigration Commission, Dimitris Avramopoulos, to require Spain to end... returns at the fences of Ceuta and Melilla’ in order to
comply with the decision of the Human Rights Tribunal (TEDH) of the European Union, which just found the Administration in breach of the
European Convention on Human Rights….
…‘in any case, it also should not be forgotten that the EU has permitted them because they are nothing but another tool in the service of
Fortress Europe.”
OE Watch | November 2017

42

LATIN AMERICA
LATAM, Catalonian Separatism and Organized Religion
OE Watch Commentary: Not everyone in Catalonia is in favor
of separation and independence. If reports about the relative size
of demonstrations is a valid clue, a majority of Catalonians favor
remaining within the Kingdom of Spain. The first of the accompanying
references notes that the massive pro-unity demonstration gave the
president of Catalonia, who is pro-independence, cause to balk about
openly declaring Catalonian independence from Spain. Indeed, as
of this writing he had not taken that step. It seems, according to the
reportage, that pro-Spain leaders are not
A human tide…
keen on a dialogue between the Spanish
administration and the more radical
in defense of the
elements of the separatist movement, these
latter being associated with far-left parties, Constitution and
including and especially Podemos.

“

Spanish unity…”

The second reference is from a Costa
Rican branch of a major Latin American news conglomerate, and it
reflects a widespread Latin American take on an event in Poland that
occurred at about the same time as the Barcelona demonstrations. A
huge number of Poles went to their national borders to pray the rosary.
Celebrating an ancient battle won by Christians over the Ottomans,
which the passage notes ‘saved Europe from Islamization,’ the message
could not be mistaken. The Poles, strengthened in part by religious
identity as Roman Catholics, reject Islamic incursion into Poland. The
mass prayer was organized by a private foundation, but the report
indicates that 22 dioceses of the Catholic Church in Poland supported
it, the congregants assembling in the churches. A cleric representing
the Polish Catholic Conference reportedly asserted that the prayer was
not anti-Islam, but inclusive and for world peace. The article makes
clear that claim is incongruous at best. The conciliatory statement by
the senior Polish Episcopate is understandable, however, given the third
accompanying reference, which leads us back to the Barcelona question.
Written by a well-known Spanish radio talk show host, the essay has
been widely republished in Latin America-oriented media. Among other
things, it notes the extreme insecurity felt by the Jewish community
in Barcelona. The head Rabbi there is advising Jews to emigrate, the
specter of Catalonian independence promising an influx of Muslims,
many of which will be violently anti-Jewish. The essay also notes that
the Roman Catholic Conference in Spain has been highly conciliatory
and accommodating to Podemos and other far left Spanish parties
fomenting Catalonian separatism. Given the reportage, it may very well
be that Latin American Roman Catholics (of which there are still quite a
few) look with admiration at the attitude of Polish Catholic church, and
not so much at the Spanish. Besides the obvious difference between the
Polish and Spanish bishoprics, there may be a widening difference of
opinion between Spanish church leaders and the flock. According to the
referenced opinions, many Spaniards are looking to senior leaders of the
administration to take a harder stance toward the radical left, to assert
Spanish identity. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the Rabbi of the Jewish community in
Barcelona recommended to his coreligionaries that
they abandon Catalonia…”

Source: Àngels Piñol, “Masiva manifestación en Barcelona a favor
de la Constitución y la unidad de España (Massive demonstration
in Barcelona in favor of the Constitution and Spanish unity),”
El País, 9 October 2017. https://elpais.com/ccaa/2017/10/08/
catalunya/1507444172_851999.html
“A human tide flooded the center of Barcelona yesterday in
defense of the Constitution and Spanish unity. Under the slogan
Recuperem el seny (recover the sense ‘of unity’), the massive protest
adds an enormous dose of pressure on the Catalonian president,
Carles Puigdemont, who contemplates making a declaration
of Independence in Parliament tomorrow. The demonstrators
expressed their rejection of a possible dialog if the law was not
first re-established in Catalonia….…the march ended with the
Spanish national anthem. … The pro-independence movement
people conformed strictly to the notion of non-confrontation, and
disappeared from Barcelona. Not even a glint was seen of them.”
Source: “Polonia rezó el rosario en las fronteras para pedir por la
‘salvación’ del país (Poland prays the rosary on the border to ask
for the country’s ‘salvation’),” Nación, 7 October 2017. http://
www.nacion.com/mundo/europa/Polonia-rosario-fronteras-pedirsalvacion_0_1662833753.html
“…Hundreds of thousands of Polish Catholics went to the borders
of their country Saturday where they prayed the rosary ‘ for the
salvation of Poland and the world’, a petition of the Polish nongovernmental foundation Dios Solo Basta…The date, 7 October, was
not chosen at random. It is the date of the rosary of Mary the Virgin
that celebrates the victory in 1571 of Christians over the Turks at the
Battle of Lepanto, a victory that the church attributed at the time to
the recitation of the rosary, ‘which saved Europe from Islamization’…
Source: César Vidal, “Chávez Llega a Cataluña (Chávez arrives
in Catalonia),” pararescatarelporvenir (blog of Alfredo Coronil
Hartmann), 6 October 2017. https://pararescatarelporvenir.
com/2017/10/06/chavez-llega-a-cataluna-por-cesar-vidal/
“Currently, the Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya (Catalonian
Republican Left, ERC), is characterized by an open antisemitism,
and accentuated sympathy toward Islam, an express alliance with
the Basque separatist organization ETA, and immovable support to
dictatorships such as the chavist in Venezuela….it should come as
no surprise that a few weeks ago the Rabbi of the Jewish community
in Barcelona recommended to his coreligionaries that they abandon
Catalonia in order to avoid the fate of Venezuela. The Rabbi did not
exaggerate in the least. To tell the truth, Catalonia could become the
Venezuela of the Mediterranean and in such circumstances has a role
for Podemos, the subsidiary of chavism in the European Union.…
the only president on the planet who has expressly announced his
support for the Catalonian nationalists would be Nicolás Maduro.
Chávez’s heir knows full well that what he would derive from it is that
beachhead in the European Union.…it is more than documented that
Podemos received huge sums [of money] from chavism as they also
have from the Islamic dictatorship of Iran. It is not that Podemos is
pro-independence. It is that its leaders have grasped that Catalonian
nationalism can be the battering ram that can end up finishing off a
more than eroded Spanish system.”
OE Watch | November 2017

43

LATIN AMERICA
Demonstrations in Bolivia
OE Watch Commentary: At least two other articles in this
month’s OE Watch report on public political demonstrations
(“LATAM, Catalonian Separatism and Organized Religion”
and “A Spanish Perspective on Catalonian Separatism”).
Those reports had to do with demonstrations in Europe. Few
probably noticed the large political convocations in the cities
of Bolivia. The good news is that there is still enough freedom
of speech and mobility in that country that such demonstrating
can occur, and the accompanying reference seems to have
that upbeat take on the potential for democracy. Pessimists
have a lot to work with, however. According to the article,
the demonstrators were heard using the slogan ‘No is No’
alluding to the public referendum held last year in which the
Bolivian voters soundly rejected presidential continuance,
disallowing Evo Morales from running for a fourth term. The
regime, however, can look to recent history in both Colombia
President Evo Morales (2008, two years into his presidency).
and Venezuelan for confidence. The Colombian president
Source: Joel Alvarez, Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Evo_morales_2_year_bolivia_Joel_Alvarez.jpg
CC BY SA 3.0.
flatly ignored a public referendum that had rejected the
power-sharing agreement with the FARC, and the Maduro regime in Venezuela has watched massive street demonstration after massive street
demonstration without losing a bit of its grip on power there. Additionally, the totalitarian parties of the region stick together. Evo Morales’
party is a central member of the region’s Bolivarian bloc, so if it designs to keep Morales in power irrespective of public opinion, the Bolivian
government will continue to have plenty of international support. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Karina Martín, “Grandes manifestaciones en Bolivia contra Evo Morales por intento de perpetuarse en el poder (Large demonstrations
in Bolivia against Evo Morales for attempting to keep himself in power),” Panam Post, 11 October 2017. https://es.panampost.com/karinamartin/2017/10/11/manifestaciones-en-bolivia/
“This past Tuesday 10 October, thousands of Bolivians were out in the streets to protest against President Evo Morales’ illegal intention to
reelect himself in the post. The mobilizations that were carried out in the nine [departmental] capitals of the country warned the executive
that they would not permit new participation in the elections. ‘No is No’ was one of the slogans that was heard in the streets of Bolivia, in
reference to the victory of the opposition (of the ‘no’) in the constitutional referendum that had [in 2016] rejected reelection of the current
president.”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | November 2017

44

LATIN AMERICA
The ‘Dark Web’: An Emerging Problem
OE Watch Commentary: Gangs and large-scale criminal
organizations in Latin America and the Caribbean are now
using what is being described as the “dark web” run by
cyber-criminals, to coordinate various illegal activities. The
accompanying passages discuss the cyber/criminal nexus that
is proliferating within organized crime circles in these regions
through the dark web.
As the first passage discusses, the dark web is “a collection
of thousands of websites that can only be accessed with special
browser software, which has become the nexus for global
crime as a service market.” This phenomenon is enabling
“criminals, hackers, rogue nation-state actors, terrorists and
child pornographers to form interconnected networks, leading
to what some have called “deviant globalization.” In Latin
America and the Caribbean, cartels are exploring the dark
web to locate buyers for large-scale cocaine shipments, while
Central American gangs have used these sites to advertise
their willingness to help with cross-border trafficking. Other
regional drug traffickers reportedly use underground web
forums to source synthetic opioids from Asia.
The second passage discusses how the advancement of social
media platforms have advanced recruitment, extortion and
intimidation techniques for gangs and drug cartels. The open
web has also been used by cartels that use cyber-criminals
to hack into government websites and telecommunications
systems in order to steal or propagate information.
The dark web is much more complex than just these uses
because it enables criminals to connect for virtually any illegal
activity imaginable. The United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) asserts that the criminal/cyber nexus
in Latin America is an emerging and evolving problem. The
UNODC is urging authorities to address the issue through
prevention, partnerships, protection, and investigations. While
these suggestions are indeed relevant, Latin America and the
Caribbean cannot tackle the nexus before all countries in the
region develop policy regarding cyber-crime. Currently, four
out of every five countries in the region do not even have basic
cyber-security strategies or plans in place to protect critical
infrastructure.
As the final accompanying passage discusses, many
countries in this region lack the government policies and
the legal frameworks required to prosecute these types of
crimes, making them attractive to cyber-criminals. Thus,
these countries remain highly vulnerable to potentially
devastating cyber-attacks including data breaches, banking
Trojan viruses (malicious computer programs), and mobile
malware. Furthermore, cyber-crime is now a sought-after
skillset desired by local and transnational criminal groups
who utilize individuals to help them navigate the dark web.
Given that Latin America and the Caribbean have one of
the fastest growing internet populations in the world, this is
likely to become an increasingly urgent problem that requires
international cooperation and coordination. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“The dark web is a collection of thousands of websites
... which has become the nexus for global crime as a
service market. Using Amazon-like sites on the dark web...
criminals, hackers, rogue nation-state actors, terrorists
and child pornographers are forming increasingly
interconnected networks and furthering what some have
called ‘deviant globalization’...”
Source: “ONU: pandillas utilizan para el crimen la “Internet oscura (United
Nations: How Gangs Utilized the “Dark Web” for Criminal Activity),”
Abriendo Brecha, 20 June 2017. http://www.abriendobrecha.tv/onu-pandillasutilizan-la-red-oscura/
The dark web is a collection of thousands of websites that can only be
accessed with special browser software, which has become the nexus for
global crime as a service market. Using Amazon-like sites on the dark
web like the now-shuttered Silk Road, AlphaBay and Playpen, criminals,
hackers, rogue nation-state actors, terrorists and child pornographers are
forming increasingly interconnected networks and furthering what some
have called “deviant globalization.” In Latin America and the Caribbean,
cartels are exploring the dark web to locate buyers for large-scale cocaine
shipments, while Central American gangs have used these sites to advertise
their willingness to help with cross-border trafficking. Other regional drug
traffickers reportedly use underground web forums to source synthetic
opioids from Asia.
Source: “Cuando las pandillas se vuelven virales: asi usan las redes sociales
para reclutar, atacar y delinquir (When Gangs go Viral: The Use of Social
Networks to Recruit, Threaten, and Carry Out Criminal Activities),”
Univision, 27 June 2017. http://www.univision.com/los-angeles/kmex/
noticias/actividad-de-pandillas/cuando-las-pandillas-se-vuelven-virales-asiusan-las-redes-sociales-para-reclutar-atacar-y-delinquir
For billions of individuals around the world, social networks such as
Facebook, Whatsapp and Snapchat play an important role in day to day
activities as they facilitate real time communication with anyone who has
access to Internet no matter where they are in the world. At the same time,
social media platforms are useful tools for gangs and drug cartels because
they are utilized for criminal activities to include recruitment, extortion, and
intimidation. In this sense, social networks have taken foot soldiers off the
streets onto the worldwide web.
Source: “Latin America and Caribbean Highly Vulnerable to Cyber-Attacks,”
Caribbean 360, 17 October 2016. http://www.caribbean360.com/business/
latin-america-caribbean-highly-vulnerable-cyber-attacks
Deloitte’s Global Chief Information Officer, Larry Quinlan says that despite
increased improvements in technology in the Caribbean and Latin America,
the regions remain highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks from data breaches,
banking Trojans, and mobile malware. He further stated that cyber-security
is a concern that will continue to grow worldwide and one that threatens to
engulf developing countries in Latin American and the Caribbean if the region
is not careful....Four out of every five countries in Latin American and the
Caribbean do not have cyber-security strategy or plans for protecting critical
infrastructure. Furthermore, two out of every three countries in the region
do not have a command and control center for cyber-security and lack the
capacity to protect critical infrastructure.
OE Watch | November 2017

45

LATIN AMERICA
Guatemala and Honduras Increase Cooperation
against Criminal Groups
OE Watch Commentary: In August 2017, Guatemala’s President
Jimmy Morales and his Honduran counterpart Juan Orlando
Hernandez agreed to improve intelligence coordination regarding
criminal groups operating in the two countries. They also agreed to
accelerate extradition of criminals back to their respective nations.
Hernandez further asserted that the goal of enhanced coordination
was to fight for the most fundamental of human rights: the right to
life, liberty and the right to enjoy the fruits of one’s honest labors, all
of which are threatened by rampant criminal activity in the region.
These efforts follow a series of other initiatives by Guatemala
and Honduras in recent years to enhance security in the region.
One example is monthly joint missions conducted by the countries’
respective naval forces and frequent communication between
commanders which have been ongoing for the last three years.
As the first and second accompanying passages note, many of
these joint missions entail maritime patrols. These patrols involve
large vessels suitable for the open sea; as well as smaller fast
boats capable of entering sandbars, lakes, rivers and lagoons, and
which are better suited to chasing. As the third passage discusses,
Guatemala and Honduras have also included El Salvador in
enhancing regional security cooperation by creating the “Elite
Security Group” in 2016. According to the passage, the new regional
task force is assigned to combat organized crime with a special
focus on gangs. The initiatives stem from the idea that cooperation
and interoperability are key components necessary to combat
transnational threat networks. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

Source: “Patrullajes marítimos conjuntos en sector fronterizo entre
Honduras y Guatemala (Joint Maritime Patrols in Border Area between
Honduras and Guatemala),” Honduran Secretary of National Defense,
27 March 2017. http://sedena.gob.hn/2017/03/27/patrullajes-maritimosconjuntos-en-sector-fronterizo-entre-honduras-y-guatemala/
Joint actions to include maritime patrols are carried out in compliance
with agreements made during the Conference of Central American
Armed Forces (CFAC, for its Spanish acronym) in order to counteract
the effects of emerging regional threats, especially transnational
organized crime and related incidents. Recent maritime ops were
conducted by the Honduran National Force and the Guatemalan
“BITOL” Coast Guard Naval Force with “Caimán” type boats.
Source: “Patrullajes marítimos entre Honduras y Guatemala continúan
con éxito (Maritime Patrols between Honduras and Guatemala Continue
Successfully)”, Diálogo Digital Military Magazine, 31 August 2017.
https://dialogo-americas.com/es/articles/maritime-patrols-betweenhonduras-and-guatemala-continue-successfully
In accordance with established plans that are updated twice a year, the
Honduran and Guatemalan Armed Forces are meeting the stipulated
timelines for their joint maritime patrol program goals in the Caribbean,
and along the Motagua River sandbar that runs into the Gulf of
Honduras. The border and its problems, regardless of their origin,
must be a shared responsibility, both nations affirm. For the last three
years, the naval forces of the two nations have conducted monthly joint
missions, with their regional commanders in constant communication.

Source: “Northern Triangle Countries to Launch Elite Security Task Force,” Telesur, 16 June 2016. https://www.telesurtv.net/english/news/
Northern-Triangle-Countries-to-Launch-Elite-Security-Task-Force-20160813-0009.html
Meanwhile, the head of security in the country, Julian Pacheco Tinoco, said that the new proposal regarding an Elite Security Task Force is
to “create new public policies to be implemented in the region and ultimately exert influence for better results in the fight against crime and in
combatting gang activity.” In addition, the project will target structures of organized crime engaged in drug trafficking, illegal arms trafficking,
trafficking in persons, extortion and kidnapping.

“The border and its problems, regardless of their origin, must be a shared responsibility, both
nations affirm.”

Border Guatemala-Honduras.

Source: JVC3ETA via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frontera_Guate-Hond_1_-_Copy.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.

OE Watch | November 2017

46

LATIN AMERICA
Expanded Canal Provides Boost to
Panama’s Economy
OE Watch Commentary: On 26 June, the Panama Canal
Authority (ACP, per its Spanish acronym) celebrated the first
anniversary of the opening of the expanded waterway. Prior to
the $5.4 billion upgrade and widening of its locks, the almost
48-mile long canal that links the Pacific Ocean with the Atlantic
Ocean was restricted to vessels of about 5,100 teu (twenty-foot
equivalent unit container). With the expansion, it is capable of
supporting ships that exceed 1,180 feet and that carry an excess
of 13,000 teu. As the first excerpt discusses, this is triple the
capacity of ships that transited the Canal before its renovation.
Since its inauguration in 2016, over 1,500 ships have sailed
through the canal, exceeding all expectations for the first 12
months of activity, and profits are soaring. The Fitch Ratings
agency asserts that the increase in traffic and revenue of the
Panama Canal should have a sustained positive effect on the
country’s growth profile, fiscal position, and external accounts.
As the second accompanying passage discusses, Fitch claims
that the volume of traffic through the Canal in the first full
year of operations (from July 2016 to June 2017) rose 17.6%
compared to the previous 12-month period. Meanwhile, toll
revenues are on the rise and the Panama Canal currently
represents approximately 8% of worldwide maritime commerce;
an increase of 3% from just one year ago. As the final passage
points out, even though the canal’s expansion cost more than
originally forecasted, the investment is proving worthwhile and
should continue to benefit the country for decades to come. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Panamá inauguró la ampliación del Canal: costó 5.450 millones
de dólares (Panama Inaugurated the Expansion of the Canal at a 5.4 Billion
Cost),” La nación, 26 June 2016. http://www.lanacion.com.ar/1912822panama-inauguro-la-ampliacion-del-canal-costo-5450-millones-de-dolares
The Panama Canal expansion involved installation of a third rail in
order to allow larger ships such as the “neopanamax,” with up to 13,000
containers to pass through. This expansion tripled previous capacity of
the Canal which can currently accommodate ships measuring more than
1,180 feet. In regards to the new locks, they are 427 meters long, 55 meters
wide, and 18.3 meters deep. Installation required 4.4 million cubic meters of
concrete, 16 gates that together weigh 50,000 tons, and the labor of 30,000
individuals over nine years.
Source: “Fitch Ratings reafirma por segundo año consecutivo calificación
“A” del Canal de Panamá (Fitch Ratings Reaffirms for Second Consecutive
Year Panama Canal’s “A” Rating),” Telemetro, 31 August 2017. http://
www.telemetro.com/nacionales/Fitch-Ratings-calificacion-CanalPanama_0_1058895073.html
International ratings agency Fitch Ratings affirmed the Panama Canal
Authority’s (ACP) A investment grade rating with a stable outlook, for its
long-term issues default and senior unsecured notes, for the second year.
The ratings reflect an underlying asset that is critical not only for Panama,
but for international commerce, as demonstrated by its stable volume which
actually increased by 17.5 percent in 2017. The same ratings also encompass
increased revenue generated through higher tolls which puts the Canal
in a more competitive position that has proven to be largely resilient to
economic downturns,” the rating agency said in a report.

Source: “El sector logístico impulsa la economía (Logistics Sector Boosts the Economy),” La Prensa, 13 September 2017. http://impresa.
prensa.com/economia/sector-logistico-impulsa-economia_0_4847515304.html
The Panamanian GDP is on the rise in large part due to the Panama Canal expansion because it has resulted in increased volume which in turn,
generates more toll earnings. Additionally, port activity is up with a reported 13.4 percent increase in container movement. The director of the
National Statistics and Census Institute, David Saied, said that “if Panama maintains its current rate of growth into 2018, it will be the country
with the highest per capita GDP in Latin America.”

“The Panamanian GDP is on the rise in large part due to the Panama Canal expansion... if Panama
maintains its current rate of growth into 2018, it will be the country with the highest per capita GDP in
Latin America.”

New Panama Canal Agua Clara locks (Atlantic side).

Source: US DOT via Wikimedia Commons, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:New_Panama_Canal.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | November 2017

47

LATIN AMERICA
China’s Economic and Strategic Moves in Latin America
OE Watch Commentary: China’s ventures in Latin America are
booming. Since 2000, China’s trade with Latin American countries
has increased by a factor of 22. To put this in context, trade between
the United States and the region has only doubled in that time period.
China is now the largest trading partner for Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
El Salvador and Guatemala; due especially to its huge demand for
food, oil and other raw materials. The accompanying passages from
Latin American sources discuss some trends regarding China’s
activities in Latin America.
As the first accompanying excerpt discusses, recently there are
signs that China’s interest in the region may be switching from food,
oil and raw materials to infrastructure and services. For example, as
the second passage discusses, China is backing a planned waterway
in Nicaragua that aims to compete with the Panama Canal. The new
170-mile facility aims to be twice as deep as its famous rival and
form an important new trade route.
China also lends a significant amount of cash to countries in the
region -- around $30 billion in 2015, up from $231 million in 2005.
Thus far, the funds come with mostly no strings attached. As the
third passage points out, these investments created at least 1.8 million
new jobs between 1990 and 2016. Simply put, Chinese presence in
Latin America is growing by leaps and bounds, and deserves close
analysis. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “China profundiza su apuesta por América Latina
(China Deepens Its Bet in Latin America),” El País, 17 June
2017. https://economia.elpais.com/economia/2017/06/15/
actualidad/1497560655_900574.html
Something seems to be changing in China’s approach to Latin
America. Although the country’s appetite for raw materials — mostly
oil and mining — is still significant, it has given way gradually to a
growing interest in other sectors, such as infrastructure and services,
according to data from the latest study of the Academic Network of
Latin America and the Caribbean on China, recently presented in
Mexico City.
Source: “El canal fantasma de Nicaragua (The Ghost canal of
Nicaragua),” El País, 22 February 2017. https://elpais.com/
elpais/2017/02/10/planeta_futuro/1486758466_852892.html
In 2013, the Nicaraguan government granted the concession for the
construction of an inter-oceanic canal to the private Chinese company
HKND, directed by entrepreneur Wang Jing, through the adoption
of Law 840, also known as the Canal Act: a concession granted with
no bidding process, exempt from all taxation, exclusive for 50 years,
and one that can be extended by another 50 for the development of the
canal, with other seven sub-projects such as ports, trade regions, an
oil pipeline and an airport, among others.

“Something seems to be changing in China’s approach to Latin America.

Although the country’s appetite

for raw materials — mostly oil and mining — is still significant, it has given way gradually to a growing
interest in other sectors, such as infrastructure and services...”

Official Photograph, China and Latin American/Caribbean Leaders’ Summit, 2014.

Source: Chilean Government via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Foro_China-Celac_2014_(14661316116).jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.

Source: “Comercio, inversiones y proyectos de China generan 1,8 milliones de empleos (China’s Investments, Projects and Trade Helped
Create 1.8 Million Jobs),” El Nacional, 11 September 2017. http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/economia/comercio-inversiones-proyectoschina-generan-millones-empleos_202991
The International Labor Organization presented the first report on the effects of the economic relations between China, Latin America, and the
Caribbean, related to jobs in the region. Between 1990 and 2016, at least 1.8 million new jobs were created as a result of activities such as trade,
investment and infrastructure projects, the study says. This number represents almost 4 percent of the jobs created in the region during that
period, but potentially understates the actual amount.
OE Watch | November 2017

48

LATIN AMERICA
Mexican and Cuban Responses to
North Korea’s Nuclear Tests
OE Watch Commentary: The Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea
(DPRK) has maintained diplomatic relations with Cuba since 1960 and Mexico
since 1980. The accompanying passages contrast North Korea’s relations with Cuba
and Mexico following the country’s nuclear tests. While relations with Mexico took
a turn for the worse, relations with Cuba appear to be going strong.

Source: “North Korea Envoy Expelled From Mexico
Relocates to Cuba,” Milenio.com, 14 September 2017.
http://www.milenio.com/politica/corea_del_nortepersona_no_grata-mexico_expulsa_a_embajador_
corea-milenio-noticias_0_1030097316.html

As the first excerpt from a Mexican source notes, the North Korean ambassador
to Mexico was expelled “as a reprisal for the nuclear tests conducted by North
Korea.” While Mexico and the DPRK have not officially broken diplomatic
relations, the decision followed a call from the US government for Latin American
countries to “break off diplomatic and commercial relations with the Asian nation.”
Kim Hyong-gill, DPRK’s ambassador to Mexico was declared unwelcome in
Mexico on 8 September and he departed for Havana, Cuba on 14 September.

North Korea’s ambassador to Mexico Kim Hyonggil, who was expelled by the Mexican government last
week in protest against a 3 September North Korean
nuclear test, flew to the Cuban capital Havana where
he would remain exercising his functions as concurrent
ambassador in the countries of the Central American
region…

In contrast, the DPRK and Cuba celebrated their 69th year of mutual support at
a reception at the DPRK embassy on 19 September. As the second excerpt from a
North Korean source explains, during the reception, Kim Yong Dae, vice-president
of the Presidium of the Supreme People’s Assembly, declared that “the peoples of
the two countries have supported and cooperated with each other in the common
struggle for socialism against imperialism and the US and created the sincerest
and durable history of friendship.” The article suggests that DPRK-Cuban relations
continue to be strong, pointing out that the DPRK intends to “extend full support
and solidarity to the struggle of the fraternal Cuban people” and to continue
working towards socialist objectives. End OE Watch Commentary (Kelsay)

Mexico’s government declared Kim “persona nongrata” on 8 September and gave him 72 hours to leave
the country, but his departure to Cuba was delayed
until 14 September because Havana’s Jose Marti
International Airport was closed due to the impact of
Hurricane Irma…
It noted the expulsion took place as a reprisal for the
nuclear tests conducted by North Korea and after the
United States government called on the countries of
Latin America to break off diplomatic and commercial
relations with the Asian nation.

“... the Korean people would ... extend full support and solidarity to the struggle of the fraternal Cuban
people to frustrate the US vicious moves against Cuba…”
Source: Cuban Ambassador Gives Reception,” Pyongyang KCNA, 19 September 2017. http://www.kcna.co.jp/item/2017/201709/
news19/20170919-23ee.html
Cuban Ambassador to the DPRK Jesus De Los Angeles Aise Sotolongo gave a reception at the embassy on Tuesday to celebrate the 69th
anniversary of the DPRK….
…Jesus De Los Angeles Aise Sotolongo said at the reception that the DPRK is demonstrating its dignity as a prosperous and powerful socialist
country under the dynamic and seasoned guidance of respected Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un. The Korean people’s life is improving day by day
despite the unreasonable UNSC’s sanctions, he noted, adding that Cuba will always stand by the DPRK despite difficulties and trials and support
the Korean people in their cause of justice.
Kim Yong Dae in his speech noted that the peoples of the two countries have supported and cooperated with each other in the common struggle
for socialism against imperialism and the US and created the sincerest and durable history of friendship. He said that the Korean people would
as ever extend full support and solidarity to the struggle of the fraternal Cuban people to frustrate the US vicious moves against Cuba, reliably
defend the gains of socialism and carry through the decision of the 7th Party Congress.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | November 2017

49

ASIA-PACIFIC
The Hulunhu: Another Step Forward for
China’s Global Military Expansion
OE Watch Commentary: The Chinese Navy recently took another
step toward becoming a global, blue-water force by commissioning
a new supply ship. The Hulunhu (965), Type 901, will be joining the
Chinese aircraft carrier fleet around the end of 2018. The ship is now
the largest supply ship in Asia, and is expected to more than double
the combat radius of China’s aircraft carrier, reaching as far as Hawaii.
The Hulunhu is said to have a greater load capacity for oil, water, and
ammunition. It is also faster than previous Chinese supply ships. The
accompanying passages from the Chinese press discuss the ship and
China’s needs for more overseas ports and replenishment bases.
According to Ni Lexiong, a Shanghai-based military expert, the
supply ship could be deployed to support warships on missions around
the world. Lexiong also notes that China needs more overseas ports
to strengthen the navy’s long-range capabilities. Xu Guangyu, a
retired rear admiral and senior advisor to China Arms Control and
Disarmament Association, also says that China needs more overseas
replenishment bases and at least 10 more support ships to sustain
its missions and combat capacity. Guangyu notes that China may
build logistics bases in West Africa and Pakistan. When this will
happen is not known. For now, as the third article explains, China is
beefing up its current overseas military base in Djibouti by building
a multi-purpose wharf there. The wharf will allow a four-ship flotilla,
which would include China’s new generation Type 901 supply ship,
destroyers, frigates, and amphibious assault ships “for combat and
humanitarian missions” to dock there. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

“The combat radius of China’s aircraft carrier
could at least be doubled with the Hulunhu, and it
would be capable of reaching Hawaii.”
Source: Viola Zhou and Sarah Zheng, “China Commissions
New Naval Supply Ship,” South China Morning Post, 1 August
2017. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/
article/2105010/china-commissions-new-naval-supply-ship
The new supply ship has almost double the displacement tonnage of
the Type 903 supply ships currently being used for escort and antipiracy missions off Somalia.

Aircraft Carrier Liaoning CV-16 at Hong Kong Waters.

Source: Baycrest - Wikipedia user - 維基百科用戶, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aircraft_Carrier_Liaoning_CV-16.jpg ,CC BY SA 2.5.

Source: Liu Caiyu, “Chinese Navy Gets New Comprehensive Supply
Ship, Asia’s Largest,” Global Times, 6 September 2017. http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/1065090.shtml
The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Navy’s new supply ship is Asia’s
largest and will allow China’s aircraft carrier fleet to fight further
afield.
The first Type 901 combat support ship, the Hulunhu (965), will form
part of the Chinese aircraft carrier fleet.
“The combat radius of China’s aircraft carrier could at least be
doubled with the Hulunhu, and it would be capable of reaching
Hawaii,” Xu Guangyu, a retired rear admiral and senior adviser
to the China Arms Control and Disarmament Association, told the
Global Times.
The Hulunhu has a greater load capacity for oil, water and
ammunition, and is also faster, to compensate for the shortcomings of
the aircraft carrier. Previous supply ships were smaller and slower,
Xu said.
Xu said China’s future aircraft carrier fleets will sail to wherever
Chinese interests are located, including the Indian and Atlantic
oceans.
“China’s navy might need at least 10 more such ships to support
aircraft carriers as well other naval fleets,” Xu said.

Ni Lexiong, a Shanghai-based military expert, said the supply ship
could be deployed to support warships on missions around the world.

More support ships and replenishment bases overseas are needed to
sustain the Chinese navy’s oceanic missions and combat capacity, Xu
said.

But he said China still needed more overseas ports to strengthen the
navy’s long-range capabilities.

Logistics bases may also be built in West Africa and Pakistan, Xu
added.

Source: Minnie Chan, “China Plans to Build Djibouti Facility to Allow Naval Flotilla to Dock at First Overseas Base,” South China Morning
Post, 27 September 2017. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2112926/china-plans-build-djibouti-facility-allow-naval
China is planning to build a multi-purpose wharf that would allow a naval flotilla to dock at its first overseas military base in Djibouti,
according to military sources.
“Projects such as the multi-purpose naval wharf are complicated. The Chinese navy needs a large-scale pier to offer logistical support for
its flotillas conducting anti-piracy operations in Somali waters,” the source said.
“The scale of the wharf should allow for the docking of a four-ship flotilla at least, including China’s new generation Type-901 supply ship
with a displacement of more than 40,000 tonnes, destroyers and frigates, as well as amphibious assault ships for combat and humanitarian
missions.”
OE Watch | November 2017

50

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Casts a Heavy Hand in Exploration of Oil and Gas
OE Watch Commentary: In 2011, a representative
from the Philippine Department of Energy (DOE)
announced that the Philippines hoped to become 60%
energy self-sufficient by 2024. Two potential petroleum
blocks within the South China Sea looked promising to
contributing to this goal. However, due to tensions with
China over territorial claims in the area, the DOE issued
a moratorium on all exploration and drilling in what is
known as Service Contracts (SC) 72 and 75 in 2014 and
2015 respectively.
The two Service Contracts fall within the Philippine’s
exclusive economic zone. According to Article 56
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, “In the exclusive economic zone, the coastal
State has sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring
and exploiting, conserving and managing the natural
resources… such as the production of energy from the
water, currents and winds.” Despite the law, China
lays claim to the territory, even ignoring a 2016 ruling
by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague,
which gave the Philippines sovereign rights to access the
petroleum fields.
Now, according to the accompanying article, the
Chinese government will allow exploration of oil and
gas resources, but only “if joint commercial development
of the petroleum blocks would be agreed upon by both
governments.” The article quotes Chinese Ambassador
to the Philippines Zhao Jianhua as saying, “We are
in favor of joint development and we are not in favor
of unilateral development of oil and gas in disputed
areas.” Agreements have already reportedly been signed
between state-run Philippine National Oil CompanyExploration Corporation and the Chinese National
Offshore Oil Corporation for some development
initiatives in the area. It will be interesting to see how
big of a stake China ends up taking in what seemed
to have belonged to the Philippines. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“We are in favor of joint development
and we are not in favor of unilateral
development of oil and gas in disputed
areas.”
- Chinese Ambassador to the
Philippines Zhao Jianhua

Map of the South China Sea, with 9-dotted line highlighted in green.

Source:: U.S. Central Intelligence Agency via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3A9_dotted_line.png, Public Domain

Source: Myrna M. Velasco, “China Sets Condition on Lifting of Moratorium
on Oil/Gas Exploration,” Manila Bulletin, 1 October 2017. https://business.
mb.com.ph/2017/09/30/china-sets-condition-on-lifting-of-moratorium-on-oilgasexploration/
The Chinese government will concur to the lifting of the moratorium on
exploration of oil and gas resources within the so-called “disputed areas” if joint
commercial development of the petroleum blocks would be agreed upon by both
governments.
Nevertheless, he [Chinese Ambassador to the Philippines Zhao Jianhua]
forthrightly stated that “our position is quite clear: We are in favor of joint
development and we are not in favor of unilateral development of oil and gas in
disputed areas.”
Talks on the lifting of moratorium on exploration and development at petroleum
blocks on what have been classified “disputed territories,” according to [Philippine
Energy Secretary] Cusi, are only confined on bilateral discussions between the two
governments – with the Philippines led by the Department of Foreign Affairs

OE Watch | November 2017

51

ASIA-PACIFIC
PLA Attempts to Attract Higher-Quality Recruits
by Peter Wood
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 12, dated 21 September 2017, Edited for
OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/pla-attempts-to-attract-higher-quality-recruits/

OE Watch Commentary: China’s annual conscription period ended in late August. This year’s newest
group of PLA recruits was reportedly among the worst in recent memory, with widespread reportage
across Chinese and international media about the recruits’ health issues. As the first passage from the
Chinese military’s official newspaper notes, “One [unnamed] city’s physical exam washout rate for
conscripts was 56.9 percent—enough to leave one speechless.” Recruits were overweight, inactive or
psychologically unfit.
Conscription, which began in early May, accepts young men and women between the ages of 18–22
and forms the bulk of the PLA. Conscripts serve for two years, before leaving the PLA or advancing
to become Non-Commissioned Officers. Recruits for the PLA’s officer track are brought in at the same
time. According to the Chinese Ministry of Education, over 1,070,000 college students signed up for
PLA in 2017, an increase of 5.6 percent over last year. Only a fraction of these will make it into the
PLA.
Those that do join will increasingly be representative of how China’s changing demographics and
transitioning economy are having an impact on its ability to attract high-quality recruits. Although
China’s One Child Policy was ended in 2015, it will continue to have a lingering effect on the PLA—
most recruits for the next 15 years will likely not have siblings. The policy also contributed to China’s
dramatic population aging, which according to some estimates will lead to there being two retired
people for every working-class person by 2050. Population aging could have a chilling effect on
recruitment, as more young people are needed in the workforce, with higher paying jobs, to support
their parents.
As the PLA modernizes and adopts more sophisticated equipment, higher levels of education among
recruits are necessary. To attract more highly educated students the PLA has created a number of
incentives. One of the pathways for college students, “National Defense Students”—somewhat similar
to Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) in the United States—are an increasingly important
proportion of PLA recruits.
In addition to financial incentives, the PLA has borrowed from the Pentagon’s Hollywood playbook
and invested in TV series and movies targeted directly at encouraging young people to sign up. In late
July CCTV premiered the PLA Navy-focused Sharp Sword of the Deep, a 34-episode series following
a group of young college students from their recruitment into the Submarine Force through training
and eventually to performing missions escorting PLAN surface ships on anti-piracy missions. The
series, which received direct support from China’s South Sea Fleet and the Submarine Academy in
Qingdao, directly addresses issues such as China’s changing class structure and attempts to make the
navy life appealing to a broad audience. The series is indicative of the PLA’s willingness to spend
significant amounts to reach young Chinese through popular television.
Not to be left out, the Chinese Air Force is involved in the production of the big-budget Sky Hunter, a
blockbuster film to be released this fall. As the second accompanying passage notes, one of the film’s
producers, a former PLAAF officer says, “The original intention of the PLA Air Force to produce
this movie is simple. We don’t intend to make money; we want to use it to tell the people, especially
the youth, what the PLA Air Force is like and what it can do to protect the country in this era and the
future.”
These TV series and movies, as with earlier productions such as Soldiers’ Sortie, appear to be having
an effect and are widely cited as helping inspire young Chinese to join the PLA. China’s economic
situation is also helping incentivize more young people to join the PLA. Since hitting a five-year low
in 2014, Chinese youth unemployment is again rising—it has stood at over 10 percent since 2010. With
financial incentives and the chance for specialized training, the PLA remains a decent option for many
Chinese youths.
To achieve China’s “strong military dream” the PLA is going to have to continue to invest heavily
in its people: providing more financial incentives, job training, and better living standards. For the
majority of people in China, life has improved dramatically in the past 20 years, but prosperity is
bringing its own challenges, with associated health problems from richer foods, and demographic
problems due to the One Child Policy. These longer-term trends have the potential to undercut the
PLA’s strength just as it makes major strides in improving training, equipment, and technological
development. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“...to tell the people,
especially the youth, what the
PLA Air Force is like and what
it can do to protect the country
in this era and the future.”
Source: Liu Dong “保家卫国，多想
想’我们是谁’” (To ‘Defend the Home,
Guard the Country’, Think About “Who
Are We?”),” 解放军报 PLA Daily, 28
October 2017. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/
content/2017-08/28/content_186595.htm
“One [unnamed] cities’ physical exam
washout rate for conscripts was 56.9
percent—enough to leave one speechless.”
Source: Yang Sheng, “PLA aims to inspire
youth with use of advanced aircraft,
weapons in Sky Hunter,” Global Times, 10
September 2017. http://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/1065693.shtml
Lieutenant Colonel Zhang Li, a producer
of Sky Hunter as well as an officer of the
PLA Air Force, told the Global Times
that “the original intention of the PLA
Air Force to produce this movie is simple.
We don’t intend to make money; we want
to use it to tell the people, especially the
youth, what the PLA Air Force is like and
what it can do to protect the country in
this era and the future.”
“Unfortunately, in the past, we didn’t
treat the publicity seriously, and we
didn’t produce successful films to shape
the air force’s image among the people.
Interestingly, many young people who
applied to become PLA fighter jet pilots
were inspired by US-made Hollywood
movies like Top Gun. Therefore, we have
to produce a movie about the PLA Air
Force that can touch the heart of our own
people,” Zhang said.
According to the trailer of the film, the
PLA Air Force has used its advanced
aircraft and main combat weapons
to support the filming. The fighter jets
including J-20, J-10C, J-11, J-11B and
J-16 can be seen in the trailer. Some
foreign fighter jets like US-made F-15 and
France-made Mirage are also displayed
in the air combat with the PLA fighter jets.

OE Watch | November 2017

52

ASIA-PACIFIC
China: The J-20 Enters Official Military Service
OE Watch Commentary: In late 2010, photos that circulated
in domestic Chinese blogs, and then international news outlets
prompted the question of whether the Chinese had produced a
stealth aircraft. Later, it was determined that the photos were of
a prototype of a stealth aircraft, the Chengdu J-20, which was
undergoing flight testing. This has been the subject of a major
international debate concerning air superiority and stability in
East Asia. The question of the new Chinese fighter jet’s combatreadiness was finally answered on 28 September, when the J-20
officially entered military service.
According to the accompanying passage from an official Chinese
military news source, Wu Qian, spokesman for the Ministry of
Defense, was asked by a reporter about when the J-20 fighter would
enter service. Wu responded to the reporter that the aircraft had
entered service on that day, with test flights going well and “on
schedule” making “smooth progress.” The same reporter, in the
initial question, also brought-up rumors surrounding China’s plans
to build a domestic fighter engine, known as the “Taihang,” but no
specific comment was offered by Wu.
Both developments offer significant insight into how China
is viewing its relative position globally, especially in the area of
airpower. The J-20 demonstrates China’s successful advances in
developing a fifth-generation stealth aircraft. China’s technological
gap with the US is narrowing, with regional and global implications
for defense and conflict readiness. Further, China is moving away
from its principle engine supplier, Russia, toward the development
of domestically-built engines on its military aircraft, which will
give China greater independence in military manufacturing.
What remains unclear is the number of deployable stealth aircraft
that China has at its disposal. The second excerpt indicates that
as of mid-June this year, China had produced at least 20 of these
aircraft. More are likely on the way. End OE Watch Commentary
(Shanks)

“Wu Qian: Presently, the J-20 has entered into
military service, with test flight work on schedule and
making smooth progress.”
Source: “9月28日一分钟阅尽天下军情 (28 September One-Minute
to Review World Military Intelligence),” XinhuaNet—Military
News, 29 September 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/mil/201709/29/c_129714234.htm
Reporter Asks Wu Qian about the J-20 and “Taihang” Engine
Reporter: The fourth generation (sic) stealth fighter J-20 has received
frequent exposure since its Zhuhai Airshow debut, I would like to
ask when the J-20 will enter service? In the past few days, the first
photographs of the 2021 J-20 began to circulate extensively online,
some reports claim that the machine has already had the domestic
“Taihang” engine installed. Can you please comment and introduce the
relevant information?
“Wu Qian: Presently, the J-20 has entered into military service, with
test flight work on schedule and making smooth progress.”
Source: “中国已启动第三条歼20战机生产线 总产量已超20架
(China has Started the Third Production Line of the J-20 Fighter, with
Total Production Exceeding 20),” Sina—Military News, 14 June 2017.
http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/jssd/2017-06-14/doc-ifyfzfyz3941865.shtml
Now as for China’s J-20, this new achievement is entirely attributable
to China’s independent technological creation, there is no price
problem, nor subject to human error, which is why as of now, only 15
production models have appeared. In addition to this, moving forward
(in testing) are at least 7 other planes. So, there is no doubt that China
now has more than 22 J-20s. Now, reportedly the third J-20 production
line has already been launched, and the fourth production line will
also soon begin trial production. By next year, China will have four
production lines at full speed producing the J-20 model.

China’s J-20 stealth fighter.

Source: Times by Asi, https://goo.gl/W4rdUt, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | November 2017

53

ASIA-PACIFIC
China and Russia Donating Arms to the Philippine
Military
OE Watch Commentary: The
Philippine media is reporting that both
China and Russia are donating weapons
to the Armed Forces of the Philippines.
According to the first article, China
recently donated 3,000 assault rifles. Some
time prior to the donation from China,
the Philippines had tried to purchase
26,000 firearms from a US dealer, but the
article states that this delivery was taking
too long. Meanwhile, according to the
second article, Russia is donating 5,000
Kalashnikov Rifles and 20 large Army
trucks.
Both articles describe China’s and
Russia’s motivation to donating the arms
as a desire to help the smaller Asian
country fight the terrorism that is plaguing
Duterte and Russian President Vladimir Putin meeting in Moscow, May 23, 2017.
it. According to the first article, Chinese
Source:: Kremlin.ru, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_international_presidential_trips_made_by_Rodrigo_Duterte#/media/File:Meeting_of_Vladimir_Putin_with_the_President_of_the_Philippines_
Rodrigo_Duterte.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.
Ambassador Zhao Jianhua explained that,
“efforts to combat terrorism in the country would result in peace and stability in the Asian region.” According to the second article, Russia
wants to help fight terrorism in the world because it suffers from terror too.
While China’s and Russia’s intentions are under the guise of serving a greater cause, it is hard to ignore the facts. Since Rodrigo Duterte
took office in the Philippines in 2016, he has been striving to distance his country from US influence and aid. This offers a prime opportunity
for China and Russia to step in to try to further cut the cord between the US and the Philippines, thereby increasing their own influence in
Southeast Asia. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“…the turnover of the rifles is ‘another demonstration of the commitment we [China] have to friendly and
cooperative relations with the Philippines.”
Source: Jaime Laude, “PNP to Get Second Batch of Rifles from China,” Philippine Star, 5 October 2017. http://www.philstar.com/
headlines/2017/10/06/1745995/pnp-get-second-batch-rifles-china
The 3,000 assault rifles, donated by China to the Philippine military yesterday will be handed over to the Philippine National Police (PNP) as
ordered by President (Rodrigo) Duterte, Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said.
“If you remember, the PNP tried to buy 26,000 firearms from a dealer in the US but it has taken them too long to deliver,” Lorenzana said,
pointing out that China is also there to meet this urgent requirement.
The first batch of assault weapons are currently being used by the PNP’s elite Special Action Force (SAF) fighting alongside the military in
Marawi City against the Maute-Islamic State terrorists. It is also being used in counter-insurgency, maritime protection, and all police antidrug operations.
China’s ambassador Zhao Jianhua said the turnover of the rifles is “another demonstration of the commitment we have to friendly and
cooperative relations with the Philippines.”
He hopes that the efforts to combat terrorism in the country would result in peace and stability in the Asian region.
Source: Trisha Macas, “Russia to Give 5K Kalashnikov Rifles, 20 Army Trucks for PHL’s Anti-Terror Efforts – Dut,” GMA News, 11 October
2017. http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/news/nation/629161/russia-to-give-5k-kalashnikov-rifles-20-army-trucks-for-phl-s-anti-terrorefforts-duterte/story
President Rodrigo Duterte on Wednesday said weapons from Russia would be arriving in the Philippines soon.
“Five thousand sa inyo baril, Kalashnikov…It’s useless keeping it a secret…” (said Duterte).
(Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana) could not say how much all the equipment was worth, but it would come with no strings attached.
“They want to help us fight terrorism. They also fight terrorism in their own country and want to help the world to fight against terrorism.
That is their reason,” Lorenzana said.
OE Watch | November 2017

54

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Supports Duterte’s Drug War
OE Watch Commentary: Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte has been
very vocal about launching a war on illegal drugs in the country. Although
the drug war has received criticism from various countries for its excesses,
China has been a donor of firearms and ammunition to the Philippine
National Police (PNP) to support Duterte’s efforts.
According to the accompanying passage from manilatimes.com on 5
October, the Philippine Defense Secretary said that the PNP initially tried
to buy arms from dealers in the US but the delivery was taking too long.
The Defense Secretary considers the PNP lucky to have then received
such arms from the Chinese government. According to the article, the
US halted arms to the PNP due to concerns about how the war on illegal
drugs was being prosecuted. The arms from China were reportedly worth
$3.3 million. The Defense Secretary also said that a small portion of the
arms from China, such as sniper scopes, would be retained by the military
for counter-terrorism purposes, including prosecuting the battle against
militants supporting the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in Marawi.
The article also quotes the Chinese ambassador to the Philippines,
who claims that the transfer was a demonstration of the two countries’
commitments to fighting terrorism and securing regional peace and
stability together. Specifically, the ambassador cited good relations between
Duterte and Chinese President Xi Jinping and the two countries’ militaries
as a reason for the transfer of arms. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “PNP share of China arms, ammo to beef up drug war,”
manilatimes.net, 5 October 2017. http://www.manilatimes.net/
pnp-share-china-arms-ammo-beef-drug-war/354789/
Some of the donated firearms and ammunition turned over by
Beijing to Manila will be used by the Philippine National Police
(PNP) in the Duterte administration’s war on illegal drugs,
according to Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana. Lorenzana
said, “If you remember, the PNP tried to buy 26,000 firearms
from dealers in the United States but it has taken them too long
to deliver, so we are lucky that the Chinese government provided
firearms.” In November 2016, the US government halted delivery
of firearms to the PNP, arguing that it would only be used in the
war on illegal drugs that the US has been criticizing.
The assault rifles and the ammunition will be distributed to
the PNP and they may also be used by the police for counterinsurgency, counter-terrorism and maritime security. The
sniper scopes will be used in sniper rifles that are being used by
government troops against the terrorist Maute Group in Marawi
City, Lanao del Sur. Chinese Ambassador to the Philippines
Zhao Jianhua, in the news conference said that the handover of
the guns and ammunition signifies that China is committed to
friendship and cooperation with the Philippines.

“Chinese Ambassador to the Philippines, Zhao Jianhua... said the handover of the guns and ammunition
signifies that China is committed to friendship and cooperation with the Philippines.”

President Duterte meets Chinese ambassador Zhao Jianhua.

Source: Presidential Communications Operations Office via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:President_Duterte_meets_Chinese_ambassador_Zhao_Jianhua.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | November 2017

55

ASIA-PACIFIC
ISIS Exploiting Crisis in Myanmar
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Malaysian Assistant Director of Counter-Terrorism, the crisis in Rakhine State, Myanmar, is
serving as a recruitment tool for the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). As the accompanying article from a Malaysian source discusses,
ISIS has been sharing photos of the violence in Myanmar on the Internet to generate sympathy for the Muslim Rohingya people as a way of
targeting potential new recruits. The Assistant Director also says that Malaysia’s proximity to Myanmar provides an opportunity for ISIS to
recruit Malaysians and spread its influence to Rakhine, adding that Rakhine has become the newest destination for jihad in Southeast Asia.
Nonetheless, so far only one Malaysian, according to the article, has been reported arrested for traveling to Myanmar to fight. That fighter,
however, also had plans to fight for ISIS in the Philippines, which shows the diversified threat in the Southeast Asia region. Although Syria
is a much more active theater than either Myanmar or the Philippines, the article says there are only four Malaysians in Syria believed to be
recruiting Malaysians at home. This is why the situation in Myanmar is concerning. At a time when the foreign fighter threat of Malaysians
in Syria has begun to decrease, the fighting in Myanmar and the Philippines has the potential to reinvigorate recruitment to jihadi groups in
Malaysia. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
Source: “ISIS Manfaatkan Krisis Rohingya untuk Jaring Anggota Baru (ISIS Exploits the Rohingya Crisis for Recruiting New Members),”
Today.line.me, 20 September 2017. https://today.line.me/id/pc/article/ISIS+Manfaatkan+Krisis+Rohingya+untuk+Jaring+Anggota+Baru-Xjl1v9
The ISIS terrorist group is increasingly being cornered in Iraq and Syria. International intelligence has revealed the possibility that ISIS
militants will return to their hometown and continue their terror activities. It also appears that the suffering of the Rohingyas in Rakhine,
Myanmar, which is the focus of the world’s attention, will be exploited by ISIS. Admittedly, according to the Malaysian security forces, a
number of ISIS sympathizers have called for ‘holy war’ in defending Rohingya Muslims. Assistant Director of Counter-Terrorism Division
Datuk Ayob Khan Mydin Pitchay said that ISIS militant groups have used the Rohingya crisis as a tool for recruiting new members.
The proximity of Myanmar’s location to Malaysia is an opportunity for ISIS to spread its influence to Rakhine. Malaysia is closer to
Myanmar and the Southern Philippines than Syria. Now Rakhine has become the newest destination for the ‘ jihad’.”

“...Rakhine has become the newest destination for the ‘ jihad’.”

Burnt down house in northern Rakhine State.

Source: Moe Zaw, via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Burnt_down_house_in_northern_Rakhine_State_(Moe_Zaw-VOA).jpg, Public Domain

OE Watch | November 2017

56

ASIA-PACIFIC
The Maute Group in Mindanao: Who They Are and
How They Operate
OE Watch Commentary: Since May 2017, there has been an ongoing battle over Marawi, the capital and
largest city of Lanao del Sur province on the southern Philippine island of Mindanao. The battle is being waged
between Philippine government security forces and militants who include the Maute group. The following
articles offer some insight on the terror group, its origins and strategies.
According to the first article, the Maute group first emerged in the town of Butig in the district of Lanao del
Sur over two years ago. Originally named Dawlah Islamiya, it was founded by brothers Omar and Abdulla
Maute, after they had worked as contractors in the Middle East, where they spent their free time studying
Islamic theology. The Maute group would go on to form links with the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters
in Maguindanao and, earlier this year, Abu Sayyaf. All three groups use the flag of the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) as their revolutionary banners, according to the article.
The second article describes the tactics and strategies used by the Maute
group as being similar to those used by ISIS. For example, under the
assumption that it will be difficult to dislodge a fighting force, “prepared for
urban warfare and occupying the built up portions of a city,” the Maute group
occupied the center of Marawi, in an area in which hundreds of medium-rise
concrete buildings, a church, and several mosques could be used as sniper
nests. This type of urban warfare has also helped them to hold on to the area
more tightly, with the only way to dislodge them being to turn the area into
rubble. They have also used hostages, civilian shields and religious buildings
to help protect them from the military’s assault.

“The occupation of

Marawi resembles the
strategy and tactics
used by ISIS when they
decided to overrun about
a dozen Syrian and Iraqi
cities including Raqqa
and Mosul.”

As of 22 October, reports have emerged saying that both the Maute brothers
have been killed and that the Marawi City siege was over. It is hard to tell whether or not there are other
members of the group still at large. However, earlier articles, such as the third article, have warned that the
group is planning to infiltrate other areas, replicating the attack in Marawi. Whether or not the group will be
able to rise up again, only time will tell. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)
Source: John Unson, “How Maute Group Came to be,”
Philippine Star, 25 May 2017. http://www.philstar.com/
headlines/2017/05/25/1703502/how-maute-group-came-be
The Maute terror group first emerged in Butig town in Lanao
del Sur more than two years ago, just as the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria in the Middle East started to hit the news.
Founded by siblings Omar and Abdulla Maute, the group was
originally named Dawlah Islamiya, but eventually became more
known as the Maute terror group, now feared for its impunity.
Omar and Abdullah are descendants of a big Maranaw warrior
clan in Butig, a hinterland town in the first district of Lanao del
Sur.
Omar and Abdullah were former contract workers in the Middle
East, who both studied Islamic theology in between works in
secular schools in Syria and in the United Arab Emirates.
Relatives said even before Omar and Abdullah organized the
Dawlah Islamiya, they already have links with the founder of the
Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters in Maguindanao, the late
Ustadz Ameril Umbra Kato.
Kato started as a commander in the MILF, but got booted in
2010 for insubordination and differences with members of their
central committee.
The Maute group and the Abu Sayyaf fused ranks early this
year, according to local officials in Lanao del Sur and sources in
the Army’s intelligence community.
The BIFF, the Abu Sayyaf and the Maute group have a
common denominator - that of using the black ISIS flag as their
revolutionary banners.

Co-Founders of the Maute group
TOP: Omar Maute, BOTTOM: Abdullah
Maute.

Source:: Philippine National Police, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Omar_and_Abdullah_Maute#/media/File:Omar_Maute.jpg and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omar_and_Abdullah_Maute#/media/
File:Abdullah_Maute.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Alex Magno, “Philippines: Frontline,” Philstar, 2 October 2017.
http://www.philstar.com/opinion/2017/10/03/1744994/frontline
By all indications, the battle to retake Marawi is winding down
dramatically. The threat posed by terrorism, however, will linger for a
while.
The occupation of Marawi resembles the strategy and tactics used
by ISIS when they decided to overrun about a dozen Syrian and Iraqi
cities including Raqqa and Mosul. The strategy is based on the sound
assumption that a fighting force, prepared for urban warfare and
occupying the built up portions of a city, will be very difficult to dislodge.
Mosul required over half a year of intense urban warfare to recover,
notwithstanding the uncontested air superiority and clear advantage in
weaponry enjoyed by Iraqi government forces.
The Maute fighters smartly occupied the built-up center of Marawi City.
They deployed a much larger force and had hundreds of medium-rise
concrete buildings, a church and several mosques to serve as sniper
nests. They have been holding fort for over four months now against an
intense military assault. Dislodging the Maute fighters required damaging
their concrete urban cover. The core of Marawi is now rubble. … the
Maute fighters also used hostages and religious buildings as protection
against the assault…”
Source: Victor Reyes, “Maute Planning Attacks in Other Areas: Army
Chief,” Malaya Business Insight Online, 5 October 2017. http://www.
malaya.com.ph/business-news/news/maute-planning-attacks-other-areasarmy-chief
Army chief Maj. Gen. Rolando Bautista yesterday said the Maute Group is
planning to “infiltrate” some areas and replicate its attack in Marawi City.
OE Watch | November 2017

57

ASIA-PACIFIC
New Group Presents Twist in Marawi Violence
OE Watch Commentary: For several months,
the Philippine military has been battling a faction of
militants loyal to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) in Marawi, Lanao del Sur. Despite a much longer
and bloodier battle than originally anticipated, the
fighting is coming to an end with the defeat of the proISIS faction. However, according to the excerpted article
from a Philippine source, a new group has emerged
which opposes both the Philippine military and the
pro-ISIS faction, adding a new element to peace and
reconciliation efforts.
According to the article, this new group, which calls
itself the Meranaw Victims Movement (MVM), is
demanding that the pro-ISIS faction release its hostages
in Marawi and leave the city. The group claims that
the pro-ISIS faction has abandoned the welfare of the
people and misinterpreted the concept of jihad in Islam.
Marawi peace corridor.
Source: Hariboneagle927, via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marawi_peace_corridor.svg, CC BY 2.0.
The group also demanded the government stop ordering
airstrikes in Marawi in order to spare the remaining buildings in the city and to allow civilians to return to their homes. The group also called
on the government to provide relief to civilians and repair destroyed religious and cultural buildings.
The group has already posted a video and statement on Facebook. The military, however, does not confirm the group’s strength or existence
beyond its social media proclamations. What is most important about this group is that its demands reflect some level of local sentiment after
weeks of the military battling the pro-ISIS faction and much of Marawi being destroyed. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“MVM [Meranaw Victims Movement] also urged the
government to provide support to wounded civilians and
pay compensation for the damaged houses and buildings
and other property.”

A building in Marawi is set ablaze by airstrikes carried out by the Philippine Air Force.
Source: Mark Jhomel, via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bombing_on_Marawi_City.jpg, CC 4.0.

Source: “New armed group after IS-inspired terrorists in
Marawi,” Newsinfo.inquirer.net, 20 September 2017. http://
newsinfo.inquirer.net/931907/new-armed-group-after-isinspired-terrorists-in-marawi
Provincial officials and the military have declined to
comment until they have ascertained who are behind
the new group that calls itself Meranaw Victims
Movement (MVM). MVM posted a statement on Facebook
demanding that the Maute group and Abu Sayyaf
terrorists holed up in Marawi free their hostages and
leave the city “at once”. Col. Romeo Brawnier, Joint
Task Force Group Marawi commander, said top military
officials in the region were trying to determine the
identities of the people behind the group, as well as the
source of the video that was posted on Facebook.
MVM demanded that President Duterte stop airstrikes
on Marawi to save “the houses or buildings that may
not have been destroyed yet” and to allow the return
of residents to areas of the city that had already been
cleared by the military. MVM also said the government
should ease access to southern Lanao del Sur towns and
“stop the abuses of some military and police personnel at
checkpoints, and accord respect to civilians, especially
the women.” MVM also urged the government to provide
support to wounded civilians and pay compensation for
the damaged houses and buildings and other property.

OE Watch | November 2017

58

ASIA-PACIFIC
Indonesian Foreign Fighters Return Home for
Assassination Missions
OE Watch Commentary: On 19 September, the
excerpted Indonesian-language source reported a
foiled assassination attempt of Indonesian President
Joko Widodo (Jokowi). According to the article, the
alleged assassin was an Indonesian who had returned
from fighting in Syria and Iraq. The article reports
that the suspect was arrested in Cirebon at a festival
that Jokowi was planning to attend, carrying weapons
and a letter from a jihadi group. Investigations were
ongoing as to whether the alleged assassin was part of
a broader terrorist network.
The police also reported that there are as many as
1,494 total Indonesian foreign fighters, with as many
as 310 men and 224 women having been deported
back to Indonesia from Syria and Iraq presumably
after surrendering or being captured. 84 Indonesians
have voluntarily returned from Syria and Iraq. The
relatively even proportion of men and women is a
Pemerintah Provinsi DKI Jakarta (Provincial Government of Jakarta), “Jokowi blusukan.”
reflection of Indonesian families traveling together
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Jokowi_blusukan.jpg, Public Domain.
to Syria and Iraq. Indonesian women, who have not
been allowed by ISIS to be fighters, have often been found by coalition forces in Syria when ISIS strongholds have been cleared.
In addition to Syria and Iraq, the police also now report on the presence of Indonesians in the Philippines as foreign fighters. According to
the article, the police count 32 Indonesian foreign fighters there and only two women. This may suggest that although the Philippines is nearer
to Indonesia than Syria and Iraq, it does not captivate the attention of aspiring Indonesian jihadists like Syria and Iraq does. However, the
lower numbers of Indonesians in the Philippines could also be because the Philippine military’s battles with pro-ISIS forces there only began
in mid-2017, whereas ISIS announced its caliphate from Syria and Iraq three years earlier, in 2014. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Indonesian police are increasing vigilance for potential terrorist attacks coming from Indonesian
citizens who have joined the Islamic State of Syria and Iraq (ISIS)...”

Source: “Polisi Selidiki Terduga Teroris yang Incar Jokowi di Cirebon (Police are investigating the suspicious man who was arrested when
Jokowi arrived in Cirebon),” Katadata.co.id, 19 September 2017. http://katadata.co.id/berita/2017/09/19/polisi-selidiki-terduga-teroris-yangincar-jokowi-di-cirebon
Police are investigating the suspicious man who was arrested when Jokowi arrived at Cirebon airport. Police said the suspect was carrying
a black backpack with a gun, knife, Molotov cocktail from a gasoline bottle, and a jihad invitation letter. Currently the Indonesian police are
increasing vigilance for potential terrorist attacks coming from Indonesian citizens who have joined the Islamic State of Syria and Iraq (ISIS)
in Iraq and Syria. Police Headquarters recorded as many as 1,494 Indonesian citizens suspected of being a foreign terrorist fighter (FTF) in
acts of terrorism in Syria, Iraq and the Philippines.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | November 2017

59

ASIA-PACIFIC
What’s in a Name?
OE Watch Commentary: This summer’s China-India standoff in Doklam
was international news for weeks. Meanwhile, both China and India
continue to spar using soft power in India’s northeastern state of Arunachal
Pradesh. The Chinese refer to the area in question as South Tibet and
consider it sovereign Chinese territory. The current de-facto border or Line
of Actual Control (LAC) is part of the British Imperial legacy and a line of
demarcation that China does not recognize. China claims all the territory
south as far as the plains of Assam at the foot of the Himalayan Mountains
that constitute much of Arunchal Pradesh.
The controversy became more pronounced in the spring when the
Dalai Lama made a pilgrimage to the famous Tawang Monastery. As the
accompanying passage from a Chinese source discusses, this was perceived
as an insult by the Chinese, who consider the Dalai Lama an agitator at best
and a secessionist who wants to free all of Chinese-held Tibet. A majority of
the inhabitants of Arunachal Pradesh are Monpa, considered cousins to the
Tibetans. In fact, the sixth Dalai Lama was born in Tawang and his home is
now a shrine. The people of Tawang take their commitment and connection
to the Dalai Lama seriously. The town abides by a citywide ordinance that
no meat and alcohol is to be served on Wednesdays-- because the current
Locator map of the Seven Sister States and Sikkim in India.
Source: by Jeroen, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SevenSisterStates.png, CC BY-SA 3.0.
Dalai Lama was born on a Wednesday. The Chinese responded to the Dalai Lama’s
visit to Tawang by publically changing the names of six cities and towns in Arunachal Pradesh, standardizing them with Chinese pronunciations
of Tibetan names.
Arunachal Pradesh is significant territory to both the Indians and Chinese. In the 1962 Sino-India War, Chinese forces drove across the LAC
in locations and advanced deep into Indian controlled Arunachal Pradesh. Indian forces were routed and suffered nearly 3,000 KIA. A month
later the Chinese pulled back across the LAC and there has not been any significant confrontation since then, but both sides continue to eye each
other with mistrust. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“China... will take further measures to safeguard China’s
territorial sovereignty and national security.”

Anti-aircraft Gun at 1962 India-China War Memorial ,Tawang.
Source: Dodge Billingsley. Author’s private collection. By Permission of Author.

Source: “中国增补藏南6地名 专
家：印度反应强烈再公布两批
(China to add six names in southern
Tibet; Experts: India reacted strongly
to the two batches),” News.ifeng.
com, 20 April 2017. http://news.ifeng.
com/a/20170420/50970144_0.shtml
Recently, India, despite the concern of
the Chinese, arranged for the 14th Dalai
Lama to visit the disputed area and
engage in activities in the eastern sector
of the Sino-Indian border. Political
remarks by the 14th Dalai Lama and
Indian officials provoked the Chinese
side. The 14th Dalai Lama’s trip has
long surpassed the so-called “religious
activities” of the Indian side, which
India has done to violate the Indian
government’s solemn promise on the
issue of Tibet and to properly resolve the
territorial dispute between China and
India through negotiations. This will
have an adverse effect. China has made
solemn representations to India and
will take further measures to safeguard
China’s territorial sovereignty and
national security.
OE Watch | November 2017

60

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
India Discussing Defense Reforms after Doklam
Standoff
OE Watch Commentary: The Doklam border standoff
between India and China that took place from 16 June to 28
August resulted in both sides pulling back their forces and
avoiding a war. While India points to the resolution of the
standoff as a diplomatic success, the accompanying excerpted
articles demonstrate how the incident is prompting more
discussions about ongoing defense reforms.
The first article from the independent English language news
website The Quint, looks at the recent history of reforms. The
author references the Shekatkar Committee, which former
Defense Minister Manohar Parrikar established in 2016. Led
by retired Lt Gen DB Shekatkar, the committee made several
recommendations, focused on improving combat capability and
rebalancing defense spending.
The author notes that “while 65 of the 99 recommendations
Tensions-between-India-and-China Doklam.
have been approved, the ones that really matter have not,
Source: Nilesh Shukla, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ATensions-between-india-and-china.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0..
and if the past is any guide, they will be simply shelved.” He
points to “the Arun Singh Committee in 1990,” “the Group of Ministers in 2001 and the Naresh Chandra Committee in 2012,” and how “all of
them were successfully subverted by the IAS (India Administrative Service)-dominated Ministry of Defence bureaucracy.” It is worth noting
that the article compares the reforms to those of China, not Pakistan. This does not mean that India views Pakistan as any less of a threat, but
the recent border dispute with China appears to be having an impact on ongoing defense reforms.
Lastly, the author proposes that India needs “a high-tech and mobile force which can be rapidly built up to counter local challenges along its
borders.” He notes that the Indian Army now has “two divisions which are being raised for the so-called Mountain Strike Corps,” but that it
would have been better to increase the “combat capability of the existing mountain divisions by adding attack and heavy-lift helicopters and
enhancing their mobile artillery capabilities.” The Shekatkar Committee put forth its recommendations before the Doklam standoff, but it will
be important to watch what impact the incident has on the reforms of the Indian Armed Forces.
The article from the Daily Excelsior, an English language newspaper in the city of Jammu, reports on a recent speech by General Bipin Rawat
at the Centre for Land Warfare Studies, a think tank which looks at defense and security issues with a focus on the Indian Army. General
Rawat, India’s Chief of Army Staff, believes that India “should be prepared for a two-front war” and warns that “these conflicts could be
limited in space and time or can expand into an all out war along the entire frontier, with Pakistan taking advantage of the situation.” General
Rawat notes that “the Army’s supremacy among the three services must be maintained to successfully combat external security threats.” India
viewing China as a threat is nothing new, but the speech demonstrates how the Doklam standoff has prompted discussion on how India should
be prepared to deal with it. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
Source: Joshi, Manoj. “Post Doklam, Army Needs Reforms That Have Been Stalled For Decades,” The Quint, 1 September 2017.
https://www.thequint.com/voices/opinion/reform-in-indian-army-after-doklam
The Indian Army has come out well in the Doklam crisis. But we should not exaggerate its actions…All the Army personnel had to do was
to walk down 100 metres or so from their dominant position in Doka La and confront a PLA road construction crew…This pithy version of
events is being deliberately exaggerated to make the point that we did not triumph in any military confrontation and that we should not draw
the wrong lessons from it. The Indian military has in the past decade strengthened its deterrent posture vis-à-vis China, but it needs to do
even more to confront the Chinese challenge which will only grow in the coming decade.
… While 65 of the 99 recommendations have been approved, the ones that really matter have not, and if the past is any guide, they will be
simply shelved, as has been done in the case of recommendations of two previous commissions…Ironically, India began its reform process
well before the Chinese. The idea of a tri-service chief was first mooted by the Arun Singh Committee in 1990. It was repeated by the Group
of Ministers in 2001 and the Naresh Chandra Committee in 2012. All of them were successfully subverted by the IAS-dominated Ministry of
Defence bureaucracy…
…What (India) needs is a high-tech and mobile force which can be rapidly built up to counter local challenges along its borders and deal
with contingencies beyond our borders. Unfortunately, the Indian military remains structured in the same way that it was thirty or even
forty years ago…So, it has simply added numbers, two divisions in 2009 and further two divisions which are being raised for the so-called
Mountain Strike Corps. It would have made much more sense to contain and indeed reduce the growth of personnel and, instead, begin
raising the combat capability of the existing mountain divisions by adding attack and heavy-lift helicopters and enhancing their mobile
artillery capabilities…

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2017

61

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Continued: India Discussing Defense Reforms after
Doklam Standoff
“It would have made much more sense to contain and indeed reduce the growth of personnel and,
instead, begin raising the combat capability of the existing mountain divisions by adding attack and heavylift helicopters and enhancing their mobile artillery capabilities.”
Source: “India must be prepared for 2-front war: Rawat,” Daily Excelsior, 6 September 2017. http://www.dailyexcelsior.com/india-mustprepared-2-front-war-rawat/
Army chief Gen Bipin Rawat today said the country should be prepared for a two-front war, insisting China has started “flexing its
muscles”, while there seems to be no scope for reconciliation with Pakistan…Referring to the 73-day long Dokalam standoff, the Army chief
warned that the situation could gradually snowball into a larger conflict on the northern border. He said there is a possibility that these
conflicts could be limited in space and time or can expand into an all out war along the entire frontier, with Pakistan taking advantage of the
situation…(he added) “…the Army’s supremacy among the three services must be maintained to successfully combat external security threats.
As far as northern adversary is concerned, the flexing of muscle has started. The salami slicing, taking over territory in a very gradual
manner, testing our limits of threshold is something we have to be wary about…”…He was speaking at a seminar organised by the Centre for
Land Warfare Studies.

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | November 2017

62

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Behind the Joint Exercises of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization
OE Watch Commentary: A number of changes have taken place within the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) over the
past several years, including amendments to the charter that allow for the organization to more easily deploy its Collective Operational
Reaction Force (CORF) to a conflict in a member state and to take part in UN peacekeeping missions. The accompanying excerpted articles
look at ongoing activities of the CSTO and offer contrasting viewpoints of the organization from member states at a time when tension
between Armenia and Azerbaijan remains high, fighting continues in Syria and Iraq, and Central Asian governments monitor the situation in
Afghanistan.
The first article from 1in.am, a Russian-language website in Armenia,
looks at the joint CSTO exercise “Interaction-2017.” The author does not
believe the cooperation in the exercise reflects the relationships member
states have with each other, claiming that “there are no unifying goals,
ideas or visions of CSTO members” and that the CSTO is “an instrument
of Moscow politics.” The points that the author brings up are worth
noting, particularly as the CSTO continues to conduct a series of joint
military exercises in the latter half of the year.

“On the same day when Armenian and Belarusian
soldiers take part in joint military exercises in
Armenia, the Defense Minister of Azerbaijan
discusses the need to strengthen AzerbaijaniBelarusian military cooperation in Minsk...”

The author questions relations between fellow CSTO members and asks for example, how Armenia and Kazakhstan can act harmoniously
if Kazakhstan “is ready to provide assistance to Azerbaijan over the issue of Karabakh.” He also points out the contradiction in Armenian
and Belarusian soldiers taking part in joint military exercises in Armenia, while “the Defense Minister of Azerbaijan discusses the need to
strengthen Azerbaijani-Belarusian military cooperation in Minsk.” Armenian government officials have criticized other CSTO members for their
security cooperation with Azerbaijan and not coming to the country’s defense against Azerbaijan, particularly following the April 2016 clash.
The article from Nezavisimaya Gazeta, the Russian daily newspaper, discusses CSTO exercises and how a series of them in October and
November will work through scenarios of “various armed conflicts and the organization of peacekeeping missions.” In past years, the annual
CSTO exercises noted in the article had common aspects, but this is the first year that they are “made up of several stages, each of which will
be carried out in the framework of a single plan.” The author notes how the exercise “Unbreakable Brotherhood – 2017” is being carried out as
“preparations for a peacekeeping operation by CSTO forces” in a non-member state and that it “could be Syria, Ukraine or other places where
CSTO members have common interests.” This shows how Russian media continues to promote a Russian-led peacekeeping mission in Syria
with CSTO members contributing forces. However, this does not appear likely, given that Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan declined to get involved
in Syria earlier this year. Ultimately, the articles show that the CSTO continues to prepare for various scenarios with the CORF, but members of
the organization appear to have become less inclined to provide support for fellow members. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
Source: Artsruni, Sargis. “Шантаж: кто в Армении
мишень военных учений ОДКБ? (Blackmail: who in
Armenia is the target of the CSTO’s military exercise?),”
1in.am, 10 October 2017. http://ru.1in.am/1201734.html
The CSTO joint military exercise “Interaction-2017,” of
the Collective Operational Reaction Forces and part of the
Joint Group of Forces of Russia and Armenia, started in
Armenia…these military exercises are geared toward the
forces of member states acting jointly and harmoniously…
how is it possible to ensure harmonious action of CSTO
members if the organization is one of the instruments of
Moscow politics?…An informed answer to this question
cannot be given by anyone, and not because it is a secret,
but because there are no unifying goals, ideas or visions of
CSTO members…
Members of the organization are brought (in) and held
exclusively by Russian blackmail. How can the Armed
Forces of Armenia and Kazakhstan act harmoniously if
Astana is ready to provide assistance to Azerbaijan over
the issue of Karabakh? On the same day when Armenian
and Belarusian soldiers take part in joint military exercises
in Armenia, the Defense Minister of Azerbaijan discusses
the need to strengthen Azerbaijani-Belarusian military
cooperation in Minsk…In issues of defense and security,
cooperation of governments is practically impossible if
they have diametrically opposed interests…

Source: Mukhin, Vladimir. “ОДКБ готовится к миротворческим миссиям
(The CSTO is preparing for peacekeeping missions),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 3
October 2017. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2017-10-03/2_7087_odkb.html
The CSTO operational-strategic exercise “Combat Brotherhood – 2017”
began yesterday in the Rostov region…Over three weeks in October and ten
days in November, CSTO forces will work out tasks in the south of Russia,
the Caucasus, and Central Asia. Almost all of the maneuvers are planned
for operations in mountainous-desert terrain. Outside of offensive and
defensive tasks, the issues of various armed conflicts and the organization of
peacekeeping missions will be worked out…
The exercise is made up of several stages, each of which will be carried
out in the framework of a single plan. One of the tactical exercises,
“Search-2017,” started yesterday in the Southern Military District…all
military leadership must (then) move on to the Bagramyan base in Armenia.
There, the large-scale exercise “Interaction-2017” will take place…From
October 16 to 20 the peacekeeping exercise “Unbreakable Brotherhood
– 2017” is planned to take place in Kazakhstan. And the last stage of the
exercises, “Combat Brotherhood – 2017” will be carried out in Tajikistan
from November 10 to 20 and involve the Collective Operational Reaction
Force…
…according to the official version, the intent of “Unbreakable Brotherhood
– 2017” is related to “preparations for a peacekeeping operation by CSTO
forces in a state that is not a member of the organization.” Therefore, it is
possible to assume that this could be Syria, Ukraine or other places where
CSTO members have common interests…
OE Watch | November 2017

63

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Jamaat ul Ansar al-Sharia: The New al-Qaeda Threat in
Pakistan
by Farhan Zahid
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Terrorism Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 18, dated 22 September 2017, Edited for OE
Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/jamaat-ul-ansar-al-sharia-the-new-al-qaeda-threat-in-pakistan/

OE Watch Commentary: Recent months have seen the sudden emergence
in Pakistan of an organization calling itself Jamaat ul Ansar al-Sharia
Pakistan. Information about the group is only now beginning to surface, with
indications that it is associated to al-Qaeda. The accompanying passages
from Pakistani sources provide insight into the group, whose recent activities
herald a possible resurgence for al-Qaeda in Pakistan, where the group had
been struggling to make a comeback after years of drone strikes and military
operations.
As the first passage demonstrates, the new entity is thought to be behind
a series of five terror attacks in Karachi and Baluchistan provinces. A
statement by Abdullah Hashmi, the group’s spokesperson who was arrested
in early September, makes it clear that the group is associated with al-Qaeda.
In addition, a leaflet announcing the establishment of the group indicates
that militants are taking on the ideology and philosophy of Osama bin
Laden, while praising al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri. As the second
accompanying passage notes, Pakistani authorities also believe that the group
is comprised of highly trained and battle-hardened Pakistani returnees from
the conflict in Syria, where many fought for the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS), the Nusrah Front or Ahrar al-Sham.
Jamaat ul Ansar al-Sharia appears set to revive al-Qaeda in Pakistan
after three years in limbo, a result of drone strikes and Pakistani military
operations which targeted al-Qaeda affiliated Islamist groups in the tribal
and settled areas of Pakistan. With the establishment of Jamaat ul Ansar alSharia, al-Qaeda appears to be aiming to lure ISIS-Khorasan cells in Pakistan
into its embrace, as well as taking back those who defected to ISIS between
2014 and 2017. With ISIS weakened, having lost more than 60 percent of
its territories in Iraq and Syria, the al-Qaeda move to re-establish itself in
Pakistan appears calculated and timely.
A boost in numbers gained from embracing the well-trained ISIS returnees
arriving from Syria would likely allow al-Qaeda, which was in desperate
need of a new cadre in Pakistan, to resume its activities. Al-Qaeda has
always presented a threat to a varying degree, but the appearance of Ansar
in the jihadist landscape of Pakistan shows its resilience to counter-terrorism
operations and its resolve to stay put in Pakistan. Pakistan will need to devise
a strategy to tackle this new group before the possibility of an al-Qaeda
resurgence becomes a reality. End OE Watch Commentary (Zahid)

Source: “Terror outfit Ansar-ul-Sharia behind recent attacks in
Karachi: sources,” Geo TV News, 22 July 2017. https://www.geo.tv/
latest/150528-terror-outfit-ansar-ul-sharia-behind-recent-attacks-inkarachi-sources
“A new terrorist group has been involved in recent wave of
terror attacks in Karachi, security sources told Geo News Friday,
which is inspired by Al Qaeda brand of terror activities.
Ansar-ul-Sharia has been involved in five terrorism incidents in
Karachi and Mastung, security sources said, and has so far been
outside the reach of law. The incidents include killing of a retired
colonel, six policemen and a private security guard in Karachi,
and an IED blast targeting security forces in Mastung.
The outfit ... was influenced by Al Qaeda’s Osama bin Laden and
Ayman al-Zawahiri.”
Source: “Militants who returned from Syria are involved in
Karachi police killings,” Samaa News, 4 July 2017. https://www.
samaa.tv/pakistan/2017/07/militants-who-returned-from-syria-areinvolved-in-karachi-police-killings/
The Counter Terrorism Department (CTD) has linked a new
terror group Ansar-al-Shariah Pakistan (ASP) in connection
with recent attacks on policemen in Karachi... ASP claimed
responsibility for the attacks on policemen in Karachi in May
that took place in the city’s Dhoraji Colony area and June in
SITE area. The group had also claimed credit for the killing
of ex-army officer Tahir Nagi in April.... According to an
assessment by the CTD, the fighters who recently returned from
Syria are members of ASP and are involved in attacks on police
in Karachi...
Ansar al-Shariah... militants... joined hands with Al-Qaeda’s
Syrian branch Al Nusra Front and Ahrar al-Sham and fought
with... ISIS militants in Syria.”

“A new terrorist group... which is inspired by
Al Qaeda... has been involved in five terrorism
incidents in Karachi and Mastung...”

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of
an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and
relying solely on brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations
Forces (SOF) who were the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in
Crimea. This book will attempt to split the difference between these radically different
ideas by shedding some light on what exactly the Russian Ground Forces consist of, how
they are structured, how they fight, and how they are modernizing.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | November 2017

64

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
An Indian Perspective on the Rohingya Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article in India’s The Hindu,
written by India’s former High Commissioner to Pakistan, provides
insight into some of the challenges that India is facing in dealing with
the fighting and refugee crisis along the Myanmar-Bangladesh border.
On the one hand, there is a desire to ensure the Muslim Rohingya fleeing
Myanmar’s Rakhine State find security and on the other there is a need
to prevent radical Islamists from infiltrating the Rohingya population
in Rakhine State. The author claims that, like “the western and Islamic
world,” India is outraged by the plight of the Rohingya. He argues that the
recent crisis was provoked by attacks across the Bangladesh-Myanmar
border by radical Islamic groups who were trained in Pakistan.
The author acknowledges that the Myanmar army is engaging in a
scorched earth policy of Rohingya communities in Rakhine State. He
notes that the Rohingya have not been granted citizenship in Myanmar
since 1962 and have suffered discrimination, but that the current military
actions are unprecedented. Driving support for the military’s actions are
statements from the country’s Buddhist clergy, which reacted strongly
after attacks by Rohingya Islamist groups on the military.
The article also discusses the impact of the refugee crisis on India,
which is now hosting 45,000 Rohingya refugees. However, geopolitics
require India take sides and support Myanmar. According to the article,
Myanmar plays a crucial role for India in supporting it to deal with
insurgencies that are allegedly backed by Pakistan and China in the
country’s landlocked northeastern states, where important development
projects are underway. If India places too much pressure on Myanmar’s
South Asia.
Source: CIA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:South_asia.jpg, Public Domain.
government, it could risk China gaining a greater foothold in Myanmar
through its defense of Myanmar on the Rohingya issue in international forums, such as the UN.
A solution for India is to operate trilaterally between India, Bangladesh and Myanmar in the name of India’s “Act East” policy, which
would keep China’s influence at bay while also boosting cooperation between India and two of its neighbors. This, according to the article,
would hopefully leading to a repatriation of the Rohingya to Myanmar. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“...a number of questions remain on how we are going to deal with an estimated 45,000 Rohingya
refugees from Myanmar who have entered India since 2012.”
Source: “The Rohingyas pose a regional challenge,” Thehindu.com, 4 October 2017. http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/therohingyas-pose-a-regional-challenge/article9887201.ece
The outrage that accompanied the plight of the Rohingyas was not only seen in sections of people in India, but also across the western and
Islamic world. India has stood its ground, maintaining that recent events were triggered by attacks across the Bangladesh-Myanmar border
by radical Islamic groups. But a number of questions remain on how we are going to deal with an estimated 45,000 Rohingya refugees from
Myanmar who have entered India since 2012.
The animosity of the army, which dominates national life in Myanmar towards the Rohingyas, has increased ever since sections of Rohingyas
formed armed groups to wage an ill-advised struggle after indoctrination in Pakistan. But seldom, if ever, has the army undertaken the sort
of scorched earth policy it has adopted against the Rohingya Muslims. And never has the Buddhist clergy reacted so strongly, as in what
transpired in Rakhine, after recent coordinated cross-border attacks on police posts and the army by the Rohingya Solidarity Army.
Making India relevant in India-Myanmar relations has been looking up in recent years, even though much improvement is needed to
implement Indian-aided projects there if we are to make any impression of our relevance in the face of some aggressive Chinese involvement.
Myanmar has a crucial role in supplementing our efforts to deal with insurgencies backed by Pakistan and China in our landlocked
northeastern states. Most importantly, India, Myanmar and Bangladesh share a common interest in combating radical Islamic groups, whose
primary aim is to destabilize all three.

OE Watch | November 2017

65

MAD SCIENTIST

MAD SCIENTIST INITIATIVE
CALL FOR IDEAS
SOLDIER 2050
DUE 1 DECEMBER 2017

About Us
•

Mad Scientist is a U.S.
Army Training and
Doctrine Command
(TRADOC) Community of
Action that continually
explores the future of
armed conflict through
collaborative partnerships.

•

This Community shapes
the Army’s view of future
multi-domain operations
& perspectives on the
future Operational
Environment (OE).

•

Mad Scientist helps the
Army continuously learn,
anticipate, innovate, and
engage broadly for more
creative problem solving.

Warfare is a human endeavor. Humanity’s next evolutionary leap, its coevolution with Artificial Intelligence (AI) and becoming part of the network, will
change the character of war. Convergences in nano, neuro, information, and
quantum technologies will further drive this change.
HOW DO I CONTRIBUTE
We want your ideas! The Mad Scientist Initiative uses storytelling and crowdsourcing
to imagine potential futures. Choose your creative methods:
(1) Researched Topics (see topics of interest)
(2) “A Soldier’s Letter from the Frontline”
You can share your ideas by submitting papers, artwork, videos, and games.
These questions are writing prompts and should not limit your imagination and
creativity:
Prompt 1: How does the convergence of bio, quantum, neuro, nano, and information
change warfare?
Prompt 2: How will the Soldier of 2050 interact with their equipment, fellow Soldiers,
and autonomous capabilities?
Prompt 3: Soldiers’ letters have been a window into warfare for hundreds of years.
How do Soldiers describe their units, equipment, and war to their loved ones in 2050?

Why Contribute?

BEST IDEAS
- Publication in a military or academic journal
- Invited to speak at a Mad Scientist Conference
- Mad Scientist SWAG

Connects you to a vibrant
group of innovators.
Provides opportunity to
attend and present at future
Mad Scientist events.
Offers a vehicle for you to
influence how the future Army
will fight.
Improves your future
readiness.

GUIDELINES
- Submissions must be unclassified, unpublished, and cleared by your public affairs
office and operations security managers (USG & as applicable).
- Research papers: max 5000 words/12 point font.
- “A Soldier’s Letter from the Frontline” – max 2000 words/12 point font; video
length max 5 minutes.

Get Connected

TOPICS OF INTEREST
- Human Co-Evolution with AI
- Hyper Connected Military Formations
- Robotics & Autonomous Systems
- Character of War

- Convergence with Bio, Neuro, Nano, and Quantum
- Leaders & Artificial Intelligence
- Man-Machine Interface
- Moral/Ethical Dilemmas in Future Warfare

Send Submissions to: allison.d.winer.civ@mail.mil

@ArmyMadSci
Join us on APAN

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradocg2/mad-scientist/

OE Watch | November 2017

66

