community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #8
September 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

CONSIDERING
IRAN
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Iran: Production Line Opens for New Sayyad-3 Missile
Iran: Qods Force Commander Brags about American
Casualties
Iran: Launch Officially Opens Space Facility
Iran: IRGC Training in China
Iran Officially Opposes Kurdish Independence
Referendum
Iran and Iraq Sign Defense Memorandum of
Understanding
Iran: Policing the Internet and Social Media
Iran’s Concern About Kurdish Insurgency
Iran: Army Unveils Video Game
Western Sahara: The Cherry Blossom Affair
Turkistan Islamic Party Benefiting from Syrian War
Dynamics
The Future of Syrian Refugees in Turkey
Israel’s New Project to Tackle Tunnel Threat
Germany Withdraws from Incirlik
Yemen’s Ballistic Missiles Continue Taunting Saudi
Arabia

AFRICA
18
19
20
21

An African Perspective on China’s Role in Africa
Israel Tries to Re-Engage Africa
Al-Shabaab’s Defiant Reply to Amnesty Offer
Mali’s Dilemma over Dialogue with Insurgents

LATIN AMERICA
22
22
23
24
25
26

FARC-EP Changes Its Name... to FARC-EP
The Colombian Military’s Changing Priorities
A Meeting in Lima, an Americas Ledger
Venezuela’s Internal Crisis
Haiti Peacekeeping Mission to End in October
Honduras: Gang Leaders “Clone” Themselves to
Avoid Maximum Security Prison
27 Engineer-Enhanced Cocaine Production in Honduras

ASIA-PACIFIC

28 Is Thailand on the Verge of a Disruptive Power
Struggle?
28 The Thai Junta’s Struggle for Legitimacy: At What
Cost?
29 Xi Jinping’s Push for a Strong Military
29 Decision-Making Recommendations for China’s PLA
30 “New-Type” Training in China’s PLA
31 Making Sense of China’s Caribbean Policy
32 Indonesia and Neighbors to Coordinate Response to
ISIS
33 Indonesia Steps Up Presence around the South
China Sea

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
34
35
36
38

Georgian Diplomatic Initiatives to Security Issues
Strengthening Russia’s Military in South Ossetia
An Indian-Chinese Border Dispute and the SCO
Uzbekistan’s Post-Karimov Security Cooperation

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

39 Russian Force Structure Developments in the Southern
Military District
41 The ‘Strelets’ C4ISR System
43 The Changing Face of the Russian Conscription System
45 Russia Implements New Logistic Depot System and
Inventory Controls
47 Russian Railroad Troops and Logistic Support
49 Russia Opens Rail Line Bypassing Ukraine
51 Training to Fight in Syria
52 Russian EW Developments
54 Improving Russian Military Medical Care
55 Strains in the Russia-Kazakh Relationship?
57 Russia’s Northern Fleet and Pacific Fleet Share the
Russian Arctic
58 Northern Fleet Puts to Sea in Support of Operation
Zapad
59 Russian Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Expansion into the
Pacific
60 Russia’s National Guard Forms a Science Company

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 8

September | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER: Emad Missile by Tasnim News

Source: Tasnim News via wikimedia commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/90/Emad_missile_
by_Tasnimnews_04.jpg, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
BACKGROUND IMAGES: Roof hafez tomb by Pentocelo, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/60/
Roof_hafez_tomb.jpg/1024px-Roof_hafez_tomb.jpg, CC BY 3.0 and Tiles of al-Mahruq Mosque by Jamal Nazareth, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tiles_of_Al-Mahruq_Mosque_2.JPG, CC BY 3.0

Asia-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Tim Thomas
Jared Ward
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Ray Finch
Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Tim Thomas

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Production Line Opens for New Sayyad-3 Missile
OE Watch Commentary: With the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the unfreezing of many Iranian assets and the lifting of some
sanctions, Iran has been able to augment its military budget. One of its top priorities appears to be boosting its missile capabilities. According
to the excerpted article from Kayhan, a newspaper whose editor is appointed by Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and which remains close to the
Office of the Supreme Leader, Iran is moving ahead with its Sayyad surface-to-air missile line.
The Sayyad-3 appears to be an enhanced version of the Sayyad-2, which was unveiled in November 2013 and is similar to the RIM-66 that
pre-revolutionary Iran acquired from the United States in the 1970s. According to the excerpt, Defense Minister Hossein Dehghan inaugurated
the production line of the new Sayyad-3 missile which has a 75-mile range and can reach altitudes of 16 miles. If true, this capability puts
the Lockheed U-2 within range. Dehghan also reportedly said that the Sayyad-3 uses active radar, semi-active radar, and infrared guidance to
maximize its potential against a host of targets and that it would be a component of the Talash-2 air defense system which the Iranian military
has yet to unveil publicly. Iranian investment in the Sayyad-3 and the Talash-2 suggests that despite Iran’s purchase of the S-300 (and potential
purchase of the S-400) from Russia, Iranian military officials do not want to rely on Russia for air defense. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

“The Sayyad-3 system has been designed… to serve against medium and long-range airborne threats.”
Source: “Iftetah’-e Khat-e Tavalid Moshak Barad Boland Sayyad-3 (Opening of the Production Line for the Long-Range Sayyad-3
Missile),” Kayhan, 22 July 2017. http://kayhan.ir/fa/news/109363
In the presence of Gen. Hossein Dehghan, Minister of Defense and Armed Force Logistics, and Gen. Amir Farzad Esmaili,
Commander of the Air Defense Force, on the 115th day of the year of the resistance economy, the production line for the Sayyad-3
missile opened and it was delivered to the Khatam al-Anbia Air Defense Base. The Sayyad-3 was designed and built by scientists and
specialists of the Aerospace Industries Organization at the Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics. In his opening speech,
Gen. Dehghan stated that this production line was part of the strategy of the Ministry of Defense to strengthen and update the air
defense of the country, in short, medium, and long ranges, and said, “The Sayyad-3 system has been designed with a range of 120
kilometers [75 miles] and a maximum attitude of 27 kilometers [16.7 miles] to serve against medium and long-range airborne threats.”

The Sayyad-3 missile on display

Source: Iranian Ministry of Defense, http://mod.gov.ir/sites/default/files/sayyad4.jpg, public domain.

OE Watch | September 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Qods Force Commander Brags about American
Casualties
OE Watch
Commentary: Within
the broad spectrum
of Iranian power, the
Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC)
is more powerful than
the executive branch. It
arguably wields more
influence over Iranian
policy than any other
body with the exception
of the Supreme Leader.
Therefore, what IRGC
commanders and recruits
think and believe matters.
Within the IRGC, the
Qods [Jerusalem] Force
is the most elite unit. It is
against this backdrop that
the excerpted remarks of
Deputy Commander of
the Qods Force Brigadier
General Esmail Qaani merit
attention.

Deputy Qods Force Commander Ismail Ghani
Source: Tasnim News, goo.gl/RAUYMW, CC BY SA 4.0.

“America has suffered more losses from us than we have suffered losses from them.”

The remarks are from a ceremony in which Qaani is speaking to ‘defenders
of the shrines’--a moniker which Iranian religious authorities and hardline press
use in reference to those who supposedly volunteered to fight in Iraq against the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and in Syria against any number of antiAssad regime force. Qaani embraces and endorses the conspiracy theory that
the 11 September 2001 attacks were an inside job, and suggests that Operation
Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan was actually a pretext to attack Iran. He
claims that the rise of ISIS and US military involvement in Syria along with its
re-engagement in Iraq were merely the second stage of the same plot. Qaani
boasts, however, that despite the financial strength of the United States, it has
not only failed in its supposed objectives, but the Qods Force has also managed
to cause more casualties against Americans than the reverse.
Qaani’s speech reflects two important elements of IRGC ideology. The first is
the paranoia at the heart of the IRGC and especially the Qods Force worldview
that great powers always seek to victimize Iran, thus the Qods Force can never
drop its guard (even when Iranian politicians are tempted to do so). The second
element is Qods Force enmity toward the United States in particular. In its
extreme form such as that voiced by Qaani, this manifests itself in the ideas
that the Qods Force is figuratively and literally at war with the United States.
The question is whether rhetoric voiced by leaders such as Qaani is actually
internalized in the mindset of the IRGC and Qods Force, or whether it is treated
more as a stylistic flourish. Regardless, the fact that so many recruits into the
Qods Force entered the IRGC bubble at a young age through youth programs,
summer camps, and after school activities, suggests that many Qods Force
officers share Qaani’s worldview. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Amerika ba 6 hazar milyard dollar hazineh hich
Eqdami ‘Alihe Natavanast Anjam Dahad (America could
not do anything against Iran, even with $6 trillion),” Tasnim
News.com, 13 July 2017. https://goo.gl/L52Qh7
General Esmail Qaani, speaking today at a ceremony for
the martyrs of the defenders of shrines from the village of
Palak-e Sofla in the Amol district [of Mazandaran]… Qaani
said, “From the beginning of the Islamic Revolution to the
present day, the global arrogance [the United States] and
enemies have designed and sought to implement various
actions.” Adding that the enemies began a war with Iran
from inside houses and towns, he said, “The enemies of
the Islamic Revolution were not small people and small
countries, but rather at their head is the arrogance of
America and Israel. Qaani said, “We do not forget our
direction,” and added, “During the eight years of the
imposed war [the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq War], thousands
of kilometers away, people have been working [against
us]. Today, the war with the enemy is also taking place
thousands of kilometers away and, he said, “America
ordered its elites to fight us, but the powerful, divine system
defended against them… America, under the pretext of
September 11 attacks which it carried out itself, invaded
Afghanistan and mobilized youth Muslims and deployed
them to Afghanistan so that they can later attack Iran…
[but] America has suffered more losses from us than we
have suffered losses from them.

OE Watch | September 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Launch Officially Opens Space Facility
OE Watch Commentary: On 27 July, Iran launched a ‘Simorgh’ (‘Phoenix’)
rocket from its Imam Khomeini spaceport in Semnan, northern Iran. The
Simorgh (also known as the Safir-2) was officially unveiled by then-President
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in 2010. While Iran had launched a Simorgh from the
Semnan facility in 2015, the excerpted article claims the most recent launch—
which Iranian media said resulted in the two-stage rocket reaching orbit—was
meant to officially inaugurate the updated spaceport.
Iranian investment in the spaceport suggests that Tehran plans to continue
its rocket and ballistic missile work. The excerpted article from a moderate,
pro-regime web portal once associated with the late senior statesman Ali
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani discusses the potential for Iran to carry payloads
eventually surpassing 1,000 pounds into low earth orbit for both Iran and
other states. It also claims that Iran will compete with countries like France or
Russia-- a far-fetched idea. After all, countries antagonistic to the West could
more easily and with less risk utilize the Russian spaceport in Kazakhstan.
The potential for Iranian rockets to carry greater payloads will raise concerns
among countries suspicious of Iran’s nuclear intent given the possibility that
the Simorgh is intended as a dual-use platform for an intercontinental ballistic
missile and also to carry a nuclear warhead. Even without the most advanced
miniaturization technologies, a crude and effective nuclear warhead can be
constructed that would fall well within the payload weight ambitions of 11001540 pounds, as the excerpt mentions. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Bah Shalik Moafaqit Amiz ‘Simorgh’ Paygah
Fizayi Keshvarzeman Rasman Efftitah’ Shod (Our country’s
spaceport was officially opened with the successful launch
of ‘Simorgh’),” Tabnak.com, 27 July 2017. https://goo.gl/
cFYyHp
After carrying out a successful test launch of a rocket
named Simorgh [“Phoenix”] at the Imam Khomeini
spaceport in 2015, today another Simorgh rocket was tested
and it was successful. The difference was that this time
the launch of the Simorgh had two aims: The first was the
complete testing of the structures and equipment of our
country’s only spaceport in Semnan which was the official
opening of this site, and then sensing the performance of
the second-stage of the rocket: If it happened [successfully]
then the Simorgh will be ready to carry satellites from
Iran and other countries into Low Earth Orbit. It was a
great result that with today’s test, the rocket capabilities
of our country have increased dramatically and the ability
to carry payloads of 25-50 kilograms has increased to
100 kilograms. Considering that the development plan of
Simorgh is on the agenda of our country, and with future
adjustments and optimization, this rocket is set in the
future to be able to handle loads ranging from 500 to 700
kilograms.

“The rocket capabilities of our country have increased dramatically.”

Safir space launch vehicle carrying Fajr satellite

Source Tasnim News via wikimedia commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Safir_space_launch_vehicle_carrying_Fajr_satellite_06.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: IRGC Training in China
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
has, like last year, sent a team to participate in the International Army
Games, an annual exercise and competition founded by the Russian Ministry
of Defense which this year Russia and China jointly host. Numerous teams
participate, most of which tend to be in the Chinese and Russian policy orbit,
including Zimbabwe, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Angola, South Africa, Laos, and
Iran. The excerpted article from a news portal closely aligned with the IRGC
discusses the Iranian special operations airborne team’s departure for China
and its first days drilling with the Chinese.
While the games are competitions rather than traditional military exercises,
the teams also conduct joint drills in and around the games (though this
is not reflected on the games’ website). This increases interoperability
between elite Iranian forces and their Chinese and Russian counterparts. The
excerpted article, for example, highlights Iranian use of Chinese People’s
Liberation Army Air Force Z8KA helicopters.
The continued expansion of the Army Games signals that the diplomatic
axis developing against the West both informally and via the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization has an emerging military angle as Beijing and
Moscow gather the elites from their formal and informal alliance in annual
exercises. Iran’s presence is increasingly regular in such gatherings. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Tamrinat-e Niruha-ye Vizheh Havabarad Sepah
Pasdaran dar Chin (IRGC Airborne Special Forces Training
in China),” Tasnim News, 25 July 2017. https://goo.gl/
e6vW7M
The 33rd Mahdi Special Airborne Unit of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps based in Jahrom [Fars
Province], which ranked first in domestic competitions with
other airborne teams, went to China in recent days and they
are preparing for a strong presence in the 2017 Army Games.
There are six subjects in the games: Suvorov Attack [Infantry
Fighting Vehicles racing and target shooting]; Aviadarts
[fighter jet navigation and targeting]; nuclear, biological,
and chemical protection unit competitions; anti-aircraft;
airborne unit competitions; and maintenance competitions…
Up until now, the Iranian team has received its equipment
and is preparing and conducting periodic exercises which
include firing artillery and RPGs, parachuting, and jumping
from Chinese Z8KA helicopters.

“The Iranian team has [been]…jumping
from Chinese Z8KA helicopters.”

Iranian soldiers drill in China during joint war games and exercises
Source Tasnim News, goo.gl/fz674x, CC BY SA 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Officially Opposes Kurdish Independence Referendum
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 September, Iraqi Kurds will go to the polls in a referendum in both the Iraqi Kurdistan Region and the
“disputed territories” such as Kirkuk and Diyala which are claimed by both the central Iraqi government in Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) in Erbil. On the ballot will be a single question: “Do you want the Kurdistan region and the Kurdistani areas outside the
region’s administration to become an independent state?”
The Iranian government has long opposed any Kurdish independence in Iraq, largely because they fear how the precedent might impact the
Kurdish population in Iran. While no Middle Eastern country besides Israel has allowed true censuses in decades because of the sensitivity of
the data for their own internal security, most geographers and anthropologists estimate that perhaps eight percent of Iranians speak Kurdish
as their first language. Iran has a Kordestan province, but it encompasses only about half of the areas inside Iran in which Kurds predominate.
Therefore, the idea that the Iraqi Kurdish referendum will include not only the Iraqi Kurdistan Region itself but neighboring provinces worries
Tehran even more.
Recently, Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) Major-General Mohammad Bagheri, Chief of Staff for the Armed Forces of Iran,
commented that the referendum “is the beginning of [a] crisis and ... new challenges in the region” and called the vote “unacceptable.” In the
excerpted remarks from an Iranian Ministry of Foreign Affairs press conference, an unidentified journalist asks Bahram Qassemi, the foreign
ministry spokesman, to speak about Bagheri’s remarks. While Qassemi’s remarks are a bit more diplomatic in tone, he underscores that the
Iranian government shares the concerns of the IRGC. So too does the Supreme National Security Council who, on the same day as Qassemi’s
press conference, warned that “Although this issue might look attractive, it will actually isolate and pressure the Iraqi Kurds; weaken Kurdistan
and finally the entire Iraq.”
The KRG brands itself as the most stable, democratic, and pro-American entity in the region. The KRG’s decision to move forward with the
referendum despite Iran throwing down the gauntlet will likely lead to growing tension between Iran and the KRG. How that tension plays
out—whether in greater Iranian support for anti-referendum Kurdish parties and politicians or more overt violence directed at Masoud Barzani’s
Kurdistan Democratic Party—can significantly alter stability calculations throughout the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Independence of Kurdistan…will trigger instability in the region.”
Source: “Neshast Khabari Sokhanguye Vezarat-e Amor-e Kharaji ba Khabarnagaran-e Dakhli va Kharaji (A News Conference with the
Foreign Ministry Spokesman with Domestic and Foreign Reporters),” Iran Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 24 July 2017. http://www.mfa.gov.ir/
index.aspx?fkeyid=&siteid=1&pageid=128&newsview=467192
Question: What did Major General [Mohammad] Bagheri’s comments mean with reference to the referendum on independence of
Kurdistan?
Answer: The independence of Kurdistan is a dream which will take a lot of time to interpret. Iran calls for territorial integrity and territorial
unity in Iraq, and we see the referendum at the expense of peace and stability in the region. This will trigger third-party agents and instability
in the region and will not benefit anyone. In the current situation, we want Iraq’s territorial integrity and the rule of the central government.”

Image: “Ukraine vs. Pro-Russian”
Image Source: Andrew Butko, https://www.flickr.com/
photos/121483302@N02/14690671827, Licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported | Wikimedia Commons

UKRAINE’S HIDDEN BATTLEFIELD
by Robert Kurz
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195079

This paper was previously published as a book chapter:
Kurz, Robert. “Ukraine’s Hidden Battlefield.” In Cultural Perspectives, Geopolitics & Energy Security of Eurasia: Is the Next Global Conflict Imminent?
edited by Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov, Mr. Gustav Otto, and Colonel Lee G. Gentile, Jr., 93-99. Fort Leavenworth: Army University Press, 2017.

OE Watch | September 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran and Iraq Sign Defense Memorandum of
Understanding
OE Watch Commentary: Since June 2014, the fight against the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has consumed Iraqi security resources. Iraq faced a
military and security crisis when many army units disintegrated in the face of
ISIS. While Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani called for volunteers to defend Iraq,
giving rise to the Hashd ash-Shaabi (Popular Mobilization Units), the Iraqi
government welcomed external assistance
in its drive to liberate Mosul. Iranianbacked militias and Iranian advisors up to
and including Qods Force Chief Qassem
Soleimani answered the call and made
no secret of their efforts to counter ISIS
inside Iraq.
The growing Iranian presence—and the
presence of Iraqi militias answering more
to Tehran than to Baghdad—raised many
questions, however, about the future of the
Iranian presence after ISIS’s defeat. While
Iraqi leaders and diplomats acknowledged
the legitimacy of these concerns, they
deferred discussion by arguing that such
matters were secondary until after Mosul’s
liberation. On 10 July 2017, however, Iraqi
Prime Minister Haider Abadi traveled to
Mosul to declare the city liberated.

“Both sides emphasized the importance
of deepening and expanding defense
cooperation.”

Iran and Iraq’s Defense Ministers Shake Hands after Signing Memorandum of Understanding
Source: Iran Ministry of Defense, goo.gl/vrivgv, public domain.

Both inside and outside Iraq, conversation began not only about the political future
of Mosul and many predominantly Sunni areas of Iraq, but also about what should
become of the Hashd ash-Shaabi and especially the Iranian-backed militias which
comprise perhaps 30 percent of the total militiamen in the Hashd ash-Shaabi. It is
against this backdrop that the recent memorandum of understanding (MoU) between
the Iraqi and Iranian defense ministers is important. The accompanying excerpt from
the Iranian Ministry of Defense discusses the MoU, and notes that it is “the beginning
of a wide range of military-defense cooperation in various areas.”
Relations between Iran and Iraq are nothing new. The border between the two is the
longest for both. Religious pilgrimage goes both directions and Iraq is a major market
for Iranian manufactured goods and agriculture. In addition, both countries are
majority Shi’ite and ruled by Shi‘ite parties, although serious theological differences
exist between the philosophy espoused by Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and
the leading ayatollahs in Iraq. Nor is this the first time the two countries have signed
an MoU. In 2014, former Iraqi Defense Minister Khalid al-Obeidi visited Tehran and
signed an MoU to boost cooperation between the two countries.
While lacking in details, the updated MoU appears to promote a wide range
of cooperation that could regularize the presence of Iranian trainers and Qods
Force liaisons within Iraq. It could also slow, if not halt the disarming and
decommissioning of Iranian-backed and trained groups. A more robust Iranianbacked militia or advisor presence in Iraq could halt reforms and provide Iran with
veto power over the decisions of future Iraqi governments, as it does with Hezbollah
in Lebanon. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Yadasht Tafahem Hamkarihaye Mian
Iran va Iraq Emza’i Shod (A Memorandum of
Understanding on Military-Defense Cooperation
was signed between Iran and Iraq),” Iran Ministry of
Defense, 23 July 2017. https://goo.gl/xQX5SR
According to the information office of the Ministry
of Defense, the memorandum of understanding
marked the beginning of a wide range of militarydefense cooperation in various areas agreed by the
parties. Among the provisions of this memorandum
of understanding are the extension of cooperation
and the exchange of experiences in combating
terrorism, extremism, border security, and other
educational, logistical, technical and military
support. Following the signing by the defense
ministers of the two countries of the Memorandum
of Understanding on military-defense cooperation,
both sides emphasized the importance of deepening
and expanding defense cooperation between the
two countries and they expressed their hope that the
memorandum would usher in more serious, deeper
and more active cooperation.

OE Watch | September 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Policing the Internet and Social Media
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s 1979 Islamic Revolution was not
only a political revolution but also an ideological one. Adherence
to the Islamic Republic’s values and morals is mandatory, and the
Iranian government has inaugurated multiple security agencies to
ensure that Iranians obey and submit to the ideology of the regime.
The expansion of the internet, particularly social media, however,
poses an increasing challenge to Iranian security forces. To deal
with this challenge, the Iranian government set up a cyber-police
force charged with policing the internet and social media. In the
excerpted article from the cyber-police website, the chief of cyberpolice details a huge increase in crimes committed on the internet.
Whereas in past years, he spoke about crackdowns on ‘moral
crimes’ (code for pornography), this year he singled out social
media and especially Telegram (a cloud-based instant messaging
service) and Instagram (a photo and video-sharing service) as being
involved in almost two-thirds of the cybercrimes investigated and
prosecuted.
The cyber-police emphasis on Telegram may reflect fear that
politicians and civil society leaders upset with the shrinking public
and social space under current President Hassan Rouhani may
turn to social media to organize. Iranian police recently arrested
six administrators for reform-minded chat channels on Telegram.
However, according to an interview with their lawyer published
in the excerpted Iran Labor News Agency article, the judiciary
subsequently released them on bail. They may have been pawns
in a larger behind-the-scenes fight over government control and
access to social media. On 26 July, for example, Iran’s public
prosecutor deputy for cyberspace affairs threatened to bring
charges against the minister of communications if he did not take
more robust action to block social media “with criminal content.”
Four days later, the Iranian press reported Telegram had moved its
servers into Iran in an apparent compromise whereby it could still
operate but Iranian police would have greater access to monitor
the platform. (Telegram’s founder Pavel Durov, however, denied
in a tweet that the company had transferred any servers into Iran).
Ordinary Iranians might not see Durov’s denial, however, as
cyber-police chief Hadianfar reaffirmed Iran’s ban on Twitter.
For several decades, Iranian police and security forces sought
to weed out terror cells, police women’s clothing, prevent drug
trafficking and alcohol consumption, and break up mixed gender
parties. Recent events suggest that concern over social media
and the Iranian government’s ability to monitor and control it
are leapfrogging over other police priorities. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

An Iranian Cyber Crime poster

Source: Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, http://www.iribnews.ir/files/fa/news/1395/7/13/409498_355.jpg, public domain.

“More than 60 percent of the cybercrime involved
Telegram and Instagram.”
Source: “Rashed 45 dar sadi Jaraim Siberi (Cyber Crimes Up 45
Percent),” Cyberpolice.ir, 27 July 2017. http://www.cyberpolice.ir/
news/88291
General Sayed Kamal Hadianfar, on the sidelines of the opening
ceremony of the Tehran Summit, told reporters that the conference was
held for two days, with a focus on crime tracking, countering terrorists
from cyberspace, and so on. In response to a question about the state
of cybercrime in the country, he said: “In the year from March 2016 to
March 2017, in comparison to the previous year, there has been more
than a 70 percent increase in cybercrime cases, of which 43 percent of
the total crimes involved Telegram and 20 percent involved Instagram.
Thus, more than 60 percent of the cybercrime involved Telegram and
Instagram… General Hadianfar said that this year, we witnessed an
increase in cybercrime, and that in the past four months, cybercrime
has increased by 45 percent. He added, “Our discovery rate is as high
as 80 percent, and we are looking to increase our ability. The Ministry
of Communications, along with the development of the Internet, will
also pay attention to the security of the citizens. “With the development
of infrastructure and equipment, it seems that crime in cyberspace is
also increasing, and we hope that the Ministry of Communications will
coexist with the development of growth,” he said, predicting that crimes
will continue to increase in cyberspace.

Source: “Sedur Qarar 500 Milyon Tomani baraye Madiran Kanalha-ye Telegrami Islah Talab/She Nefar Azad Shodand (5 Billion Rial Bail
Issued for Reformist Telegram Managers/3 People Freed),” Iranian Labor News Agency, 29 July 2017. https://goo.gl/zV8tMK
Ali Mojtahedzadeh, in an interview with the Iranian Labor News Agency [ILNA] correspondent regarding the latest status of the case against
the reformist managers of Telegram, said, each of the six administrators of the Telegram channels received a 500 million toman bail by the
decision of the court. Misters Baqeri, Naqdi and Jamshidi were freed, and Nima Keshvari will be released tomorrow as well. The lawyer for
the administrators of the reformist Telegram channels said, “Mr. Sobhan Jafari has not yet been able to secure bail and, God-willing, he will
make bail or it will be waived by the court so that this person will also be released…. A number of reformist telegraph channel managers were
arrested last month, according to ILNA...”
OE Watch | September 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran’s Concern About Kurdish Insurgency
OE Watch Commentary: Kurds living in Iran have long been restive.
Kurdish resistance to Tehran’s centralized control dates back almost a
century. In the 1920s and 1930s, Reza Shah—the father of the Iranian
monarch ousted in 1979—brutally crushed tribal resistance to the central
government. In 1946, Kurds (including the father of Masoud Barzani,
the President of the Iraqi Kurdistan Region, or IKR) briefly claimed an
independent state in and around Mahabad, in northwestern Iran, but
the Iranian army pacified it within a year. The 1979 Islamic Revolution
compounded the disenfranchisement many Iranian Kurds felt: Not only
were they ethnically different from many Persians but because Kurds are
predominantly Sunni, they found themselves discriminated against twice
over—ethnically and religiously—by a government which based itself on
Ayatollah Khomeini’s exegesis of Shi’ite theology and political philosophy.
Against this backdrop, violence in Iranian Kurdistan has never been
far below the surface. The Iranian military and security forces deploy a
disproportionate number of troops to keep order in the mountainous region,
and the Iranian judiciary imprisons and often executes Iranian Kurds it
suspects of joining Kurdish cultural or nationalist groups.
Still, Iranian repression of its Kurds—perhaps eight percent of its total
population—has not placated the region. With Iraqi Kurds headed to a
referendum, the decades-long understanding between the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Kurdish dissident groups appears to be breaking down. Both
the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran (KDP-I) and Komala, historically
the Iranian Kurdish communist party, have long maintained camps in Iraqi
Kurdish territory. Both understood that they would remain unmolested by
Iranian forces so long as they did not attack Iran from this territory. However,
reports—referenced here—of Iranian artillery fire directed at KDP-I and
Komala camps in Iraqi territory suggest that the Iranian military is now
operating under altered rules of engagement. The assassination of Komala’s
representative in the IKR reported in the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC)-affiliated Raja News and excerpted here likewise suggests that
Iranian aggression toward the Kurds will no longer know borders.
Such Iranian actions are not occurring in a vacuum, however. The Iranian
government remains fiercely opposed to the forthcoming referendum on
Iraqi Kurdish independence. Iranian officials fear that the IKR could create
a precedent which could inspire Iranian Kurds to demand autonomy or even
independence. The Iranian government—and many Iranian intellectuals
outside of government—believe that Kurdish moves toward autonomy or
independence could reverberate far beyond Iran’s Kurdish population: Iran,
after all, is a multi-ethnic country with a history of separatist movements
among not only Kurds but also Azeris, Baluch, Arabs, and Gilakis. Nor is
the Iranian government being blindly paranoid. The Kurdistan Free Life
Party (PJAK) aligned with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) has engaged
in an insurgency inside Iran. The interception of weaponry along Iran’s
mountainous border—reported in Tasnim, an outlet close to the security
services and the IRGC and excerpted here, likely raises concern in Tehran
about the possibility that the Kurds’ long low-grade insurgency might
increase in intensity. Certainly, Iranian authorities may worry that despite
the successful interception of contraband, more might have evaded Iran’s
security net. If that is the case, Iran may be looking at additional terrorist
attacks inside the country. Either way, it seems that the border region between
Iran and the IKR may soon grow hotter. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

“…Weapons, ammunition and explosive
devices were discovered in the northwestern
parts of the country….”
Source: “Keshef-e Salah, Mohemat va Tejezhat-e Enfejari
Shemal-e Gharb-e Keshavarz (Discovery of Weapons,
ammunition and explosive devices in the northwest of
the country),” Tasnim News, 24 July 2017. https://goo.gl/
mzKh6M
General Qassem Rezaei, during a ceremony to honor the
commander of the Bushehr province, and noting how wellbeing and security in Islamic Iran are due to the passion
of the martyrs, said that the defenders of the shrines and
martyrs play a significant role in the security of Islamic Iran
because the defenders of the shrines also defend the ideals
of the Islamic Revolution, and stand against the threat of
enemies across the border and do not allow enemies or those
attacking to penetrate the borders of Iran…. The commander
announced the discovery of a large cargo of contraband in
the northwest of the country: 30 horses and mules, carrying
a cargo of weapons, ammunition and explosive devices, were
discovered in the northwestern parts of the country by the
border guards….” General Rezaie, pointing to the increase in
smuggling discoveries on the borders of Islamic Iran, stressed
that counteracting smuggling is not satisfactory. More
serious measures should be taken in this area.
Source: “Namayendeh Komala dar Kurdistan-e ‘Iraq bar asar
Shalik Goluleh beh Halekat Rasid (Komala’s Representative
in Iraqi Kurdistan Killed by a Bullet),” Raja News, 28 July
2017. https://goo.gl/AfJxwv
Based on news received from the Zargwez Camp [southwest
of Sulaymani] of the communist Komala party, on the
afternoon of 14 July, Rahman Nejat was shot dead in a
completely suspicious incident…! He served as a member of
the Central Committee of Komala, a member of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Iran and as the official
representative of Komala in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.
Source: “Iran Movazeh Goruhaye Kurd ra dar Khak-e ‘Iraq
Golulehbaran Kard (Iran Shells Kurdish Opposition Groups
on Iraqi Soil),” Porcesh.ir, 3 July 2017. http://porcesh.ir/
fa/2238
The media and local authorities in Iraqi Kurdistan have
released reports and videos showing that this morning Iran
shelled the positions two Kurdish groups—the Kurdistan
Democratic Party of Iran and Komala… The location of the
attack is Halgurd mountain in the border area near Haji
Omran [Iraq] and Piranshahr [Iran].

OE Watch | September 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Army Unveils Video Game
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article discusses a new video
game recently released by the Iranian army, called the “Battle in the Gulf of
Aden 2.” The game’s scenario is described as the Iranian Navy’s “powerful
presence fighting pirates in international waters in the Gulf of Aden.” The
game was unveiled at the country’s top computer and electronic expo before a
group of senior Iranian military officials. The first version of the game hit the
market in 2012 and quickly became the most popular computer game in Iran
supplanting the “Age of Heroes,” a three-dimensional game based upon the
stories of the Shahnameh, Iran’s national epic.
As the article discusses, senior officials of the Iranian military, including
the commander of the Navy, attended the unveiling of the new version. This
likely underscores the importance that the Iranian military places on such
gaming, both for recruitment purposes and to indoctrinate youth who are
more likely to play a video game than pay much heed to the state-controlled
media. It is significant that the game’s sponsors appear to be the regular
Iranian navy rather than the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the elite
military organization which prides itself on ideological commitment to
Iran’s revolutionary ideals and which normally is the body more engaged in
indoctrination.
Glorification of Iran’s participation in counter-piracy efforts in the Gulf of
Aden may exaggerate Iran’s actual effectiveness in that operation, but the
video game provides an effective way to revise the narrative to place Iran
front and center in the fight against Somali pirates. The game’s focus on the
Gulf of Aden may also signal the Iranian military’s commitment to operation
in and around Yemen. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Bazi ‘Mobarzeh dar Khalij-e Aden 2’ Ravanmayi
Shod (The Game ‘Battle for the Gulf of Aden 2’ is
Unveiled),” Islamic Students News Agency, 24 July 2017.
https://goo.gl/rfLe8b
A mobile version of the ‘Battle for the Gulf of Aden 2’ was
unveiled before a group of commanders on the sidelines of
Elecomp 96 [an annual Iranian computer and electronics
trade exposition]. The ‘Gulf of Aden 2’ mobile game was
unveiled on Monday afternoon, at a ceremony attended by
Rear Admiral Habibollah Sayyari, commander of the Iranian
Navy; Amir Golfam, president of the Organization for the
Protection of Works and the Publishing of the Values of the
Holy Defense of the Army; Abbas Mohammad Hassani, chief
of the Political Ideology Center of the Armed Forces; and
Amir Shahin Taqikhani, army spokesman for Elecomp 96.
This game was made with a Unity 3D graphic engine and
professional audio and the scenario is about the Iranian
Navy’s powerful presence fighting pirates in international
waters in the Gulf of Aden. “Battle for the Gulf of Aden” is
one of the first Iranian games that is dedicated to modern
warfare and takes place at the present time, and in it, the
player takes the role of an Iranian navy marine deployed on
an important mission to international waters.

“The player takes the role of an Iranian
navy marine.”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | September 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Western Sahara: The Cherry Blossom Affair
OE Watch Commentary: In 1975, Morocco repossessed the Western Sahara, a former Spanish colony carved out of territory originally
seized from Morocco during the 19th century. The Polisario Front (PF- The Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia el Hamra and Rio de
Oro), a Marxist group and a relic of the Cold War long supported by Algeria and Cuba, contested the move and laid claim to the territory
as leader of the self-styled Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. This led to a 16-year war that ended in a cease-fire and the establishment
of a UN peacekeeping mission in 1991. Since then, UN-facilitated discussions on the territory’s status have been inconclusive. While the
UN considers the area to be non-self-governing territory, the United States, France, and a number of African and Arab countries have
embraced neutrality while endorsing a 1999 plan for autonomy of the Western Sahara under Moroccan sovereignty. The US Congress’ 2017
Consolidated Appropriations Act signed into law on 5 May 2017 agreed to allow Morocco to use US funds to develop the Western Sahara.
While United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 690 created the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) to organize a
referendum to determine the status of ethnic Sahrawi from the Western Sahara, that
effort floundered over disputes of qualifications to vote. Both Algeria and the PF have
long opposed a full census of refugees and likely inflate their numbers in order to collect
additional foreign aid. Moroccan officials, meanwhile, object to Algerian efforts to pad
the PF camps in Tindouf with those who trace their roots to Algeria and Mauritania
rather than the Western Sahara.
In 2016, after a disputed road clearing operation near Guerguerat, a village in the UN
buffer zone in the southern Western Sahara about six miles from the Mauritanian border,
the PF entered the territory leading to a military standoff with Morocco. In February
2017, Morocco withdrew its forces at the urging of the UN, but the PF fighters remained
for several more months to extract ‘tax’ on trade until finally acceding to UN Secretary
General Antonio Guterres’s demand. Their months-long unilateral presence, however,
took a diplomatic toll as the UN and regional powers viewed the PF singly as the threat
to regional stability and the status quo. Both the PF withdrawal and the African Union’s
invitation for Morocco to rejoin the body after 33 years represented blows to PF’s
prestige and momentum.
It is against this backdrop that the PF has embarked on a new strategy: One day
after the UNSC asked both Morocco and the PF to resolve their dispute “without
preconditions and in good faith,” PF activists requested that South Africa impound the
cargo vessel ‘Cherry Blossom’ after it made an unscheduled stop in Port Elizabeth,
South Africa, carrying phosphate mined in the Western Sahara. The PF claims
that exports from the disputed territory are illegal. As the excerpted article from a
Casablanca paper documents, South Africa agreed to the request and impounded the
ship and cargo. A similar request to Panamanian authorities with regard to another ship
carrying phosphate mined in the Western Sahara was denied when the Panamanian
court ruled it had no “jurisdictional competence” in the matter.

Source: “Affaire « Cherry Blossom »: OCP dénie
la légitimité de la cour sud-africaine (The ‘Cherry
Blossom’ Affair : OCP Denies the Legitimacy of
the South African Court),” La Nouvelle Tribune,
13 July 2017. https://lnt.ma/affaire-cherryblossom-ocp-denie-legitimite-de-cour-sudafricaine/
In deciding to refer the case of “Cherry Blossom”
on its merits, the South African court makes a
highly political decision and commits a serious
abuse of power. Not only does it claim for itself
jurisdiction which contravenes the basic principles
of international law but, moreover, its decision
constitutes political interference in the process
conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations Security Council. OCP [Morocco’s stateowned Office Chérifien des Phosphates] and its
subsidiary Phosboucraa deny the South African
court any legitimacy to pronounce on the merits
of a case followed at the highest international
level. On 1 May 2017, following a request by
the Polisario Front, a South African judge
ordered the seizure of a shipment of phosphate
from Phosboucraa, resulting in the vessel being
detained in Port Elizabeth. This request was based
on purely political allegations…. While accepting
the complexity and international character of
the matter, the South African court assumed
jurisdictional competence in contradiction [with]
principles of international law.

South Africa’s African National Congress has long acted as a patron for the PF. But
the South African court’s decision to agree to the seizure of the ship heralds increasing chilliness in relations between Morocco and South
Africa, two of Africa’s economic powerhouses. It also establishes a very dangerous precedent as it creates an incentive for self-styled
liberation movements to avoid diplomacy and instead use third state courts to seize property.
Finding a compliant court is akin to winning the lottery: If the South African court decides against the ship’s owners, the sale of the
phosphate will represent a windfall for the PF and enable the group to double down on insurgency instead of the diplomatic process. If
this becomes a pattern with other separatist movements, the chance of conflict could increase as owners of seized property might consider
judgments against them to be akin to piracy and separatist movements might seek backdoor legitimacy by becoming claimants in courts.
Either way, the final disposition off the Cherry Blossom and its cargo bear watching. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The South African court assumed jurisdictional competence in contradiction [with] principles of
international law.”
OE Watch | September 2017

12

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkistan Islamic Party Benefiting from Syrian
War Dynamics
OE Watch Commentary: Uyghur jihadist fighters
have been involved in the Syrian war since at least 2012.
The most prominent Uyghur group in Syria, the Turkistan
Islamic Party (TIP), played a key role in several battles
against Syrian loyalist forces in 2015 and 2016 (see:
“Turkistan Islamic Party Makes it Mark on the Syrian
Rebellion,” OE Watch, June 2016). As highlighted in the
two accompanying passages, the group is now benefiting
from the shrinking territory of the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) and rebel-jihadist infighting in Syria’s Idlib
Province.
According to the first accompanying passage, from the
pro-Syrian government Lebanese daily al-Akhbar, “the
past year witnessed a constant exodus of Uyghur fighters
from ISIS to the TIP, as fighting against ISIS intensified.”
The article cites figures for the city of al-Bab in East
Aleppo Province, from which Turkish-backed forces
expelled ISIS last February. According to the article,
ISIS’s Uyghur fighters were given the choice between
retreating to Deir Ezzor with other ISIS fighters or joining
the TIP as part of a negotiated surrender. The majority
opted to join the TIP.
The TIP has also “begun to reap the rewards of the
tensions in several parts of rural Idlib,” according to the
article. The second accompanying passage, from the
Lebanese news site al-Modon, details how the TIP has
staked out a neutral position in the ongoing conflict for
control over a lucrative border crossing linking Syria’s
Idlib Province and Turkey. The conflict pits Idlib’s two
main rebel-jihadist groups, Ahrar al-Sham and Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham or HTS (formerly the Nusra Front).
The TIP has, in the past, worked closely with former
incarnations of HTS, but in the current spat it has sought
to remain neutral. As the article notes: “Even though a
considerable number of TIP fighters favor HTS… a large
chunk of the TIP knows who Ahrar al-Sham is and that
the majority of the moderate opposition would side with
them were HTS to attack Ahrar.” The TIP has remained on
the sidelines and sought to mediate in previous rounds of
intra-jihadist fighting, including the 2013 Nusra Front/ISIS
split and the dissolution of Jund al-Aqsa in early 2017.
Over the past five years an estimated 3,000 TIP fighters
and their families have taken over villages in mountainous
parts of Syria, near the Turkish border. Their ultimate
stated goal, however, is to “liberate” Xinjiang Province
in western China. Having gained valuable experience and
notoriety from the Syrian war, the remaining TIP fighters
may eventually reconsider their commitment to staying in
the Levant. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

““…The TIP has begun to reap the rewards of the tensions
in several parts of rural Idlib…”
Source:
‫أنقرة وواشنطن تُسرجان الحصان الصيني األسود؟‬
“Are Ankara and Washington Saddling Up ‘The Chinese Dark Horse’?” alAkhbar, 17 July 2017. http://al-akhbar.com/node/280285
… The past year witnessed a constant exodus of Uyghur fighters from ISIS
to the TIP, as fighting against ISIS intensified… The number of Uyghurs who
defected from ISIS and joined the TIP since the middle of last year until this
February totals around 400. ISIS’s withdrawal from the city of al-Bab in
February 2017 was a notable and important event for the TIP, which worked
to help strike a deal between the Euphrates Shield (and its sponsors in Ankara)
and ISIS, which stipulated that foreign ISIS fighters would leave al-Bab while
local fighters would be granted amnesty and their personal safety, as well as
that of their families and their belongings. It also gave Uyghur ISIS fighters
in al-Bab the choice between withdrawing with their families or going to
temporary centers before joining the TIP. According to a Syrian source inside
Euphrates Shield, 72 Uyghurs fighting with ISIS in al-Bab chose to go to the
temporary centers, while 11 decided to remain with ISIS and withdraw toward
southeast Aleppo Province and from there to al-Tabqa and Raqqa… The TIP
has begun to reap the rewards of the tensions in several parts of rural Idlib in
recent days. The TIP is not a party to the outbreak of hostilities, which consist
primarily of skirmishes between Ahrar al-Sham and Hayat Tahrir al-Sham/alNusra. Developments seem to point to an expansion of areas under the control
of the TIP.
Source:
‫لماذا استنفر “الحزب التركستاني” قواته في سوريا؟‬
“Why Are ‘Turkistani Party’ Forces on Alert in Syria?” al-Modon, 8 July 2017.
https://goo.gl/GEwGX3
Tens of motorcycles transporting TIP fighters left on Friday from Syrian
villages along the Turkish border toward Bab al-Hawa and Sarmada in Idlib,
after HTS took over the historical town of Sarmada and set up checkpoints
near Bab al-Hawa. In response, Ahrar al-Sham sent reinforcement with heavy
weaponry including anti-tank missiles. TIP leadership took a neutral position
between the two groups regarding these events, even though a considerable
number of TIP fighters favor HTS. Still, a large chunk of the TIP knows who
Ahrar al-Sham is and that the majority of the moderate opposition would side
with them were HTS to attack Ahrar. Consequently, the TIP is currently working
to mediate, meeting with Saudi preacher Abdullah Moheisini, former Nusra
Front jurist Abu Maria al-Qahtani, and Ahrar al-Sham leaders, in order to
calm the situation in northern Syria, particularly Bab al-Hawa… Residents
of the villages where the TIP is present do not feel in danger from fighting
between Ahrar and HTS, and thus the presence of the TIP represents a form of
insurance in the case of fighting between the two largest factions in northern
Syria… Residents of Jabal az Zawiya believe there are attempts to draw the TIP
to side with HTS in the expected attacks against Ahrar al-Sham. Residents fear
statements issued on Friday, which they view as the start of impending clashes
and which, according to some, marks the end of the jihad in the Levant; for
others they signal the end of a complicated phase of the Syrian Revolution.

OE Watch | September 2017

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Future of Syrian Refugees in Turkey
OE Watch Commentary: The Syrian refugee
crisis is one of the largest humanitarian crises of
our time, with over five million refugees having
fled Syria. More than three million of these are in
Turkey, with the rest divided between Iraq, Lebanon,
Jordan, Egypt and other countries. The accompanying
passages from the Turkish press discuss some of the
challenges Turkey is facing in hosting such a high
number of refugees, and the possible long-term threat
arising from refugee children, who make up two
thirds of the Syrian refugees in Turkey.
In the first passage, Turkish President Erdoğan
discusses the efforts that Turkey has made to host
the Syrian refugees. He points out that Turkey has
stretched its own resources and spent close to 30
billion dollars on addressing their needs, to include
shelters, health, education, training and employment.
He also laments that Turkey has only received 800
million euros of the six billion that was promised. In
March 2016, Turkey and the European Union (EU)
had signed a complicated agreement aimed to curb
the flood of refugees into Europe, which included
financial support to Turkey to improve the lives of the
three million Syrian refugees there.
Many outside observers agree that Turkey has done
a reasonably good job in hosting the refugees without
much outside support. Nevertheless, the refugees are
traumatized from a brutal war and trying to settle
into a country where they don’t speak the language.
The second and third passages feature findings by a
psychology and human development professor from
Turkey who has been conducting studies on the issue
of Syrian refugee children in Turkey. As the second
passage discusses, the data suggests that, of the two
million Syrian refugee children in Turkey, three
quarters suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder,
and 70% have lost a family member. The data also
shows that “over half of these children should be in
elementary school but are not going; 70% of those
who should be in middle school are not going.. [and] at
the high school level, the rate is 90%.”
In the third passage, the same professor points
out that this dangerous combination of traumatized
children with no education and no hope for the
future, and living in refugee camps has produced
terror groups in other parts of the world. He notes
that the refugee camps in the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border are where the Taliban was born. Similarly, he
claims that refugee camps in Africa are where Boko
Haram was born. He concludes that Turkey does
not have the option to allow this to happen, limited
resources or not. End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya)

Source: “Erdoğan’dan Afrin mesajı! ‘Gerekli cevabı vereceğiz’ (A message about
Afrin by Erdoğan! ‘We will respond as necessary’),” Milliyet.com, 8 July 2017.
http://www.milliyet.com.tr/son-dakika-erdogan-kapsamli-siyaset-2481448/
“Unfortunately our European friends have continued to stand idly by in the face of
this issue which is a life or death situation for millions of innocent people. We have
tried very hard to fulfill our humanitarian duties, by stretching our own resources.
The camps that we built for the refugees are unmatched in the world. We did not
and are not letting the refugees live in ghettos, or islands that are effectively open
air prisons, nor did we leave them in desperation and hunger. On the contrary,
we are hosting them in temporary shelters and our cities, in a dignified way. From
education to health services, from language training to employment, we are working
on answering their every need. We have spent close to 30 billion dollars through
our government agencies, municipalities and NGOs, but we have not received any
serious support from the international community. I want this to be known...
....While doing all these, the European Union had promised 6 billion Euros. But
until now, we have only received 800 million Euros. Numbers and statements are
being distorted here...”
Source: Ayşe Arman, “Eğitilmeyen Suriyeli mülteci çocuklar karşımıza Taliban
olarak çıkabilir! (Syrian refugee children who are not educated can emerge as the
Taliban!),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 9 July 2017. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/
ayse-arman/egitilmeyen-suriyeli-multeci-cocuklar-karsimiza-taliban-olarakcikabilir-40514186
[Question:] One of the issues that you highlight is Syrian refugee children. There
are 3 million refugees, 2 million of them are children.... What kind of data do you
have on these children?
[Answer:] The data is awful. Very sad. These children are experiencing huge
levels of trauma. Three quarters of them suffer from post-traumatic stress
disorder. The rate of depression is near 50%.... They can’t sleep at night, they wet
themselves... The rate of losing a family member is near 70%. They have either lost
their mother or father. The result is depression. They don’t want to eat, they don’t
want to sleep, maybe they are suicidal. This is the situation....
This is a very sad picture....Over half of these children should be in elementary
school but they are not going. 70% of those that should be in middle school are not
going. For the high school level, the rate is 90%... So, on the one hand, they have
experienced trauma. They can’t sleep. They have no hope for the future. On the
other hand, they are not going to school. So what is going to happen to these kids?...
We have seen the answer to this question in other parts of the world, when there are
similar conflicts. For example in the Pakistan-Afghanistan border... [if they are not
educated] they will become the Taliban... This is how Boko Haram in Africa, and the
Taliban emerged. So we do not have the option to do nothing....
Source: Selçuk R. Şirin, “İtiraz Et, Hayal Kur, İlerle! (Object, Dream, Get Ahead!)”,
Speech at TEDxIstanbul, 6 July 2016. https://www.youtube.com
watch?v=SAsC0zifeTU
“We have a very dangerous situation. A group that has suffered trauma, [who is]
not going to school, and ... settling in a country where they don’t speak the language.
In order to predict where this can lead, we only need to look at three geographies.
Look at the Far East-- the Pakistan-Afghanistan border is just one of them-- the
refugee camps there is where the Taliban was born. Look at Africa, from the refugee
camps in Africa, Boko Haram was born. Look at the Middle East-- you know the
Middle East. We have this danger ahead of us. We need to provide these kids with a
better hope for the future.”
OE Watch | September 2017

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Israel’s New Project to Tackle Tunnel Threat
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages from Israeli
sources discuss the construction of a new wall aimed to tackle the
threat posed by Hamas tunnels. The wall will reportedly reach dozens
of meters deep into the ground, stand six meters high from ground
level and have sensors installed in it.
As the first passage from the Times of Israel notes, “the construction
of Israel’s underground security barrier aimed at countering the Hamas
terror group’s attack tunnels is picking up speed...with hundreds of
workers operating around the clock on the massive engineering project.”
Work on the 37-mile barrier began this summer and is planned to be
completed within two years. It will reportedly feature an “advanced
underground protection system that extends dozens of meters below the
ground... in order to detect and destroy tunnels that attempt to penetrate
into Israeli territory, as well as an above-ground metal fence adorned
with sensors.” As the second passage from the Haaretz notes, “sensors
installed inside the barrier will sound an alarm if anyone approaches it
and warn Israel of any future tunnel digging.”
The passages note that the Israeli military is concerned that the
construction of the barrier could spark a conflict with Hamas. However,
they also point out that the barrier is being built inside Israeli territory.
The third passage from Al Monitor discusses Israeli assessments
regarding how Hamas might react to the construction. It points out that
the tunnel project is the “apple of [Hamas’s] eye,” and that Hamas may
try to sabotage the construction of the project. It also notes that as the
situation in Gaza worsens, the project may be a catalyst for a wave of
Hamas violence. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The defense establishment hopes the underground
concrete barrier will eliminate the threat posed by
Hamas tunnels entering Israel.”

Source: Judah Ari Gross, “Revealing details of Gaza tunnelthwarting barrier, IDF says it could spark war,” Times of Israel, 10
August 2017. http://www.timesofisrael.com/revealing-details-ofgaza-tunnel-thwarting-barrier-idf-says-it-could-spark-war
The construction of Israel’s underground security barrier
aimed at countering the Hamas terror group’s attack tunnels is
picking up speed, the head of the IDF’s Southern Command said
Wednesday, with hundreds of workers operating around the clock
on the massive engineering project.
Maj. Gen. Eyal Zamir said the military was concerned that the
construction on the barrier could spark a conflict with Hamas.
The terror group sees its tunnels as a central weapon in the fight
against Israel and the Defense Ministry’s barrier presents a threat
to them...
The work on the 37-mile (60-kilometer) barrier began in earnest
earlier this summer, and Zamir said it would be completed within
two years. It will feature an advanced underground protection
system that extends dozens of meters below the ground — the
army would not specify the depth — in order to detect and destroy
tunnels that attempt to penetrate into Israeli territory, as well as
an above-ground metal fence adorned with sensors.
The Defense Ministry will also bulk up the defense along the Gaza
coast, putting up breakwaters and other protective measures in
order to prevent infiltration into Israel from the sea, as occurred
during the 2014 Gaza war...
The barrier is being built inside Israeli territory, Zamir said. The
current metal fence surrounding the Strip, which lies exactly on
the border, will remain in place, while the new fence is built a few
dozen meters inside Israel.

Source: “Israeli Army Reveals Massive Barrier Being Built to Stop Hamas’ Gaza Terror Tunnels,” Haaretz.com, 10 August 2017. http://www.
haaretz.com/israel-news/1.806052
The Israel Defense Forces is tackling the threat posed by tunnels that Hamas builds from Gaza into Israel by constructing a massive barrier.
The project, estimated to cost 3 billion shekels ($833 million), will include a concrete wall fitted with sensors and reaching dozens of meters
deep into the ground and standing six meters high from ground level...
The defense establishment hopes the underground concrete barrier will eliminate the threat posed by Hamas tunnels entering Israel. Sensors
installed inside the barrier will sound an alarm if anyone approaches it and warn Israel of any future tunnel digging.
The barrier’s construction is also aimed at destroying the existing tunnels near the border. The army is using a huge drilling machine that
crushes anything in its path to a considerable depth. This is expected to destroy the tunnels currently crossing the border from Gaza to
Israel...
Afterward large iron cages containing water-resistant pipes with sensors will be inserted into the ground as foundations. Once the
underground barrier is built, a six-meter-high metal wall will be built on top of it to prevent anyone from crossing the border above the
ground.
Source: Shlomi Eldar, “Israel to launch major project to block Hamas tunnels,” Al Monitor, 27 April 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2017/04/israel-hamas-gaza-strip-attack-tunnels-construction-idf.html
Israel feels that there is a chance that Hamas’ military wing may try to sabotage the construction in order to rescue the apple of its eye: the
tunnel project....
...the more the economic situation in Gaza worsens, and the more Hamas feels powerless regarding the distress of the Gaza residents, the
more likely it is to retaliate. There is a high likelihood that Israel’s obstacle-building efforts may be the catalyst for an eruption of Hamas
violence to break the closure on Gaza.
OE Watch | September 2017

15

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Germany Withdraws from Incirlik
OE Watch Commentary: In late July, Germany completed the
withdrawal of its troops from the Incirlik Air Base in southern
Turkey. Approximately 260 troops and 6 Tornado patrol planes
along with an air refueling tanker, equipment and aircraft parts
will be moving to the Azraq Airbase in Jordan by October. The
German Tornado war planes conduct reconnaissance missions
as part of the coalition against the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS). The accompanying passages from the Turkish and
international press discuss this development.
As the first passages discusses, the decision was made after a
series of issues causing tension in Turkish-German relations. The
second passage discusses some of the operational details of the
transfer. It will take two months to move the planes and technical
equipment, especially for the containers with digital military
A U.S. Air Force KC-135 Stratotanker prepares to land at Mwaffaq Salti Air Base in Al
equipment to be removed from Incirlik and re-established in the
Azraq, Jordan, October 17, 2009
base in Jordan. The base in Jordan is not yet ready to accommodate
Source: By Caycee Cook, U.S. Air Force [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AKC-135_
prepares_to_land_at_Mwaffaq_Salti_Air_Base.jpg, Public Domain.
the German planes, so the planes will first be sent back to Germany. It
also points out that the base is smaller than Incirlik and that it “must first be modified to meet the needs of the German air grouping.”
Then-Turkish Defense Minister Fikri Işık (current Deputy Prime Minister) said that Turkey was ready to provide support to ensure that the
withdrawal did not disrupt the fight against ISIS. The final passage by a Turkish foreign policy expert points out that Germany’s withdrawal
of its troops from Turkey would make it difficult for Germany to implement Article 5 of the NATO charter on Turkey’s behalf, warning that
Turkish-German frictions may be “the harbinger of an overhaul of the transatlantic security system.” It may be premature to make such a claim,
and it is worth noting that German troops remain at the Konya Airbase in Turkey. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“... the last Tornado plane at the Incirlik Base left today [31 July].”
Source: “Alman Tornadolarının İncirlikten çekilmesi tamamlandı (German Tornados’ withdrawal from Incirlik is complete),” Cumhuriyet.
com, 31 July 2017. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/turkiye/793407/Alman_Tornadolari_nin_incirlik_ten_cekilmesi_tamamlandi.html
In June, following Turkey’s refusal to grant permission to German parliamentarians to visit the base, the German government and Federal
Parliament had decided to move its approximately 260 troops and 6 Tornado patrol planes and fuel transfer planes located in Incirlik to Jordan.
According to the reports in the German press, based on reporting on [German] Defense Ministry sources, the last Tornado plane at the Incirlik
Base left today [31 July]. It was reported that the Tornados have returned to the Buchel Air Base in the Rheinland Pfalz area of Germany.
Germany had been conducting patrol missions in Syria and Iraq since early last year, as part of its support to the anti-ISIS international
coalition. It is expected that the German Tornados will re-start their patrol missions as of mid-October, following the completion of preparations
at the Jordanian Azraq Base.
Source: “Germany begins troop withdrawal from Turkey’s Incirlik Air Base,” RT.com, 10 July 2017. https://www.rt.com/news/395820germany-troops-withdrawal-incirlik/
The process of transferring military aircraft and personnel from the Turkish airbase to a new location in Jordan will result in the suspension
of German participation within the US-led coalition for at least two or three months, the German Defense Ministry said earlier...
Tornado reconnaissance jets stationed at Incirlik will be sent back to Germany as the Jordanian base is not yet fully ready to accommodate
the aircraft. The Tornados are due in Jordan by October. Jordan’s Al-Asrak base is also much smaller than Turkey’s Incirlik and must first be
modified to meet the needs of the German air grouping. Berlin must also still sign several technical agreements with Amman regulating the
stationing of German aircraft at the base, German’s Der Spiegel weekly reports.
Source: “Cengiz Çandar, “German troops poised to leave Turkey for Jordan,” Al Monitor, 7 June 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2017/06/turkey-germany-nato-rift-may-bring-overhaul-nato-ranks.html#ixzz4pUaGoiwh
“If Germany indeed removes its troops from Turkey, Berlin would no longer be able to implement Article 5 of NATO’s charter on Turkey’s
behalf. Article 5 is the backbone of the alliance under which every member country agrees to defend the others. ... Turkish-German frictions
may be the harbinger of an overhaul of the transatlantic security system.”
OE Watch | September 2017

16

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Yemen’s Ballistic Missiles Continue Taunting Saudi Arabia
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 July, Yemeni forces from the
“Huthi-Saleh” alliance battling the Saudi/UAE-led “Arab Coalition”
launched a “Burkan-2-H” missile toward an oil refinery in the Saudi
port city of Yanbu, approximately 800 kilometers from the Yemeni
border. Days later they claimed the simultaneous launch of several
“Burkan-1” missiles toward the King Fahad Airbase in the Saudi
city of al-Taif. Although neither strike seems to have caused
significant damage, the launches signal that Yemeni forces are still
able to lob missiles across the border, in greater numbers and across
greater distances than before. That is a problem for Saudi Arabia,
according to the two accompanying passages.
The launch targeting Yanbu is the deepest missile penetration into
Saudi territory in the current conflict, while the simultaneous launch
a few days later was the first of its kind. The Huthi-Saleh forces’ use
of ballistic missiles recalls tactics used by Saddam Hussein and the
Iraqi Army in 1990, where range, mobility and concealment of TELs
(Transporter-Erector-Launcher) were prioritized at the expense of
firepower and accuracy. Yemen’s cave-rich mountainous terrain is a
favorable environment for such an employment of missiles. The mere
fact of successfully flying a Burkan (modified SCUD) across the
border is considered a strategic victory for the Huthi-Saleh forces.
As noted in the first accompanying passage from the Qatari
daily al-Araby al-Jadid, it is significant that Huthi-Saleh forces
can escalate their missile launches after two years of conflict.
Neutralizing Yemen’s ballistic missile threat was, after all, a key
driver of the initial Saudi military intervention in March 2015.
As the article notes, “the most important message of the Huthis
and their allies to Saudi Arabia is that after tens of thousands
of airstrikes they are still able to threaten Saudi airspace.” The
launches may have little operational value, but they can be held up as
evidence of shortcomings in the Arab Coalition’s “SCUD-hunting”
efforts and the Saudi-led effort as a whole.
With each additional missile launch, Yemeni forces aligned with
the Huthis and former president Saleh seek to drive home the point
that the Arab Coalition lacks meaningful ground-level intelligence
in Yemen. The second accompanying passage, from the Arabiclanguage webpage of the Russian news website Sputnik, quotes a
spokesperson for the anti-Saudi Yemeni armed forces who argues,
somewhat tauntingly: “The intelligence shortcomings lead to the
hysteria and haphazardness of the coalition airstrikes against civilian
targets, in light of their inability to strike Yemen’s missiles.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…after tens of thousands of airstrikes [the Huthis
and their allies] are still able to threaten Saudi
airspace…”
Source:
‫صواريخ الحوثيني باتجاه السعودية رسائل سياسية أو ًال‬
“Huthi Missiles Toward Saudi Arabia: Political Message Primarily,”
al-Araby al-Jadid, 28 July 2017. https://goo.gl/qKyzEK
On Thursday evening the Huthis announced that they had launched
“several [ballistic] missiles” toward the King Abdel Aziz Airbase
in al-Taif, Saudi Arabia…This is the first time the Huthis claimed to
have launched “several missiles.” There are questions whether they
were three or four and whether they were launched simultaneously
or sequentially. This is nonetheless a notable escalation… it is clear
that they carry a political message more so than an attempt to strike
and destroy the enemy. The most important message of the Huthis and
their allies to Saudi Arabia is that after tens of thousands of airstrikes
they are still able to threaten Saudi airspace. This is the most they
can do given the asymmetry in favor of the coalition airstrikes.
Each missile launched may be answered with hundreds of airstrikes.
The Huthis and their allies don’t have air defense to prevent these
strikes…

Source:
‫الجيش اليمني املتحالف مع أنصار اهلل قدراتنا الصاروخية تحمل الكثير من املفاجآت‬
“The Yemeni Army Allied with Ansar Allah: Many Surprises
Remaining For Our Missile Capabilities,” Sputnik (Arabic), 12 July
2017. https://goo.gl/xei3Sq
“The United States wants to tell the world that it has military
intelligence on Yemen while in fact that is not the case. Most of
what is published by U.S. intelligence is available in leaks and
different media outlets including social media. This points to an
American inability to obtain intelligence, especially given the tactics,
formations and military measures secretly taken by the army and
the popular committees and which cannot be infiltrated… The
intelligence shortcomings lead to the hysteria and haphazardness
of the coalition airstrikes against civilian targets, in light of their
inability to strike Yemen’s missiles… [Yemen’s] missile capabilities
are improving daily and there are further technical models that will
improve our capabilities of establishing a strike and counter-strike
balance. Meanwhile, the U.S. and the west will continue to attrite the
Gulf countries.”

OE Watch | September 2017

17

AFRICA
An African Perspective on China’s Role in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: China establishing a military base in
Djibouti – so far its one and only in Africa – is not a sudden change
in foreign policy. As the accompanying article relates, this expanding
military footprint is part of a natural progression that started with
the end of the Cold War. Since then, China has gradually increased
its willingness to be involved in Africa, especially in the realm of
peacekeeping. The article, from a South African source, analyzes
China’s role in Africa through three broad perspectives, which it
claims are related to China’s goals: Asserting its position as a global
power, crafting a positive image of itself, and promoting its national
interests.

“African leaders must be realistic about

developments such as the Djibouti military base.
They can’t welcome China’s presence – and
investments – as an acceptable alternative to
America, while opposing Beijing’s use of diplomatic
– and even military – means to protect its
interests.”

On the first point, it is notable that China is the only country that
contributes both significant amounts of money and numbers of troops
to UN peacekeeping operations. In fact China has emerged as an
important player in international peacekeeping operations not just
in Africa but in other locations as well. On the second point, using
peacekeeping in a deliberate and systematic way enables China to
project itself not just as a global power but also a responsible one, thus
helping to fulfill its goal of placing itself in a positive light. Gifting
the entire African Union building has certainly further helped it to
burnish its image.
China’s third goal, according to the article, is promoting its national
interests. With China now Africa’s largest trading partner, and the
country making huge investments in African infrastructure and
businesses, it is no surprise that it would also want to protect these
financial outlays. Therefore China’s strategic and material concerns
are inextricably tied to African politics and security. Although the
article does not mention it, there has been considerable blowback in
Africa against China because Chinese goods frequently undercut
locally produced ones. Thus from the Chinese perspective, good
public relations from peacekeeping can possibly help offset some of
the bad publicity it receives for its often controversial marketplace
actions.
Although China has a tradition of non-interventionism, it
recognized a need to participate in peacekeeping in South Sudan, a
country where it has strong interests in oil production. As the article
relates, this perhaps signals a more assertive role for China with
regards to peace and security in Africa. However, there is a risk
that if it becomes too assertive it will be viewed as yet just another
colonial power mainly interested in exploiting African resources.
With China contributing troops to peacekeeping operations in
South Sudan, Mali, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
author claims that China is sending a message to other major powers
that while its profile is rising, it is not a strategic threat to them. The
author notes that China “wants developing countries to regard it as
a friend in global politics,” but warns that China may apply military
power if “it believes its economic interests are under threat.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Chinese engineers serving with the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID), part of an expanding role of China in Africa

Source: UN Photo/Stuart Price, https://www.flickr.com/photos/un_photo/5812675060/in/photolist-9RDtMw-RM2eWy-72RDVM-5Jf4R-ucdCLzJz526B-ziB29i-9U25Ev-7b63aD-E2VJey-DVyfFe-xcG3Cf-rioCv9-rzWPut, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0

Source: Theo Neethling, “Africa: What the Djibouti Military Base
Tells Us About China’s Growing Role in Africa,” The Conversation
(South Africa), 1 August 2017. https://theconversation.com/whatthe-djibouti-military-base-tells-us-about-chinas-growing-role-inafrica-81783
At the same time, as much as China is being forced to adopt high
risk strategies in cases of overseas investment, as in South Sudan, its
approach can still be defined as being carefully impartial. It remains
true that China’s increased involvement in political dynamics in South
Sudan doesn’t sit easily with its long held policy of non-intervention.
China remains acutely aware of the pitfalls associated with the
politics of interventionism, especially in developing nations. It wants
developing countries to regard it as a friend in global politics.
But it wouldn’t be surprising if China started to apply at least a
measure of military (hard) power alongside diplomatic (soft) power if
it believes its economic interests are under threat.
African leaders must be realistic about developments such as the
Djibouti military base. They can’t welcome China’s presence – and
investments – as an acceptable alternative to America, while opposing
Beijing’s use of diplomatic – and even military – means to protect its
interests.

OE Watch | September 2017

18

AFRICA
Israel Tries to Re-Engage Africa
OE Watch Commentary: “Israel is coming back to Africa,” or at
least that’s what Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s Prime Minister, told
attendees at the recent Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) summit. The accompanying article discusses Israel’s
efforts to strengthen its relations with the continent and some local
reactions to this.
About 50 years ago Israel had thriving relations in many parts
of the continent as African nations were eager to receive technical
assistance in security, agriculture, health, and education from
a country viewed as a model for successful post-colonization
development. In return, as the accompanying article relates, Israel
was hoping to garner diplomatic support in its troubling relations
with its neighboring Arab countries. Thus, the article claims that
nothing has changed as Israel’s present push to return to Africa is
once again to garner support for its diplomatic policies and many in
Africa are once again looking forward to the technological solutions
to some of their problems Israel has to offer.
What happened that caused Israel to leave Africa? The article
claims that it was Israeli success in the Six Day War in which it
captured great swaths of Arab land. By 1972, Arab pressure and
fears of African disunity persuaded many African nations to sever
ties with Israel. Israel’s “Africa adventure,” as described by then
Foreign Minister Golda Meir, was over by late 1973.
Israel’s attempted return to Africa is not being met by jubilant calls
in all parts of the continent. Nigeria, Benin, Niger, and Morocco
all chose not to attend the ECOWAS summit. Morocco’s King
Mohammed VI explicitly noted that the reason was Netanyahu’s
attendance; the others provided no explanation. Israel has even had
difficulties with Senegal, a country whose president, Macky Sall,
met with Netanyahu in New York, which led to the latter declaring
afterwards that the two nations had “great relations.” Three months
later Senegal was a co-sponsor of a UN Security Resolution declaring
certain Israeli settlements illegal. Israel cut its aid programs to
Senegal and also Angola, which had voted in favor of the resolution,
and recalled its ambassador from Senegal. Relations between Israel
and Senegal were repaired when Netanyahu and Sall met again at the
ECOWAS summit, but it is still uncertain whether or not Senegal will
adopt a more pro-Israel stance.
There have been other disputes with African countries, including
at international forums. Thus, while Israel has made some progress,
there is still a great deal of resistance to its present charm offensive.
Indeed, as the author states, even some of the countries perceived
as being more amenable to better relations with Israel might not
readily embrace diplomatic support for it as they balance regional
commitments to other countries that have a more critical stance
towards the Middle East nation. In other words, the support Israel gets
in Africa might take different forms in different nations and could
frequently be ambivalent or unstable. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is working to establish
better relations between Israel and Africa

Source: US State Dept, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benjamin_Netanyahu_portrait.jpg, Public Domain

“During his speech in Monrovia, [Israeli Prime

Minister Netanyahu] declared once again that ‘Israel
is coming back to Africa’.”
Source: Yotam Gidron, “Call it a comeback: Israel’s grand ‘return’ to
Africa,” African Arguments, 2 August 2017. http://africanarguments.
org/2017/08/03/call-it-a-comeback-israels-grand-return-to-africa/
This June, Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu broke new
ground as he became the first non-African leader to speak at the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) summit.
During his speech in Monrovia, he declared once again that “Israel is
coming back to Africa.”
Israel is making considerable efforts to strengthen its relations with
the continent. A year ago, Netanyahu became the first Israeli PM to
visit Africa in decades as he travelled to Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda and
Ethiopia. Since 2016, at least nine African heads of state have visited
Israel.
Netanyahu’s vow that Israel is “coming back” to Africa is a reference
to the thriving relations of the 1960s...
Israel’s engagement was largely driven by the need to gain support at
the UN and curb Arab influence.
Israel is also clearly focusing on East and West Africa in its efforts.
In southern Africa, where memories of apartheid and Israel’s support
for it are fresher, the country is still less welcome. The same is true in
North Africa.

OE Watch | September 2017

19

AFRICA
Al-Shabaab’s Defiant Reply to Amnesty Offer
OE Watch Commentary: No one expected Somalia’s offer of amnesty
to al-Shabaab fighters to bring an end to the ongoing conflict in that
country, but the hope was that more of the fighters would accept it than
ultimately did. To be sure, there were some who decided to leave the
terrorist group – approximately 50 at last count – including a few senior
leaders. However, as the accompanying article relates, such efforts,
while weakening al-Shabaab, are not enough to defeat the organization
since the core leadership’s vision of Somalia does not include the federal
government.

“With the presumed expiration of that amnesty,
it is clear which path most of al-Shabaab has
chosen, but what is less clear is the Somali
government’s ability to respond.”

That government is presently
led by Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, known as Farmajo.
As President of Somalia he was
the one who announced the
amnesty in April of this year,
with a promise to eradicate
those who did not accept the
offer within two years. Some
speculated that with Farmajo,
reportedly incorruptible and
less clan-inclined, there was a
genuine chance for engagement
with al-Shabaab. However,
al-Shabaab leaders quickly
squashed that idea, declaring
that the amnesty offer was
really made for western
consumption.
Somali National Army soldiers, such as the ones shown here on a technical, will assume greater responsibility for protecting the

Since Farmajo’s inauguration,
country from attacks by al-Shabaab as AMISOM withdraws
Source: AMISOM, (Flickr) https://goo.gl/g7iHFP, Public Domain
al-Shabaab has stepped up its
attacks in Mogadishu, letting
the country know how it feels about the new president. These bloody
Source: Omar S. Mahmood, “Al-Shabaab holds its ground against
incidents are especially unnerving as the African Union Mission to
Somalia’s amnesty deal,” Institute for Security Studies (South
Somalia (AMISOM) has already handed over security of the capital to
Africa), 4 August 2017. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/al-shabaabSomali forces and has plans for a large countrywide drawdown to begin
holds-its-ground-against-somalias-amnesty-deal
in October 2018 and be completed by 2020. Al-Shabaab’s continued
In early April, Farmajo announced a 60-day amnesty for alstrength has some worried that such a move by AMISOM may be
Shabaab militants, while also offering to open discussions with the
premature, and that Somali military forces may not be fully prepared to
movement’s leadership.
deal with the terrorist organization by then.
At the same time, he noted that Somalia was in a state of war,
Besides launching large-scale attacks, al-Shabaab has also been
and promised to eradicate within two years those who didn’t take
targeting the 14,000 individuals delegated by their clans to vote in the
advantage of his offer to surrender. With the presumed expiration of
2016-2017 elections. These assassinations could serve to intimidate the
that amnesty, it is clear which path most of al-Shabaab has chosen,
population at large for the 2020-2021 elections when universal adult
but what is less clear is the Somali government’s ability to respond.
suffrage will be in effect. And al-Shabaab is not limiting its attempts
The biggest question is whether Farmajo will be able to implement
to impact political processes to just Somalia. Its violent activity in the
the stick of his approach, and militarily defeat the group within two
northern part of Kenya, where it has an operational sanctuary in the
years. It is too early to judge – but al-Shabaab has demonstrated it
Boni Forest, is meant to persuade Kenya to reduce its military presence
is up to the task.
in Somalia.
The violence, combined with messaging directed towards Kenya,
As the accompanying article states, with AMISOM withdrawing its
is an attempt to influence the nation’s political process (in favour of
forces over the next few years, al-Shabaab does not need to be stronger
a government that would reduce its military presence in Somalia).
than its enemies, it just needs to be strong enough to survive. If it does,
This indicates how al-Shabaab can strategically employ its violence
its presence will continue to be a problem not only for Somalia but the
to shape larger events.
entire region. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
OE Watch | September 2017

20

AFRICA
Mali’s Dilemma over Dialogue with Insurgents
OE Watch Commentary: Amadou Kufa is
the leader of a group in Mali called the Macina
Liberation Front (FLM) or the Macina Brigade
(Katiba Macina), which is part of a coalition of
militant groups that make up al-Qaeda in the
Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). The group claims
a desire to revive a Fulani Islamic emirate in
Mali. Although al-Qaeda groups rarely negotiate,
the excerpted French-language article from Le
Monde discusses a recent development in which
Kufa offered his terms for a ceasefire with the
government of Mali.
According to the article, Kufa sent two
emissaries to Bamako, Mali’s capital, to pass a
message to a professor in the city who used to
be in government. The terms Kufa demanded
for a ceasefire were an end to French operations
in Mali and the United Nations Integrated
Multidimensional Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA). He also demanded that the professor
who received his message act as mediator. Kufa’s
support comes from his perceived support of ethnic
Fulanis in Mali and the protection he offers to
Fulani pastoralists.
The article states that the Malian position on
negotiations is unclear. Officially the government
indicated at a national conference that it was open
to talks and that negotiations were necessary
given that it was unable to militarily defeat the
insurgents. There is hope that negotiations could
achieve success because the group that oversees
FLM under the AQIM umbrella is Ansar Dine,
whose leader, Iyad Ag Ghaly, was a Malian
diplomat before becoming a Salafi-jihadi and
joining al-Qaeda. The government, however,
has also reiterated that it does not negotiate with
terrorists, which it labels both the FLM and Ansar
Dine. The condition the government has stipulated,
according to the article, is that Kufa or Ag Ghaly
must identify as Malians.
There are, however, other prominent institutions
in Mali that have influence over whether
negotiations can take place. The head of the Malian
Islamic High Council, for example, supports
negotiations with Ansar Dine and the FLM. On
the other hand, as the article notes, France and
the international community’s opposition to
negotiations would likely make Mali hesitate before
engaging with Ansar Dine or the FLM. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“On the principle of direct discussions with jihadist groups, the
position of the Malian authorities remains unclear.”

Ansar Dine Rebels

Source: Anne Look, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ansar_Dine_Rebels_-_VOA.jpg, ([Public domain)

Source: “Au Mali, le djihadiste Amadou Koufa pose trois conditions pour négocier
avec le pouvoir (In Mali, the jihadist Amadou Koufa Poses Three Conditions to
Negotiate with the Government),” Lemonde.fr, 25 July 2017. http://www.lemonde.fr/
afrique/article/2017/07/25/au-mali-le-djihadiste-amadou-koufa-pose-trois-conditionspour-negocier-avec-le-pouvoir_5164770_3212.html
At the end of May, two emissaries of Amadou Kufa, the founder of the Malian jihadist
movement Macina Liberation Front (FLM), traveled to Bamako to bring a message
to Professor Alioune Nouhoum Diallo. Amadou Kufa, a Fulani preacher active in the
Mopti region and a leading figure in a movement that has claimed since 2015 a number
of deadly attacks, poses as the first condition for any negotiation with the government
the cessation of Operation Barkhane. Launched in August 2014, the French force’s
mission is to combat terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region, which extends from
Mauritania to Chad via Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger. The second condition laid
down by the founder of the MLF is the departure of the United Nations Integrated
Multidimensional Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Finally, the third
condition to any negotiation is in the first phase of the talks in Bamako to have as the
mediator Professor Alioune Nouhoum Diallo.
According to a reliable source, Amadou Koufa organized this year in the Macina
region the crossing of the Niger River of Fulani herders. There were no Malian
authorities or security forces. Amadou Kufa supervised the passage of animals in three
parts of the Niger River and everything went very well.
On the principle of direct discussions with jihadist groups, the position of the Malian
authorities remains unclear. For the moment, [Malian] President Keita and his
government are reluctant to take the plunge. They may be afraid of placing themselves
in an uncomfortable position vis-à-vis the international community, particularly
France.

OE Watch | September 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA
FARC-EP Changes Its Name... to FARC-EP
OE Watch Commentary: The FARC-EP, which abbreviates
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia -- Ejército del Pueblo
(Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces -- Army of the People),
usually shortened to just FARC, has indicated it will change its name as
it transitions (ostensibly) into peaceable political pursuits and electoral
politics. Now we have the first credible information as to what its new
name will be. Reportedly, it will be called the FARC-EP, Frente Amplio
de Reconciliación de Colombia - Esperanza del Pueblo (Broad Front
of Colombian Reconciliation -- Hope of the People). This researcher
and many analysts and journalists here and abroad hope that this report
pans out as valid. It will save thousands of us from having to repeatedly
write “New Name Such-and-Such, formerly known as the FARC.”
In any case, the name-change does not seem to indicate anything
substantive about the organization’s goals, leadership structure, or
organizational ethics. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Flag of the FARC-EP

Source: By MrPenguin20 via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_the_FARC-EP.svg, CC BY SA 3.0

Source: “El nuevo nombre de las FARC (The new name of the FARC),” Caracol Radio, 27 July 2017. http://caracol.com.co/
programa/2017/07/27/6am_hoy_por_hoy/1501160016_991561.html
“Caracol Radio scooped the news of the name that the group will take upon leaving its weapons behind and taking the path [to peace]. The
Armed Forces of Colombia -- Army of the People, that turned in its weapons and are in transit towards civilian life, leave behind that name of
more than fifty years and from now on will call themselves the Broad Front of Colombian Reconciliation -- Hope of the People.”

The Colombian Military’s Changing Priorities
OE Watch Commentary: The Colombian military is looking to the future and preparing for its role in post-conflict Colombia, now that some
of the country’s internal threats have been addressed. Given the decreased violence associated with drug trafficking activity and the peace
deal with the FARC, the military is now looking outside Colombia. The accompanying passages from Colombian sources discuss some of the
changing priorities of the Colombian military.
The Colombian Air Force (FAC per its Spanish acronym), in particular, has many new plans. As the first accompanying passage discusses,
the FAC is looking to launch a new military satellite before the end of 2017 in addition to developing new aeronautical science and technology
projects. It is also planning to participate in international military coalitions and in capacity building of partner nation militaries.
The FAC has already begun their efforts related to capacity building of partner nations. In June 2017, the FAC offered training for the
Guatemalan Air Force which focused on combating illicit trafficking; something that the FAC is well-versed in, given their extensive experience
in counternarcotics operations. Also in the realm of building partner nation capacities, Colombia has intensified its efforts to share its
experiences with countries in Central America, South America, and the Caribbean that are impacted by the effects of transnational organized
crime. Over the last two decades, the FAC has received extensive training on how to use air assets to counter illegal activity. Now, they have an
opportunity to share their experiences with partner nations.
As the second passage discusses, the most important challenge that the FAC faces in the post-conflict era is “redefining the roles, functions and
mission of the armed forces and the police in a complex multi-criminality context.” For example, the war on drugs will gradually be transferred
back to the National Police. The military has played a critical role in controlling internal conflicts for an extended time and their removal
from this status must be gradual so that the National Police can assimilate to their new and expanded duties. Although there is no set time
frame for when military components will separate their duties from the National Police, it is a priority in the post-conflict era. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)
Source: “Fuerza Aérea lanzará su satélite en 2017 (Colombian Air Force
Will Launch Its Satellite in 2017),” El Colombiano, 03 May 2017. http://
www.elcolombiano.com/colombia/fuerza-aerea-lanzara-su-satelite-en2017-DX4909162
During a one-on-one interview with reporter Ricardo Gaviria, Colombian
Air Force General Carlos Eduardo Bueno talks about new plans for the
institution, led by him. Among other things, Gen. Bueno says that the FAC
has plans to launch a military satellite before year’s end. He also discussed
how science and technology will play a bigger role in the future of the
country’s Air Force. Finally, he indicated that with a stronger dollar in
comparison to their peso, the Colombians will replace their Kfir aircraft.

Source: “La necesaria transformación de las FFAA (Necessary
Changes for Transformation of the Colombian Armed
Forces),” Confidencial Colombia, 23 May 2017. http://
confidencialcolombia.com/es/1/lo_mas_confidencial/31148/
La-necesaria-transformaci%C3%B3n-de-las-FFAA-(Parte-1)Jaime-Polanco-Fuerzas-Militares-Farc.htm
The article enumerates challenges the Colombian Armed
Forces face in the post-conflict era but one of the most
pertinent has been highlighted as redefining the roles, the
functions and the mission of the armed forces and the police in
a complex multi-criminality context.
OE Watch | September 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA
A Meeting in Lima, an Americas Ledger
OE Watch Commentary: A sideline event related to the news
coming out of Venezuela gives us useful insight into the real ledger of
competitors, that is, who stands for and against what in the hemisphere.
The Peruvian government invited a group of foreign ministers to a
meeting in Lima to consider the situation in Venezuela. At the meeting,
the attendees unanimously reprimanded the Maduro regime, defined
it as a dictatorship and took some first steps to show solidarity to the
Venezuelan National Assembly that Maduro recently ousted. We will
have to wait to see if there is anything to the attendees’ claims that what
they did was anything more than gesture.
The second accompanying source discusses a parallel meeting to the
one in Peru, organized by Maduro in Caracas, in which the attendees
“closed ranks in favor of the Venezuelan President, Nicolás Maduro.”
This highlights for us the underlying problem: many governments in
the region support the Maduro regime -- governments of countries
controlled by Marxist-inspired political parties. The core group is
formed of Cuba (Communist Party of Cuba), Bolivia (Movement
Toward Socialism), Ecuador (PAIS Alliance) and Nicaragua (Sandinista
National Liberation Front). Venezuela’s ruling party, the United Socialist
Party of Venezuela, PSUV, hardly stands isolated. The Marxist parties
continue to enjoy the backing of numerous extra-regional governments
and political parties as well.
As the third accompanying source indicates, the region’s non-Marxist
governments were indeed unable to assert the necessary support in
the Organization of American States (OAS) to effectively condemn
Venezuela. Whether the meeting in Peru was or was not in accordance
with international law is beside the point. The ledger of competitors
is best sorted by political parties and right now, pro-Bolivarian parties
have enough strength to paralyze the OAS and its supposedly potent
application of the Carta Democrática (a finding by the OAS that
democratic order within a country had been ruptured such that it
constituted an insurmountable obstacle to OAS participation by the
government that perpetrated the rupture). Imposition of said Carta
would in any case do nothing to reduce support that the PSUV enjoys
from affiliated parties like the Communist Party of Cuba. Statements
that the regime in Venezuela is a dictatorship or that Venezuela is
a failed state may have some future utility for justifying physical
action. In the meantime, the sides of the contest are at least clarifying
themselves.
The accompanying diagram is from Wikipedia. Note the Bolivarian
Alliance of the Americas (ALBA) countries in the middle. Therein
resides the core of support for totalitarian control of Venezuela. A
general list of parties forming the greater constellation of regional
support for the ALBA regimes can be discovered as the membership of
the Forum of Sao Paulo. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational
organisations in the Americas
Source:Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Supranational_American_Bodies, CC BY SA 3.0

Source: “17 países cierran filas contra la dictadura de Nicolás
Maduro (17 countries close ranks against the dictatorship of
Nicolás Maduro),” La Republica, 9 August 2017. http://webcache.
googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:jfr8srXWDNsJ:larepublica.
pe/politica/1071646-17-paises-cierran-filas-contra-la-dictadura-denicolas-maduro+&cd=6&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us
Videgaray [Mexican foreign minister] asserted that, ‘beyond
simple reflective posturing’, the countries will recognize legal
actions such as the signing of contracts or financial agreements with
Venezuela only if approved by the National Assembly…. This [the
meeting and its results] is no small thing considering that previously
the countries of CARICOM [Caribbean Community] voted against
the application of the Carta Democrática in Venezuela.”
Source: Editors, “Países del Alba cierran filas para defender a
Maduro y su Asamblea Constituyente (ALBA countries close ranks
to defend Maduro and his Constituent Assembly),” El Comercio,
9 August 2017. https://elcomercio.pe/amp/mundo/latinoamerica/
paises-alba-cierran-filas-defender-maduro-asamblea-constituyentenoticia-448591
“Parallel to the meeting of foreign ministers that was carried out in
Peru, the President of Venezuela called a meeting of representatives
of the Bolivarian Alliance in Caracas…they closed ranks in favor of
the Venezuelan President, Nicolás Maduro to reject international
sanctions against the National Constituent Assembly (ANC)…”

Source: Fabiola Velásquez, “Saúl Ortega: Reunión de cancilleres en Lima es violatorio del derecho internacional (Saúl Ortega: Meeting
of foreign ministers in Lima is violative of international law),” Ciudad MCY, 10 August 2017. http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/
search?q=cache:xGCUI9hvFg8J:ciudadmcy.info.ve/%3Fp%3D7020+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us
“The document signed in Lima is a failure. It follows an illegality that they promoted from the OAS. They met there [in Lima] because they
could not apply the Carta Democrática against Venezuela.”
OE Watch | September 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela’s Internal Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: The United Socialist
party of Venezuela (PSUV), has been consolidating
and deepening its control over the Venezuelan
population. The previous article in this issue
considers the external support that the PSUV enjoys
from other Marxist and Marxist-inclined parties
in the region and beyond. The overall analytical
proposition of that article (that the region is more
usefully sorted according to political party than
according to country or nation) applies in turn to
Venezuela’s internal crisis.
From the first accompanying source, we note that
the Vente Venezuela party, led by María Corina
Machado, is separating itself from the other parties
of the heterogeneous opposition coalition known
as the Table of Democratic Unity (MUD). That
party is refusing to participate in upcoming regional
elections that have been announced by the newlyimposed National Constituent Assembly (ANC) and
which will be controlled by the PSUV.
The second accompanying source is sufficient
explanation as to why. Diosdado Cabello, a PSUV
leader and leader of the ANC, is demanding a
show of capitulation and subordination from any
parties wishing to participate. In the same article
he asserts that the ANC is absolutely sovereign and
may continue in power for six years. While Vente
Venezuela asserts itself as committed to opposing
the PSUV dictatorship, other parts of the MUD
coalition, notably the socialist Democratic Action
party headed by the aging Henry Ramos Allup, has
apparently decided for the compromise participation
under the leadership of the PSUV. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Source: “Maria Corina se deslinda de los traidores
de la MUD que quieren ir a elecciones regionales
(Maria Corina sets herself apart from the traitors
of the MUD who want to go to [participate in] the
regional elections),” DolarToday and Noticiero
Digital, 11 August 2017. https://dolartoday.com/
maria-corina-se-deslinda-de-los-traidores-de-lamud-que-quieren-ir-elecciones-regionales/
[Opposition leader María Corina Machado:] “To
go to regional [elections] the way they are set up
now is to legitimate a CNE [National Elections
Council] that the entire world recognizes as
complicit in the greatest fraud in this hemisphere,
to go to elections is to accept that we lost the
struggle in the street, and that is not true,” she
warned.

Maria Corina Machado, Vente Venezuela

Source: By Carlos Díaz via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Maria_Corina_Machado.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0

“…to go to elections is to accept that we lost….”

Diosdado Cabello (in 2013)

Source: By El Cambur COM VE (http://www.elcambur.com.ve/) via Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VP-DiosdadoC.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0

Source: “Cabello: Candidatos a las
regionales deberán tener carta de
buena conducta (Candidates for the
Regionals Must Have a Letter of
Good Conduct),” El Nacional Web, 9
August 2017. http://www.el-nacional.
com/noticias/gobierno/cabellocandidatos-las-regionales-deberantener-carta-buena-conducta_198012

“Diosdado Cabello, member of the fraudulent National Constituent Assembly (ANC),
expressed that ... the regional elections candidates would have to present a good
conduct letter extended to them by the constituent assemblymen. Cabello warned that
they had better read all the regulations that the ANC approved and know the rules of
the democratic game.”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked
concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up
debate and critical thinking. As Geoff
Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the
ideas in it will be contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | September 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA
Haiti Peacekeeping Mission to End in October
OE Watch Commentary:
The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
will cease operations in October
2017. However, given Haiti’s
fragile state, the withdrawal of
MINUSTAH troops is hardly
welcome in the region, with several
countries already having expressed
their concerns with the plan. The
accompanying passages from Latin
American sources discuss regional
concerns regarding this withdrawal.
The mission had been established
in June 2004 by a United Nations
Security Council (UNSC)
resolution, after then-President
Bertrand Aristide left Haiti for
exile following an armed conflict
which spread to several cities across
the country. In January 2010, after
One of the bases of the Minustah in Cap-Haitien, with Nepali forces
Source: By Rémi Kaupp (Self-photographed), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMinustah_in_Cap-Haitien.jpg, [GFDL (http://www.gnu.
Haiti was devastated by a powerful
org/copyleft/fdl.html), CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) or CC BY-SA 2.5-2.0-1.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bysa/2.5-2.0-1.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
earthquake, the UNSC decided to
increase the overall force levels of
MINUSTAH to support the immediate recovery, reconstruction
“... the end of MINUSTAH might cause a surge in
and stability efforts in the country. Since the completion of
presidential elections in 2011, MINUSTAH has been working
Haitians trying to migrate to the Dominican Republic.
to fulfill its original mandate to restore a secure and stable
environment, to promote the political process, to strengthen Haiti’s
Source: “Venezuela y Haití son los países más corruptos de
government institutions and rule-of-law-structures, as well as to
América Latina (Venezuela and Haiti Are the Most Corrupt
promote and protect human rights.
Countries in Latin America),” Univision y Agencias, 07 January

“

Haiti is still viewed as very fragile when it comes to its
democratic institutions. As the first excerpt notes, it is ranked
the most corrupt country in Latin America (tied with Venezuela)
by Transparency International, an international anti-corruption
organization. For these reasons alone, the withdrawal of
MINUSTAH troops is creating concern. The Dominican Republic
in particular is worried about a possible mass migration of Haitian
nationals into the country, as border control was one of the many
roles performed by MINUSTAH troops. In an attempt to mitigate
concerns, the Dominican Republic is already planning to increase
troop presence along the countries’ shared border. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

”

2017. http://www.univision.com/noticias/corrupcion/venezuela-yhaiti-son-los-paises-mas-corruptos-de-america-latina

In Latin America, the countries ranked at the bottom of the list
put together by Transparency International – a global civil society
organization leading the fight against corruption – are Haiti and
Venezuela, both tied at 158 points. The index is formulated on
opinions of corruption experts in the public sector based on a
number of factors. An example is if public authorities are held
responsible for their acts or punished if caught in corruption
scandals.

Source: “El Ejército reforzará la frontera con Haití por salida MINUSTAH (Dominican Army Will Send More Troops to the Border with Haiti
After MINUSTAH Leaves),” Metro República Dominicana, 02 May 2017. https://www.metrord.do/do/noticias/2017/05/02/ejercito-reforzarafrontera-haiti-salida-minustah.html
The Dominican Republic Ministry of Defense announced the deployment of 1,000 troops to border areas between the country and Haiti
anticipating that the end of MINUSTAH might cause a surge in Haitians trying to migrate to the Dominican Republic. Dominican Defense
Minister Rubén Darío said that this mobilization will be a combined operation with a Border Security Special Unit (CESFRONT, per its
Spanish acronym).

OE Watch | September 2017

25

LATIN AMERICA
Honduras: Gang Leaders “Clone” Themselves to
Avoid Maximum Security Prison
OE Watch Commentary: In early 2017, Honduran authorities began
transferring high-level MS-13 and Barrio 18 gang members from the Tamara
prison in Tegucigalpa, Honduras to a maximum security prison recently built
outside the capital as part of operation Arpía III. These transfers aimed to
establish better control over gang members who were known to freely run
their operations from inside prisons. They were also designed to take away
luxuries known to few prisoners in Honduras except those with power or
money. To date, 773 prisoners classified as “highly dangerous” have been
transferred to the new prison. However, during the process, it was discovered
that some of the prisoners were able to “clone” themselves, meaning that they
used a fellow gang member to take their place in prison.
Within the Tamara prison, gang members operated with impunity and
could freely use cell phones. Thus the initial abrupt transfer of important
gang leaders led to a lack of communication and a rupture of their structures
outside prisons. This in turn led to the emergence of new leaders and new
roles on the outside, which in some cases angered incarcerated leaders. As
the first accompanying excerpt discusses, incarcerated gang members thus
began formulating plans to change their identities and appoint members of
their own organizations to take their place in prison before their scheduled
transfer.
The escape of dozens of Barrio 18 gang members in early May, just days
before their intended transfer, may be linked to this effort. As the second
excerpt suggests, authorities claim that this was not a simple escape, but
instead, part of the gang members’ plan to clone themselves, with the help
of complicit prison guards. Follow-on investigations into cloning within the
prison system revealed that at least 17 other inmates were serving sentences
for others. Now that this knowledge is public, steps are being taken to better
identify prisoners. These include improved intake procedures when initial
photos and fingerprints are taken. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Jefes de pandillas tienen a sus clones en los penales
(Gang Leaders Use Clones in Prison),” La Prensa, 17 June
2017. http://www.laprensa.hn/honduras/1077137-410/jefespandillas-clones-penales-pandilleros-ms-pandilla_18
The Honduran National Police revealed information which
confirms that many MS-13 and Barrio 18 gang leaders
changed their identities and appointed members of their
organizations to take their place in prison two months
before their scheduled transfer. This information is in line
with the identification process carried out by the National
Penitentiary Institute (INP), in coordination with Forensic
Medicine and the National Registry of Persons (RNP), which
indicated that they too obtained information that Mara
leaders did indeed “clone” themselves to avoid the drastic
changes they would have to endure in the new maximum
security prison.
Source: “Hasta 4 ‘clones’ tienen reos (Prisoners Have up to
4 Clones),” La Tribuna, 5 June 2017. http://www.latribuna.
hn/2017/06/05/4-clones-tienen-reos/
The escape of dozens of Barrio 18 gang members in early
May was only part of the plan the criminals came up with
following the announcement they would be transferred to
maximum security prisons. As one detective pointed out,
“It was not an escape, it was a well-orchestrated plan
implemented by Barrio 18 gang members in which they
decided to pay high amounts of money to key individuals
within the prison system so that they leave.” The detective
further stated that what happened is not at all uncommon and
that some prisoners have up to 4 clones serving their sentence
at varying times.

“... some prisoners have up to 4 clones serving their sentence at varying times.”
Source: “La cárcel hondureña donde están presos los pandilleros más peligrosos (The Honduran Prison Where the Most Dangerous Gang
Members will be Incarcerated),” Prensa Libre. 6 October 2016. http://www.prensalibre.com/internacional/la-carcel-hondurea-donde-estanpresos-los-pandilleros-mas-peligrosos
Honduran prisons are known for their abysmal conditions, but for high-ranking gang members who possess the economic means to bribe
guards, many are able to live in the same or even better conditions than outside of prison. For example, La Prensa news source reported that
following the transfer of some high ranking gang members, it became public knowledge that some were allowed to play video games on 52inch TVs, bring in their own furniture, and even install air-conditioning units, amongst other luxuries.

OE Watch | September 2017

26

LATIN AMERICA
Engineer-Enhanced Cocaine Production in Honduras
OE Watch Commentary: Are certain climates or locations
better than others for growing crops? Yes, but certain key factors
needed to grow specific crops can be mimicked to make an
area previously deemed as unfavorable more favorable. The
accompanying passages from Latin American sources discuss
engineer-enhanced cocaine production in Honduras, which has
significant implications for drug-cartel routes and schemes.
As the first excerpt discusses, in late April 2017, authorities
discovered the first ever coca plantation in the Olancho
Department of Honduras. From this location, drug traffickers
were growing more than 10,000 cocaine plants and 1,200
seedlings. More surprising still were indications that the
plantation had likely been operational since 2014. The second
excerpt points out that initial findings by authorities revealed
that the land used to create the plantation was scouted out by
Colombian crop engineers around that time. Once successful
with coca plants, the Colombians then proceeded to start growing
additional plants. As the third passage notes, Colombian drug
cartels will likely try to continue to produce in Honduras because
they can lower costs and further enhance their operational
structures. The piece also points out that this change “should put
countries such as Guatemala and El Salvador on alert because
route changes may occur due to new production schemes.”
Indigenous cocaine is prevalent in the jungle region of the
Andean ridge in Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia. This is because
cocaine plants require hot, damp, and humid climates as well
as iron-rich clay soil to thrive; all of which is readily offered by
the rainforest environment unique to the Andean jungle. The
Andean jungle is also perfect to dry out leaves as the geography
in and around where cocaine grows provides an ideal setting to
lay mature leaves along the hillside until they are ready to be
carefully packed into sacks and taken to a lab where they are
further cultivated into coca paste. These factors make the Andean
Ridge the premier location in the world to grow and cultivate
cocaine. However, even though this region is ideal for production,
it is not logistically ideal for producers whose primary consumers
live in the United States or Europe. This is why Colombian cartels
are looking to produce in areas such as Honduras. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... the first cocaine plantation in Honduras shows that
drug cartels are looking for new areas to develop.”
Source: “Honduras: Incautan plantación clandestina de coca en
Esquipulas del Norte (Clandestine Coca Plantation Seized in
Esquipulas del Norte, Honduras),” El Heraldo, 27 April 2017.
https://goo.gl/KTpPzD
Three months of surveillance and intelligence collection aided
Honduran authorities in discovering the countries’ first ever coca
plantation on April 27, 2017. The plantation itself was located on top
of a mountain in the Palos Blancos village of Olancho. From this
location, drug traffickers were growing more than 10,000 cocaine
plants and 1,200 seedlings.
Source: “Hallazgo de plantas de coca pone a Honduras en nueva
fase del narco (Discovery of Cocaine Plants Marks New Phase
of Drug Trafficking in Honduras),” La Prensa, 10 June 17. http://
www.laprensa.hn/honduras/1079056-410/plantas-coca-narcotraficomarihuana-coca%C3%ADna
Information released by authorities revealed that two Colombian
crop engineers entered Honduras and selected different land areas
to conduct trial runs to see if coca plants could thrive in any of the
selected regions. As part of their assessment, the engineers tested
soil and evaluated the effects that elevation and climate would have
on the plants. Given the experiment was successful in Olancho, they
stayed in the country and started a full-grown coca plantation there.
Source: “Honduras descubre plantación de coca (Cocaine
Plantation Discovered in Honduras),” Estrategia y
Negocios, 07 June 2017. http://www.estrategiaynegocios.
net/centroamericaymundo/1078918-330/honduras-descubreplantaci%C3%B3n-de-coca
Army intelligence agents believe that the discovery of the first
cocaine plantation in Honduras shows that drug cartels are looking
for new areas to develop. It also shows how they are re-thinking their
operational schemes and innovating to reduce transportation costs.
Analysts also indicated that this change should put countries such
as Guatemala and El Salvador on alert because route changes may
occur due to new production schemes.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | September 2017

27

ASIA-PACIFIC
Is Thailand on the Verge of a Disruptive Power Struggle?
OE Watch Commentary: King Maha
Vajiralongkorn, who acceded to the throne in
Thailand in December 2016, two months after
his father’s death, is making some noteworthy
changes to the law. He is granting himself greater
powers and taking control of certain agencies,
which has the military junta concerned. His
father, King Bhumibol Adulyadej had taken a
back seat and allowed the junta to have total
control over the country, while still being able
to wield influence and power. According to the
accompanying article, there is a growing divide
between the new king and the ruling junta,
which is causing tension. The article raises the
question of whether growing friction between
King Maha Vajiralongkorn and the ruling junta
may create a “disruptive and debilitating power
struggle” within the country. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Source: John Pennington, “King Maha Vajiralongkorn Expands His Territory – But at
What Cost?” ASEAN Today, August 2017. http://www.aseantoday.com/2017/08/kingmaha-expands-his-territory-but-at-what-cost
Since acceding to the throne in December, King Maha Vajiralongkorn has taken a
number of steps to increase his decision-making influence and consolidate his power.
Unlike his father, he is not simply going to take a back seat and allow the junta to have
total control. The junta risks losing influence and decision-making ability. But it is obliged
to obey the king’s orders thanks to protocol obligations and King Maha Vajiralongkorn’s
military background.
Soon after he began ruling, he demanded changes to the constitution. King Maha
Vajiralongkorn now has power over naming a regent and the option to intervene in case
of political deadlock. The amendment affords him independence and political influence. It
also creates more instability.
For decades, the monarchy and military have worked closely together. But differences
between the junta and the king are growing. King Maha Vajiralongkorn is keen for
reconciliation between opposing political camps whereas Prime Minister Prayuth Chanocha has little appetite for it. Prayuth is also averse to King Maha Vajiralongkorn’s
allegedly close links with Thaksin Shinawatra.

“For decades, the monarchy and military have worked closely together. But differences between the junta
and the king are growing.”

The Thai Junta’s Struggle for Legitimacy: At What Cost?

OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article argues that the Thai military junta is trying to gain legitimacy by boosting the country’s
slow economic growth. It is doing this by strengthening its bond to China, which the article warns could harm the smaller Asian country. Along
with invoking Section 44, a controversial constitutional provision that will allow the military to pass any measure “for the sake of the reforms
in any field…” the government has been speeding up the approval process of various projects in a controversial manner. For example, they are
awarding projects to Chinese firms even “before the Environmental Impact Assessment report is finished.” The article notes that this “unlawful
action lacks of good governance for environmental management of the country.” While this likely strengthens Thailand’s ties with China, it
could hurt the junta’s reputation among Thai citizens, making it another source of tension. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)
Source: Laura Villadiego, “Thailand Chases Chinese Money, But At What Cost?”
com/week-asia/society/article/2102934/thailand-chases-chinese-money-what-cost

, 23 July 2017. http://www.scmp.

… “We are the slowest growing economy in Southeast Asia.” The Thai economy grew by only 0.8 per cent in 2014, 2.8 per cent in 2015 and
3.2 per cent in 2016.
“Since the junta came in power, there has not been any protection for the environment. Almost every step they are taking is for GDP
[growth],” said Somnuck Jongmeewasin, an academic and a member of Community Rights and Natural Resources Sub-Commission, under
the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand.
It’s taking longer than expected and the government is trying to reinforce its position by pushing economic growth. “The Thai junta is very
worried about legitimacy,” said Paul Chambers, an expert on the Thai military at Naresuan University. “It’s important for the junta to show
good economic results. If there are results, the Thai people will probably accept the ‘achievement’ [as] legitimacy.”
Thai Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-o-cha also invoked Section 44 in May, shortly after the Belt and Road Forum, to speed up the
controversial Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC), one of the government’s main development projects that aims to expand the industrial
areas in the eastern provinces of Chonburi, Rayong, and Chachoengsao, which are currently focused in the petrochemical, electronics and
automotive sectors. These new industrial zones will include value-added industries such as aviation, robotics, or medical tourism.
The government started to pave the way last year, when they issued several orders to override the existing Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) and urban planning laws. “The junta is not complying with what the normal environmental laws require ...This unlawful action lacks of
good governance for environmental management of the country,” said the academic Somnuck Jongmeewasin. He said the new laws allow the
government to award projects to companies before the Environmental Impact Assessment report is finished, even though the contract cannot
be signed before. Nevertheless, this “locks up the project” for a specific contractor, which might sue the government if the project is dropped.
For China, Thailand is a key player in the regional development of their interests in Southeast Asia due to its strategic position in the
middle of the region and the good relationships between both countries, explained Sakkarin Niyomsilpa, a demographic expert at Mahidol
University’s Institute for Population and Social Research who has researched on the recent migration wave of Chinese in Southeast Asia.
OE Watch | September 2017

28

ASIA-PACIFIC
Xi Jinping’s Push for a Strong Military
OE Watch Commentary: According to Chinese President Xi Jinping,
China needs a strong military more than ever to “defeat all invading
enemies” and “safeguard world peace.” The People’s Liberation Army,
which celebrated its 90th anniversary on 1 August, is expected to build
a “world-class armed force with confidence and capability.”
The accompanying excerpts from a recent speech by Xi offer a
glimpse into his calls on army personnel to “build the army with better
political awareness, strengthen the army through reform, develop the
army with science and technology, and govern the army according
to law.” The ultimate push for reform is driven by Xi’s firm desire to
achieve the “Chinese dream of national rejuvenation” and to realize
China’s “two centenary goals,” which are to build a “moderately
well-off” society by 2021, which is the centenary of the founding of
the Communist Party of China; and to become a strong, democratic,
harmonious, and modern socialist country by 2049, which is the
centenary of the founding the People’s Republic of China. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Today, we are
closer to the goal of
the great rejuvenation
of the Chinese nation
than any other time
in history, and we
need to build a strong
people’s military
more than any other
time in history.”

Xi Jinping in 2015

Source: Foreign and Commonwealth Office (China State Visit), https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AXi_Jinping_October_2015.jpg, Creative Commons
Attribution 2.0 Generic

Source: “Xi Calls for Strong Military to Defeat Invading Enemies, Safeguard World Peace,” Xinhuanet, 30 July 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.
com/english/2017-07/30/c_136485380.htm
President Xi Jinping said Sunday China needs a strong military more than ever, urging building the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) into
world-class armed forces with confidence and capability to “defeat all invading enemies” and “safeguard world peace.”
“The world is not all at peace, and peace must be safeguarded,” said Xi. “Today, we are closer to the goal of the great rejuvenation of the
Chinese nation than any other time in history, and we need to build a strong people’s military more than any other time in history.”
He also called on the officers and soldiers to build the army with better political awareness, strengthen the army through reform, develop the
army with science and technology, and govern the army according to law, in order to push for the modernization of national defense and the
military in all respects.

Decision-Making Recommendations for China’s PLA
OE Watch Commentary: This article from the daily newspaper of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) stressed three points for PLA
commanders. First, it is important to convert information superiority into action superiority, especially by making decisions ahead of time.
Action superiority is described the “prerequisite [to] winning a battle.” Second, it is necessary to change the goal of decision-making from
optimization to the satisfaction principle, due to the fast changing nature of warfare. Third, “cluster intelligence” is better than one-person
decision-making because it raises the “scientific character of decision-making.” As the excerpt below notes, decision-making superiority is the
core of operational actions. End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)
Source: “Strive to Establish Decision-Making Superiority in Informatized Joint Operations,” Zhang Wei, Jiefangjun Bao Online, 10 August
2017, p. 7.
Beyond all doubt, decision-making is the core of operational actions, and is the central part of a commander’s work. Decision-making
superiority is the commanding of a favorable status for one’s decision-making activity versus the enemy’s decision-making activity. This is
the key to converting a force’s information superiority into action superiority, and action superiority is the prerequisite of winning a battle.
Commanders should accurately grasp the characteristics and regularities of informatized joint operations, and strive to establish their
decision-making superiority over their adversaries.
“Cluster Intelligence” Decision-Making
On the opposite side of decision-making based on “cluster intelligence” is the commander’s one-man decision-making, of which, the biggest
drawback is that such a one-person decision-making form can hardly prevent mistakes of being subjective, one-sided, arbitrary. In the
course of making decisions based on “cluster intelligence”, commanders at multiple levels fully express their opinions in a form of military
democracy, and then the opinions are comprehensively analyzed with the optimal being selected to shape the final decision. The greatest
advantage is that such a decision-making pattern may prevent major errors caused by individual decision-making.
Moreover, with the smart decision-making support system being embedded in the information system, decision-making will no longer
be exclusively done by a commander alone, but will be turned into “man-machine” joint decision-making. This will reduce the time of
planning and decision-making, and will also raise the scientific character of decision-making. Therefore, decision-making based on “cluster
intelligence” will be better suited to joint operations in the future big data epoch with a multitude of information…commanders will also
quicken the change of the decision-making mindset from individual decision-making to collective decision-making.
OE Watch | September 2017

29

ASIA-PACIFIC
“New-Type” Training in China’s PLA
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passage from a recent article in the daily newspaper of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
discusses “new-type” combat forces and their training. “New-type” combat forces, which represent where priorities for the development of
military power lie, require “new-type” training assets. In addition to new equipment and technologies, these include new training models,
textbooks, and organizations. “New-type” training must capture the capabilities of information power, which is a key factor in winning
contemporary warfare. Information power determines the accuracy of operational actions and helps attain battlefield control. “New-type”
training will shape combat capabilities and uncover ways to win the strategic initiative. Later this training will enable the PLA to break
networks, strike key points, and paralyze whole systems. As the excerpt notes, building operational labs and using “new-type” training methods
will establish a realistic simulated battlefield for exercising these developments. End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)

“By taking this experience of the US military as reference, while enhancing the role of the training

grounds as the ‘quasi-battlefield,’ we should also move training forward to the labs as a ‘simulated
battlefield.’ We should strengthen the building of operation labs in the new domains for the new forces,
implement such technologies as military simulation, information processing, systems integration to
develop new operational concepts, create new tactics and countermeasures, and test and validate combat
plans and conceptions.”
Source: Shi Ming, “How to Forge the New-Type Combat Forces Into ‘Iron Fist’ Power,” Jiefangjun Bao Online, 25 July 2017. p. 7.
New-Type Training on the Simulated Battlefield
The new-type combat forces represent the developmental orientation of combat power. Effectively conducting realistic combat training may
play a strong demonstrating and guiding role. The new-type combat forces possess new equipment and new technologies, serve in new battle
domains, and implement new operational forms. They take the lead and serve as an engine for accelerating the change of the combat power
generation model. The endeavor of exploring the methods and means of generating and enhancing the new-quality combat power through
effectively conducting combat-realistic training may facilitate the organic combination of personnel and new-model weaponry, and may also
promote the optimization of the combat power structure, enrich the theory on combat training, propel the development of weaponry and
equipment, thus playing a guiding and sampling role for the transformation of military training and for the faster building of the new military
power system.
By taking this experience of the US military as reference, while enhancing the role of the training grounds as the “quasi-battlefield”, we
should also move training forward to the labs as a “simulated battlefield”. We should strengthen the building of operation labs in the new
domains for the new forces, implement such technologies as military simulation, information processing, systems integration to develop new
operational concepts, create new tactics and countermeasures, test and validate combat plans and conceptions. We should rely on large-scale
multipurpose training bases to set up complex battlefield environments, bring the new-type combat forces into the training grounds for being
forged and tempered, and close combine experiments, training, and operations.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | September 2017

30

ASIA-PACIFIC
Making Sense of China’s Caribbean Policy
by Jared Ward
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 10, dated 21 July 2017, Edited for
OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/making-sense-of-chinas-caribbean-policy/

OE Watch Commentary: While the world’s attention focuses on the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) connecting China with
Eurasia and Africa, China is also making major investments in the Caribbean. China’s short and long-term interests in the region
appear to be not only motivated by economics but also aimed at connecting nations in America’s backyard to a Maritime Silk Road
under Chinese influence. This presents a way
for Xi Jinping to position China to challenge
America in its own hemisphere. Thus, beyond
market access, China’s increased presence
in Caribbean affairs can be understood as a
subtle jab at American Western Hemisphere
dominance at a time when Washington is
pushing Beijing in the South China Sea.
In September 2016, the China Harbor
Engineering Company agreed to build a
mega-port in Jamaica that would make the
small island-nation a hub for mammoth
Chinese ships soon to begin crossing through
an expanded Panama Canal. Valued at $1.5
billion, the port will become China’s largest
in a region that has become a growing target
for Chinese aid and diplomatic overtures.
Barbados, a small island in the Lesser
Antilles, has received millions from Chinese
companies to restore historical landmarks
and provide free medical care. In March of
this year, a visa waiver program was created, aimed at opening the Caribbean
paradise to an untapped market of 20-million Chinese tourists. Chinese funds
have restored the Baha Mar luxury resort in the Bahamas. In Guyana, Chinese
companies have developed the timber, oil, and gold industries.
The Caribbean has always been unable to offer Beijing the same natural
resources or strategic military alliances with countries in Africa, Asia, and
the Middle East. However, geopolitically the region provides economic
and symbolic incentives for China’s investments. Many of China’s largest
infrastructure projects, like ports in the Bahamas and Jamaica, will be used to
accommodate larger volumes of cargo coming from China for transshipment
throughout the Western Hemisphere. In the excerpted interview with Cuban
newspaper Granma, Zhu Qingqao from China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs
makes it clear that the Caribbean is part of a Maritime Silk Road. Recent
developments in Sino-American relations have magnified the importance of
border seas and the Caribbean, like the South China Sea, is likely to become a
stage for clashing Chinese and American visions of global politics.

Source: “Cuba-China relations at all-time high,” Granma,
2 June 2017. http://en.granma.cu/mundo/2017-06-02/cubachina-relations-at-all-time-high
Zhu [Director General of the department of Latin
American and Caribbean Affairs at China’s Foreign
Ministry] highlighted opportunities for Latin America and
the Caribbean to participate in the Silk Road initiative; an
inclusive project launched by China but open to the entire
world.
We are working on elaborating our development strategies
and policies even further, with the aim of generating greater
interconnectivity, he stated...
He noted that Latin America and the Caribbean is the
second most important destination for Chinese investments
abroad, only surpassed by Asia. In 2016, total investment by
China in the region exceeded 150 billion dollars, 100 times
more than five years ago, and has expanded to new sectors
such as automobile and machine production industries, cell
phone factories, as well as air conditioner, bus, electronics,
as well as battery and solar panel manufacturing.

Chinese promises of aid to the Caribbean are consistent with a pattern
elsewhere in the developing world. Beijing touts its own success as a
developing nation; a rags to riches story of a non-Western power rising to
global prominence. Caribbean officials generally view China’s checkbook
diplomacy in a positive light. Generous loan terms and willingness to
undertake badly needed infrastructure projects have helped offset drying up
funds from Western institutions like the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. The influx of capital and projects
bring promises of badly needed jobs for locals and training programs to teach transferable skills. However, on the ground, these
promises are much more complicated. Chinese aid to the Caribbean is a double-edged sword, with accusations against Chinese
companies ranging from flouting local labor laws to providing job and contracts exclusively to Chinese nationals, to an exploitation
of natural resources. End OE Watch Commentary (Ward)
OE Watch | September 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
Indonesia and Neighbors to Coordinate Response to ISIS
OE Watch Commentary: As the violence
between the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)
and fighters affiliated with the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) in Marawi (Philippines) continues,
countries in the region are increasing their counterterrorism preparedness. As the accompanying article
from the Indonesian news source Merdeka.com
discusses, six regional countries met in Indonesia to
plan and coordinate their measures against ISIS in
the region.
According to the article, Indonesia, Australia,
New Zealand, Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei
agreed to share intelligence on foreign fighters,
cooperate with social media and file-sharing
companies, understand each others’ terrorism
laws, cooperate on counter-terrorism financing
and on immigration and border surveillance. Also
discussed were possible food support to Marawi or
providing unmanned aircraft to the Philippines.
An Indonesian official noted the importance of
social media. ISIS has been widely advertising
photos, videos and threats from the militants in
Marawi. As a result, Indonesia views social media
as a double-edged sword. While indicating it has
its benefits for information-sharing, the official said
more monitoring is needed to prevent its exploitation
by ISIS. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Begini tindak lanjut hasil pertemuan di Manado usir ISIS dari Marawi (Here’s
the Follow-up of the Meeting in Manado to Banish ISIS from Marawi),” Merdeka.
com, 31 July 2017. https://www.merdeka.com/peristiwa/begini-tindak-lanjut-hasilpertemuan-di-manado-usir-isis-dari-marawi.html
Indonesia along with five other countries over the weekend held a meeting on the
Foreign Terrorist Fighters and Cross Border Terrorism in Manado, North Sulawesi.
Together with Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei, [the
six countries] agreed on five commitments to expel ISIS from its new headquarters in
Marawi, Southern Philippines. There was a working group that may help with food
provision, tightening up navy patrols or, later, unmanned aircraft.
Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal and Security Affairs Wiranto said the
monitoring of social media is necessary given the technological developments that
are currently taking place. In this regard, cyber teams will be involved because
“technology is like a double-edged sword that can provide a positive and negative
impact.”
The five points of agreement that have been established by the sub-regional countries
are:1. The formation of forums on foreign terrorist fighters in order to strengthen
information-sharing and cooperation between law enforcement and intelligence
services; 2. Encouragement of cooperation among the six countries and with
companies that provide social media, video file sharing and messaging services; 3.
Comparative studies of laws related to terrorism that are applicable in each country;
4. Strengthening cooperation between institutions for the prevention of financing of
terrorism activities; and 5. Increased cooperation among immigration agencies in the
framework of integrated border surveillance

“Technology is like a double-edged sword that can provide a
positive and negative impact.”

Marawi crisis troops

Source: Philippines Information Agency (Philippines Information Agency), “Marawi crisis troops”, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File%3AMarawi_crisis_troops.jpg, (Public Domain)

OE Watch | September 2017

32

ASIA-PACIFIC
Indonesia Steps Up Presence around the South China Sea
OE Watch Commentary: Two
recent developments concerning
Indonesia’s activities in and around
the South China Sea point to the
country’s growing diplomatic
and naval presence there. The
accompanying passages from
Indonesian-language sources
discuss these developments and
regional reactions to them.
The first article discusses
Indonesia’s decision to name
a body of water bordering the
South China Sea, specifically the
waters north of the Natuna Islands,
as the North Natuna Sea. The
articles note that the area contains
vast fishing and oil drilling
opportunities. Chinese protests
of Indonesia’s name change were
met with a negative reaction from
Scenery at Serasan Harbor, Natuna Islands, Riau Islands Province, Indonesia
Indonesia’s Minister of Marine
Source:: a_rabin (Flickr: 100_1575), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AScenery_at_Serasan_Harbor%2C_Natuna_Islands%2C_
Riau_Islands_Province%2C_Indonesia.jpg, (CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0))
Affairs and Fisheries. The Minister
asserted that Indonesia had every
right to name its own waters. The Minister is known for blowing up foreign-owned ships that fish in Indonesian waters, which in recent years
have included Chinese vessels, and in 2017 for arresting more than 100 fishermen from Vietnam who were fishing in Indonesian waters.
The second article discusses a recent incident in which the Indonesian navy shot and injured several Vietnamese fisherman in the South
China Sea waters. According to the Vietnamese government’s rescue team, the boat was 132 nautical miles off the coast of Vietnam’s Con
Dao island, which is near the newly renamed North Natuna Sea. Vietnam asserted that this incident contravened the strategic partnership
between Vietnam and Indonesia and called for an investigation. There is no claimed tie between this incident and Indonesia’s new naming
of the North Natuna Sea, but it shows a trend of Indonesian assertiveness in the North Natuna Sea area both in rhetoric and action. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The Vietnamese government asked the Indonesian government to investigate and clarify reports that the
Indonesian Navy has shot and injured several Vietnamese fishermen in the waters of the South China Sea.”
Source: “Menteri Susi Heran China Protes Penamaan Laut Natuna Utara (Minister Susi Surprised that China Protests Name of Natuna
Sea),” Kompas.com, 18 July 2017. http://nasional.kompas.com/read/2017/07/18/1Menteri%20Susi%20Heran%20China%20Protes%20
Penamaan%20Laut%20Natuna%20Utara
Disputes over fishing rights and oil drilling have triggered tension in the waters of the South China Sea. The Chinese government claims
almost all of these waters. But Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Vietnam and Taiwan also have claims over these waters. Although Indonesia
is not a party to the dispute, recently the Indonesian government through the Coordinating Ministry of Marine Affairs officially announced the
new name of the waters north of the Natuna Islands bordering the South China Sea as the North Natuna Sea.
Source: “Vietnam Minta Indonesia Selidiki Penembakan Nelayannya (Vietnam asks Indonesia to investigate the shooting of its fishermen),”
Detiknews, 29 July 2017. https://news.detik.com/internasional/3578653/vietnam-minta-indonesia-selidiki-penembakan-nelayannya
The Vietnamese government has asked the Indonesian government to investigate and clarify reports that the Indonesian Navy has shot and
injured several Vietnamese fishermen in the waters of the South China Sea. A Vietnamese fishing boat was about 132 nautical miles southeast
of Con Dao Island, Vietnam when the fishermen on board were shot by the Indonesian Navy. Based on the coordinates given by Vietnamese
authorities, the shootings took place near the area that Indonesia now calls the North Natuna Sea.

OE Watch | September 2017

33

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Georgian Diplomatic Initiatives to Security Issues
OE Watch Commentary: A number of Georgian
government officials and security analysts have claimed
that the best way to deal with another possible conflict with
Russia is to build up and reform the country’s armed forces.
However, as the accompanying excerpted articles discuss, the
government is engaged in diplomatic efforts on a non-use-offorce agreement with Russia. In addition, Georgia has been
trying to engage the international community amid reports
that the occupied South Ossetia region is gradually expanding.
The first article from the independent Georgian language
newspaper Versia features an interview with the Georgian
Minister of State for Reconciliation and Civil Equality,
Ketevan Tsikhelashvili, about issues with South Ossetia.
The article mentions how officials are “hearing almost daily
that the occupation forces have moved the “border” forward
by a certain distance” and that according to Tsikhelashvili,
it is “a continuation of the occupation which we have been
confronting since 2008.” There is nothing mentioned
about how much the “border” has moved since 2008, but
Tsikhelashvili states that the issue is being brought up in
negotiations in Geneva.
The second article, from the English language news website
Civil Georgia, analyzes the negotiations in Geneva over the
non-use-of-force agreement with Russia. The article mentions
how the “European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM),
originally seen as the key component of the international
security arrangement to oversee the implementation of the
ceasefire and potential subsequent agreements was never
allowed access to either Abkhazia or South Ossetia.” The
article also states that “It might thus be useful for GID (the
Geneva International Discussions) to start re-thinking the
International Security Arrangements in terms of a revised
confidence and security building measure regime, “rightsized”
for these conflicts.” The articles show that Georgia is looking
for another mechanism to resolve not only the non-use-offorce agreement, but the more immediate and impactful
occupation problems. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: Gochadze, Tatia. “დეოკუპაციის საკითხთან დაკავშირებით
პრინციპული და შეურიგებელი პოლიტიკა გვაქვს.“ რას
უპირისპირებს საქართველოს ხელისუფლება რუსეთის მცოცავ
ანექსიას (We Have a Principled and Uncompromising Policy on the
De-occupation Issue.’ How the Georgian Government Is Countering Russia’s
Creeping Annexation),” Versia, 14 July 2017. https://goo.gl/GX1fCV
The 79th Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism meeting took
place in Ergneti a few days ago. Government representatives discussed the
incidents that had occurred along the occupation line and in the adjacent
areas between 7 June and 10 July. We are hearing almost daily that the
occupation forces have moved the “border” forward by a certain distance…
They are installing banners, setting up barbed wire fences, and digging
trenches…we will try to find out what is actually happening in Samachablo
(South Ossetia) and what the government is doing to stop the occupation
forces. Ketevan Tsikhelashvili, Minister of State for Reconciliation and Civil
Equality, answered Versia’s questions.
(Gochadze) Ketevan, what is the government doing to stop the creeping
annexation?
(Tsikhelashvili) …Unfortunately, this is not a new situation but a
continuation of the occupation which we have been confronting since 2008.
They have been installing artificial barriers along the occupation line as part
of the occupation for years now. This process began intensively in 2009 and
they also set up barbed wire fences in 2011 and 2013...
(Gochadze) On the other hand, some people believe that the government has
achieved nothing through the so-called moderate policy toward Russia and
that it needs to be more active, “disturb” the international community, and
prompt it to engage in occupation issues.
(Tsikhelashvili) The government is already very active with regard to the
international community.
(Gochadze) How is this activeness manifested?
(Tsikhelashvili) It is the number one issue on the agenda in any format and
at any meeting…
(Gochadze) It would be interesting to know whether you are discussing these
issues with the international community or raising them with the occupation
force.
(Tsikhelashvili) For example, (we are discussing them) in the Geneva
negotiating format...

Source: Batashvili, David. “Georgia-Russia: Getting Security Right,” Civil.ge, 19 June 2017. http://wp1.civil.ge/archives/187539
This past spring, the observers of largely anemic diplomatic talks in Geneva were excited to hear the reluctant confirmation by the Georgian
foreign ministry of the “minor progress” regarding the non-use-of-force (NUF) agreement. This followed on Russian Foreign Minister Sergey
Lavrov’s “expectation” that such agreement was becoming “realistic…in the foreseeable future.”
The NUF agreement has been the holy grail of the Geneva International Discussions (GID) – a diplomatic gathering to sort out the
aftermath of the August 2008 war between Russia and Georgia. But even if the abyss between the incompatible diplomatic positions can be
breached, NUF would be of no consequence in real security terms…In 2016-2017, additional agreements saw the Abkhaz and South Ossetian
military units either absorbed into, or put under Russian command…
The (EUMM), originally seen as the key component of the international security arrangement to oversee the implementation of the ceasefire
and potential subsequent agreements was never allowed access to either Abkhazia or South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region…Although the key
elements of NUF document have long been identified at GID, Russia insists that it is signed by Georgia on one side and Abkhazia and South
Ossetia on the other. Tbilisi refuses, arguing that such a signature would amount to a de facto recognition of the two breakaway regions’
independence, and also that Russia, not these entities represent a military threat to its security…
It might thus be useful for GID to start re-thinking the International Security Arrangements in terms of a revised confidence and security
building measure regime, “rightsized” for these conflicts. Such an arrangement would aim to increase transparency and predictability of the
military deployments and moves, reduce threat perceptions of the regional actors and minimize harm of any potential escalation…
OE Watch | September 2017

34

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Strengthening Russia’s Military in South Ossetia
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Kremlin official line, South
Ossetia is an independent state; but in reality Kremlin officials consider it to
be a protectorate of Russia, or more precisely, a purloined province of Georgia.
Over the past year, there have been rumors that the Kremlin intends to annex
South Ossetia via the same referendum model used for Crimea in March 2014.
The region declared independence after the brief war against Georgian forces
in August 2008, and its sovereignty has only been recognized by Russia and
three other states (Venezuela, Nicaragua and Nauru). Regardless of its political
status, since 2008, Russia has continued to strengthen its military presence
in South Ossetia, and the accompanying excerpt from the popular Russian
source, Izvestiya Online, portrays the Kremlin’s rationale for this significant
deployment.
The excerpt points out that Russian military peacekeepers have been in
the region for the past 25 years, having helped to quell conflicts in both 1992
and 2008. Indeed, the author asserts that “the events of 2008 and 1992 are
associated with a single chain for Ossetians.” The argument goes that during
both conflicts, Russian military personnel helped to defend the locals from
Georgian aggression and to restore order. The size of the Russian contingent
(4th RF Armed Forces Military Base) in the capital city of Tskhinvali has
grown significantly since 2008 (approximately 4,000 personnel), and includes
“at least several full-fledged motorized rifle battalions,” equipped with heavy
armor, artillery, and air defense systems. The Russian military facilities are
both modern and extensive, including everything from a new mess hall,
satellite communications center, soldiers’ dormitories to a kindergarten. Not
surprisingly, the Ossetian locals now assert “that the guarantor of peace is 4th
RF Armed Forces Military Base.”
The composition of this Russian military base, where “local residents
constitute nearly 70 percent of the contract servicemen,” suggests that the
Russian military presence has been a boon for the local economy. With the
population of South Ossetia estimated at only 50,000, the Russian military base
provides significant employment opportunities for both soldiers and civilians.
If the modern military facilities in Tskhinvali are any indication, it appears that
the Russian military will be stationed in South Ossetia for a long time. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Nikolay Surkov, “Дважды миротворцы: В
Цхинвале вспоминали, как россияне спасли Южную
Осетию (Twice Peacekeepers. Tskhinval Residents
Recalled How the Russians Saved South Ossetia),”
Izvestiya Online, 14 July 2017. https://iz.ru/619367/
nikolai-surkov/dvazhdy-mirotvortcy
The 25th anniversary of the introduction of the
peacekeeping forces, who actually stopped the 1989-1992
war and insured the survival of the young republic, was
celebrated On Friday, 14 July, in South Ossetia. But then
again, they did this twice – first in 1992 and later in August
2008….
…Russians remember well the August 2008 war.
However, the events of 2008 and 1992 are associated with
a single chain for Ossetians.
“It is unlikely that the residents of South Ossetia would
have remained here without the peacekeepers,” Republic
President Anatoliy Bibilov said. In his words, 1992 was
no different than 2008. At that time, Georgia also actually
conducted the “Open Fields” Operation and only the
peacekeepers’ arrival could have prevented this….
…There is no alarm or tension right now in the eyes of
the residents of South Ossetia. Tskhinval is being actively
built, it lives a normal life and is little distinguished
from the cities of Russia’s south, except that there are an
unexpectedly large number of traffic lights in the center.
The Ossetians themselves say that the guarantor of peace
is 4th RF Armed Forces Military Base
The 4th Military Base is three military garrisons and also
another dozen outposts. The base itself looks precisely
like any other Russian military unit. A parade ground,
mess hall, satellite communications center, even rows
of light green one- and two-story soldiers’ dormitories
(barracks)… Only an orange kindergarten stands out.
…But vehicle parks with tanks, SAUs [self-propelled
artillery mounts], BMPs [armored infantry vehicles],
BTRs [armored transport vehicles], and multiple rocket
launchers are parked behind the barracks. At least several
full-fledged motorized rifle battalions…. Only the brand
new communications systems catch your eye. …
…Approximately half of the servicemen on the base are
conscripts. But then again, right now they are striving to
recruit more contract servicemen. One officer brings 5-6
men from an agitation trip to the military commissariats.
The warm climate and relatively low prices attract people.
Local residents constitute nearly 70 percent of the contract
servicemen….

“...the events of 2008 and 1992 are
Map showing South Ossetia

Source: Wikimedia.org, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Maps_of_South_Ossetia#/media/File:Caucasus_breakaway_regions_2008.
svg CC BY-SA 3.0

associated with a single chain for
Ossetians.”
OE Watch | September 2017

35

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
An Indian-Chinese Border Dispute and the SCO
OE Watch Commentary: When India and Pakistan joined
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) on 9 June,
questions came up on how the new members would impact the
organization’s activities of coordinating security efforts when
they continue to clash over Kashmir. While many focused on
how India and Pakistan could work together in the SCO, the
accompanying excerpted articles report on a border dispute
between India and China that flared up on 16 June and what
impact this could have on the SCO. The dispute, which is
taking place on India’s border with the Tibetan Autonomous
Region of China, represents a significant incident between two
members of the SCO and will likely serve as an example of
how incidents between members are resolved.
The articles come from English language sources in India
(the privately owned online news website Firstpost) and China
(the online version of the government run Global Times) and
provide some background on the dispute. The first article
from Firstpost references the 1962 India-China War, which
started because of border issues and resulted in China gaining
territory. The article includes a quote from a retired Indian
general, that “Chinese efforts to push a road-building party
near the China-India-Bhutan trijunction is an attempt to get
in behind Indian and Bhutanese defenses,” and this is worth
noting alongside references to the 1962 war. Road construction
by China near its border with India contributed to the 1962
conflict and it appears to be one of the factors in the recent
standoff.
The second Firstpost article reports on a meeting between
the Indian and Chinese National Security Advisors noting
that they are “the Special Representatives for India-China
boundary talks.” While it claims that relations haven’t
deteriorated as much as the media claims, it also warns that
“there is always the possibility that things could turn ugly
given China... is more powerful and assertive than it was ten or
twenty years ago.”
The article from China’s Global Times provides insight into
China’s perspective. First, it describes the standoff as “Indian
troops [having] illegally crossed the border with China in
the Doklam area...” It also claims that “India’s participation
in the SCO will do more harm than good in the short and
medium term.” It discusses that the most important issue
regarding the security of western China is the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region and that security cooperation among SCO
states “has created a favorable environment for the stability
and development of Xinjiang.” However, it warns that now
India may oppose “China’s position on terrorism” in Xinjiang,
given that China blocked an Indian bid on a related matter at
the UN Security Council in June. This would impact SCO’s
role in maintaining security in western China. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

UNSMIS deployment map as of July 2012

Source: United Nations Cartographic Section,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:UNSMIS_map_2012.png, Public Domain

Source: Sujan Dutta. “Sikkim standoff: Doka La incursions betray Chinese
intentions of getting behind Indian, Bhutanese defences,” Firstpost,
5 July 2017. http://www.firstpost.com/india/sikkim-standoff-doka-laincursions-betray-chinese-intentions-of-getting-behind-indian-bhutanesedefences-3778973.html
‘Chinese efforts to push a road-building party near the China-India-Bhutan
trijunction is an attempt to get in behind Indian and Bhutanese defences’…
Lt General Subrata Saha, who retired as the Deputy Chief of Army Staff
(DCOAS) earlier this year told Firstpost…The current stand-off began
around 16 June when a Chinese road building party entered Doka La. They
were first spotted by the Royal Bhutan Army…Both India and China sent in
reinforcements. Reports emerging from the area so far indicate to minor
scuffles but no major flare-ups in violence have been seen…
… In the year 2006, too, there was a stand-off between Chinese and Indian
troops in East Sikkim facing Doka La. Through 2006 and 2007, the Indian
Army relocated its 27 Mountain Division to the region from Jammu…
Despite the revival of memories of the 1962 war during which the Chinese
overran Indian forces, there have been instances of strong Indian fightbacks.
At Nathu La in Sikkim in 1967, for instance, and at the Sumdorong Chu in
Arunachal Pradesh in 1987 when the then army chief had surprised the
Chinese by airlifting an entire brigade of troops to the region…

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

36

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Continued: An Indian-Chinese Border Dispute and the SCO
“While the border stand-off continues, bilateral relations between India and China have not deteriorated
as much as it is being described in the national media of both nations.”
Source: “NSA Ajit Doval in Beijing this week: Amid Sikkim stand off, all eyes on BRICS NSA summit which begins on 27 July,” Firstpost,
24 July 2017. http://www.firstpost.com/india/nsa-ajit-doval-in-beijing-this-week-amid-sikkim-stand-off-all-eyes-on-brics-nsa-summit-whichbegins-on-27-july-3848787.html
As the ongoing India-China standoff in the Doka La region in Northeastern part of the country continues for the second month, National
Security Advisor Ajit Doval is all set to travel to Beijing to attend a BRICS NSA summit on 27 and 28 July…Chinese analysts have welcomed
the Doval’s meeting with his counterpart Yang Jiechi, claiming that the meeting may help ease prevailing tensions on the border…Both Doval
and Yang are also the Special Representatives for India-China boundary talks (and) Chinese officials say Doval and Yang may have informal
talks to resolve the standoff in Dokalam in the Sikkim sector…
…While the border stand-off continues, bilateral relations between India and China have not deteriorated as much as it is being described in
the national media of both nations…However, there is always the possibility that things could turn ugly given China, as a neighbour, is more
powerful and assertive than it was ten or twenty years ago…
Source: Xiao Bin. “India’s SCO membership threatens West China security,” Global Times, 23 July 2017. http://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/1057631.shtml
Since Indian troops illegally crossed the border with China in the Doklam area, China and India, both of which are members of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), have been locked in a standoff…India’s participation in the SCO will do more harm than good in the short
and medium term. The Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region matters the most to the security of western China. Security cooperation among
the SCO states has created a favorable environment for the stability and development of Xinjiang… Due to a lack of evidence provided by
India, China blocked India’s bid to add Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar to the banned terrorists’ list at the 1267 Sanctions Committee
of the UN Security Council in June. Therefore, the possibility of India opposing China’s position on terrorism using the same excuse cannot
be ruled out. This will definitely affect the SCO’s role of maintaining security in western China…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | September 2017

37

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Uzbekistan’s Post-Karimov Security Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: Over the last several years Kazakhstan
Now the parties are discussing the creation of a
has actively been buying weapons and equipment from a number of
international defense companies with a condition that the technology
joint venture to produce such cars in Uzbekistan with
be transferred to Kazakh firms. Now Uzbekistan appears to be
the involvement of Turkish investments.
following a similar path. The accompanying excerpted article
reports on a recent deal between Uzbekistan and Turkey for light
Source: “Узбекистан хочет закупить в Турции десять бронемашин
armored vehicles that includes a condition to eventually produce
и наладить у себя их производство (Uzbekistan wants to purchase ten
them in Uzbekistan.
armored vehicles in Turkey and establish its own production of them),”
Fergana News, 27 July 2017. http://www.fergananews.com/news/26679
The article from Fergana News, an independent Russian news

“

”

website with a focus on Central Asia, reports on the agreement for
the purchase of the Turkish Ejder 4x4 armored vehicles. It notes that
“testing of the armored vehicles in the conditions of Uzbekistan
took place in June 2017.” This is worth noting alongside reports
of increased security cooperation between Uzbekistan and Russia
earlier this year, including upcoming joint military exercises. The
article also mentions how the Turkish Minister of Defense “Nurettin
Canikli discussed the prospects for military and military-technical
cooperation between the two countries with Uzbek President
Shavkat Mirziyoyev.” Following the death of President Karimov in
2016, there had been questions about what, if any changes President
Mirziyoyev would carry out, particularly in regards to foreign
policy and security cooperation. If the recent agreement is any
indication, Mirziyoyev is pursuing deeper security partnerships
than his predecessor and could be prepared to spend more money in
the defense sector. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Uzbekistan intends to purchase ten lightly armored cars of the Turkish
company Nurol type Ejder 4x4, Uzdaily.Uz reports with reference to the
press service of the Uzbek Defense Ministry. This became known during
the meeting of Uzbek Defense Minister Kabul Berdiyev with his Turkish
counterpart Nurettin Canikli, who arrived in Tashkent on an official
visit. Testing of the armored vehicles in the conditions of Uzbekistan
took place in June 2017. Now the parties are discussing the creation of a
joint venture to produce such cars in Uzbekistan with the involvement of
Turkish investments…
…On the same day, Nurettin Canikli discussed the prospects for
military and military-technical cooperation between the two countries
with Uzbek President Shavkat Mirziyoyev. Remember that in 2015 the
Ministry of Defense of Uzbekistan received 328 Mine-Resistant Ambush
Protected (MRAP) vehicles and 20 armored repair and evacuation
vehicles within the framework of the US Excess Defense Articles…

Vladimir Putin with Shavkat Mirziyoyev

Source: The Russian Presidential Press and Information Office, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AVladimir_Putin_with_Shavkat_
Mirziyoyev_(2017-04-05).jpg, CCA-SA 3.O

OE Watch | September 2017

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Force Structure Developments in the
Southern Military District
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying articles from Izvestiya
discuss the growing force structure in Russia’s Southern Military District.
The reforms appear to be intended for modern high-tech warfare against an
adversary with significant precision-guided munitions.
According to the first excerpted article, the Russian Federation is
currently executing a phased activation of a new Combined Arms Army
in Novocherkassk (8th Combined Arms Army). This new formation is
unlikely to involve the creation of any new maneuver units, but it will add
new command and control assets.
The second article discusses an organizational change to the 150th
Motorized Rifle Division (MRD). Typically, Soviet/Russian motorized
rifle divisions have three motorized rifle regiments and one tank regiment,
while tank divisions have three tank regiments and one motorized rifle
regiment. Since a motorized rifle regiment has many more personnel
than a tank regiment, motorized rifle divisions are significantly larger
(in terms of personnel) than tank divisions. The 150th MRD will not
follow this convention, having two motorized rifle regiments and two
tank regiments, and is being called the ‘Division of the 21st Century.’ This
division is a ‘general purpose tool of the 21st century’ and is designed
to confront enemies using ‘precision-guided munitions and electronic
jamming.’ Although atypical, it is not the first time the Soviets/Russians
have experimented with this type of force structure. This structure was
first implemented in a few units in the late 1980s, but was abandoned after
the collapse of the Soviet Union. It was tried again by Chief of General
Staff General Staff, General Yuriy Baluyevskiy, but was again abandoned
during the 2008 ‘New Look’ reforms which abolished most Ground Forces’
divisions. Interestingly, one of these divisions was also called the ‘Division
of the 21st Century.’
Although the Southern Military District presents a number of challenges
for the Russian Armed Forces, the intent of these reforms likely has little
to do with a (sometimes) restless Muslim population, Georgia, or even
Ukraine. These potential threats have few capabilities for precisionguided munitions and electronic jamming. The addition of a new level
of command and control (8th Combined Arms Army) would also not be
particularly useful for dealing with these challenges. These reforms would
be effective if Russia was a facing a modern adversary such as the US and/
or NATO, which have significant precision-guided munitions and electronic
jamming capabilities, and can create conditions where the additional
command and control capabilities provided by combined arms army may be
seen as beneficial. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “В Южном
военном округе появится новая армия (Combined-Arms
Army Planned for Southern Military District),” Izvestiya
Online, 17 March 2017. http://izvestia.ru/news/670561
Combined Arms Army Planned for Southern Military
District
The 8th Combined Arms Army will appear in the Southern
Military District. It is planned to station the 8th Army
headquarters in Novocherkassk, while units and subunits of
the new formation will be stationed in Rostov and Volgograd
Oblasts…In the opinion of experts, the new army will be a
very important element in safeguarding Russia’s security
on the Southeastern strategic salient. Izvestiya was told at
the Southern Military District that the army’s formation has
already begun. The plan is for the first stage to be completed
in June 2017. During this stage, the 8th Army headquarters
itself will be created, as will the control brigade. The brigade
will provide the army command with communications with the
units, subunits, and formations…
The new formation’s precise T/O structure is not yet
known. But it is assumed the army will include the newly
formed 150th motorized rifle division, which is also based in
Novocherkassk. The 8th Combined Arms Army will most likely
be supplemented by the 20th Guards Motorized Brigade from
Volgograd. “The task of creating self-sufficient combinedarms multi-service formations on all strategic salients was set
not long ago by Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu personally,”
Izvestiya was told by Viktor Murakhovskiy, chief editor of
the Arsenal of the Fatherland magazine…” In simple terms,
combined-arms armies are now being created on all strategic
salients. In addition to motorized rifle and armored divisions
and brigades, they will include artillery and engineering
regiments and brigades, and air defense, communications,
and radiation, chemical, and biological protection units.
The armies will be supported by Aerospace Forces’ fighters,
bombers, and attack aircraft and on specific salients by Navy
ships and submarines.” The expert says that the newly formed
8th Army will be a very important element in safeguarding
Russia’s security on the Southeastern strategic salient…

“The classic motorized rifle division is well-suited for defense and breakthrough of the enemy defense, and
a tank division is effective in mobile operations: encirclements, envelopments, marches, But the new 150th
Division is a general-purpose tool. It can perform missions effectively as an ordinary motorized rifle division
and as a tank division. This new unit is designed for modern high-tech warfare. Its units and subunits will
operate effectively under conditions of employment of precision-guided munitions and electronic jamming. It
is not as big as an ordinary motorized rifle division and surpasses a tank division in firepower.”
-Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin
OE Watch | September 2017

(continued)
39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Force Structure
Developments in the Southern Military District
“The 8th Combined Arms Army will appear in the Southern Military District. It is planned to station the
8th Army headquarters in Novocherkassk, while units and subunits of the new formation will be stationed in
Rostov and Volgograd Oblasts.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “Минобороны сформировало «дивизию 21-го века» (Defense Ministry Activated
‘Division of the 21st Century’),” Izvestiya Online, 4 August 2017. http://iz.ru/624964/aleksei-ramm-evgenii-andreev/na-iuge-rossiisformirovali-stalnogo-monstra
Defense Ministry Activated ‘Division of the 21st Century’
The Russian Federation Defense Ministry is completing activation of the 150th Motorized Rifle Division (MRD). This military unit was given
a unique table of organization structure. An ordinary motorized rifle division has three motorized rifle regiments and one tank regiment, but
150th MSD has two tank regiments and two motorized rifle regiments. Each MRP also has reinforced tank battalions. Thanks to this structure
the new division was given unique maneuverability and firepower and the number of personnel and auxiliary equipment was reduced
considerably. The military already has nicknamed the new military unit the “steel monster.”
Experts believe the new division is an effective tool of modern high-tech mobile warfare. Its regiments can halt the enemy, soften up
his defense, make breakthroughs, and battle in his rear with identical effectiveness… In addition to the two-motorized rifle and two tank
regiments, it has an artillery and an air defense regiment, reconnaissance battalion, signal battalion, and other units and subunits. Tank
regiments of the new division will be armed with modernized T-72B3 tanks with added protection.
“The classic motorized rifle division is well-suited for defense and breakthrough of the enemy defense, and a tank division is effective in
mobile operations: encirclements, envelopments, marches,” military expert Vladislav Shurygin told Izvestiya. “But the new 150th Division
is a general-purpose tool. It can perform missions effectively as an ordinary motorized rifle division and as a tank division. This new unit is
designed for modern high-tech warfare. Its units and subunits will operate effectively under conditions of employment of precision-guided
munitions and electronic jamming. It is not as big as an ordinary motorized rifle division and surpasses a tank division in firepower.”
According to the expert, division maneuverability and mobility are determined by the number of personnel as well as by the amount of
equipment of combat and rear services subunits. The greater the number, the less mobile the formation, but at the same time it has great
firepower. The new 150th MRD is a reasonable compromise…

The 150th Motorized Rifle Division

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12126899@
egNews CC 4.0

OE Watch | September 2017

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The ‘Strelets’ C4ISR System
OE Watch Commentary: The Strelets reconnaissance, command and
control, and communications system (KRUS) [комплекса разведки,
управления и связи (КРУС)] has now become Russia’s “go-to” system of
record for C4ISR fires. The accompanying articles from the Ministry of
Defense of the Russian Federation press service and Krasnaya Zvezda discuss
the fielding of the Strelets for Naval Infantry and Coastal Defense Artillery.
The Strelets was developed in 2007, but was only fielded in large numbers
beginning in 2011. It has undergone several modifications and hardware
upgrades, and its use by Russian forces in Syria is well publicized. The
‘targeting’ component of the Strelets is primarily used by the Ground Forces,
Airborne, and Naval Infantry, and consists of a small tablet computer that can
be worn on a tactical vest. The Strelets (likely based on the Linux operating
system), reportedly can interface with legacy Soviet and Russian intelligence
collection equipment, and can interface with a variety of sensors (azimuth
determination, radar, electro-optical, thermal-imaging, acoustic, target
designation and sighting, etc.), to include UAV based sensors. Russia’s next
generation of man-portable short-range reconnaissance radars, the 1L277
Sobolyatnik and the 1L111М Fara-VR, appear to have been designed from the
outset to integrate with it. The Strelets can also interface with other Russian
Automated Command and Control Systems (ACUs) to include the Aerospace
Defense Forces (VKS) Metronom strike-aviation ACU, and the Airborne
Troops (VDV) Andromeda-D ACU.

Source: “Aртиллеристы морской пехоты Каспийской
флотилии впервые провели учение с использованием
комплекса «Стрелец» (The Caspian Flotilla Naval Infantry’s
Artillerymen Have Conducted an Exercise Using Strelets
System for the First Time),” Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation, 7 July 2017. http://function.mil.ru/news_
page/country/more.htm?id=12132414@egNews
The Caspian Flotilla Naval Infantry’s artillery subunit
has conducted an exercise using the Reconnaissance,
Command and Control, and Communications System (KRUS)
[комплекса разведки, управления и связи (КРУС)] Strelets…
According to the exercise scenario, a reconnaissance
patrol had discovered the opposing force. A scout equipped
with a new KRUS Strelets system determined the target’s
coordinates using a laser range finder from the system’s kit
and communicated them in an automatic mode using his
personal tablet to the battalion commander, who takes the
decision on the use of artillery…Having received an order,
the self-propelled artillery battery advanced to its position
and, using the received coordinates, fired at the designated
targets, confidently destroying target positions simulating the
opposing force, thereby proving in practice the effectiveness of
the use and the application of the KRUS Strelets system.

The Strelets reportedly allows a serviceman to easily annotate the
The use of the KRUS Strelets system to support fire missions
position of a target on digitized maps contained in the Strelets. The targets’
allows the commander to half the time between target
coordinates are then transferred in real time to command posts, artillerymen
detection and target destruction thanks to the transfer of
and pilots, halving the amount of time needed to lay fires. The Strelets has
target coordinates from the scout to the commander in an
several levels of accessories, the base variant is for individual serviceman, up
automatic mode without having to enter them manually or
to squad leader. The next accessory level is intended for platoon leaders and
communicate them verbally. In addition, the KRUS Strelets
company commanders, having a computer and keyboard. The highest-level
system interfaces with various reconnaissance devices,
accessory package is for battalion and brigade commanders. The Strelets has
including UAVs, and makes it possible to communicate to
an organic communications capability to communicate with other Strelets
the commander information about the scout’s health, text
systems up to 1.5 kilometers away, and can retransmit communications from
messages (SMS), voice information, and information about the
other Strelets transmitters. Presumably, it can also be integrated into existing
serviceman’s location.
communications networks for longer distance communications. The Strelets
also has an organic GLONASS satellite receiver for navigation, and can likely
use US GPS signals as well, and has an inertial navigation capability that is automatically activated in satellite navigation denied or degraded
environments. Perhaps one of the more interesting features is the ‘friend-or-foe’ recognition system, with range depending on the specifications
of the sensors to which the Strelets is interconnected. (The Strelets sends a query to the unrecognized object, if the object is a ‘friend’ then the
serviceman hears an audible notification in the earpiece. If quiet, The Strelets defines the object as ‘foe’.)

Initially, the Strelets was only designed to direct artillery and aircraft fires, but the system has reportedly been upgraded to allow the direction
of naval fires, namely the Kh-35 “Zvezda” (AS-20 Kayak/ SS-N-25 Switchblade/ SSC-6 Sennight), 3M-54 “Kalibr” (SS-N-27 Sizzler), P-800
“Oniks” (SS-N-26 Strobile), and presumably the forthcoming 3M22 “Tsirkon” (SS-N-33) hypersonic cruise missile. The true value of the Strelets
is signified by much more than the fielding of a computer tablet that allows the rapid direction of fires. The real value of Strelets is the behindthe-scenes infrastructure that creates the conditions for a network-centric C4ISR system that successfully integrates operators, reconnaissance
assets, command elements, and very different fires systems to include ground-based tube artillery and rocket artillery; ballistic and cruise
missile; strike aviation; and ship and coastal naval fires. If Strelets truly functions as described, the Russian Armed Forces will need only one
system to task fires rapidly at all levels of battle, from front line artillery to deep strike aviation, through rear area missile strikes, truly fielding a
unified Reconnaissance-Fire System that facilitates fires at both the tactical and operational depths. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The use of the KRUS Strelets system to support fire missions allows the commander to half the time
between target detection and target destruction thanks to the transfer of target coordinates from the scout
to the commander in an automatic mode without having to enter them manually or communicate them
verbally.”
(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The ‘Strelets’ C4ISR System
“The reconnaissance-fire system is organizationally, informationally, and functionally an integrated

aggregation of forces and resources of effective engagement and operational, combat, and technical
support. They are unified by a single automated control system which, in aggregate, ensures the discovery
and destruction of an adversary’s groups and facilities to the very core of his structure.”

AFV crew individual protection kit 6B48 Ratnik-ZK in two variants and a variant of Ratnik infantry combat system with
KRUS Strelets intelligence, control and communications system
Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/4th-Kantemirovskaya-Tank-Division-Open-Day-Part2/i-9QLgvKP/A,, CC BY SA 4.0

Source: Pavel Zavolokin, “РОК: как много в этом слове! (ROK: What a Meaningful Word!),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 14 July 2017. http://
redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/item/33791-rok-kak-mnogo-v-etom-slove
The Reconnaissance-Fire System (ROK) makes it possible to reduce several fold the time between the moment of detecting targets and
destroying them…Black Sea Fleet Army Corps artillery regiment has practiced joint operations with subunits of a coastal defense brigade
during reconnaissance-fire system training sessions on the Angarskiy range. The motorized riflemen’s and gunners’ interaction ensured the
discovery and destruction of enemy facilities in real-time mode…
Essentially, a training session lasts two days: On day one, individual and group performance evaluations are rehearsed in subunits,
reconnaissance is conducted, coordinates of targets are determined at night by simulating enemy activities on the training fields, and data for
fire control are prepared. On day two, fire control is conducted on levels from battery to brigade…
The reconnaissance-fire system is organizationally, informationally, and functionally an integrated aggregation of forces and resources
of effective engagement and operational, combat, and technical support. They are unified by a single automated control system which, in
aggregate, ensures the discovery and destruction of an adversary’s groups and facilities to the very core of his structure…As for additional
reconnaissance and communications equipment, the motorized riflemen are receiving “Sobolyatnik” and “Fara” radar stations, and UAVs
of various classes, from the “Orlan-10” to the “Takhion.” For the assigned task to be successfully performed, the motorized rifle company is
also receiving a rocket-propelled, artillery, or mortar battery with its own equipment, which includes mobile reconnaissance posts capable of
conducting radar, optical, and thermal-imaging reconnaissance.
The “Strelets” reconnaissance, command and control, and communications system (KRUS) makes it possible to conduct target
reconnaissance and to transmit an image and the coordinates of targets with great precision. The KRUS system enables one to emit a target
designation and to adjust aviation and artillery fire via a radio channel and space communications. In this way, a commander is able to assess
a target visually and to define the target destruction sequence in real time.
OE Watch | September 2017

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Changing Face of the Russian Conscription System
OE Watch Commentary: In recent years, the Russian Federation has put a great deal
of effort to determine if conscription is needed, and if so, how it should be implemented.
This issue has become particularly problematic as Russia reduced the conscription
period from 24 months to 12 months. Commanders have complained that a 12-month
conscription period is insufficient for training and utilization, while the generals point out
that Russia cannot afford to implement a completely contract-based system, and lament
the loss of a conscription system which imparts at least some military training for almost
all Russian males. Despite a few public comments to the contrary, Russia appears to be
adopting a hybrid system of contract service and conscription to fill the enlisted ranks. The
accompanying passages from Russian sources discuss important aspects of this system.
Russia’s current conscription system involves a mandatory period of state service for most
Conscript Day in 27th Separate Guards Red Banner
young men. The majority of these young men opt for a 12-month conscription period of
Sevastopolskaya Motor Rifle Brigade
uniformed service, but a few opt for “alternative civil service.” This program allows a young Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin,
http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/27OMSBr/i-phmc8LT/A,, CC BY SA 4.0
man to serve an 18-month conscription period of civil service for the military or they may
serve a 21-month conscription period of civil service with a federal body or federal subject (state, oblast, republic, etc.). In practice, “alternative civil
service” is rarely chosen, only 395 men opted for the program during the spring 2017 draft, and a total of only 970 are currently serving. (Continued)
Source: Pavel Panov and Aleksey Ramm, “В сержанты со студенческой скамьи (Straight from Student to Sergeant),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta
Online, 13 July 2017. https://iz.ru/618371/pavel-panov-aleksei-ramm/v-serzhanty-so-studencheskoi-skami
The Defense Ministry, jointly with the Education and Science Ministry, is planning to introduce special military courses for civilian higher
educational institution (VUZ) students without drafting them for military service. In contrast to traditional military departments, graduates
will not become officers upon completing their courses, but will receive military specialties at primary enlisted or sergeant rank level
(commander of a squad, tank, fighting vehicle, or surface-to-air missile system). After graduating from the VUZ, they will be able to enter
military service or conclude a contract to join the active reserve…
The Defense Ministry has told Izvestiya that the plan is for graduates to independently decide what to do after their courses end: Whether to
enter military service under contract for a post defined by a military-related specialty or to join the active reserve. In this case the graduate
will not permanently perform military service. But, in cases of necessity (commencement of hostilities, natural disasters, manmade disasters,
and so forth), he will be called up from the reserve. To prevent reservists from losing their skills, it is planned that they will be summoned to
special training musters several times a year. For being in the reserve, graduates from the courses will receive special monetary payments.
“The Armed Forces’ combat capability is determined not only by the availability of modern arms and equipment, but also by trained
personnel,” Viktor Murakhovskiy, editor-in-chief of the Arsenal of the Fatherland magazine, told Izvestiya. “The military department
leadership is working systematically to increase the Russian Armed Forces’ combat capabilities. One of the key elements is the creation of
a reserve. At present, special territorial commands have been deployed in the military districts, and civilian agencies are being involved in
mobilization deployment. The reserve makes it possible, in cases of necessity, to rapidly increase the armed forces’ numerical strength and to
compensate for the shortfall of personnel in military units. But modern types of arms and military equipment require trained personnel with
the appropriate education.”
Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Сотни тысяч новых штыков (Hundreds of Thousands of New Bayonets),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 16 July
2017. https://rg.ru/2017/07/16/zavershilsia-vesennij-prizyv-v-armiiu.html
The Ministry of Defense has summed up the preliminary results of the spring draft for military service. During the last three and a half
months, the military commissariats based upon the edict of the country’s president placed 142,000 young Russians into formation…As much
as you would like, you can’t call the current draft sequester “cosmetic”. As compared to last spring, it totaled 13,000 men and, in comparison
to the fall – 10,000 men…Although the Ministry of Defense insists on the reduction of the troop mixed manning principle, the Russian Army’s
progress toward universal professionalization is becoming increasingly perceptible…
Should we be surprised that the Ministry of Defense is quite calmly relating to the introduction of new deferments from the barracks. In
the spring draft, hundreds of students of professional technical schools, colleges, and technical schools took advantage of that privilege for
the first time. Beginning this year, they are legally guaranteed the opportunity to obtain a diploma with a vocational education, so to speak,
without a separation from their studies…
In fact, this practice only works in favor of the commanders. A shortage of compulsory service soldiers is not being observed in the troops.
And the officers are happy when they send new recruits with degrees to them in the subunits. Until recently, that is how it was with yesterday’s
higher educational institution (VUZ) students. It will soon be that way with vocational graduates. The commanders are saying: the equipment
in the Army right now is complex and the soldiers with an education master it far more easily and rapidly than recent school graduates. The
number of new recruits with degrees in the ranks is increasing from year to year. By way of illustration, according to the General Staff’s
information, nearly one in five conscripts this spring turned out to be a higher educational institution graduate. As appropriate according to
the law, the military commissariat afforded the VUZ graduate the choice: be conscripted into the Army for twelve months or serve on contract
for two years…

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Changing Face of
the Russian Conscription System

Apparently, draft evasion is becoming less common as less than .002% of
draftees failed to report, continuing an ongoing trend. In some areas, like
the North Caucasus, there are more young men wanting to serve than there
are billets available. In these situations, the young men are not inducted for
military service. This can cause problems, as based upon recent legislation,
young men who do not serve, with certain exceptions, face a ten-year
prohibition from state service. Due to this situation, Russia has amended
its conscription legislation to exempt these young men from any negative
consequences regarding this situation.
Other legislative changes to the draft system have involved better
leveraging of the education system. Although Russian conscripts only
serve one year, Russia is attempting to make the best use of these conscripts
by allowing educational deferments, and then assessing these conscripts
for military service after they have obtained a valid military occupational
specialty (MOS) and/or higher education.
The Russian Federation has a solid education system, with a 98% literacy
rate. This system is similar to the German model, where after approximately
the 9th grade (15-16 year olds) Russian students are tracked to either a
university or vocational education. In Soviet times, only young men on
the university track could apply for draft deferments. After the completion
of their studies these young men would serve as conscripted officers.
The Russian Federation abolished the practice of conscripting officers,
but education deferments are still granted. In theory, the young men that
received these deferments were supposed to serve in some reserve capacity,
but rarely did they ever wear a uniform after graduation.
Russia appears to be revisiting the issue of how educational draft
deferments are handled in order to make better use of Russia’s human capital
and education system. According to the accompanying interview of Colonel
General Vasiliy Tonkoshurov, Chief of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces General Staff Main Organizational and Mobilization Directorate, in
Krasnaya Zvezda, “This spring, almost one in every five conscripts sent to
the troops to perform military service has a higher education.” Apparently at
least a portion of university graduates that receive educational deferments are
now serving in the ranks. The accompanying excerpt from the 16 July issue
of Rossiyskaya Gazeta states that these new graduates are given a choice,
serve one year as a conscript or two years as a contract serviceman. Some
of these graduates may be placed into the newly-formed ‘science companies’
that perform research and development tasks, in which both conscripts
and contract serviceman may serve, there have been reports that some of
these serviceman volunteer for commissioned service after their mandatory
service. Perhaps the most interesting development is a new program
that allows educational deferments for young men pursuing a vocational
education. According to the excerpt from a 13 July article in Rossiyskaya
Gazeta, educational deferments for students on the vocational track are now
being granted, and they will be allowed to serve one year as a conscript or
two years as a contract serviceman upon the completion of their studies. If
Russia is able to grant educational deferments for students on university and
vocational tracks, and actually assess most of these young men into the ranks
after the completion of their studies, Russia will develop a more educated
enlisted force, and reduce educational deferments being used to avoid service.
This reform is being done in parallel with a strengthening of the Volunteer
Society for Cooperation with the Army, Aviation, and Navy (DOSAAF)
program that imparts military skills and MOSs to secondary school students.
In the spring draft, more than 17,000 conscripts entered the service with a
valid MOS provided by a DOSAAF organization. These efforts may help
to solve some of the problems related to Russia’s relatively short 12-month
conscription period. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Yuliya Kozak, “Служба не в тягость, а в радость
(Service Is Not a Burden but a Joy),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online,
16 July 2017. http://www.redstar.ru/index.php/component/k2/
item/33815-sluzhba-ne-v-tyagost-a-v-radost
…In an interview, Colonel General Vasiliy Tonkoshurov, chief
of the Russian Federation Armed Forces General Staff Main
Organizational and Mobilization Directorate, discusses draft
results…
[Kozak] How many people today are trying to evade their military
duty?
[Tonkoshurov] It is no secret that the prestige of military service
has recently increased significantly. And there are not infrequent
cases of yesterday’s drafted service members staying on under
contract. To “dodge” the Army, as the young people say, has again
become unprestigious…This fact is also confirmed by the fact that
the number of citizens failing to present themselves at the military
commissariats is falling substantially every year and at present is
no more than 0.2 percent of the number of those summoned to draft
events.
[Kozak] And what are the results of the medical examinations
carried out during this draft? How is the health of this year’s
conscripts?
[Tonkoshurov] A positive trend has also been observed on this
issue for some time now. Since 2008 there has been an annual
reduction in the proportion of citizens exempted from the draft for
military service on health grounds. Since 2012 alone, an increase in
suitability has been observed from 69.9 percent to 78 percent -- that
was the figure recorded in the course of this draft campaign…
[Kozak] Preparation for Army service in the Voluntary Society
for the Promotion of the Army, Aviation, and Navy (DOSAAF), as
was established in Soviet times, is today being revived. How many
conscripts who already have a military specialty have joined the
ranks of the Armed Forces?
[Tonkoshurov] They really account for a considerable proportion.
In the course of this spring’s campaign more than 27,000 citizens
in this category were sent into the formations and troop units.
Of these, more than 17,000 underwent training in the Russian
DOSAAF. First and foremost, these are vehicle drivers. For the
first time after a long break, Navy specialists were trained in the
Defense Society by way of an experiment. They have been training
recruits for the Airborne Troops here for two years now.
[Kozak] Since recently, graduates of higher educational
establishments have had the right to choose: to serve for one year
under the draft or two years under contract. How many of these
new recruits are there, and are they taking advantage of this
opportunity?
[Tonkoshurov] This spring, almost one in every five conscripts
sent to the troops to perform military service has a higher
education. It is true that these conscripts were granted the
opportunity to choose. About 2,500 conscripts took advantage of
this. The most talented specialists with diplomas were selected to
man scientific companies, where something like 650 people are
serving today. In the spring 356 young guys were sent to join these
companies.

“This spring, almost one in every five conscripts sent
to the troops to perform military service has a higher
education.”
OE Watch | September 2017

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Implements New Logistic Depot System and
Inventory Controls
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying article from Rossiyskaya
Gazeta discusses a Russian initiative to
consolidate 330 bases and warehouses into
24 logistics complexes (PLK) [перевалочнологистических комплексов (ПЛК)] by
2020. This initiative will involve some sort
of privatization, and will reportedly save an
estimated 250 million dollars annually. In
addition it will require 50,000 fewer federal
employees and military personnel.
The first of these new complexes has been
established in the Moscow suburb of NaroFominsk. The Nary PLK provides storage
for approximately 220,000 tons of material
and 4,700 items of weaponry and special
equipment. The Nary PLK is managed by a
director with deputies for logistics, production,
and security, with a total staffing of about
1,200 people. This complex has replaced 27
bases and warehouses, and allowed 31 military
units to be disbanded. (Continued)

General Bulgakov inspecting 150th Motorized Rifle Division supply depot

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12132326%40egNews&utm_medium=more&utm_source=rnews&_print=true CC 4.0

“Beginning this year, military seamen will etch special QR-codes on torpedoes, missiles, and other

weapons. The “electronic tags” will become a mandatory attribute both for packaging with munitions,
transporter-launcher canisters, and also for the missiles and torpedoes themselves.”
Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Шойгу проверил строительство высокотехнологичного армейского склада (Shoygu Inspected a New Military
Logistics Center),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 19 July 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/07/19/shojgu-proveril-stroitelstvo-vysokotehnologichnogoarmejskogo-sklada.html
Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu inspected how they are building the first military production-logistics complex in Naro-Fominsk Rayon
near Moscow in the Russian Federation. Its construction was stipulated by the “Effective Army” Program. We are talking about not a single
facility but the creation of an entire network of state-of-the-art army depots. There will be a total of 24 of them on Russian territory. We know
that similar complexes will appear in Armavir, Novosibirsk, the Village of Vanino of Khabarovsk Kray, and other locations right after the one
in the Moscow area. So, the Ministry of Defense hopes that with them some well-organized military materiel storage facilities will appear in
Russia.
What is more, new production-logistics complexes like “Nary” will permit the reduction of the number of currently operating military
storage facilities and save resources for their maintenance…The Moscow production-logistics complex occupies a land area of 182 hectares.
High-rise apartment buildings, administrative buildings, and also areas for the storage of equipment and petroleum, oil, and lubricants will
be accommodated on it. Previously, while inspecting this construction site, Sergey Shoygu stated that they will not only create the needed
infrastructure here but also introduce the automation of the inventory of the materiel with the employment of state-of-the-art technologies.
What is more, it is precisely automation that will provide the transportation of everything that is being stored in the warehouses.
Various types of military equipment – from entrenching tools to gas-turbine tank engines - will be delivered to the logistics facility in
Naro-Fominsk Rayon. While taking into account the favorable location of the production-logistics complex, its transport accessibility,
the availability there of state-of-the-art loading and unloading equipment, and also the capability at Nary to prepare any materiel for
transportation using packages, parcels, or shipping containers, this center’s efficiency coefficient actually promises to be very high.
It is estimated that, besides warehousing and transport functions, this complex will also be outstanding for the repair and servicing of army
equipment. For which they will build several specialized shops here – to maintain small arms and military uniforms, the mothballing of
materiel, etc.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russia Implements New Logistic Depot
System and Inventory Controls
The accompanying article from Izvestiya discusses the use of Quick Response Code (QR) technology by Russian logisticians to securely track
inventories and hinder the introduction of unapproved and/or counterfeit parts and materials into the supply chain. Although not mentioned
explicitly, both of these reforms are likely intended to stymie internal graft and corruption. These problems are particularly endemic to the
areas of procurement, military construction, and logistics. Consolidating and privatizing logistic facilities and creating an inventory control
system could prove beneficial as a corruption control measure. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, Aleksey Ramm, “На ракеты и торпеды нанесут QR-коды (They Will Inscribe QR-Codes on Missiles and
Torpedoes),” Izvestiya Online, 28 July 2017. https://iz.ru/624114/dmitrii-litovkin-aleksei-ramm/na-rakety-i-torpedy-nanesut-qr-kody
Beginning this year, military seamen will etch special QR-codes on torpedoes, missiles, and other weapons. The “electronic tags” will
become a mandatory attribute both for packaging with munitions, transporter-launcher canisters, and also for the missiles and torpedoes
themselves. The codes will be accomplished in the form of a super-secure laser etching. The innovation will simplify the system for the storage,
monitoring, and expenditure of munitions and will permit them to completely monitor the items’ life cycle. Furthermore, it will become an
impediment for deliveries of uncertified components, and also of illegal trafficking of the end product outside the jurisdiction of the Navy
command authorities.…According to the experts, a QR-code – is a sort of digital “finger print” for a specific item or munition. They covertly
apply the super-secure laser marker to the torpedo or missile. Special “stickers” have been developed for boxes and transporter-launcher
canisters with items. The markers have undergone a test cycle for climactic effects and also resistance to counterfeiting…
The marker is completely destroyed during an attempt to “wipe out” or break the QR-code. It is impossible to apply a repeat marker on that
same section of the item. In the process, the marker’s service life is limited only by the time of the operation of the specific types of items and
packaging. Special equipment for their inconspicuous identification and information readout was developed together with the QR-markers.
One could do this not only at the storage locations but also under field conditions or directly on the Navy’s ships.
Arseniy Shcheltsin, the director of design activity of the Institute for the Development of the Internet, told Izvestiya that, in contract to
the barcodes, the QR-codes are more secure because the information key has more symbols…“If the information is worth nothing of state
importance, then a cheaper variant – is the barcode,” the expert said. “It is easier to read. It is used as the standard for sales. Everything
is more complex in the case with the QR-code. One can realize its development using two methods. The simple method is when the initial
information is entered into the QR-code, the code is printed and it is already impossible to make changes. But one can use the QR-code as
an access code to the information system with minimal rights for the operators. In all cases, specialized devices and software programs are
needed to read it”.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an
incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying
solely on brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces
(SOF) who were the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea.
This book will attempt to split the difference between these radically different ideas by
shedding some light on what exactly the Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are
structured, how they fight, and how they are modernizing.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | September 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Railroad Troops and Logistic Support
OE Watch Commentary: Since the Russian Empire spanned a vast
landmass (11 time zones), it is no surprise that the Russian military
was keenly interested in the nation’s railways. Russia’s first rail line
opened in 1848, with the Imperial Russian Army being one of the
first users. Rail transport proved to be the fastest and most reliable
means of transport for
the Russian Army to
connect its many far
flung outposts that were
protecting the country’s
borders. The Russian
Empire, as many other
European nations,
also planned to use
railroads for large-scale
military mobilization
The Russian Federation Railway Troops
and for the support
medium emblem.
Source: Government of Russia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
of armies in the field.
File:Railway_Troops_of_Russia.jpg, Pulblic Domain
Despite the technological
advancements of the
last 150 years, rail transport is still the most important means of
transportation in today’s Russian Federation. The economy would grind
to halt in the event of any large-scale disruption of the nations railways.
Just as rail transportation is essential for the country’s day-to-day
functioning, rail transportation is still important for the Russian Armed
Forces. The accompanying article from Krasnaya Zvezda discusses
Deputy Defense Minister General Dmitry Bulgakov’s inspection of the
Railroad Troops conducting bridging operations. The accompanying
interview from Strazh Baltiki of Captain 1st Rank (O6/U.S. Navy
Captain equivalent) Vadim Eduardovich Zykov, chief of the Baltic Fleet
Military Transport Communications Service, describes the importance
of rail operations for supporting Russian military forces in Kaliningrad.
The Russian Federation currently has a vast rail infrastructure
including at least 85,000 km (53,000 miles) of rail, 167,000 switches,
138 tunnels, and 30,000 bridges. This rail infrastructure is primarily
maintained and repaired by civil institutions, but due to the importance
of the railways to the military, remoteness of some lines, and
vulnerability of railroads to attack, the Russian Armed Forces have long
used special military railroad units, now known as the Russian Railroad
Troops, to maintain and repair Russian railroads when needed. Although
the use of civil institutions for railroad maintenance is much cheaper, the
Russian Railway Troops are usually used in restricted areas, to support civil
efforts resulting from natural disasters, and in combat conditions when civil
support is not feasible.
The Russian Railroad Troops have approximately 25,000 personnel,
including an estimated 1,800 officers, 5,000 contract NCOs, 2,500 civilian
personnel, and conscripts. In terms of organization, the Russian Railroad
Troops are commanded by Lieutenant General Oleg Ivanovich Kosenkov,
and are part of the Material Technical Support (MTO) commanded by
Deputy Defense Minister, General Dmitry Bulgakov. (Continued)

Source: Aleksey Trofimov, “От Замысла До Воплощения (From
Scenario to Accomplishment),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 14 July
2017. http://www.redstar.ru/images/files/2017/07-2017/075-14-072017_c-v-o.pdf
Russian Deputy Defense Minister Army General Dmitriy
Bulgakov has inspected the Railroad Troops’ readiness for
upcoming exercises…Participating in the event were chiefs of
Central Military District’s railroad troop directorates, separate
railroad formations’ commanders and staff chiefs, and also the
command of two separate logistic support formations, and the
department [kafedra] heads from the Railroad Troops Military
Institute and the Military Academy of Logistics. The servicemen’s
professionalism was being assessed by Russian Federation Deputy
Defense Minister Army General Dmitriy Bulgakov…
According to the scenario, a notional enemy had destroyed
a section of the railroad bridge over the Yenisey River. The
military railroad engineers had been set the task of restoring,
on the double, the disrupted movement of military trains over
that section…Around 500 soldiers, as well as 100 items of
equipment, were assigned to its execution. One of the subunits
swiftly assembled a trestle-frame bridge, and another removed the
consequences of the railroad tracks and ties that were damaged by
an “explosion.” The railroad formation personnel laid a 200-meter
pontoon rail and road crossing over the water obstacle. The river’s
rapid current -- more than three meters per second -- posed a
particular problem. Anchors weighing many tons were used for
securing the floating bridge in the water. The railroad engineers
coped with all the assigned tasks within the set deadline, displaying
excellent special skill…
Rounding up its results, RF Deputy Defense Minister Army
General Dmitriy Bulgakov appraised the military railroad
engineers’ standard of professionalism highly, noting that the
Railroad Troops were, and continue to be, an important component
of the state’s military organization and an integral part of the
Armed Forces…

Flag of Federal Service of the Railway Troops 2007
Source: Government of Russia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Russianrailway-troops-flag-2007.gif, Pulblic Domain

“In overall total, more than 70,000 tons of various cargos were transported for the Baltic Fleet in 2016,
which approximately equates to 2,000 railroad cars. Around 90 percent were delivered to the region by
ferry”
(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Railroad Troops and Logistic Support
The Russian Railroad Troops consist of 10 Railroad Brigades divided into four corps headquartered in Smolensk, Volgograd, Yekaterinburg,
and Khabarovsk, but operational control is maintained by their respective military districts. A railroad brigade typically consists of at least
three different types of battalions that may be geographically distant from their brigade headquarters. The rail battalion can lay and repair
track, build small bridges and other structures, and destroy rail infrastructure in wartime. The horizontal construction battalion operates
bulldozers, cranes, graders and other heavy equipment. The third type of battalion is the bridge battalion. These units operate pontoon bridging
systems and the sectional railway bridges that can span lengths of over 500 meters, (spanning most Russian rivers), and can build smaller
bridges from construction materials that can support weights up to 50 tons. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Vladimir Dashevskiy, “Ключевое Звено Логистики Балтфлота (The Baltic Fleet’s Vital Logistics Echelon),” Strazh Baltiki Online,
16 June 2017. http://sc.mil.ru/files/morf/military/archive/SB_16_06.pdf
On the history and present-day life of the Baltic Fleet Military Transport Communications Service, and also on the people who shoulder
responsibility for resolving logistics issues of the country’s large strategic formation, we conversed with Captain 1st Rank Vadim Eduardovich
Zykov, chief of the Baltic Fleet Military Transport Communications Service and deputy chief of the Baltic Fleet Transport Directorate…he
was the chief of the Military Transport Communications Service of the Black Sea Fleet Transport Directorate…
[Dashevskiy] What distinguishes your work here, and what are the specifics of Baltic Fleet logistics?
[Zykov] Many problems are similar to those I used to have to solve in the Black Sea Fleet.
Here, the territory is isolated from every direction, and the situation in Crimea is similar. Just the same as there, the main transport artery
is a ferry connection. Of course, the distance is substantially greater in the Baltic region. There, the ferry crossing does not exceed one hour,
whereas here the journey from Ust’-Luga takes around 36 hours. There is an overland route via neighboring Lithuania. But only fuel from
Russian oil refineries is delivered to the region that way. Also, those deliveries constitute approximately five percent of the total volume of fleet
cargoes that are delivered to the region…
[Dashevskiy] What are the volumes of military cargos being transported -- if it is not a secret?
[Zykov] In overall total, more than 70,000 tons of various cargos were transported for the Baltic Fleet in 2016, which approximately equates
to 2,000 railroad cars. Around 90 percent were delivered to the region by ferry...In addition, Baltic Fleet military units are in charge of a total
of around 30 km of railroad access lines, which must also be maintained in serviceable condition. And, supporting the entire array of tasks
which our service performs, there are people…

Special troops are represented by parade battalions from Railway troops, Engineer troops and CBRN defence troops
Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/keyword/Victory%20Day%20Parade;alabino;2012/i-wHG8XxV/A, CC BY SA 4.0

OE Watch | September 2017

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Opens Rail Line Bypassing Ukraine
OE Watch Commentary:
Interconnected infrastructure
(rail, roads, pipelines, etc.)
is a legacy of the Soviet
Union. The post-Soviet
republics are still untangling
infrastructure issues and
have had to work closely
with their neighbors on
otherwise internal matters
due to this legacy. Russia’s
annexation of Ukraine and
activities in Eastern Ukraine
have caused major economic
and infrastructure issues on
both sides of the border. The
accompanying articles from
Russian sources discuss one
such issue.
The first accompanying
passage from Interfax
announces that Russia has
Russia Opens Rail Line Bypassing Ukraine
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://function.mil.ru/news_page/world/more.htm?id=11974743@egNewsCC 4.0
now opened the ZhuravkaMillerovo railroad line, a line
constructed to avoid passing through Ukrainian territory as the previous route did. The construction of this segment was reportedly planned
well before 2014, as part of Russia’s “Developing Russia’s Transportation System (2010-2020)” federal program that planned to start building
a 748-km railroad line (Prokhorovka-Zhuravka-Chertkovo-Bataysk) in 2018 that would bypass Ukraine. Due to the deteriorating situation
with Ukraine, alternate routes were considered to avoid Ukrainian territory and reopen the line. Russia decided on the Zhuravka-Millerovo
railroad to reopen the route, but not substantially extending the line. This 270 km stretch of electrified double-track (almost all rail in Russia
is electrified) replaces 37 km of electrified double-track that connected the towns of Zhuravka and Millerovo, and reportedly has enough
throughput for 240 passenger or freight trains per day in both directions. The new rail line will not only connect the towns of Zhuravka and
Millerovo, but will also serve as an important connection between the Western and Southern Districts. Thus, it would likely be an important
asset for any conflict with Ukraine or the West, making it a strategic asset.
According to JSC Russian Railways Vice President Oleg Toni (the primary contractor), there are 2,500 civilian contractors and 1,500
units of equipment involved in the construction of the line, at a cost of approximately $1 billion, but Russia is not solely entrusting this
project to a contractor. The Russian Railroad Troops are also heavily engaged in the project, having began work in March 2015. In all three
rail battalions, five horizontal construction battalions, and a bridge battalion were pressed into service for the project, bringing over 1,500
personnel and 700 pieces of heavy equipment. (Continued)

“The Railroad Troops have once again demonstrated their proficiency and professionalism during the
accomplishment of their assigned mission.”
-Colonel General Vasiliy Tonkoshurov, chief of the Russian Federation Armed Forces
General Staff Main Organizational and Mobilization Directorate
Source: “Two-track railroad bypassing Ukraine put into de facto operation in southern Russia,” Interfax, 7 August 2017
A railroad that Russia has built in the Rostov and Voronezh regions to bypass Ukrainian territory has been put into operation, an informed
source told Interfax-AVN on Monday…”Working traffic on the Zhuravka-Millerovo stretch has been opened. Therefore, it can be said that this
electrified two-track railroad built to bypass neighboring Ukraine has begun operations,” he said…”Traffic on this stretch will intensify, and
relevant plans are being implemented by the Transport Ministry, Russian Railways, and other relevant institutions,” the source said.

OE Watch | September 2017

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russia Opens Rail Line Bypassing Ukraine
According to the accompanying article from Gazeta.ru, the Railroad Troops constructed 177 km of the total 270 km of rail that was built.
(Other reports mentioned that electrification aspect of the entire project was conducted by the civilian contractor). The article also mentions
that the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, General Sergei Shoygu, gave an award to the 39th Railroad Brigade and made some
comments, demonstrating Russian beliefs about the strategic importance of the Zhuravka-Millerovo rail line, and the Railroad Troops role
in constructing it. The accompanying interview of Deputy Defense Minister and Logistics (MTO) Chief, General Dmitriy Bulgakov in
Krasnaya Zvezda shares his view on the performance of the Railroad Troops, and again underscores how the Railroad Troops are proving
to be a key asset (as are the Pipeline Troops) for solving some of the infrastructure problems due to the Ukraine situation. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

““…well-earned appreciation of the brigade personnel’s high standards of skill, courage, steadfastness,
and professionalism. The brigade…actively participated in restoring the country’s transport arteries and in
building very major and strategically important railroad main lines.”
-General Sergei Shoygu, Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation

Source: Yuliya Kozak, “Приказано обеспечить (We Have Been Ordered to Support),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 31 July 2017. http://redstar.
ru/index.php/newspaper/item/33958-prikazano-obespechit
A contemporary army’s combat capability depends to an enormous extent on the effective operation of the Armed Forces Logistics Support
System. Today this is a well-organized mechanism, which successfully operates even in extreme and emergency situations.
On the eve of the celebration of Rear Services Day, Russian Federation Deputy Defense Minister General of the Army Dmitriy Bulgakov told
Krasnaya Zvezda about how the MTO system is operating today, which technologies are being introduced within its enhancement, and what
the main vectors of the development of the Russian Army’s logistics support are…
[Kozak] At what stage is the construction of the Zhuravka-Millerovo Railroad to bypass Ukraine?
[Bulgakov] In the concluding stage. The Railroad Troops have once again demonstrated their proficiency and professionalism during the
accomplishment of their assigned mission. On 6 August, the military railroad personnel will celebrate their professional holiday and, while
approaching their anniversary, they have something of which to be proud.
Source: Ivan Zhukovskiy, “Российские отпускники поедут мимо Украины (Russian Vacationers Will Bypass Ukraine),” Gazeta.ru Online, 7
August 2017. https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2017/08/07/10822345.shtml
Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu awarded the Order of Zhukov to the 39th Separate Railroad Brigade for having constructed the railroad
that bypasses Ukrainian territory, the Russian Federation Defense Ministry Information and Mass Communications Department reported on
Monday [August 6, 2017]. The branch line that the soldiers laid between Zhuravka and Millerovo stations in Voronezh and Rostov Oblasts has
connected Russia’s southern and central regions.
According to Shoygu, the award is “well-earned appreciation of the brigade personnel’s high standards of skill, courage, steadfastness, and
professionalism.” “The brigade, which was formed shortly after the great victory, actively participated in restoring the country’s transport
arteries and in building very major and strategically important railroad main lines,” the minister said by way of a reminder. “Without any
doubt, the building of the Zhuravka-Millerovo railroad section to an extremely tight schedule will enter the brigade’s glorious chronicle. It
is hugely significant for supporting the intensiveness and security of journeys in the country’s southern regions,” Shoygu said at the award
conferral ceremony…Millions of Russian citizens from the country’s central region will now not have to pass through two frontier posts on
the border with Ukraine. The railroad’s construction began in April 2015. The overall length of the railroad track from Zhuravka to Millerovo
was more than 270 km. Of that stretch, 177 km were built by military construction battalions. The remaining track section was built by civilian
railroad workers.
In addition to actual railroad tracks, the corresponding infrastructure and eight new stations are due to be added on the Zhuravka-Millerovo
section, not only vacationers, but also local inhabitants will make use of the branch. The decision to construct a railroad bypassing Ukraine
for trains traveling from the country’s central areas to the southern regions was made at the height of the armed conflict in the Donets Basin.
The railroad section that had operated previously ran along a 37 km stretch across Luhansk Oblast territory. The station at Zorynivka is
located on it.

OE Watch | September 2017

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Training to Fight in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: While the overall
situation in Syria remains unstable, the Kremlin
leadership apparently intends to maintain a military
presence within Syria for the foreseeable future
to restore order. The first excerpt from the official
Russian news agency TASS points out that in late
July, President Putin “signed into law a Russian
bill ratifying a protocol to an agreement between
Moscow and Damascus about the setting up of a
Russian air base in Syria,” which “will be in force
for 49 years and ‘automatically’ renewed for 25year periods.”
The pro-Kremlin media frequently features
reports about Russian military advances in
eliminating the terrorist threat and stabilizing the
country. Quoting Russian Defense Minister Sergey
Shoygu, the second excerpt points out, “the Syrian
army has really achieved considerable success.
Over the past two months, more territory has been
liberated than what was under Syrian government
control when we [Russia] entered [Syria].”

Chief of the Russian General Staff met the President of Syria Bashar al-Assad at the Hmeymim Air Base
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://syria.mil.ru/en/index/syria/news/more.htm?id=12131240@egNews, CC 4.0

The third excerpt from the Russian military news source Krasnaya Zvezda describes how lessons-learned from the Syrian conflict are
being incorporated into military training exercises. It describes an exercise conducted in July 2017, at the relatively new combined arms
training facility at Mulino (Nizhniy Novgorod Oblast) in the Central Military District. The exercise scenario was built around units from
the Ministry of Defense and National Guard capturing a rebel-held town, “freeing hostages taken by the rebels and preventing the terrorists
breaking out from their encirclement.” Besides employing massive amounts of firepower, the exercise incorporated the latest Russian
UAV and Electronic Warfare (EW) technologies. For instance, instead of using “propaganda leaflets calling for voluntary surrender and a
laying-down of arms,” Russian military personnel employ “a special EW system [mounted on a drone] which sends out the corresponding
information to the mobile phones of all subscribers in this area in the form of text messages.” (A brief video of the exercise can be found
here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALGNb-2baSw)
The training facility at Mulino allows for a full spectrum
of combined arms operations, where tailor-made scenarios
are developed for learning to defend against the specific
challenges confronted in Syria. The article describes how
Russian air and ground assets trained to eliminate “so-called
mobile weapon positions. These being medium machineguns
mounted on the beds of trucks or light pickup vehicles…
which are currently being employed by the terrorists of
ISIL.” The article concludes on a positive note, emphasizing
that the enemy tactics which Russian military forces are
confronting in Syria are being replicated, war-gamed and
defeated at modern combined arm training facilities like
Mulino. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“President Vladimir Putin has
signed into law a Russian bill...
about the setting up of a Russian
air base in Syria...”

Source: “Путин подписал закон о ратификации протокола о размещении
авиагруппы РФ в Сирии (Putin Signs Into Law Protocol Regarding
Stationing of Russian Airbase in Syria),” TASS, 26 July 2017. http://tass.ru/
politika/4442263
President Vladimir Putin has signed into law a Russian bill ratifying a
protocol to an agreement between Moscow and Damascus about the setting up
of a Russian air base in Syria, Russian state news agency TASS reported on 26
July…. The protocol says that the agreement will be in force for 49 years and
“automatically” renewed for 25-year periods.
Source: “Шойгу заявил об увеличении подконтрольной Дамаску
территории за два месяца в 2,5 раза (Shoygu says that the area controlled by
Damascus has increased 2.5 times over the past two months),” Interfax.ru, 13
August 2017. http://www.interfax.ru/world/574657
“The Syrian army has really achieved considerable success. Over the past
two months, more territory has been liberated than what was under Syrian
government control when we entered [Syria]. That is to say, we have in fact
made it 2.5 times greater than what it was before. When I say we, I mean the
Syrian army with our support,” Shoygu told Russian state-owned Rossiya 2 TV
in an interview.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Training to Fight in Syria
Source: Dmitriy Semenov, “С учётом сирийского опыта (Considering the Syrian Experience),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 21 July 2017.
http://redstar.ru/index.php/syria/item/33866-s-uchjotom-sirijskogo-opyta
…Units and subunits of all combat arms and individual services of the Armed Forces and also subunits of the Russian National Guard were
employed in the rehearsal of training issues in the notional area of concentration. It was no accident that Mulino was chosen as the location
for so significant a stage of the assembly. Conditions for study of a wide range of elements of combat training, with their demonstration
on an enlarged scale, in real time have been created here today at the range facilities, which have been prepared to a high quality….
According to the legend, the assault detachment composed of a reinforced motorized rifle battalion had to take out the defending adversary
at the approaches to the locality and, interacting with elements of the military police of the Russian Ministry of Defense and men of the
Russian National Guard, to capture the township, freeing hostages taken by the rebels and preventing the terrorists breaking out from their
encirclement.
Both the possibilities of the personnel and the potential of the modern types of arms and technical resources were demonstrated during
optimization of the elements of the exercise. … Or one further novelty, which is this time absolutely innovative: there’s no longer any need
today, apparently, as used to be the case earlier, to scatter over the adversary’s positions propaganda leaflets calling for voluntary surrender
and a laying-down of arms. This is now done by a special EW system, which, thanks to those same drones, sends out the corresponding
information to the mobile phones of all subscribers in this area in the form of text messages.
The most advanced methods of the conduct of combat operations, with consideration of the events in the Syrian Arab Republic included, were
rehearsed at the training sessions in Mulino. Colonel-General Andrey Kartapolov, commander of the Western Military District, emphasized
that even the most notional locality prepared for defense as part of the demonstration exercise had been equipped per Syrian “templates”….
Truly, together with the traditional procedures and methods of the conduct of combat operations – the mounting of fire attacks on exposed
command and observation posts of the adversary, suppression of his artillery and mortar batteries, and the employment of air weaponry such
as multi-role fighter bombers and attack helicopters -- issues whose study was dictated precisely by the Syrian operation were worked up at
the practice drill. They included the elimination of so-called mobile weapon positions. These being medium machineguns mounted on the beds
of trucks or light pickup vehicles. It is such “carts” which are currently being employed by the terrorists of ISIL (an organization banned in
Russia) when countering government forces in Syria and Iraq. Or “ jihad-mobiles” – explosives-packed specially equipped means of transport
converted from regular vehicles or tractors. The possibility of the rebels’ use of such adaptations is now also being taken into account in the
training of the troops and the preparation of the personnel for combat operations. The range in Mulino makes it possible to practice these and
other issues in full. Even the terrain here is reminiscent of Syrian terrain at times – there is both sand and flat country. …

Russian EW Developments
OE Watch Commentary: Given that the Russian GDP (and associated defense budget) is much smaller than that of the US, over the
past several years, Kremlin leaders have focused on weapon systems which might give Russia an asymmetrical advantage over their chief
geopolitical rival. Electronic Warfare (EW) is one such category. The accompanying excerpt from the pro-Kremlin news source Gazeta.ru
features the highlights of a recent interview with a top official (Yuriy Mayevskiy, Deputy General Director of the KRET AO for Research
and Electronic Warfare System General Designer) responsible for developments within this industry.
Mayevskiy begins by asserting that Russian EW systems “are far stronger and more sophisticated than the American systems,” and that
Russia is even capable of jamming the AWACS (Airborne Early Warning and Control). Later he points out that Russian EW developers
closely followed and derived important lessons-learned from American military operations in the former Yugoslavia, Iraq and other regions,
drawing distinctions between the need to defend against both air and ground forces. He goes on to claim that “in conceptual terms in the
electronic warfare sphere [Russia] is at the forefront of development or we are outperforming foreign countries.” He comments that the
current sanction regime has forced Russian manufacturers to rely upon “import substitution,” but this has had an “insignificant” impact
since domestic industry has “been working intensively on [developing] our own electronic component base.”
Mayevskiy goes on to list some specifics of the Russian EW arsenal, for instance: “the Rychag-AV… the Prezident-S system, …the series
of Krasukha-type jamming stations that are unrivaled anywhere,” designed against a wide spectrum of targets. He goes on to warn that
American “optimism” about being able to degrade Russia’s air defense systems is based upon the false assumption that modern Russian
air defense systems are similar to those fielded in the 1970s. The article concludes by describing how the conflict in Syria is serving as a
testbed for improving and fielding new EW systems. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…across a whole range of basic parameters our [EW] systems are far stronger and more sophisticated
than the American systems…”
(continued)
OE Watch | September 2017

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian EW Developments
Source: “Мы их «Патриота» тоже не боимся (We Also Have No Fear of Their Patriot),” Gazeta.ru, 22 July 2017. https://www.gazeta.ru/
army/2017/07/22/10798658.shtml
… [Gazeta.ru] How true are the claims made by some
specialists that our EW systems lag way behind Western
systems? Some believe that state-of-the-art American assets
represent some value that for us is unattainable.
[Mayevskiy] An assertion that is absolutely incorrect.
Because across a whole range of basic parameters our
systems are far stronger and more sophisticated than the
American systems. … So, if we are combating an AWACS,
then by definition our electronic warfare system has to be
more effective than all the rest.
[Gazeta.ru] And we are able to jam the AWACS?
[Mayevskiy] Yes, of course. We have been compelled to
develop and manufacture such equipment. I suppose the
Americans are acting in exactly the same way with regard to
our electronic assets….

1L269 Krasukha-2

Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2015/i-p5kr7MK, CC BY SA 4.0

[Gazeta.ru] It can be said that any adversary always has
weak and strong aspects. Where are we stronger and where do we lag behind in the EW context?
[Mayevskiy] I would say that in conceptual terms in the electronic warfare sphere we are at the forefront of development or we are
outperforming foreign countries in this respect. Experience demonstrates that as a rule our ideas, our concepts surpass the contemporary
world standard for the development of EW equipment. At the same time, there are some difficulties associated with the implementation of
concepts and ideas…. Among these problems is that of import substitution for several elements of the electronic component base. Over the last
few years we have been working intensively on our own electronic component base, and this program is proceeding pretty well….
[Gazeta.ru] And generally speaking, this switch from borrowing a foreign component base to establishing our own very likely increases the
reliability of the equipment, its resistance to influences emanating from a potential adversary?
[Mayevskiy] There has been no abrupt transition in this respect, nor could there have been. Despite the fact that we previously made use of a
number of elements of imported output, the proportion of these was insignificant…
[Gazeta.ru] Without revealing any state secrets, or a successful technology, can you cite an example when, for instance, we are responding
unconventionally to existing threats and outstripping the competition?
[Mayevskiy] I can name a product for the collective protection of aircraft, the Rychag-AV, as an example of EW equipment that is completely
unrivaled anywhere. The Prezident-S system, which possesses very good characteristics, also employs unconventional solutions. There is the
series of Krasukha-type jamming stations that are unrivaled anywhere. We have ample examples.
[Gazeta.ru] You come across statements put out by the American military saying that they have no fear of our PVO [air defense] systems
because with their own EW assets they have the capability to jam literally all the systems’ electronics.
[Mayevskiy] Believe it or not, but we also have no fear of their air defense systems, because we also are able to jam them. In this connection
we must not forget that this “optimism” of theirs can only be based on their experience of combating Soviet air defense assets in third world
countries whose development mainly dates back to the 1970s. I’m not sure they’ll retain this “optimism” when they’ve encountered the Russian
Federation’s modern air defense systems (newly developed and modernized in recent years) in real combat, not to mention our combat
crews….
[Gazeta.ru] Did our developers of EW assets take into consideration -- for instance -- the experience of the American military campaign in
Iraq?
[Mayevskiy] Undoubtedly. Any experience of the employment of EW in an armed conflict is viewed by us as experimentally acquired
data…. For us, there are in principle two types of modern conflict: the “Yugoslav,” when there were no boots on the ground, and the “Iraq,”
when there was a classic invasion -- air supremacy was secured initially and then the mission was accomplished in the course of a ground
operation.
[Gazeta.ru] How are our EW facilities performing in Syria?
[Mayevskiy] The Russian air grouping in Syria is securely protected by our electronic warfare systems. The pilots feel confident enough,
and they are ensuring high combat effectiveness in the way aircraft and armament are employed. Helicopters are protected by the Vitebsk
system. Certain assets from the pool of EW ground equipment have also been used there. They have also demonstrated their high effectiveness
in accomplishing the assigned missions. It may be said that at the contemporary stage, even given the limited scale of the EW equipment’s
combat use, we have achieved pretty high marks….
OE Watch | September 2017

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Improving Russian Military Medical Care
OE Watch Commentary: Since the collapse of the USSR, health care in Russia has suffered from the same vicissitudes as other aspects
of Russian society. While on paper, citizens enjoy free medical care, the system has been plagued by under-funding, corruption, and a wide
disparity between urban and rural medical care. Until quite recently, these same problems have (to a lesser degree) hampered medical care for
those connected to the military and security services. The situation appears to be improving. The accompanying excerpt from the popular daily,
MK Online, describes a visit to the renovated Military-Medical Academy, a military hospital in St. Petersburg, and how this updated facility will
respond to the medical needs of those serving in the military.
The article begins by describing the 219-year long history of this military hospital, pointing out that “despite the establishment’s renown and
international authority, hardly any work ha[d] been done toward improving the academy. The last clinical sub-department here was built as
long ago as in 1913.” This lack of capital improvement changed under Defense Minister Shoygu, who proposed a few years ago that the hospital
be renovated and equipped with modern medical technology. Today the modernized facility includes “15 academic departments, 15 medicaldiagnostics centers, 27 operating theaters, eight research laboratories, and 22,000 items of the most up-to-date equipment.”
Besides being “able to accommodate 630 inpatients simultaneously,” the hospital “boasts an ultralow-temperature bank, which makes it
possible to maintain a strategic stock of donated blood in case of emergency situations or armed conflict.” It also possesses “the Russian Army’s
first center for coordinating organ donation and transplant surgery, and a center for storing blood and tissue, which has a capacity unequalled
anywhere in Russia.” Equally impressive is the facility’s ability “to offer telemedicine consultations and practical aid to serious cases, including
to those who are located in the most remote parts of Russia.”
While Russian military power has traditionally been measured by the number of trained uniformed personnel and the quantity of advanced
weapon systems, the support infrastructure to maintain such a force is equally vital. To further strengthen the country’s military potential, this
article suggests that Russian military leaders have recognized the importance of improving and modernizing the country’s military healthcare
system. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Here it is possible to administer high-tech aid to patients, train future doctors, and develop research in
any sphere of medicine…”

Source: “Aleksandr Stepanov, “Путин откроет уникальную клинику Минобороны: мы посмотрели, что внутри (Putin Will Open a
Unique Defense Ministry Clinic: We Took a Look Inside),” MK Online, 27 July 2017. http://www.mk.ru/politics/2017/07/27/putin-otkroetunikalnuyu-kliniku-minoborony-my-posmotreli-chto-vnutri.html
The multi-specialty clinic at the Military-Medical Academy named for Kirov is a unique Russian Defense Ministry complex equipped with the
newest innovative medical technology. Here it is possible to administer high-tech aid to patients, train future doctors, and develop research in
any sphere of medicine….
…The Saint Petersburg medical academy is one of Russia’s oldest educational establishments. This year is its 219th. Despite the
establishment’s renown and international authority, hardly any work has been done toward improving the academy. The last clinical subdepartment here was built as long ago as in 1913.
It is clear that entering the new century with old baggage is very difficult; the decision was therefore made to build modern wings here. It
was Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu who proposed the idea, and Vladimir Putin who endorsed the initiative, and it took off from there, as we
say….
Everything here is the last word in medicine. The building houses 15 academic departments, 15 medical-diagnostics centers, 27 operating
theaters, eight research laboratories, and 22,000 items of the most up-to-date equipment, the majority having no equivalents in Russia. The
clinic will be able to accommodate 630 inpatients simultaneously….
…Another of the clinic’s proud boasts is an ultralow-temperature bank, which makes it possible to maintain a strategic stock of donated
blood in case of emergency situations or armed conflict. The low-temperature storage facility makes it possible to hold in reserve 3,000 doses
of erythrocytic and 8,000 doses of thrombocytic material, as well as up to 5,000 liters of blood plasma…
Colonel Anatoliy Zavrazhnyy, the head of the multi-specialty clinic at the Military-Medical Academy, gave up a few minutes for MK. He
spoke about the innovations that exist in this center alone. “We house the Russian Army’s first center for coordinating organ donation and
transplant surgery, and a center for storing blood and tissue, which has a capacity unequalled anywhere in Russia. This is especially relevant
for the Armed Forces. And a center for coordinating the work of all of the Russian Army’s medical establishments,” the medic relates with
pride….
“Here we are able to offer telemedicine consultations and practical aid to serious cases, including to those who are located in the most
remote parts of Russia….”

OE Watch | September 2017

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Strains in the Russia-Kazakh Relationship?
OE Watch Commentary: Since it was willing to employ force to protect its perceived interests in Ukraine, Russia’s armed aggression has
complicated the Kremlin’s relations with its other neighbors. This aggressive sentiment serves as the background to a recent article from the
centrist news source, Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, where the author expresses his indignation at Kazakh authorities for their willingness to
participate in a NATO peacekeeping exercise and work with the Americans to reduce WMD threats.
The author begins by bemoaning that the “core feature of the [peacekeeping] exercises is that Russian servicemen are absent from them,” and
that “the instruction and training of the Kazakhstani men and officers within the Kazbat peacekeeping battalion is performed exclusively to the
standards of the North Atlantic alliance.” He goes on to contrast the Kazakh willingness to participate in UN/NATO peacekeeping missions with
its reluctance to assist its CSTO partner, Russia, with its mission in Syria. He mistakenly claims that “Kazakhstani service personnel… have
taken part in the NATO operation in Afghanistan.” The author then goes on to suggest that Kazakh authorities might be considering drawing
closer to the US since senior defense officials “concluded … a plan of military cooperation for 2018-2022,” and that since “content of this plan is
not being disclosed officially,” it “is giving rise to questions.”
To drive home the point that the Kremlin does not appreciate Kazakh closer relations with the US, the author then resorts to the canard that
American attempts to control WMD within the region by helping to construct research facilities are “not entirely peaceful” and “present a
potential danger for the Russian Federation.” That this normally centrist news source would now be suggesting that the US plans to use these
research facilities to produce “biological weapons” reflects the depths to which US-Russian relations have sunk.
The author concludes on an ominous note, quoting a Russian military expert who asserts that “the Kazakhstani leadership is sitting on two
stools,” and that “it is conniving at the clearly anti-Russian actions of the United States and other NATO countries.” This expert goes on to
claim that “the United States is actively assimilating the Central Asian military theater. The presence of the Pentagon’s service personnel in
Kazakhstan affords an opportunity for objectively reconnoitering Russian military facilities.” Finally, he accuses “American advisers” with the
recent decision to change the “Kazakh alphabet [from Cyrillic] to Latin script.” This could have dire consequences, since “more than half the
population of Kazakhstan considers Russian its native language.” If this article is any indication, the Kremlin leadership may be considering
employing greater pressure to keep Kazakhstan within its embrace. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Vladimir Putin and President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev (2012)

Source: Russian Presidency, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/trips/16505/photos/13365,
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike4.0 International License https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode

OE Watch | September 2017

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Strains in the Russia-Kazakh Relationship?
“You get the impression that the Kazakhstani leadership is sitting on two stools. On the one hand it is
with Moscow, on the other, it is conniving at the clearly anti-Russian actions of the United States and other
NATO countries”
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Пентагон формирует в Казахстане антироссийский рубеж (The Pentagon Is Forming an Anti-Russian Line in
Kazakhstan),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 9 August 2017. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2017-08-09/1_7047_kazahstan.html
The Steppe Eagle 2017 international peacekeeping exercises have wrapped up in Kazakhstan with the participation of NATO and CIS
countries at the Ilisky training range in Almaty Province. Such maneuvers have been held in the country regularly since 2003. A core feature
of the exercises is that Russian servicemen are absent from them, the instruction and training of the Kazakhstani men and officers within the
Kazbat peacekeeping battalion is performed exclusively to the standards of the North Atlantic alliance.
This time also Kazakhstani soldiers, together with military personnel from the United States and Britain, rehearsed at the exercises, whose
main phase lasted more than three months, a set of various peacekeeping assignments. Saken Zhasuzakov, defense minister of Kazakhstan,
believes that Steppe Eagle has become “an important instrument for the consolidation of cooperation and an enhancement of the level of
interoperability of Kazbat subunits with NATO entities.” Positive assessments of the maneuvers were made also by Major-General Jan
Toft, director of NATO’s Cooperation and Regional Security Division. The Kazakhstani defense department quoted President Nursultan
Nazarbayev, who in his address to the UN Security Council noted that “Kazakhstan supports the continued improvement of the UN
peacekeeping system and intends to increase the number of its military observers and peacekeepers in UN peacekeeping missions.”…
It is understandable that Kazakhstan wants to take a more active part in peacekeeping operations. But literally a month ago Kairat
Abdrakhmanov, leader of the country’s foreign ministry, strictly ruled out the participation of Kazakhstani blue helmets in Syria lest they
became “hostages of the situation”. …Aspersions were clearly cast here at Russia, which for almost two years has been attempting in Syria to
deal with the terrorists and reconcile the antagonists.
Kazakhstani service personnel, who together with their counterparts from the Russian Federation and other CIS countries are members
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, have taken part in the NATO operation in Afghanistan. But as distinct from Russia, Turkey,
and Iran, are emphatically refusing to take part in such a mission in Syria. Of course, this is Kazakhstan’s right, but if the allied relations of
Moscow and Astana are considered, this position is in clear contradiction with that of the Russian Federation.
This subject came to be discussed in the expert community when meetings of a Kazakhstani delegation led by Lieutenant-General Talgat
Mukhtarov, deputy republic defense minister, with Pentagon representatives took place in July in Washington. Kazakhstan and the United
States concluded at that time a plan of military cooperation for 2018-2022. The content of this plan is not being disclosed officially, and this in
itself is giving rise to questions.
Many experts and politicians claim that there are American military facilities, which could present a potential danger for the Russian
Federation and other countries of the CIS, on the territory of Kazakhstan. For example, the subject of the building with Pentagon money of
biological centers in Georgia and Kazakhstan was raised during an exchange at the end of May 2017 during RF Defense Minister Sergey
Shoygu’s government hour with members of the Federation Council. It is known, in addition, that with Washington funds totaling $130
million such a facility was built in Almaty and commissioned in September 2016. The laboratory is officially intended for infectious-disease
diagnostics, research, storage of the strains of particularly hazardous viruses, search for vaccines, and so forth. All this could be called
simply biological weapons. But due supervision here on the part of the Russian Federation and other CIS countries is lacking, about which
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov spoke back last September, emphasizing that the United States’ refusal “to create a mechanism of
supervision of compliance with the requirements of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention prompts the thought that this research is
not entirely peaceful.”…
“Russia and Kazakhstan are united by allied relations. In the military sphere included. We are jointly conquering space and organizing joint
military international games and military exercises. Kazakhstan acquires Russian weapons at preferential prices…. But, unfortunately, these
relations are accompanied by troublesome facts,” Lieutenant-General Yuriy Netkachev, military expert, believes. “You get the impression that
the Kazakhstani leadership is sitting on two stools. On the one hand it is with Moscow, on the other, it is conniving at the clearly anti-Russian
actions of the United States and other NATO countries.” NG’s source is certain that “through participation in Steppe Eagle-type military
maneuvers the United States is actively assimilating the Central Asian military theater. The presence of the Pentagon’s service personnel in
Kazakhstan affords an opportunity for objectively reconnoitering Russian military facilities.”
“The United States is instructing Kazakhstani servicemen free of charge, instilling in them its values and ideology. I am certain that the
planned transition of the Kazakh alphabet to Latin script has been organized with the assistance of American advisers. This is a clear
provocation and a shaping of the prerequisites for social conflicts. After all, more than half the population of Kazakhstan considers Russian its
native language. For them, particularly for the Slavs, this will be an alien phenomenon,” the expert says.

OE Watch | September 2017

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s Northern Fleet and Pacific Fleet Share the Russian
Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages discuss Russia’s activities in the Russian Arctic, including a new type of unit called
the ecological platoon. The Russian Arctic coastline stretches 24,140 kilometers (15,000 miles). The Northern Fleet Operational Strategic
Command is the main striking force in the Arctic. However, the Russian Pacific Fleet is building a base on Cape Schmidt, located on the
headland of the Chukotka Peninsula across from the Bering Straits. The Eastern Military District, to which the Pacific Fleet belongs, has been
delivering supplies to Cape Schmidt and the small naval facility and weather station on Wrangel Island. This would indicate that the Pacific
Fleet controls the eastern entry to the Northern Sea Route. Does its control extend further to Kotelny Island in the New Siberian Island Group?
Regardless, both the North Sea Fleet and Pacific Fleet are involved in cleaning up the old trash dumps of scrap metal left behind from the Soviet
era. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Atle Staalesen, “Russian Navy
reports progress in building east Arctic base,”
The Independent Barents Observer, 8 June
2017. https://www.arcticnow.com/arcticnews/2017/06/08/russian-navy-reports-progressin-building-east-arctic-base

Source: “Eastern District Helicopters
Deliver Cargo to Arctic Garrisons
in Extreme Conditions,” Ministry of
Defense of the Russian Federation,
24 July 2017. http://www.mil.ru

The Eastern Military District’s
army aviation crews deployed in the
Arctic zone have delivered cargo to
the district’s remote garrisons on
Wrangel Island and Cape Schmidt
under extreme conditions. Mi-26 and
Mi-8amtsh helicopters delivered 11
tons of cargo and rotated servicemen
on duty in military units on Wrangel
Island and Cape Schmidt. In addition,
The town’s revival came with the Russian Armed the Eastern Military District’s army
aviation helicopters delivered an
Forces’ decision in 2014 to reconstruct local
environmental platoon, which will
infrastructure, including the airfield. A total of
1.5 billion rubles have been invested in the base. clean up the territory of Wrangel
Island. The flight routes pass through
Construction started in October 2014 and was
originally to be completed by the end of 2015. The several major mountain passes
which experience difficult climatic
Russian Armed Forces have over the last years
conditions -- low temperatures
invested heavily in the development of new and
upgraded bases along the country’s Arctic coast. and strong winds, that demand top
Among the other east Arctic bases are Kotelny in skills and flying experience from the
the New Siberian Islands and the Wrangel Island. aircrew.
A total of seven new buildings and facilities have
been built on the [Cape Schmidt] compound.
Another 17 are under construction and will be
handed over to the Navy in the course of the
year. Cape Schmidt is located on the coast of the
Chukotka Sea. The base on site will be operated
by the Pacific Fleet. In the late 1980s, the town
housed more than 4,500 people. By 2016, the
population had shrunk to only 150.

Source: “Military ecologists remove almost 2,000
tonnes of scrap metal from Wrangel Island over
2 years,” Interfax, 8 August 2017. http://www.
interfax.com
An Eastern Military District ecological unit has
collected 1,815 tons of scrap metal, including
36,000 pressed empty gasoline barrels, from
Wrangel Island in the Arctic Ocean over the past
two years. According to an official statement “All
of the collected scrap metal was removed from
the island by third-party ships and Pacific Fleet
support vessels. More than 10 hectares of the
island have been cleaned up.”
More scrap metal is being collected and
prepared for removal from the island. “Before
the end of October, 20 servicemen of an Eastern
Military District ecological platoon will collect
about 600 tons of scrap metal and send it to the
mainland. They are using presses, generators,
blow torches, a KS-45722 crane, and TEU
containers.”
Wrangel Island is a Russian island in the Arctic
Ocean which lies between the East Siberian and
Chukchi seas. It is an administrative unit of the
Iultinsky district of the Chukchi autonomous
region…..

“Seventeen new buildings, power generation stations and a freshwater well are under construction in
Cape Schmidt, the east Arctic Navy base. Two diesel-powered electricity generators and a fresh water
extraction unit are ready for use. The system has the capacity to pump eight cubic meters of water per
hour. Previously, the personnel on site had to melt snow to get needed fresh water.”

Military base and the “Temp” airdrome renovation on New Siberian Islands (Kotelny Island)
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, hhttp://eng.mil.ru/en/mcis/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=13078@cmsPhotoGallery,
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike4.0 International License https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode

OE Watch | September 2017

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Northern Fleet Puts to Sea in Support of Operation Zapad
OE Watch Commentary: The Northern Fleet
has been busy this summer. There was the huge
Naval Day parade in St. Petersburg, support
to Syria and now a large-scale exercise that,
according to the excerpted article, is a prequel
to the joint Russian-Belarus drills “Zapad-2017,”
scheduled for 14-20 September. This Western
Military District exercise is important as it
is headed by the Commander of the Russian
Navy-Admiral Vladimir Ivanovitch Korolev.
Admiral Korolev is a submariner who rose to
command the Black Sea Fleet and the Northern
Fleet, as well as the Arctic Strategic-Operational
Command, before becoming the top sailor in
the Russian Navy. He is clearly no stranger to
the cold waters of the north. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Northern Fleet announces big-scale exercise”, The Independent
Barents Observer, 9 August 2017. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2017/08/
northern-fleet-announces-big-scale-exercise
The Northern Fleet, the most powerful of Russia’s five fleets, is unfolding a special exercise
which includes key elements of the fleet’s capabilities.
The exercise will be headed directly by Russian Navy Head Commander Vladimir
Korolyev and will last for several days…. Included are about 50 ships, submarines and
support vessels as well as aircraft and helicopters from the Air Force and Air Defense….
The exercise is being held as several of the most powerful Northern Fleet vessels are on
their way home after participation in a Navy parade outside St. Petersburg. Among them
are the battle cruiser “Pyotr Veliky” [Peter the Great] and typhoon-class submarine
“Dmitry Donskoy”. It is likely that the returning vessels will take part in the exercise.
In the course of the exercise, antisubmarine and anti-sabotage training will be conducted
along with navigational, hydrographical, anti-mine and search and rescue operations.

“According to the Navy representatives, the exercise is held as a preparatory phase to the large-scale joint
Russian-Belarus drills ‘Zapad-2017’ scheduled for the period 14-20 September.”

III Winter Military World Games (Ships set out from Northern Fleet headquarters in
Severomorsk)
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, http://eng.mil.ru/en/cism2017/photo/gallery.htm?id=42612@cmsPhotoGallery,
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike4.0 International License https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode

OE Watch | September 2017

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG) Expansion into the Pacific
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has three Liquefied Natural
Gas (LNG) terminals in the Arctic-Murmansk, the Yamal Peninsula
and the Gydan Peninsula. The last two are owned by the Russian
Novatek Corporation. Russia is pumping a lot of oil and gas from
its Arctic oilfields. LNG transported from the Arctic region requires
expensive ice-class LNG carrier vessels. As the accompanying
passage discusses, Novatek is considering building an LNG
transshipment facility on the eastern coast with a capacity for 20
million tons a year. This would provide a point where regular LNG
carrier vessels could pick up the product for further distribution in
the Asia-Pacific region. As a Novatek official notes, construction
of the terminal is “a mega-project...” that would last “for 40 years
at a minimum and perhaps for all of 100,” adding that “this is a
permanent business.” LNG terminals have special security and
disaster response requirements-many of which must be met by the
military. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The terminal is needed to optimize the cost
of delivering LNG from Novatek projects
in Russia’s Arctic sector (on the Yamal and
Gydan peninsulas) to the main LNG consumer
markets in the Asia-Pacific region. LNG would
be delivered to the terminal in ice-class LNG
carriers on the Northern Sea Route and then
transferred to conventional LNG carriers, which
are significantly less expensive.”

Source: “Novatek may build LNG transshipment terminal in
Kamchatka” Interfax, 2 August 2017. http://www.interfax.com
Lev Feodosyev, Novatek’s deputy CEO and commercial director stated
that Novatek is evaluating the technical aspects of a project to build
an LNG transshipment facility on Kamchatka’s eastern coast with a
capacity for 20 million tons a year. “We see that this makes commercial
sense,” Feodosyev said at a meeting in Kamchatka. “Kamchatka is
the first region with deep-water, ice-free bays with direct access to the
Pacific Ocean. Geography itself has dictated our appearance here.”
He declined to provide approximate figures on how much investment
the project will require or the size of the savings it would generate. “It
is too early to say. The cost could vary substantially depending on the
concept that is ultimately selected.”
Feodosyev also declined to name a precise construction date. “We are
to finish the design of the Arctic LNG 2 project [Gyadin Peninsula] by
the end of 2018. Naturally, having arrived at investment decisions for
this project, we must understand the transport concept. Accordingly,
we will have to come to a decision for ourselves concerning
transshipment.” Feodosyev added that the terminal will be designed
only with Novatek projects in mind….
A Novatek delegation including specialists from the Atomflot state
enterprise and CJSC GT Morstroy and representatives of leading
foreign engineering firms from France, South Korea and Japan has
already reconnoitered Kamchatka’s eastern shore and made a technical
assessment of potential sites for the terminal. The specialists also have
to settle on how much capacity to build, and whether an LNG storage
facility will be built or if the terminal will have a system for transferring
LNG directly from one ship to another….
In turn, Atomflot General Director Vyacheslav Ruksha told journalists
that construction of the terminal is “a mega-project that requires
absolutely different approaches. “Transshipment will be for 40 years
at a minimum and perhaps for all of 100. Therefore it is extremely
important. This is a permanent business. Here there is work for
decades.”

Gas production launched at Bovanenkovo field

Source: Russian Presidency Website, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/16703, CC 4.0

OE Watch | September 2017

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s National Guard Forms a Science Company
OE Watch Commentary: Lieutenant General Yevgeniy Fuzhenko, chief of Rosgvardiya’s (Russian National Guard) Main OrganizationMobilization Directorate, told journalists that Rosgvardiya will be forming its first science company in the fall. It will include both conscripts
and contract servicemen. Science companies were the invention of Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu, who announced that “gifted
students of civilian educational institutes, whose scientific achievements are in demand for accomplishing military scientific tasks” should be
formed into military science companies. Here, young servicemen can learn from professionals in their area of expertise. Currently there are 649
servicemen located in other Defense Ministry science companies. As the excerpt below notes, there are specific directions of work for the new
servicemen to follow in their work for Rosgvardiya, to include public relations on social networks. End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)

“‘The main directions of activity we are planning as of today are Internet research, multimedia
technologies, and software. The second block is participation in developing preliminary specifications
for designing arms, military vehicles, and various equipment. And the third block is the study of domestic
and foreign arms as well as domestic and foreign experience of state security and counterterrorism,’ the
General said.”
Source: “Armed Forces Department: PR and Science Summoned to Rosgvardiya: First Scientific Company Will Appear in Rosgvardiya in the
Fall,” Gazeta.ru, 27 July 2017.
The National Guard Adds a Science Company
“The main directions of activity we are planning as of today are Internet research, multimedia technologies, and software. The second block
is participation in developing preliminary specifications for designing arms, military vehicles, and various equipment. And the third block is
the study of domestic and foreign arms as well as domestic and foreign experience of state security and counterterrorism,” the General said.
Preference in screening and selection for the Rosgvardiya scientific company will be given to winners of Olympiads and contests, to state
scholarship holders, and to authors of scientific works “of special applied importance for the National Guard troops,” Fuzhenko said. The
Rosgvardiya Department for Coordination with the SMI [Mass Media] also announced that a team will be formed in the scientific company
which will engage in studying PR technologies and improving the department’s image. The group will number seven persons, Rosgvardiya
added.
In a conversation with Gazeta.Ru, FSB [Federal Security Service] Major General (Retired) Aleksandr Mikhaylov, former chief of the special
service’s Public Relations Center, supposed that conscripted personnel recruited for the new Rosgvardiya subunit would engage in department
PR on social networks.

KREMLIN KONTROL
by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
In 2016 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chief of the General
Staff Valery Gerasimov instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and reestablished the
nation’s military prowess. This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to
describe how control over the security services and the military
have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | September 2017

60

