fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #4
May 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

SPECIAL ESSAY:

New Generation
Media & Militias:

RUSSIA’S SEARCH & RESCUE IN SYRIA
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
5
6
7
8

9
10
11

Syria, Egypt, Libya: A New Russia-Dominated Axis?
Turkish Perspectives on US Action in Syria
Iraq: The Day After in Mosul
Iran Claims Enhanced Missile Precision
Development of Iranian Nanotechnology Companies in
China
Iran and Russia Upgrade Cooperation
Russia’s North African Foothold
Iran and the Syrian Conflict’s Shifting Loyalties

AFRICA
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

South Africa: Protests Against President as Credit Rating
Sinks to Junk Status
South Africa’s Military Declines as Budgets Fall Short
South Sudan: As Famine Worsens, Criticism Over Military
Spending
Somali President’s Declaration of War on Al-Shabaab Met
with More Terrorist Attacks
Somalia’s Troops Have a High Expectation for Their New
President: Being Paid
Repression and Resistance in Cameroon’s Anglophone
Community
Doubt over Peace Talks in Mali

LATIN AMERICA
20
21
22
23
24
24
25

Not Guillermo Lasso
Bolivarians Talking Tough
Human Trafficking Activity in Colombia
Colombia Acquires New Scientific Research Ship
Costa Rica and Narcotics Trade
China and Cuba Strengthen Military Ties
Brazilian Army Expands Armored Vehicle Fleet

ASIA-PACIFIC
26

27
28
29
29
30
31
32

A “First” for the People’s Liberation Army:
A Navy Admiral Becomes a Joint, Regional, Commander
The Evolution of the PLA’s Red-Blue Exercises
A Russian View on US-North Korean Relations
China’s Plan to Develop its Strategic Emerging
Industries: Tap into Private Investors
Potential for Lone-Wolf Attacks on the Rise in Southeast
Asia
Strategic Issues China Faces in Military Informatization
An Insightful Indian Analysis on China’s Warfare
Strategies
The Philippines Eyes an End to the NPA Insurgency

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
33
34

The Aftermath of the St. Petersburg Metro Bombing
The Russian-South Ossetian Military Merger

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

A Russian Perspective of 21st Century War
New Special Forces Training Center in Chechnya
Training Russian Military Journalists
Military Parades and Economic Discontent
Buying “Proof” of Military Service
Arming the Icebreakers
Winter Training in the Arctic
ETA Shows in France
Stockholm Terror Attack Shows New and Old Trends

SPECIAL ESSAY

44 New Generation Media and Militias: A Case
Study in Russia’s November 2015 Search and
Rescue Operation

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil
ON THE COVER: Downed Syrian Army helicopter, Idlib Province, 3/22/15.

Sources: Downed helicopter image: YouTube (screenshot), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gZCL3skbtPE, CC BY. Logos (from L to R):
ANNA News, Telegram, WhatsApp, Viber, Zello, Twitter, VKontakte, YouTube, Facebook, Syriatel. Silhouettes: Pixabay, https://pixabay.com/en/
soldiers-military-army-militia-311925/, public domain.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 4

May | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Asia-Pacific

Dennis Blasko
Steven Galluzzi
Cindy Hurst
David Logan
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine, Europe

Geoff Demarest
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Jacob Zenn

		
				

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editors

Keith French
Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syria, Egypt, Libya: A New Russia-Dominated Axis?
OE Watch Commentary: Russia continues to expand its influence
in the Middle East and North Africa. The accompanying excerpts
from Middle Eastern sources discuss Russia’s deepening role in Libya,
including its strategy of using Egypt as a platform to establish a foothold
inside Libya. This comes amid Russia’s current presence in Syria,
suggesting a potential Russia-dominated axis in the Mediterranean,
including Syria, Egypt and Libya. This is significant because it
influences Russian access to the Suez Canal and signals Russia’s intent to
protect its future operations in the region.
The first passage from a Turkish source claims that Russia is preparing
for a military intervention in Libya. It reports that Russia has deployed
special operations forces and UAVs in the Egyptian town of Sidi Barrani,
east of Libya, with this goal. The piece claims that “Russia is using
special army forces to provide training for General Halife Haftar’s
units in Libya, which Egypt supports.” The piece also notes Russia’s
cooperation with Egypt, reminding that the two countries’ militaries
conducted joint exercises in the Mediterranean recently. It also points
out that Russia’s natural gas company purchased 30% of one of Egypt’s
richest natural gas fields for $1.5 billion last year.
The second passage from Al Jazeera features comments by Moscowbased military analyst Pavel Felgenhauer, who discusses that Russia
is keen on establishing a foothold in Libya and having influence there.
It notes that Felgenhauer did not deny claims that the Kremlin is
negotiating the opening of a military base on Egypt’s border with Libya.
Felgenhauer says that “Russia may provide weaponry, military training,
logistical support [to General Haftar],” but notes that it would seek some
sort of compensation in return, such as oil income. According to the
article, Russian support for General Haftar has been dictated by concerns
about the spread of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) on Europe’s
doorstep and Russia’s intent to set up a broad anti-terrorism coalition. In
this coalition, Moscow would play a mediating role in Libya that would
afford it a privileged relationship with the country’s leadership in the
future.
Felgenhauer also discusses Russia’s use of contractors in the region,
saying that Russia is “relying on private military contractors and
mercenaries [to help Haftar]... Private contractors are very convenient
because they have no political strings attached.” He notes that Russia is
already doing this in Syria, where contractors do the real fighting instead
of Russian servicemen. Russia’s use of private contractors without
official uniforms also makes it difficult to identify and verify the exact
nature of Russian military activity in the region.
There are several other factors which may provide a context for
Russia’s moves in Libya. First, Moscow has a general interest in
stabilizing the region. Second, Russia has an interest in assisting Egypt
and bolstering the regime in Egypt (where President Abdel Fattah alSisi’s ideological affinity, which opposes the Muslim Brotherhood, makes
it attractive to Moscow). Third, from Russia’s perspective, a friendly or
loyal regime in Libya could help create a Russia-dominated axis of Syria,
Egypt and Libya. Finally, Russian businesses have an interest in gaining
a foothold in new markets. (Also see: “Perspectives on Russian Motives
in Libya,” OE Watch, April 2017.) End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“It is being reported that Russian special forces
and UAVs have been deployed in the Egyptian
town of Sidi Barrani, east of Libya, with the goal
of an intervention [in Libya]. It is also being
claimed that Russia is using special army forces
to provide training for General Halife Haftar’s
units in Libya, which Egypt supports.”
Source: “Rusya o ülkeye asker yığıyor! (Russia piling soldiers
into that country!),” Milliyet.com.tr, 19 March 2017. http://
www.milliyet.com.tr/son-dakika-rusya-dan-dengeleri-degdunya-2416401/
Developments are showing that Russia has started to surround
Europe from the west and the south through a strategy aimed
to control the energy routes. As part of Moscow’s strategy
to encircle Europe, it is now being claimed that Moscow is
preparing for a military intervention in Libya. According to the
news from the region, Russia has started to deploy weapons to
Egypt, as a platform to intervene in Libya.
It is being reported that Russian special forces and UAVs have
been deployed in the Egyptian town of Sidi Barrani, east of
Libya, with the goal of an intervention. It is also being claimed
that Russia is using special army forces to provide training for
General Halife Haftar’s units in Libya, which Egypt supports.
If Russian President Vladamir Putin gives the green light for
a military intervention in Libya, after Syria, with the claim of
fighting ISIS, the balance in the Eastern Mediterranean will
be upended in a way that changes many of the regional actors’
calculations.
Deep Cooperation with Egypt
Russia was one of the countries that turned the 2013 military
coup into an advantage for itself. In addition to conducting
agreements with Cairo, Russian and Egyptian armies also
strengthened their cooperation by conducting joint exercises
in the Mediterranean recently. Last year Russia’s natural gas
company purchased 30% of one of Egypt’s richest natural gas
fields for $1,5 billion.

“Russia may provide weaponry, military
training, logistical support, but we would
seek some sort of compensation. Haftar
has an oil income and Russia may be
ready to trade.”
(continued)
OE Watch | May 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Syria, Egypt, Libya: A New
Russia-Dominated Axis?
Source: “Can Russia resolve the conflict in Libya?” Al Jazeera, 16 March 2017.
http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2017/03/russia-resolve-conflictlibya-170316094138550.html
“Felgenhauer [a Moscow-based military
analyst] confirmed reports that Russia
is using military contractors in
Libya, saying that it is part of a
consolidated trend in recent
conflicts. He added that
outsourcing the military
fight helps avoid a
political backlash at
home.
“Russia is not
sending its troops to
help Haftar and is
unlikely to do so in
the near future. We are
rather relying on private
military contractors and
mercenaries. We are already
using contractors in Syria, where
they are suffering serious losses, because they are doing the real
fighting instead of Russian servicemen. Private contractors are
very convenient because they have no political strings attached.”
Felgenhauer said the employment of private contractors has
been facilitated by a new legal framework aimed at regulating
Russian private military companies. In addition to limited financial
resources, Russia cannot afford outstretching its military or financial
capabilities at a moment when Moscow is involved in other strategic
conflicts on its doorstep.
“Contractors are cheaper [than servicemen] and we need to use
our financial resources as best as we can. With the conflict in Donbass
simmering, Crimea, the war in Syria still under way, Russia doesn’t have
the appetite or the resources to go into Libya,” Felgenhauer said. “Russia
is keen on establishing a foothold in Libya and have some influence there,
but committing resources is a different matter.”
Asked whether Russia was already supporting Haftar financially and
militarily, Felgenhauer said Russia was ready to trade with Haftar but would
not offer its help for free.

The Libya-Egypt border.

Source: BlankMap-World6.svg, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AEgypt_Libya_Locator.png,
public domain.

“Russia may provide weaponry, military training, logistical support, but we would seek some sort of compensation. Haftar has an oil income
and Russia may be ready to trade.”
The same discourse applies to Egypt, the Kremlin’s main ally in the region. Asked to comment on Russian media reports that the Kremlin was
negotiating the opening of a military base on the border with Libya, Felgenhauer didn’t deny the reports. He said Egypt asked for enormous
economic aid in exchange for allowing a Russian military base on its soil.
Russian analysts agree that Russia’s support for General Haftar has been dictated by its concerns about the spread of ISIL on Europe’s
doorstep and its intent to set up a broad anti-terrorism coalition. In addition, Moscow is seeking to play a mediating role in Libya that would
allow it to establish a privileged relationship with the country’s leadership in its future dealings.
OE Watch | May 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Perspectives on US Action in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages
from Turkish sources discuss Turkish reactions to US
missile strikes that hit the Syrian regime airbase alShayrat on 7 April. Initial reactions indicate that Turkish
government officials welcomed the move, and hope that
this is the first step of a strategy which will entail further
action. Government officials are also renewing their calls
for a safe-zone and no-fly zone, which would alleviate
some of Ankara’s refugee burden. Others are calling for
a more cautious view, particularly given Turkey’s recent
effort with Russia and Iran in the Astana process (peace
talks hosted by Russia in the Kazakh capital, Astana),
warning against hasty support for the US, which would
risk relations with Russia.
The first passage quotes President Erdoğan as saying
that Assad has incurred his first response from the US but
that this is not enough. He says that this must continue
and that Assad, “who uses sarin and chlorine gas” must
pay the price. The second passage discusses comments
by the Prime Minister, where he says that the US strikes
articulated the feelings of the world. He calls for a safe
zone in northern Syria, given the possibility of a new
wave of refugees heading toward Turkey. He also says
that Turkey is prepared to provide any kind of support to
the US.
Turkey had initially adopted an adamant policy of
“Assad must go,” but later appeared to soften its position.
Recently, Turkey has been working with Iran and Russia
on the Astana process which suggested that the country
had pushed its policy of working for the demise of Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad to the back burner. Its reactions
to the US strikes now suggests that Turkey is still pursuing
the removal of Assad, which puts it at odds with Russia.
Against this background, military analysts are calling
for a more measured and cautious approach. As the
third accompanying passage discusses, “it is too early
to say that the United States has shelved its priority of
eliminating the Islamic State (IS) and shifted its attention
to removing Assad from power...” Respected military
analyst Metin Gürcan cautions that Turkey must avoid
U-turns and avoid finding itself in a situation where it is
“sandwiched between” the US and Russia. He writes,
“There is still the question of whether Turkey will align
with Trump or with Putin in the post-IS period and during
Syria’s reconstruction. Ankara’s policies should be more
level-headed, cool and based on field developments.”
Given Turkey’s reaction, it is possible that there will
be a fallout in Turkish-Russian ties. Gürcan asks: “Has
Turkey made a mistake by so precipitately lining up
with Washington and reverting to its ‘Assad must go’
doctrine? Will Turkey’s animosity toward Assad trigger
new tensions with Russia?” These are important questions
Turkey will have to contend with on Syria. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The murderer Assad, who uses sarin and chlorine gas, has
incurred his first response from the United States. But is this
enough? It isn’t. I think this must continue, because this man,
who has killed nearly a million people, must pay the price.”
— President Erdoğan
Source: “Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan: Katil Esed’in attığı adım ilk cevabını buldu
(President Erdoğan: Murderer Assad’s act got its first response),” Anadolu
Haber Ajansi (Anatolian News Agency), 7 April 2017. http://aa.com.tr/tr/
gunun-basliklari/cumhurbaskani-erdogan-katil-esedin-attigi-adim-ilk-cevabinibuldu-/791883
“The murderer Assad, who uses sarin and chlorine gas, has incurred his first
response from the United States. But is this enough? It isn’t. I think this must
continue, because this man, who has killed nearly a million people, must pay the
price.”
Source: “Türkiye’den ABD’ye mesaj: Desteğe hazırız! (Message from Turkey
to the US: We are ready [to provide] Support!),” Hurhaber.com, 8 April
2017. http://www.hurhaber.com/turkiye-den-abd-ye-mesaj-destege-hazirizhaberi-315139.html
Prime Minister Yıldırım [said], “We are prepared to provide all kinds of
support on Syria. The US has articulated the feelings of the world.”... Yıldırım
also highlighted the need for a safe zone in Syria, given the possibility of a
[refugee] flow towards Turkey in light of the recent developments.
Source: Metin Gürcan, “How Turkey’s ‘hasty’ support for US missile strike
could backfire,” Al Monitor, 10 April 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2017/04/turkey-united-states-ankara-hastily-approves-missile-attack.
html#ixzz4eErkRz4J
This apparently cosmetic attack, which for the time being appears to be a oneoff, doesn’t affect the tactical picture on the ground. It’s also too early to say
that the United States has shelved its priority of eliminating the Islamic State
(IS) and shifted its attention to removing Assad from power. That shift could be
a possibility if we see a second or even third wave of US attacks on targets west
of the Euphrates River, in areas with Russian air superiority or on Damascus.
However, Ankara put out an unnecessarily hasty statement saying it would
provide all types of support for the US attack. It could find itself sandwiched
between Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin. This is a time when
Turkey should avoid U-turns. There is still the question of whether Turkey
will align with Trump or with Putin in the post-IS period and during Syria’s
reconstruction. Ankara’s policies should be more level-headed, cool and based
on field developments.
Has Turkey made a mistake by so precipitately lining up with Washington and
reverting to its “Assad must go” doctrine? Will Turkey’s animosity toward Assad
trigger new tensions with Russia? How will calling off the coordination and
communication between the United States and Russia in Syrian air space affect
Turkey’s operations?
OE Watch | May 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iraq: The Day After in Mosul
OE Watch Commentary: The battle
for Mosul, the last Iraqi stronghold of
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
began in mid-October 2016, when Iraqi
and Kurdish forces (peshmerga) backed
by coalition air power, launched a long
and complex operation to retake the city.
Iraqi forces recaptured the eastern part of
the city at the end of January. Currently,
the battle for control continues in the
western part of the city. Iraqi officials
are already planning ahead and, as the
accompanying passages discuss, have
decided to entrust the security of Mosul
to a Sunni militia called the “Nineveh
Guards,” after the city is fully liberated
from ISIS.
As the passages discuss, Osama alNujaifi, one of the three Vice Presidents
of Iraq, announced on 12 April that
the Nineveh Guards will eventually be
assigned to provide security in Mosul.
Formerly known as “Hashd al-Watani”
or the “[Iraqi] National Mobilization
Forces,” the Nineveh Guards are a Sunni
militia with approximately 2,000 to 3,000
members. As the third passage discusses,
the Nineveh Guards were trained by the
Turkish Armed Forces, and are currently
commanded by Atheel al-Nujaifi. Atheel
al-Nujaifi was the governor of Nineveh
province and its capital, Mosul, when
Islamic State fighters captured the city
in June 2014. The Sunni force most
recently participated in the Mosul
operation along with the peshmerga,
and as the first passage notes, made
significant contributions to fighting ISIS.
The third passage features a segment
from a March 2017 interview with Atheel
al-Nujaifi. He points out that the Nineveh
Guard consists of Nineveh locals and
tribes who volunteered to fight ISIS and
restore security to cities in the province.
He also claims that if the Nineveh Guard
is given the job of securing Mosul, they
“would rely on citizens as part of their
security plan, empowering and protecting
them against terrorism,” noting that
“terrorism will be weakened.” (Also
see: “Who Wants What in Mosul?” OE
Watch, November 2016.) End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

Nineveh Province, Iraq.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=3132508,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ninevehdistricts.jpg, CC By SA 3.0.

Source: “Musul’un Güvenliği Ninova Muhafızlarına Emanet Edilecek (Mosul’s Security will
be Entrusted to the Nineveh Guards),” Son Dakika, 13 April 2017. http://www.sondakika.com/
haber/haber-musul-un-guvenligi-ninova-muhafizlari-na-emanet-9489054/
[Vice] President of Iraq Osama al-Nujaifi has announced that the Nineveh Guards, a group
dominated by Sunni members, will be assigned to provide security in Mosul.
Nujaifi, who visited the Nineveh Guards’ camp near Mosul, highlighted that this group made
significant contributions to cleansing the city from the terror group DAESH.
Source: “Ninova Muhafızları Musul’da güvenliği sağlayacak (Nineveh Guards to Maintain
Security in Mosul),” Star.com, 12 April 2017. http://www.star.com.tr/dunya/ninova-muhafizlarimusulda-guvenligi-saglayacak-haber-1206583/
Who are the Nineveh Guards?
The Nineveh Guards, who were trained by the Turkish Armed Forces, are currently commanded
by the former Mosul Governor Nujaifi. The approximately 2000 Sunni force most recently
participated in the Mosul operation along with the peshmerga. Initially named as “Hash alWatani”, the force later changed its name to the “Nineveh Guards.”
Source: “Sunni ex-governor: Mosul was ‘handed over’ to Islamic State,” The New Arab, 18
March 2017. https://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/indepth/2017/3/18/Sunni-ex-governor-Mosulwas-handed-over-to-Islamic-State
[Commander of the Nineveh Guard and former governor of Mosul, Atheel al-Nujaifi]: “The
Nineveh Guard consist of Nineveh locals and tribes who volunteered to fight Daesh and restore
security to cities in the province. We currently have a full brigade taking part in holding territory
in eastern Mosul but not inside the city, and two brigades in their bases. These troops can enter
Mosul and handle security there, but we are keen for this not to be part of political conflicts. I
believe that if there is no political agreement on the entry of the Nineveh Guard into the city to
deploy and keep the order in a different way from the approach of the current forces like the
army, police and militias, which continue their practices from the time before the fall of Mosul,
then we will face a real problem.
We believe that if the Nineveh Guard enter things would be different. They would rely on
citizens as part of their security plan, empowering and protecting them against terrorism. In this
case, terrorism will be weakened.”
OE Watch | May 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Claims Enhanced Missile Precision
OE Watch Commentary: During the course of negotiations
which culminated in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and the corollary United Nations Security Council
Resolution 2231, Iran
achieved a change in
language with regard to its
ballistic missile program.
UN Security Council
Resolution 1929 from 2010
declared that the Security
Council “decides that
Iran shall not undertake
any activity related to
ballistic missiles capable
of delivering nuclear
weapons…” whereas 2231
declared, “Iran is called
upon not to undertake
any activity related to
ballistic missiles designed
to be capable of delivering
nuclear weapons….”
Iranian leaders say that
the more recent wording
does not technically ban
ballistic missile work and,
regardless, they deny they
design missiles to carry
nuclear weapons, fiercely
defending the acceleration
of Iran’s ballistic missile
program.
In the wake of the
JCPOA, Iran has tested at least ten ballistic missiles. While
most news coverage focuses on the increasing range of such
missiles, the excerpted article quoting the chief of staff of the
armed forces, claims that Iran has also made great strides
in accuracy since the time when Iran’s missile program was
based on the notoriously inaccurate SCUDs. The Iranian
claims about increasing accuracy may not simply be hyperbole:
In March 2016, Iran test-fired two different types of Qadr
ballistic missiles from the Alborz Mountains near the Caspian
which, according to the Iranian Defense Ministry, successfully
struck targets on Iran’s Makran Coast, on the Indian Ocean.
Improving Iranian missile accuracy may spur a further arms
and missile race among Arab Gulf countries. While Israel
might be concerned with such developments as well, Israeli
anti-missile defenses can likely counter such threats regardless
of their warhead’s accuracy. Regardless, growing Iranian
missile accuracy reflects on the growing technical competence
of Iran’s indigenous military industries and might also suggest
that Western attempts to embargo high-technology and dual
use goods may be falling short. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

“The missiles are capable of hitting
within ten meters of their target.”

An Iranian Shahab medium range ballistic missile.

Source: Young Journalist Club, goo.gl/7V3RWP, public domain.

Source: “Sarlashkar Bagheri: Fenavari Moshakha-ye ba Khata-ye Zir
10 meter dar Ekhtiyar Kamtar Keshvari Ast (General Bagheri: Iran is
one of the Few Countries to have Missiles with a 10 Meter Margin of
Error),” Entekhab, 18 March 2017. www.entekhab.ir/fa/news/332311/
‫رکشلرس‬-‫یرقاب‬-‫یروانف‬-‫یاهکشوم‬-‫اب‬-‫یاطخ‬-‫ریز‬-۱۰-‫رتم‬-‫رد‬-‫رایتخا‬‫رتمک‬-‫یروشک‬-‫تسا‬

Missile Margin Error Less than 10 Meters
The chief of staff of the armed forces hailed the development of missiles
which are able to hit targets within ten meters of accuracy and noted
that few countries in the world have achieved this technology, and
today Iran has the ability to produce and use these weapons. General
Mohammad Bagheri, chief of staff of the armed forces, speaking at an
exhibition of defense achievements commemorating the first battle of
Faw (Valfajr-8), said: military equipment at the exhibition are all built
utilizing Iranian technology… Bagheri said, the missiles are capable of
hitting within ten meters of their target… He said the purpose of his visit
to this region [Arvandkenar] was to visit the Islamic Republic of Iran
border guards.
OE Watch | May 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Development of Iranian Nanotechnology
Companies in China “The Second Sino Iran Nanotechnology Business Matchmaking Event
OE Watch Commentary: While Tehran’s
investment in nuclear, ballistic missile, and
other military technology is usually the topic of
diplomatic concern if not headlines in the West,
Iran’s technological focus goes much deeper.
As the excerpted article from late last year
discusses, several Iranian companies focused
on nanotechnology displayed their products
in China and successfully signed contracts
or partnerships with Chinese companies
or universities during the “Chinano2016
International Exhibition” on 26-28 October
2016.
Nanotechnology—a cutting edge focus
in which many developing countries do not
engage— has many applications, especially
in the medical field. Electrospinning, for
example, can be used for wound dressing,
medical implants, and to create scaffolding
upon which tissue can grow. However, there
are also potential military dimensions to
nanotechnology, such as nanometallics for
armaments, increased strength carbon fibers,
and advanced sensors.
This partnership will be a shot of adrenalin
for the nascent Iranian nanotechnology industry,
albeit one replete with risks should Chinese
firms steal Iranian intellectual property rights.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

was held with the participation of Iranian and Chinese parties...”

Source: “Tawse’ah Fa’aliyatha-ye Sharkatha-ye Fenavari Nano Irani dar Keshavar Chin
(Development of Iranian Nanotechnology Companies’ Activities in China),” Nano.ir, 31
October 2016. goo.gl/DLQk4H

Development of Iranian Nanotechnology Companies in China
Seven Iranian companies, active in the field of nanotechnology, participated in
Chinano2016 International Exhibition on 26-28 October 2016 in China, with the aim of
introducing their latest achievements and advanced products. Fanavaran Nano Meghyas,
Behran Filter, Nanosakhtar Mehrasa, Kian Rangin, Ramo Alibert, Sevin Plasma, and
Tavana are among the Iranian companies that participated in Chinano2016, and visitors
could see their latest products in a 90 square meter pavilion. Concurrent with the
exhibition, the Second Sino Iran Nanotechnology Business Matchmaking Event was held
with the participation of Iranian and Chinese parties. The companies signed five contracts
and memorandums of agreement, and continued negotiations on the related issues….
Among the contracts signed between the Iranian and Chinese companies, the following are
worth mentioning:
•

Memorandum of understanding between Sevin Plasma Company and Da Tina Green
Company

•

A sales agreement between Sevin Plasma and Da Tina Green for an electrospinning
machine

•

An ultrasonic device contract to Nanjing University

•

A scientific and technological memorandum of agreement between Iranian and
Chinese nanotechnology centers and Shanghai Nanotechnology Promotion Center

•

Memorandum of understanding on laboratorial services between the Iran Nanotech
China Center and the Taiwanese company of Bio Ma Tek

Iran Nanotech China Center Unveiling Ceremony.
Source: Nano.ir, goo.gl/3IRmjC, public domain

OE Watch | May 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran and Russia Upgrade Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: The RussianIranian relationship may very well be the
most significant diplomatic romance of the
21st century. The accompanying excerpt
from the joint statement between Iranian
President Hassan Rouhani and Russian
President Vladimir Putin taken from
Rouhani’s official website details a broad
range of issues covered by the two leaders
during their Moscow summit on 27-28
March. The two leaders seem united in
their animosity to the United States.
As the passage notes, the leaders
“emphasized the illegitimacy of
imposing unilateral sanctions for the
sake of advancing political aims.” Their
castigation of unilateralism in American
foreign policy is ironic given Russian
actions in Georgia and Ukraine, and
Iranian military involvement in Yemen
and Syria. The leaders also “denounced
the attempts to use force or the threat of
force in the information space, such as an
attack on Iranian nuclear facilities with
the help of the Stuxnet malware.” The
joint condemnation of alleged hacking
is also ironic given the recent aggressive
cyber strategies of both Iran and Russia.
The leaders also “hailed the launch
of the Moscow dialogue aiming to find
the ways to promote peace settlement in
Afghanistan.” This suggests that their
cooperation in Iraq against the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) is seen
as the foundation for a broader alliance
rather than a limited operation. That both
leaders tackled the narcotics trade arising
from Afghanistan opium production is
an acknowledgment that both countries
increasingly suffer from consumption and
are not simply trafficking countries. End
OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The two sides have denounced the attempts to use force…in the
information space.”
Source: “Tahqaq-e Kemal Naqsheh Rah Ejraye Pruzheh-haye Hamkari Tehran va Moscow (The
Full Realization of the Roadmap for the Implementation of Cooperative Projects between Tehran
and Moscow),” President.ir, 28 March 2017. http://www.president.ir/fa/98429

Documents for New Iran-Russia Cooperation
Hojjat al-Islam Hassan Rouhani and Vladimir Putin emphasized in a joint statement on the full
realization of the roadmaps of industrial and commercial cooperation between Russia and Iran
for the years 2016-2020 and the full text of the joint statement is as follows:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful:
Joint Statement of the leaders of Islamic Republic of Iran and the Russian Federation:
Moscow—on the dates 7 and 8 Farvardin 1396 corresponding to 27 and 28 March 2017 during
the official visit to Russia, the leaders of Russia and Iran, in an atmosphere of friendship and
trust, studied extensively the status and prospects of Iran-Russia relations and major regional
and international issues…
They also emphasized the illegitimacy of imposing unilateral sanctions for the sake of
advancing political aims…
Russia and Iran stand for elaborating rules under the UN aegis for states’ conduct in the
information space and…expressed their concern over the steadily rising number of the instances
of using information and communication technologies for criminal, terrorist, military and
political goals. The two sides have denounced the attempts to use force or the threat of force in
the information space, such as an attack on Iranian nuclear facilities with the help of the Stuxnet
malware, and also any attempts to involve information and communication techniques for
harmful purposes…
The two presidents hailed the launch of the Moscow dialogue aiming to find the ways to
promote peace settlement in Afghanistan and to give an impetus to the process of national
reconciliation in that country.
[Rouhani and Putin] expressed mutual concern over the growth of drug production in
Afghanistan which poses a threat to peace and stability, socio-economic development and
security of Afghanistan and other states,” the statement stressed. “The sides pointed to the
necessity of the implementation of concrete measures to eliminate global production of drugs,
including to uproot illegally sowed narcotic-containing crops and to do away with their
processing.”
…Russia and Iran support preserving Iraq’s territorial integrity, stand for lifting the blockade
on Yemen, positively assess the Lebanon political process and express the hope for the fair
settlement of the Palestinian problem.

Presidents Hassan Rouhani and Vladimir Putin at a press conference.
Source: President.ir, http://media.president.ir/uploads/org/149071360679654800.jpg, public domain.

OE Watch | May 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s North African Foothold
OE Watch Commentary: The ongoing debate over whether
there can be a military solution to the Libyan conflict is
illustrated by the first two accompanying passages. The first,
an analytical piece from Qatar’s Arab Center for Research
and Policy Studies, argues that “no single party to Libya’s
multi-player civil war will
ever triumph entirely” and
thus “the only way out for
the country would be for the
political factions to work
together toward a peaceful
reconstruction.” The alternate
view holds that the Libyan
National Army (LNA), which
is headed by Khalifa Haftar
and controls much of Libya’s
eastern half, is the single
force capable of ending the
conflict. As the author of the
second accompanying passage
claims, writing in the Egyptian
newspaper al-Ahram: “the key means of ending the
conflict is to militarily strengthen Haftar’s forces.” Proponents of
this viewpoint argue that the UN arms embargo on Libya should
be lifted in order to arm the LNA.
Moscow has inserted itself in the conversation over Libya’s
future by effectively playing to both sides of this argument. In a
nod to supporters of the Tripoli-based internationally recognized
government, Russian diplomats have reached out to Libya’s
various factions as well as to Libya’s neighbors in an attempt to
mediate a political settlement. At the same time, Moscow has
publicly displayed support for the LNA, which has a long wish
list of Russian weapons, including advanced fighter jets and
S-300 air defense systems. Having regained control of Libya’s
major oil export terminals, Haftar’s military has the funds to
pay for such purchases. According to the third accompanying
passage, Russia may furthermore seek to revive a 2008
agreement made with the Qaddafi regime by which Russia was to
establish a naval base in territory currently under LNA control.
Russia’s foothold in Libya is now taken for granted in most
Arabic-language media. The purported expansion of Russian
influence in North Africa has become self-reinforcing and has
shifted the calculus of important actors in the region. Among
the least considered are the effects on Tunisia, which is Libya’s
only Mediterranean neighbor to never fall under the Soviet
orbit during the Cold War. As the fourth accompanying passage
highlights, Russia has encouraged its citizens to visit Tunisia
despite recent terrorist attacks; in doing so it has helped prop
up this vital but struggling economic sector. Furthermore, as
the author notes, “regional and international changes sooner or
later push a country like Tunisia closer to the Russian Bear,”
particularly given that Westerners are preoccupied by “their
internal and occasionally petty matters.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“… Various Libyan and Arab parties have begun
welcoming Moscow’s “potentially effective” role.
Moscow welcomes this and has capitalized on it …”

North Africa Map.

Source: By Peter Fitzgerald (Own work based on the blank worldmap), via Wikimedia Commons
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ANorth_Africa_regions_map.png, CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)

Source:
‫ الصراع على الهالل النفطي وأثره في مسارات األزمة‬:‫ليبيا‬
“The Scramble for the Oil Crescent and the Fight to Control Libya,”
Arab Center for Research and Policy Studies, 23 March 2017. http://
www.dohainstitute.org/release/3509c808-a23d-4170-bf5674b840786328 (English version: http://english.dohainstitute.org/
release/84dc163e-c0cc-4a7f-ac12-621e940877c1)
Given Libya’s complex tribal and regional composition, the political
headache this is causing for the GNA as well as for others, as well as
the matrix of international interests at work, it seems that no single
party to Libya’s multi-player civil war will ever triumph entirely. The
only way out for the country would be for the political factions to work
together toward a peaceful reconstruction along the terms defined by
the Sukhairat Agreement, which already has the backing of a majority
of Libya’s political factions. The alternative would be for a continuation
of the ongoing conflict and the furtherance of political interests at
odds with the national interests of the Libyan people and their right to
live in dignity and peace, in a country with a representative form of
government.
Source:
‫ما هو نمط النفوذ الروسى فى ليبيا؟‬
Jihad Awada, “What is the model for Russian influence in Libya?”
al-Ahram, 11 February 2017. http://www.ahram.org.eg/NewsQ/578504.
aspx
It is well known that France played a pivotal role in the grueling
negotiations to convince Italy, Great Britain and Germany of the need
to support Haftar as head of the LNA, since it is the only military force
capable of bringing stability back to Libya… Russia, the West and the
United States have become convinced that the Libyan conflict must end
and that the key means of ending the conflict is to militarily strengthen
Haftar’s forces.

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia’s North African Foothold
Source:
‫ليبيا تتحول إلى ساحة صراع بين روسيا والغرب‬
Mustapha Dalaa, “Libya becomes a battleground between Russia
and the West,” Andalou News Agency, 17 January 2017. https://goo.
gl/uIhGxL
According to Dr. Jawad al-Hamed, a Jordanian strategic analyst
and the head of the Middle East Studies Center in Jordan, “Russia
will not abide by the international weapons embargo on Libya.”
He does not dismiss the likelihood of “Moscow invoking the
agreement signed with the Qaddafi regime in 2008, which was to
be implemented in 2010.” Among its clauses in the establishing of
a Russian naval base in Benghazi along the lines of the Russian
naval base in Tartous, Syria. According to Arab diplomatic sources,
Haftar hopes to reach an agreement worth 1.8 billion dollars that
includes purchasing approximately 20 fighter jets, S-300 Air Defense
Systems, T-90 tanks and the upgrading of 140 T-72 tanks. According
to the same sources, during his last trip to Moscow on 27 November,
Haftar asked to buy twelve Sukhoi Su-35 and Su30s and four
training Yakovlev Yak-130s.

Source:
‫روسيا على حدود تونس‬
Salahaddin al-Jawarshi, “Russia on the Tunisian Border,” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 14 March 2017. https://goo.gl/SNOplH
Various Libyan and Arab parties have begun welcoming Moscow’s
“potentially effective” role. Moscow welcomes this and has
capitalized on it to strengthen its position and influence in this
large and enticing oil country. Thus Tunisia finds itself needing to
develop its relationships with Russia and to correct what has been
lost in the past… Russia has also not done what the Europeans
and Americans have in terms of encouraging their citizens to stay
away from Tunisia due to terrorism concerns following the Bardo
Museum and Sousse hotel attacks. To the contrary, Moscow has
encouraged Russians to visit Tunisia and there are over 600,000
Russian tourists, which has helped alleviate Tunisian tourism’s
crisis. Thus do the regional and international changes sooner or
later push a country like Tunisia closer to the Russian Bear, which
now has a foothold in broken Libya, as Westerners focus on their
internal and occasionally petty matters.

Iran and the Syrian Conflict’s Shifting Loyalties
OE Watch Commentary: Outside of
rebel and loyalist bastions, allegiances
in Syria are more fluid than they might
otherwise appear. The accompanying
four passages, taken from various
Arabic-language media outlets, highlight
this fluidity as well as Iran’s efforts to
capitalize on it. The first accompanying
excerpt focuses on Syria’s northeast
province of Hasakah, a quintessentially
“tribal” part of Syria where “no single
tribe in the entire province [has taken] a
unified stance in the conflict.” Loyalties
are often driven by the quest for material
benefit and social prestige, and they shift
“depending on the balance of power.”
The paradigm of shifting loyalties
can be found in the story of Fadel
Salim, a summary of which appeared
in the Syrian opposition Enab al-Baladi
newspaper in mid-February and is
excerpted alongside this commentary.
Salim was born in a rural village
of Hasakah Province, studied law
at Damascus University and after
graduation returned to his home province
to work for the lawyers syndicate. When
protests broke out in 2011 he joined the
rebellion and after being briefly detained,
he left for Jordan and then Turkey, where
he became a member
(continued)

Source:
‫ الوالء لألقوى‬:‫عشائر الجزيرة السورية‬
Samer al-Ahmad, “Syrian Jazirah Tribes: Loyalty to the Strongest,” al-Modon, 19 February
2017. https://goo.gl/XgQIp8
There are many like Salim and Jarba who have shifted their loyalties over the past years…. the
regime often created their own leaders from marginalized families, giving them the power to
mediate with the regime over detainees… the growing number of leaders in a single tribe led to
fractures in most of Hassaka’s tribes, with no single tribe in the entire province taking a unified
stance in the conflict… many of the sheikhs have switched sides depending on the balance of
power… tribal loyalties in the Jazirah fluctuate according to changes in interests… new changes
in tribal loyalties may be on the horizon, following information that Iran has become yet another
of the parties with multiple goals and interests in the Syrian Jazirah, through its Popular
Mobilization militias. Kurdish units may be losing some of their western support, and Russia is
expected to withdraw support for the regime in Qamishli and withdraw from the area.
Source:
‫ من “المجلس الوطني” إلى “داعش” ثم “اإلدارة الذاتية” الكردية‬..‫محام من الحسكة‬
ٍ
“A lawyer from Hasakah… From the National Assembly to ISIS to Kurdish self-rule,” Enab
Baladi, 15 February 2017. https://www.enabbaladi.net/archives/131615
Fadel Salim was born in 1978 in the village of al-Fadghami in the southern countryside of
Hasakah Province. He graduated from the University of Damascus School of Law and then
worked as a lawyer in Hasakah’s lawyers syndicate. He was arrested for a few days early in
the revolution against the Assad regime, and then left for Jordan and then Turkey, where he
joined the “Supreme Revolutionary Council” for Hasakah Province, and then the “National
Assembly” representing the revolution. According to a former member of the council, Salim
went from Turkey to France seeking asylum, but he was expelled from France under unclear
circumstances, after which he returned to Syria and pledged allegiance to ISIS… According to
a media activist in Hasakah, Fadel Salim has recently begun working to “regularize his status”
with the Kurdish PYD, which controls the self-governing parts of the Syrian Jazirah. He added
that Salim had joined the Kurdish self-governing judicial system to work as a lawyer, although
Enab Baladi was unable to confirm this.

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran and the Syrian Conflict’s Shifting Loyalties
of the main rebel political organization. He later sought asylum in
France but left under “mysterious circumstances.” Upon returning to
his home province he pledged allegiance to ISIS and became a legal
advisor for the group; most recently he is rumored to be seeking a
position in Syria’s Kurdish regional government.
Fadel Salim’s home province of Hasakah is located in Syria’s
northeast corner, bordering both Iraq and Turkey. According to the
first accompanying passage, “new changes in tribal loyalties may be
on the horizon” in this area due to an expected decrease in Western
support for Kurdish forces in Hasakah and the expectation that
Moscow will disengage from the province. This could in turn pave
the way for Iraq’s pro-Iranian Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) to
recruit from Hasakah’s fragmented tribal population. The PMF are
deployed in areas west of Mosul just across the Syria-Iraq border and
have hinted at moving into Syrian territory.
Iranian influence may also be growing in the opposite corner of
Syria, along the contested Golan Province bordering Israel to Syria’s
southwest. The province is home to the loyalist “Golan Brigade,”
which as the third passage details, is made up of former Free Syrian
Army (FSA) fighters from towns in the Syrian Golan who switched
back to the government side in 2014. Some believe that this group has
fallen under Iran’s influence, perhaps as part of the “Golan Liberation
Brigade,” the formation of which was announced in early March by
an Iran-backed Iraqi militia that is active in Syria. Indeed, in midMarch a Golan Brigade member named Yasser al-Said was killed
by an Israeli drone, in what an Israeli military analyst cited in the
fourth passage called “a message that Israel will not allow Iran and
Hezbollah to open fronts against it from the Golan.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

Source: Nour Samaha, “How these Syrians went from opposition
fighters to pro-regime militiamen,” Al-Monitor, 3 April 2017. http://
al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/04/syria-south-oppositiondefection-army-israel.html
The Golan Regiment came into existence in 2014; based in
Quneitra province, it is the first pro-government armed group
made up of former Free Syrian Army (FSA) fighters… In 2011,
Hammoud, a soldier in the Syrian army, defected after consistently
bad treatment by his superiors and the Syrian authorities…
But for Hammoud, there were question marks over some of the
other opposition groups they were fighting alongside… it was a
combination of factors that convinced them to switch sides. They
pointed to the corruption within the opposition groups, the fact they
were being ordered to carry out battles according to the whims
of their foreign financiers and the idea that some groups had few
qualms about working with Israel. It was at that point they decided
to make contact with the government again… Today, the Golan
Regiment operates in one of the most sensitive areas in Syria.
Source:
‫قتيل في القنيطرة السورية في غارة لطائرة اسرائيلية بدون طيار‬
“Israeli UAV strike kills one in Syria’s Quneitra,” al-Bawaba, 19
March 2017. https://goo.gl/B8HXSO
In a related context, the military analyst on the Hebrew channel
10 Alon Ben David said that “the killing of Yasser al-Said by
Israel is a message that Israel will not allow Iran and Hizbullah to
open fronts against it from the Golan”… “Iran was using al-Said
to strike Israel”… “Israel fears that the Assad regime will bring
Hizbullah and Iran into the Golan, thus providing Iran with a
border with Israel.”

“…many of the sheikhs
have switched sides
depending on the
balance of power …”

Map of Syria with Hasaka Province
highlighted.

Source: By TUBS, via Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAl-Hasakah_in_Syria_
(%2BGolan_hatched).svg, GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/
fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0)

OE Watch | May 2017

12

AFRICA
South Africa: Protests Against President as Credit
Rating Sinks to Junk Status
“..Dr Iraj Abedian, Chief Executive at the Pan-African
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 April, tens of thousands
of South Africans took to the streets to protest President
Jacob Zuma’s decision to fire his respected finance minister,
Pravin Gordhan. That sacking has rattled the ruling African
National Congress (ANC) Party, the people, and, as the first
accompanying article discusses, international confidence in
the economy. Combined with other concerns regarding the
government, especially its likelihood not to be able to cover
expenditures with revenue, international rating agencies
have downgraded South Africa’s credit rating to junk status.
Thus, the continent’s largest economy after Nigeria will
now have to pay more to finance its sovereign debt. This
will result in decreased funds available for development
programs, leaving large numbers of poor less likely to
climb out of poverty. It also adds fuel to the fire of political
instability.
Zuma has long been plagued with charges of corruption
and fraud. There was even an attempt to impeach him,
though that ultimately failed. The criminal charges, the
numerous controversies that swirl around him, and several of
his political positions have resulted in large swaths of South
African society being disillusioned with his governance.
Now, with his sacking of the finance minister, many are
saying enough is enough. As the second article points out,
this means that party unity will suffer, a great deal of effort
will have to be expended by the ANC to fend off leadership
challenges, and perhaps most important from an economic
perspective, the Treasury may not be able to stand firm
against spending increases…basically digging a deeper hole.
Other factors have also served as impediments to South
Africa’s economy. These include a significant amount of
crime, a brain drain of skilled professionals, and recurrent
labor strife. Still, the country has a large and sophisticated
economy, though as the downgrades testify, there are
considerable concerns regarding future growth.
It should be noted that the impact of the downgrades to
junk status is more than just economic. As the first article
points out, much of South Africa’s influence on the continent
comes from the robustness of its institutions to prevent
abuses of power. Unfortunately this time they appear to have
failed the country, and as a result South Africa’s standing
among its fellow African nations looks to have suffered.
South Africa is not alone in having such a poor rating. It
now joins others, including Brazil and Russia, in the junk
status club. Based on the reviews of the South African
government in general and Zuma in particular, the return
to investment grade status according to both articles will
be a difficult haul, possibly leaving South Africa in that
junk status club for a very long time. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

Investment and Research Services, Johannesburg,
said [the South African] government had ‘lost its
creditworthiness’ — the rating agency did not believe
or trust that there was policy consistency, that there
was cohesion within Cabinet for it to be trusted with
investment grade and that there were prospects of turning
the economy around.”

Zuma Must Fall Protesters, April 2017.

Source: Discott https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zuma_Must_Fall_protesters_in_front_of_police_van.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

Source: Elizabeth Sidropoulos, “Is anyone listening? Of downgrades, hubris
and redemption,” South African Institute of International Affairs, 4 April
2017. http://www.saiia.org.za/opinion-analysis/is-anyone-listening-ofdowngrades-hubris-and-redemption
From the increased costs of financing the sovereign debt to higher interests
rates, rising food and petrol prices, reduced confidence in the economy and
the attendant impact on the fiscus, our newfound #junkstatus will leave us
poorer and less able to tackle our underlying developmental problems.
When [President Zuma] fires ministers that are performing but retains
others that are blatantly not, he lunges at the heart of the social contract
between the leader and citizens, which is based on trust.
Source: Jillian Green, “Fitch downgrades SA to junk status,” Daily Maverick
(South Africa), 7 April 2017. https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/201704-07-breaking-fitch-downgrades-sa-to-junk-status/#.WOmObIWcGcw
Commenting on the Standard&Poor downgrade earlier this week, Dr
Iraj Abedian, Chief Executive at the Pan-African Investment and Research
Services, Johannesburg, said government had “lost its creditworthiness” —
the rating agency did not believe or trust that there was policy consistency,
that there was cohesion within Cabinet for it to be trusted with investment
grade and that there were prospects of turning the economy around.
“This is the consequence of a government misbehaving,” said Abedian
However, Fitch believes that following the government reshuffle, fiscal
consolidation will be less of a priority given the president’s focus on ‘radical
socioeconomic transformation’.
OE Watch | May 2017

13

AFRICA
South Africa’s Military Declines as Budgets Fall Short
OE Watch Commentary: Three years ago South
Africa’s Defense Review, a lengthy document evaluating
the country’s military capabilities, sounded an alarm.
The South African National Defense Force (SANDF)
was deemed to be in a state of decline and
unable to fulfill its duties. The Review
urged immediate actions be taken to stem
the deterioration and begin a recovery.
However, as the accompanying article
relates, those actions never took place,
and now the military is in even worse
shape than it was three years ago when the
report was first issued.

“The South African National Defense Force (SANDF) is in a
“critical state of decline” and is largely incapable of carrying
out its constitutional duties.”

The main obstacle to the military’s
rehabilitation is money. Defense spending
was approximately 3% of GDP in 1994. By
2014 it had dropped to around 1.2%. The
Minister of Defense would like a defense
budget of about 2%, similar to that of
Turkey, France, and the United Kingdom.
Indeed there are plans to increase military
spending, but with impending financial
woes from the country’s recent credit
rating downgrade to junk status—detailed
in a different article in this journal—how
firm those commitments remain in the
face of competing budgetary pressures is
uncertain.
The effects of insufficient military
funding are especially apparent with
regards to infrastructure. Three years
ago only 38% of the army’s facilities and
50% of the living quarters for soldiers were in decent condition, and
several bases were described as unsuitable for human habitation.
Despite such findings and strong recommendations to do something
about them, no additional funding was forthcoming.
Beyond poor infrastructure at military bases, the lack of adequate
funding has had significant security implications. Recently the
Minister of Defense described one issue of particular concern: The
military does not have the resources to protect the porous borders
from the growing cross border crime plaguing parts of the nation.
Estimates are that even with proper funding it would take five
years to arrest the decline of the military’s capabilities and another
five to develop it to an appropriate, albeit limited, level. Budget
constraints, however, make that scenario unlikely. The article offers
an alternative: scale down the military’s commitments and have those
met with a smaller, well-trained, highly capable force armed with
modern equipment. Until a decision is made—increase funding or
scale down—SANDF may find it increasingly difficult to maintain
its rank as fifth in Africa for military capabilities and available
firepower, as determined by Global Firepower. More importantly,
it will be difficult to fulfill all its missions. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

South Africa’s military, pictured here during a training exercise, is reportedly
declining due to inadequate funding.

Source: US Army Africa, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shared_Accord_2013.jpg, Originated Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/
photos/usarmyafrica/9451752612/in/photolist-fpdGKW-6Rm1Pf-fqnv2w-k1PoVP-5SGNL5-8U8fVf-8U8fQE-6TwG1A-fCdyqm-dYJViE-9J1SGffkZMn7-a6E5ct-9oCnXr-9xZytq-9HY1WX-7Loxsu-R4FCts-2ChvZc-k1QY7f-8U5cbp-2Cho7D-8Y32jW-btaS2j-8U5chB-2Cg5mz-dYJVkE-ff3xyVdYDdt4-RLBNvE-RLBCvu-6e11T2-2CkrW7-fMPec4-5fxsnY-R4FnSJ-S7Apaq-2CmQ7J-2CggEX-fkZMm3-SaceTX-dYJVnU-RLBeUs-dYDdpHfoyBt7-2CfUwX-R4FDio-fkZMjG-2Cgo5k-Sac1m6, CC BY-SA 2.0.

Source: Savo Heleta, “South Africa’s army is in steady decline and
nothing’s being done to fix it,” The Conversation (South Africa), 5
April 2017. https://theconversation.com/south-africas-army-is-insteady-decline-and-nothings-being-done-to-fix-it-74712
The South African National Defense Force (SANDF) is in a
“critical state of decline” and is largely incapable of carrying out
its constitutional duties.
The Review noted that the army couldn’t afford its main
operating systems, was unable to meet standing defense
commitments, lacked critical mobility and was “too poorly
equipped and funded to execute the widening spectrum of tasks to
the desired level”.
The army’s dire situation has arisen because the government
hasn’t provided sufficient funds for the SANDF over the past two
decades.
During the intervening three years the government has shown no
urgency to help the SANDF develop into a capable force.
OE Watch | May 2017

14

AFRICA
South Sudan: As Famine Worsens,
Criticism Over Military Spending “The government continued to sign arms deals
OE Watch Commentary: The “guns versus butter” model in
macroeconomics essentially posits that a nation with finite resources,
when choosing whether to invest in military or civilian goods, cannot
increase the purchase of one without reducing the amount it can have of
the other. As the accompanying article relates, South Sudan is mainly
going with the military goods,
thereby reducing the amount of
money available for civilian ones,
in this case, food. Given that
South Sudan is in the midst of a
civil war, weapons purchases by
the military are understandable.
However, the country is also in
the midst of a severe famine, and
with at least half of its sizeable
oil revenues going to arms, there
is a growing outcry to redirect
some of that money to foodstuffs.
Compounding the situation has
been the government blocking
aid workers. Without additional
food, experts predict that
approximately 5.5 million people
could be facing starvation by
July.

as a famine was declared in Unity State, where
100,000 people are dying of starvation and a
further one million people are near starvation.”

Weapons destined for South
Sudanese government forces
often enter at border points
with Sudan and Uganda, and to a lesser extent the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Egypt has also shipped military hardware to the country, including
small arms, ammunition, and armored vehicles. Then there is the curious
case of two L39 jets from Ukraine that were sold to Uganda but somehow
are possibly now in South Sudan. The opposition forces, in comparison, have
received relatively limited supplies of weapons and ammunition, though they
are still a force to be reckoned with. Against this backdrop, there have been
several past calls for arms embargoes, though these have fallen through despite
concerns of possible genocide in this nascent nation embroiled in interethnic
warfare. Additional efforts to implement such an embargo may finally come to
fruition by the time this commentary is published, though with porous borders
it is uncertain how effective one would be.
Approximately 97% of South Sudan’s budget is derived from oil revenue.
As the accompanying article states, an estimated $243 million poured into
the coffers from late March to late October 2016. The article also states how
arms deals continue to be signed while the famine worsens. The situation is
particularly dire in Unity State where presently 100,000 people are dying of
starvation and another one million are on the verge of the same fate. A UN
report blames the famine on protracted conflict, particularly the repeated
government launched military operations. Thus, the famine is being fueled
by heavily armed soldiers on military missions, and the government response
has been to spend more on the soldiers’ armaments than food for the people.
In other words, more weapons, less food. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

South Sudanese soldiers near Juba. The South Sudanese government is
accused of purchasing weapons for the military at the expense of food
during the famine.

Source: VOA, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SPLA_soldiers_near_Juba_(April_2016)_1.jpg, Originated http://www.
voanews.com/a/government-soldiers-leave-juba-before-rebel-leaders-return/3286194.html, public domain

Source: “South Sudan buys weapons during famine,”
The Daily Monitor (Uganda), 19 Mar 2017. http://www.
monitor.co.ug/News/National/South-Sudan-buys-weaponsduring-famine/688334-3855426-klhhknz/index.html
The government continued to sign arms deals as a famine
was declared in Unity State, where 100,000 people are
dying of starvation and a further one million people are
near starvation.
“Weapons continue to flow into South Sudan from diverse
sources, often with the coordination of neighbouring
countries,” said the report by a UN panel of experts.
The government is blocking access for humanitarian aid
workers, compounding the food crisis, while significant
population displacement is also contributing to the famine.
“The bulk of evidence suggests that the famine in
Unity State has resulted from protracted conflict and,
in particular, the cumulative toll of repeated military
operations undertaken by the government in southern Unity
beginning in 2014,” said the report.
OE Watch | May 2017

15

AFRICA
Somali President’s Declaration of War on Al-Shabaab
Met with More Terrorist Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 April, Somali
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
appeared in full military garb and declared war
on al-Shabaab. As described in the first article,
the President, often referred to by his nickname
“Farmaajo,” delivered an ultimatum; militants in
the terrorist group should surrender or face the full
force of the army. As the second article notes, the
group’s response to the tough talking president was
to intensify its attacks on civilian and government
targets, including the country’s new military
chief, General Mohamed Ahmed Jimale. He was
fortunate to survive, but passengers in the minibus
driving near the General’s convoy when the car
bomb went off were not...15 died.

“Ironically the state of war [by the Somali President
against al-Shabaab] was followed by a surge in attacks in
the capital Mogadishu and across Somalia.”

Al-Shabaab’s stepped-up operational tempo is
likely not only in response to President Mohamed’s
comments but also to recent increased US efforts
against the group. The Islamic terrorist group
is letting it be known that they are capable of
launching attacks even within Mogadishu,
Somalia’s capital where they were largely forced
out of in 2011. Six years later, the continued attacks
on the capital show how difficult it is to completely
remove terrorists from an area and keep them out.
According to the first article, the President plans
to adopt more decisive military and political tactics
against al-Shabaab. Meanwhile, the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) is supposed to start
a drawdown next fall, with plans to be fully out
of the country by December 2020. This schedule
could change, or non-AMISOM forces could help
fill the void, but if not, 20,000 or so members of the
Somali National Army (SNA) will be expected to
shoulder the full security burden. The degrees to
which both the SNA increases its capabilities and
al-Shabaab is weakened by then will be key factors
in how successful Somalia will be in defeating or at
least significantly limiting the terrorist group.
As the first article notes, al-Shabaab has
declared the newly elected President an apostate
and has warned Somalis not to support him.
Despite this, his strong popularity since taking
office in February this year does not seem to have
diminished, especially since initiating several
important reforms, including efforts to combat the
country’s entrenched corruption. He also enjoys
widespread support in the military, which will be
important as he tries to combat al-Shabaab, a foe
that apparently is determined not to go quietly. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Young Somalis look on at the wreckage of an al-Shabaab car bomb used in a suicide attack.

Source: Albany Associates, Flickr,
https://www.flickr.com/photos/albanyassociates/9705820233/in/photolist-7AatgR-7AM7Hv-fpJaMw-7AQWbd-7AeeWb-fMf3jC-ejcJQb-7AemFs-7Aax4g-7AenC7-ej77AT-7AaCdx7AauPT-ocxLGD-gSw7yp-fMESda-fpjm2N-7AaBKK-fpjniw-gSw28V-gSvYzP-7AaxBa-btrWUT-gSvtn3-btrXd8-btrXJB-7Aemgo-gSw52F-7AatGM-otK9nD-gUrFbY-7AawBX-ejcDiLej6X3v-7AekQE-7AavNc-ovMfBP-7Aeghj-ocxMfx-btrYjX-gUrNxH-gUrJ4d-7Aeioq-gUrJt1-gSviXu-ocwGrP-PZE89X-NWjQgz-QaTV1z-gUsyB2, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0

Source: “President declares new war against Al shabaab,” Shabelle News (Somalia), 6
April 2017. http://www.shabellenews.com/2017/04/president-declares-new-offensiveagainst-al-shabaab/
The extremist group is just one of the challenges facing the new government, which
despite hundreds of millions of dollars of support from the international community
still struggles to expand its authority beyond the capital and other selected areas.
The group has been pushed out of the capital and other major urban areas in
Somalia by national and African Union multinational forces, but it continues to carry
out deadly bombings and attacks in Mogadishu and elsewhere.
Source: “Alshabaab Intensifies Attacks Despite Farmaajo Declared State Of War,”
Dalsan (Somalia), 11 April 2017. http://radiodalsan.com/en/alshabaab-intensifiesattacks-despite-farmaajo-declared-state-of-war/
On 6th April a tough talking President Mohamed Abdullahi Farmaajo adorned
in military fatigues declared war on Alshabaab giving a 60 day ultimatum for the
militants to surrender or face the full force of the Somalia National Army. Ironically
the state of war was followed by a surge in attacks in the capital Mogadishu and
across Somalia.
“The group wants to be seen to be in the upper hand in this scenario. Alshabaab
want to show they are [in charge and] are the ones calling the shots” Mohamed Shiine
a Nairobi based regional analyst told Radio Dalsan.
OE Watch | May 2017

16

AFRICA
Somalia’s Troops Have a High Expectation for
Their New President: Being Paid
“The protests are the first
OE Watch Commentary: It is one of the most basic functions of maintaining a
military...paying the troops in a timely manner. However, as the accompanying article
relates, Somalia’s soldiers have gone without pay for twelve months and are angry.
Despite orders to remain in their barracks and out of the city limits, bands of soldiers have
protested in the capital, Mogadishu.

real clash between the new
administration and military
which had high expectation[s
of] President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmaajo whose
manifesto prioritized welfare of
the army and police.”

Certainly morale suffers greatly when troops are not paid within a reasonable period.
However, there are other adverse consequences. During a similar situation in 2015, the
UN Monitoring Group for Somalia and Eritrea warned that the war against terrorism in
Somalia could be jeopardized because the unpaid troops might sell their weapons and/or
join the militants. In an impoverished country with large families living on the edge, such
actions were quite conceivable then, and with history repeating itself, quite conceivable
now.

Source: “Somalia: Army Servicemen
Demonstrated in Mogadishu Due [to Lack]
of Salary, Dalsan Radio (Somalia) AllAfrica.
com, 13 March 2017. http://allafrica.com/
stories/201703140327.html

Somali troops join a list of African militaries that have been slow to pay their troops.
Delays in full payment of salaries have even occurred among troops serving under the
African Union banner. Issues with military salaries are sometimes complicated by the fact
that several revenue streams, often from foreign governments, are utilized for military ops.
Still, a year long delay in pay is extremely difficult for a soldier no matter what the reason.
Entering this fray is newly elected Somali President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, who
has made it a priority to ensure the welfare of the military and police, and who is looking
for a good relationship with the military. During his past stint as Prime Minister, the
troops were paid, and the military is looking for the same now that he is President.
Soldiers burning tires on the streets of Mogadishu serve as a testament to the difficulties
that can arise when a country, having endured years of chaos, struggles to pay its military.
With the Somali government being notoriously slow, the economy beset by difficulties,
and much of the attention directed towards the severe famine engulfing parts of the
nation, as the article reports these gatherings by the soldiers serve as a reminder to this
new government to fulfill its promise of paying them. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Normal activities came to a stand still as
bands of Somalia National Army servicemen
demonstrated in parts of Mogadishu creating
tension…
The protests are the first real clash between the
new administration and military which had high
expectation on President Mohamed. Abdullahi
Farmaajo whose manifesto prioritized welfare
of the army and police.
Last week the government had been ordered
out of the city limits and into the barracks but
today’s protest is a clear sign that the military
has defied the orders.

Somali soldiers, such as the ones pictured here during a training
exercise, are optimistic the new president will get them paid.

Source: AMISOM Public Information through Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Somali_National_Army_Training_Pass-out_Parade_08_(7092793865).jpg Originated Flickr https://www.
flickr.com/photos/au_unistphotostream/7092793865/, CC by FlickreviewR 0.0., CCO 1.0 public domain.

OE Watch | May 2017

17

AFRICA
Repression and Resistance in Cameroon’s
Anglophone Community
“The situation in the English-speaking regions of Cameroon
OE Watch Commentary: The Anglophone
portion of Cameroon is growing increasingly angry.
As described in the accompanying article, this is due
to the discriminatory treatment they endure at the
hands of the Francophone dominated government.
The result has been an escalating spiral of repression
by government security forces and hardening
resistance to that repression by the English speaking
population. However, to truly understand the
situation, one must first take a brief look at part of
Cameroon’s history.

is so scary. A walk in any part of the regions, you will
automatically feel like you are in a war zone.”

— A Cameroonian activist

After World War I, the German colony of Kamerun
was partitioned between France and Great Britain,
with the larger portion going to France, by mandates
from the League of Nations. French Cameroon
gained independence in 1961. The following year the
northern portion of British Cameroon, which was
largely Muslim, voted to attach itself to Nigeria and
the southern, mostly Christian part to the Republic
of Cameroon, formed the Federal Republic of
Cameroon. Initially the British and French regions
remained relatively autonomous, but that changed
in 1972 when a new constitution was adopted. This
resulted in a loss of autonomy for the former British
section of Cameroon. The ensuing discrimination
against its English speaking people explains the deep
roots of the present crisis.
As the article describes, among the charges leveled
against the security forces are that they have been
responsible for detentions, torture, killing unarmed
protesters, and disappearances. The government
also initiated a shutdown of the internet in the
Anglophone region, crippling an area known
as “Silicon Mountain” where dozens of start-up
companies are located. It wasn’t just businesses that
suffered; schools and hospitals also struggled with
the lack of internet access.
Cameroon’s Anglophone population increasingly
feel economically marginalized and resentful that
the French legal and education systems are being
imposed upon them. Additionally as the article
points out, they complain their voices are not being
heard in the rest of Africa; that Africa’s leaders and
media are ignoring the situation. So far the African
Union’s response has been to express concern and
ask for a dialogue to help resolve the crisis…a reply
largely deemed insufficient by an angry Anglophone
population that is growing impatient with the current
state of affairs. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

The Anglophone region of Cameroon, originally part of British Cameroon, is in orange.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Southern_cameroon_map.JPG, Originated CIA World Factbook, public domain.

Source: Kumi Naidoo, “Africa ignores Cameroon crisis as human rights abuses
mount,” Pambazuka News, 16 March 2107. https://www.pambazuka.org/governance/
africa-ignores-cameroon-crisis-human-rights-abuses-mount
“The situation in the English-speaking regions of Cameroon is so scary. A walk in
any part of the regions, you will automatically feel like you are in a war zone.” [A
Cameroonian activist]
An internet blockade that has been in effect since mid-January has cut off internet
access and disrupted cellular services for millions of Cameroonians in the Englishspeaking regions.
In October, lawyers and teachers launched strikes to demand greater inclusion
of English-speaking professionals in the legal and teaching sectors. Weeks later,
civil society organizations called for public demonstrations in support of the strikes
and in protest against the “marginalization and deprivation” of English-speaking
Cameroonians by the Francophone-dominated government of President Paul Biya.
The government response was to dispatch security forces to quash dissent.
It is also worrying and disappointing that a crisis of these proportions, which has
implications not only for Cameroon but the region and the continent, is not getting
the attention it deserves from African leaders and African media.
OE Watch | May 2017

18

AFRICA
Doubt over Peace Talks in Mali
OE Watch Commentary: The Algiers Agreement of 2015 was intended to
restore peace and stability to northern Mali, but many hurdles remain. On 3 March,
the French-language publication Liberation published the excerpted article detailing
the perspectives of various Malian rebel factions on the latest developments related
to this agreement. The article provides insight into the difficulties surrounding the
agreement.
As the article discusses, one hurdle to its implementation is that civilians are
concerned that former rebels who become part of the new regional government in
parts of northern Mali are not fit to rule nor do they have the legitimacy of having
been elected. Even a rebel representative admitted, according to the article, that the
rebels are not trained for governance, but only for fighting. There is also a risk that
the former rebels who have not been included in the new regional government will
fear their interests will not be taken into account. Thus some former rebels have
been protesting outside the regional assembly building against what they perceive to
be their exclusion from the peace process.
The international community, meanwhile, is dismayed by the slow progress of the
reconciliation. There are suspicions that the Malian government is dragging its feet
because of its lack of interest in dealing with former rebel groups that will join progovernment militias and the Malian army in a new 600-soldier battalion in northern
Mali. It has only been a few years that the rebels had taken up arms against the
army. Some soldiers also believe this new battalion may serve the purpose of
stopping ordinary crime in cities but will not be effective against major security
threats, such as terrorism and drug trafficking. The real purpose of the battalion is
not so much counter-terrorism, some rebels say, but to restore confidence between
the ex-rebels, pro-government militias and army or, as the French Defense Minister
said, to be an important “symbolic step forward for the country.”
But how much the soldiers in this battalion can tolerate being symbolic while alQaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) reboots its operations and alliances in Mali
is questionable. As the article describes, an AQIM suicide bomber killed nearly 80
members of the Malian army at an air base in Gao in January 2017, just one month
before the new battalion became operational.
In addition, the article notes that there have been recent attacks in Burkina Faso,
after which the militants retreated into Malian territory. A new group operating in
Burkina Faso is called Ansaroul Islam, which is a sub-affiliate of the central Malibased Katiba Macina [Macina is the name of a historical Fulani Islamic emirate in
central Mali]. In March 2017, a new AQIM umbrella group Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam
wal-Muslimin was formed, with the goal of expanding the insurgency in Mali and
Burkina Faso via Ansaroul Islam by catering to ethnic narratives and grievances.
While peace efforts lag, the insurgents appear to be only increasing their
capabilities against this backdrop; the viability of the new battalion and the overall
ability to implement the Algiers Agreement has come into sharp focus. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“We are rebels, we know nothing about
the functioning of communities. We are not
trained for that!”
Source: “Peace in Mali: Fragile Hope (Paix au Mali:
l’espoir fragile),” Liberation, 3 March 2017. http://
www.liberation.fr/planete/2017/03/03/paix-au-mali-lespoir-fragile_1552847
For the past year and a half, the appointment of
an “interim authority”—supposedly the result of a
consensus between the ex-rebels and the government—
has been the subject of endless negotiations. In Gao,
the nomination of this authority was almost blocked:
the regional assembly had been occupied for three days
by a dissident armed movement, which challenged the
arrival of the man appointed to take the lead. “The
population is worried, it does not want to end up with
an administration in the hands of the armed groups,”
affirmed Mohamed Attaib Sidibé, president of Ganda
Izo, an important militia of the North. “We are rebels,
we know nothing about the functioning of communities.
We are not trained for that!” The blockage comes
mainly from the fact that some groups were created
recently and do not feel represented and demand
places in the administration. Moreover, this narrative
of the demonstrations against the interim authorities
is instrumentalized by the government, which is
dragging its feet to avoid having to deal with the armed
movements. The installation of the interim authorities
is nevertheless scrutinized by the international
community, which is exhausted by the delay in the
peace process.
The second “leg” of the Algiers Agreement is the
establishment of the Operational Coordination
Mechanisms (OMCs): battalions of 600 men made up of
equal numbers of rebel ex-combatants, pro-government
militias, and the Malian army. In Gao, nearly 80 of
them were killed, on January 18, in a car bomb attack
claimed by Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM).
The French Defense Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian,
welcomed the patrols as “so symbolic, so important ...
important pledges for the future.”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | May 2017

19

LATIN AMERICA
Not Guillermo Lasso
OE Watch Commentary: Ecuadorans held their final-round presidential
elections on 2 April. (See: “Guillermo Lasso,” OE Watch, April 2017.)
The two finalist candidates were Lenín Voltaire Moreno Garcés and
Guillermo Alberto Santiago Lasso Mendoza. Lenín Moreno won, dashing
the prediction this commenter made last month. Moreno represents a
continuation of the Bolivarian (pro-Venezuela/ pro Cuba/ Marxist socialist)
policies of the out-going Bolivarian regime of Rafael Correa. Although
Lasso called for a recount, none was authorized by the Ecuadoran election
commission. Moreno enjoyed the advantages of incumbency, potentially
including vote tampering. He was Rafael Correa’s vice president for six
years, and his election can be taken as good news for the region’s political
left, which had been experiencing a continuous series of electoral defeats
around the region. Observers will be keen to see if Moreno fills the shoes of
the presidency, or if he is merely a placeholder for Rafael Correa.
Aside from Moreno, big winners are the Maduro regime in Venezuela
and with it the Bolivarian project as a whole. Also benefitting is Julian
Assange (the founder of WikiLeaks), who has been a guest in the Ecuadoran
embassy in London. Had Lasso won, Assange would probably have had to
seek alternative dwelling arrangements.
The accompanying reference is from a first major interview, in Spanish,
with the president-elect Lenín Moreno. He addresses the accusations
of electoral fraud, economic recession, how he will finance his desired
programs (foreign debt) and other issues. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“He is going to finance his social plans with
external credit.”

Lenín Voltaire Moreno Garcés.

Source: Agencia de Noticias ANDES,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LENIN_MORENO.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0.

Source: “Ecuador, Lenin Moreno Programa De Gobierno 06
04 2017 (Ecuador, Lenin Moreno Program of Government
06/04/2017)” CNN and You Tube, 6 April 2017. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=jXtFRxbr5wg.
“...He is going to finance his social plans with external
credit....He says that Guillermo Lasso should accept the
defeat with dignity….”

Africa’s Brain Drain: Its Impacts on Security and Stability
By Robert Feldman

Africa is bleeding. Much of its lifeblood, composed of well-educated
people who could help tackle its toughest problems, is ﬂowing away.
This hemorrhaging of individuals with extensive training constitutes
Africa’s brain drain. African militaries are not immune to the problem.
From the upper echelons of the services where strategic decisions
are made, to the lower echelons where technical equipment must be
maintained, the lack of qualified individuals is being felt. Loss of educated
individuals on the civilian side also affects military capabilities. Fewer businesspersons
generate taxable revenue, fewer engineers design roads and other critical infrastructure,
and perhaps most damning of all, fewer educated people are available to serve in
government jobs and provide, among other functions, important civilian oversight of
the armed services. However, there are certain offsets that must be considered. As an
example, an African military pilot who takes a position in Europe might send remittances
back home. The brain drain also possibly serves as a safety valve, allowing disgruntled
individuals who are unable to find positions matching their educational achievements in
their home countries to leave and find employment elsewhere.
Military Review, November-December 2012

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Africa’s-Brain-Drain.pdf
OE Watch | May 2017

20

LATIN AMERICA
Bolivarians Talking Tough
OE Watch Commentary: Venezuela seems
to have entered a period of near constant street
protests. As the first accompanying passage
discusses, in this round of escalations the
government has taken to dropping tear gas
bombs from helicopters.
On 6 April, during a brief lull in the protest
actions, three very senior Bolivarian leaders,
Diosdado Cabello, Aristóbulo Istúriz and
Freddy Bernal joined to give an especially
bellicose harangue to a modest crowd of
loyalists. Curious and maybe revealing was a
sentence by the most senior leader, who said
that the mayoría (majority) of soldiers were
muy claros (very clear), as the second passage
reports. It seems odd that the course of an
aggressive pep rally he would say that the
majority are very clear. This may have been
an unintentional admission that indeed the
whole force is not committed or loyal. ‘Totally
committed’, ‘resolutely obedient’, or ‘ardently
loyal’ would have been more normal rhetorical
flourishes. Instead, his muddling and subdued
measurement of support among the troops might
reveal a clear softness in morale within the
armed forces. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“...the majority of soldiers (male and female) in the
armed forces are very clear”

Source: Editors, “’Un acto de guerra’: lo que hay detrás del lanzamiento de bombas
lacrimógenas desde el aire” (An act of war: what was behind the launching of tear gas
bombs from the air), El Cooperante, 11 April 2017. http://elcooperante.com/un-acto-deguerra-lo-que-hay-detras-del-lanzamiento-de-bombas-lacrimogenas-desde-el-aire/.
“State security forces repressed opposition demonstrators trying to reach the center
of Caracas for the fifth time this month. This time, however, they went too far. From
helicopters that overflew the protest … they launched tear gas bombs….
Source: Editors, “Sangre y armas: Los incendiarios discursos de Diosdado, Aristóbulo
y Bernal (Blood and weapons: The incendiary speeches of Diosdado, Aristóbulo and
Bernal),” La Patilla, 6 April 2017. https://www.lapatilla.com/site/2017/04/06/sangre-yarmas-los-incendiarios-discursos-de-diosdado-aristobulo-y-bernal/.
“The incendiary speeches of these three faces of Chavism were led by Cabello, who
assured that ‘Not even with blood is there going to be change in Venezuela.”
Cabello also declared that ‘the majority of soldiers (male and female) in the armed
forces are very clear’ (loyal?).
For his part, Bernal shouted that ‘if the moment comes to take a Kalashnikov to defend
Venezuela, we would be ready and willing.’
Istúriz, not to be outdone, said to the non-multitude that: Here we are going to defend
our Independence with blood if it is necessary.”

Venezuelans protest in Altamira Square.

Source: By The Photographer (Own work) [CC0], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AVenezuela_protests_against_
the_Nicolas_Maduro_government%2C_in_Altamira_Square_40.JPG, public domain.

OE Watch | May 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA
Human Trafficking Activity in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passages from Spanish open
sources provide insight into human trafficking
activity in Colombia. Colombia is a country
of origin for human trafficking, with victims
commonly sent to Asia, Europe and other
Latin American countries. Accurate statistics
regarding the number of victims in Colombia
are difficult to come by, with some sources
reporting as few as 223 victims per year
while NGOs put that number at 70,000; 80%
of which are said to be women. As the first
excerpt notes, the latter number is likely more
accurate given that 99% of human trafficking
cases are never prosecuted and human
trafficking is a crime with nearly complete
impunity. The excerpts also detail monetary
compensation made from this activity in
Colombia alone, which is also alarming.
Colombia has been classified as having the
second highest number of human trafficking
victims in Latin America following Brazil.
Once entrapped, victims are commonly sent
to China, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Argentina, Mexico, Paraguay, and the United
Arab Emirates. According to the second
source, recruitment of human trafficking
victims within Colombia generally occurs
within the “coffee region.” From these
locations, girls may be sent to Bogota to work
as prostitutes in local brothels or abroad.
According to the third excerpt, Colombia has
implemented multiple laws and decrees to end
this phenomenon; but many are not enacted
nor is there a budget to effectively fight human
trafficking in the country. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“... 99% of human trafficking cases [in Colombia] are carried out
with complete impunity.”
Source: “Trata de personas en Colombia (Human Trafficking in Colombia),” El
Colombiano, 31 January 2017. http://www.elcolombiano.com/colombia/trata-de-personassin-doliente-en-colombia-AN5843604
Human trafficking in Colombia remains an issue despite steps authorities have taken to
thwart this activity. According to this source, 99% of human trafficking cases are carried
out with complete impunity. Furthermore, each victim is initially sold for $(USD) 4,000, but
once in their destination country, are sold for as much as $(USD) 40,000. Girls trafficked
are most commonly sent to China, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Argentina, Mexico,
Paraguay, and the United Arab Emirates...
Source: “Colombia es origen, tránsito y destino de trata de personas (Colombia is an
Origin, Transit and Destination Source for Human Trafficking Victims)”, El Tiempo,
17 January 2017. http://www.eltiempo.com/politica/justicia/trata-de-personas-encolombia/16791863
Those departments within Colombia with the highest numbers of reported human
trafficking cases include Valle del Cauca, Antioquia, Risaralda, Quindío, Cauca,
Cundinamarca, Córdoba and Nariño. Of these departments, six are located in what is
known as the “coffee region” of Colombia. This idea is evidenced by the 2012 arrested
of multiple members of Las Paisitas gang. This group was dedicated to recruiting young
girls from the coffee region by offering them modeling contracts, fame, and fortune. Once
recruited, they would be taken to Bogota and forced into sex slavery or sent to other
locations.
Source: “Colombia y Ecuador buscan prevenir trata personas en feria binacional (Colombia
and Ecuador Look for Ways to Prevent Human Trafficking)”, El Heraldo, 15 September
2016. https://www.elheraldo.co/nacional/colombia-y-ecuador-buscan-prevenir-tratapersonas-en-feria-binacional-285314
Every year since 2014, Colombia has enacted laws and decrees dedicated to minimizing
human trafficking in the country (Law 985 and decrees 1069 and 1066). However, NGO’s
who work with trafficking victims claim that although the government has attempted to
implement new laws, lack of personnel to combat this activity and a relatively small budget
dedicated to eradicating human trafficking are minimizing the efforts of the new laws.

A Small Box That’s a Big Deal: How Latin
American Countries Are Using CubeSATs and
Why it Matters
by Kevin Freese
The Army is the Defense Department’s largest space user and the
space domain is an essential part of the current and future operational
environment. A relatively new satellite technology – the CubeSAT – is
now making it easier for countries such as Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and
Uruguay to launch their space programs. By facilitating traditionally nonspacefaring nations to develop space programs, CubeSATs will give such
nations a greater voice in international space policies and laws. For the
United States, this will mean increased necessity to take the interests of
other nations into consideration when operating in space.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/SWJ_-_A_Small_Box_Thats_a_Big_Deal_-_How_Latin_American_Countries_Are_Using_CubeSATs_and_Why_it_Matters.pdf
OE Watch | May 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia Acquires New Scientific Research Ship
OE Watch Commentary: Colombia uses
ships to patrol its rivers and exercise its maritime
sovereignty, but much of its fleet is aging.
Currently, the government has plans to replace
these vessels, but that is not Colombia’s only
naval concern. The General Maritime Directorate
(DIMAR) has also realized the need to overhaul
and modernize the Colombian Navy’s scientific
research vessels. As part of this commitment,
Colombian shipbuilding company COTECMAR
worked with Spanish company Armon to design
a scientific research vessel known as the ARC
Roncador. The accompanying passages discuss
this vessel.
This endeavor is significant because it
represents the first new research vessel to be
added to the Colombian Navy in 51 years. As
the first passage discusses, ARC Roncador is
replacing the ARC Quindío and is unique as the
first Colombian ship with dynamic positioning.
This means it is able to automatically maintain
the vessel’s position and direction by using its
own propellers and thrusters.

“The ARC Roncador, Colombia’s most modern multipurpose
hydrographic vessel, is in service performing scientific research
for the Colombian Navy. The ship...is outfitted with state-of-the-art
scientific research equipment for oceanography, hydrography, and
marine geology, making it the first Colombian ship with dynamic
positioning...”
Source: “Asi es el ARC Roncador, nuevo buque hidrografico de la Armada de Colombia
(ARC Roncador: The Colombian Navy’s New Hydrographic Vessel),” Webinfomil, 28
December 2016. http://www.webinfomil.com/2016/08/asi-es-el-arc-roncador-nuevobuque.html
The ARC Roncador, Colombia’s most modern multipurpose hydrographic vessel, is in
service performing scientific research for the Colombian Navy. The ship, named after
an island in the San Andrés and Providencia archipelago, “is outfitted with state-of-theart scientific research equipment for oceanography, hydrography, and marine geology,
making it the first Colombian ship with dynamic positioning,” according to a Colombian
press release.

ARC Roncador performed its first operation
in March 2017 off San Andres Island and the
Providencia archipelago where, according to the
excerpt from Infodefensa, it explored the ocean
depths and the geo forms that make up that island
chain, to decode its secrets using large multibeam
bathymetric survey instruments. The navy also
plans to use the vessel to support the Colombian
Institute of Anthropology and History to search
for ancient artifacts in the Caribbean. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: La Armada de Colombia incorpora un buque fabricado por Armon y Cotecmar
(Colombian Navy Commissions Vessel Built by Armon and Cotecmar),” Infodefensa, 27
January 2017. http://www.infodefensa.com/latam/2017/01/27/noticia-colombia-armadacolombiana-incorpora-nuevo-buque-oceanografico.html
Using ARC Roncador’s unique capabilities, “we will be able to send down devices
to sample the water at the bottom of the ocean to a depth of 4,000 meters. If filming is
needed, we can send ROVs and reveal the ocean’s secrets through video images and
photography. And we can deploy scientific equipment on board, which can do on-site
analysis and reveal the samples we’re studying,” Cmdr. León detailed. The ship will
also participate “in a series of missions that are going to be carried out this year with
various research centers, the highlight being the Seaflower Biosphere Reserve project,
which is an expedition to each of the islands that will be done during the month of
September, near Isla de Serranilla.”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked
concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up
debate and critical thinking. As Geoff
Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the
ideas in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/Winning%20Irregular%20War/WIrW_16April2017%20Cover%20V4.pdf

OE Watch | May 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA
Costa Rica and Narcotics Trade
OE Watch Commentary: “There is no beach in Costa
Rica that has not been touched by drug trafficking and
cocaine coming from Colombia.” As the first accompanying
excerpt discusses, this statement was made by Gustavo Mata
Vega, Minister of Security, in a hearing that took place on
16 February before the deputies of the Security and Drug
Trafficking Commission of the Legislative Assembly. During
this hearing, Mata Vega gave an exhibition to the legislators
where he showed a map provided by Colombian intelligence
agencies, showing the traces made by drug ships from that
country. He further added that Colombia is projecting that
traffickers will produce 2,000 tons of cocaine in 2017, much
of which is expected to pass through Costa Rica.
As the second passage discusses, Mata Vega also indicated
that Costa Rica is experiencing a large influx of marijuana
from Jamaica. Apparently there is so much cocaine in the
country that a ton of Jamaican marijuana is paid with 40 kilos
of coca and weapons by Costa Rican criminal organizations.
To combat this new issue of marijuana/cocaine exchange,
Costa Rica will be adding coastal radars and new equipment
to help detect maritime activity. Furthermore, two boats will
start conducting patrols later this year, each of which have
the capacity to accommodate 25 sailors and stay at sea for a
month. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “El narcotráfico arrebata el tradicional clima de paz a Costa Rica
(Drug Trafficking Destroys Peace in Costa Rica),” Diario Las Americas,
26 December 2016. http://www.diariolasamericas.com/america-latina/elnarcotrafico-arrebata-el-tradicional-clima-paz-costa-rica-n4110513
It [2016] has been a particularly difficult year for Costa Rica. We
underwent situations that have never occurred in the country. In fact, at this
point there is no beach in which cocaine from Colombia has not touched,
according to Public Security Minister Gustavo Mata. Mata further elaborated
that 2016 was a record year for homicides in the country and that the
principal cause of this violence is an increase in drug trafficking activities as
Costa Rica now serves as a transit and storage country for shipments arriving
from South America.
Source: “Narcos de Costa Rica usan coca y armas como moneda (Narcos
Use Cocaine and Weapons as Cash Substitute),” La Nacion, 07 March
2017. http://www.nacion.com/sucesos/seguridad/Narcos-ticos-usan-armasmodena_0_1620037994.html
Since 2014 Costa Rica has been receiving increased shipments of marijuana
from Jamaica, however, this is not what is concerning. What is noteworthy is
that drug trafficking organizations are paying for the marijuana with cocaine
and weapons instead of cash. This activity was first noted by the Costa Rican
Coast Guard last year after they confiscated a boat loaded with one metric
ton of marijuana and 20 kilograms of cocaine.

China and Cuba Strengthen Military Ties
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 March,
Cuba’s Armed Forces Minister General
Leopoldo Cintra Frías, and Deputy Chairman of
China’s Central Military Commission General
Fan Changlong met in Beijing and agreed to
strengthen military cooperation between the two
countries. The accompanying passages discuss
this meeting and Chinese-Cuban military ties.
As the first passage notes, Fan highlighted
the importance that China attaches to the
development of friendly relations and cooperation
with the Cuban armed forces and noted that
they will continue to support the military
restructuring of Cuba. He added that China will
“promote the overall development of army-toarmy exchanges and cooperation with Cuba.”
At present, Cuba’s armed forces rely heavily
on old Soviet-era equipment, much of it in need
of repair and spare parts. As indicated in the
second excerpt, the Chinese military has similar
hardware, so some of the proposed militaryto-military cooperation may involve updating
some of this equipment. As for the Chinese,
their promises have been quite vague, but as the
third passage notes, they promise “to support the
development of the Cuban Armed Forces through
personnel exchange and training.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Cuba y China fortalecen sus relaciones militares (China and Cuba Strengthen
Military Ties),” Defensa, 31 March 2017. http://www.defensa.com/centro-america/cubachina-fortalecen-relaciones-militares
“China is ready to work with Cuba to implement a consensus on deepening bilateral
cooperation reached by the leaders of the two countries and to promote the further
development of China-Cuba relations,” Fan Changlong was quoted as saying. Fan
said that China attaches great importance to the development of friendly relations and
cooperation with the Cuban armed forces and will continue to support the military
restructuring of Cuba. He added that China will promote the overall development of
army-to-army exchanges and cooperation with Cuba.
Source: “Cuban defense chief goes to China ‘to strengthen ties,” Progreso Weekly, 28
March 2017. http://progresoweekly.us/cuban-defense-chief-goes-china-strengthen-ties/
According to the Beijing-based website China Military Online and as cited in Progreso
Weekly, “Cuba’s armed forces rely heavily on old Soviet-era equipment, much of it in
need of repair and spare parts. The Chinese military has similar hardware and Cuba is
looking to Beijing for assistance in maintaining its defense capabilities.”
Source: “China espera aumentar relaciones militares con Cuba con la visita de ministro
(China Hopes to Strengthen Military Relations with Cuba),” La Vanguardia, 30 March
2017. http://www.lavanguardia.com/politica/20170330/421317303839/china-esperaaumentar-relaciones-militares-con-cuba-con-la-visita-de-ministro.html
“We are always ready to support the development of the Cuban Armed Forces through
personnel exchange and training. Furthermore, we are interested in uniting forces with
Cuba to build a stronger relationship”, according to Chinese Defense Minister Wu Qian.
OE Watch | May 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA
Brazilian Army Expands Armored Vehicle Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passages discuss the modern
Brazilian fleet of armed vehicles known as
the VBTP-MR 6x6, and the country’s plans
to expand its inventory of them. According to
the passages, the VBTP-MR 6x6 is currently
the most advanced armored vehicle being
produced in South America and is also the
first Brazilian-made armored vehicle with
anti-mine protection. With this vehicle
fleet, Brazil is once again leading the way
in indigenous military equipment (with the
help of Italian-based company Iveco) and
has already received orders from Argentina,
Chile, Colombia, and Ecuador to purchase this
equipment.
In 2013, the Brazilian Military implemented
the “Guarani Program” to develop and procure
the VBTP-MR 6x6. The vehicle was designed
for soldier transport, meaning that its function
is to deploy troops in patrol missions, as well
as in armed combat situations. Furthermore, as
the first passage notes, it can be equipped with
different weapons systems.
In 2017, Brazil is expected to receive an
additional 60 VBTP-MR 6x6 vehicles bringing
the total number of operating units in the
country to 238. By 2038, this number will
increase to 1,580. As indicated in the third
excerpt, the Brazilian military also expects to
receive 50 weapon stations for 7.62mm and
12.7mm machine guns in 2017. By 2020, 215
weapon stations are expected to be procured.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “VBTP-MR,” Military-Today, 30 March 2017. http://www.military-today.com/apc/
vbtp_mr.htm
Armor of the VBTP-MR provides protection against small arms fire and artillery shell
splinters. The vehicle can be fitted with add-on composite armor for improved protection.
This armored personnel carrier has a V-shaped hull, which provides protection against
landmines. The interior is fitted with a spall liner. Several options of weapons are proposed
for this armored personnel carrier. It might be fitted with remotely controlled 7.62-mm,
12.7-mm machine guns or 40-mm automatic grenade launcher. Variant with 30-mm cannon
and anti-tank guided missiles has also been proposed. The vehicle has a crew of two and is
designed to transport 9 troops. Troops enter and leave the vehicle via the rear doors or roof
hatches. The VBTP-MR is fitted with modern battlefield management systems, which is used
for navigation, positioning, and mission planning. It also displays nearby friendly units.
Source: “VBTP-MR GUARANI. O futuro da mobilidade do exército brasileiro (VBTPMR GUARANI. The Future of the Brazilian Military’s Mobility),” Brasil Em Defensa, 9
February 2013. http://www.brasilemdefesa.com/vbtp-mr-guarani-o-futuro-da-mobilidade.
html
The Guarani is the first Brazilian-made armored vehicle with anti-mine protection. Its
floor was built to withstand up to 13 pounds of explosives. If it is hit with a blast of such
magnitude, the vehicle will be blown off the ground, but its occupants will not be at serious
risk, according to tests done by EB (acronym for Brazilian military) engineers in the
Guarani’s approval stage, when mannequins were used in place of soldiers. The Guarani’s
frame is also protected by steel that can withstand 7.62 mm rifle rounds. It also can be fitted
with additional shielding against anti-air machine gun projectiles.
Source: “Ejército brasileño actualiza la flota de blindados (Brazilian Army Upgrades
Armored Vehicle Fleet),” Dialogo Americas, 03 April 2017. https://dialogo-americas.com/
es/articles/brazilian-army-upgrades-armored-vehicle-fleet
The Brazilian military expects to receive 50 weapon stations for 7.62mm- and 12.7mmmachine guns in 2017. This equipment is attached to the vehicles, and it has remotecontrolled automatic firing. It also has a computerized aiming and firing control system, as
well as day- and night-vision cameras that provide precision firing.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading
e-journal highlighting current threats in the
Operational Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE
Threats Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.
aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | May 2017

25

ASIA-PACIFIC
A “First” for the People’s Liberation Army:
A Navy Admiral Becomes a Joint, Regional, Commander
by Dennis J. Blasko
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol.17, Issue 5, dated 31 March 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/first-peoples-liberation-army-navy-admiral-becomes-joint-regional-commander/

OE Watch Commentary: Among recent changes in the People’s
Liberation Army’s (PLA) leadership, the appointment of Vice Admiral
Yuan Yubai to Commander of the Southern Theater Command is
particularly noteworthy. Yuan is the first and only non-Army officer
ever to command a Military Region (MR) or Theater Command (TC),
one of the five newly formed joint headquarters that replaced the seven
Military Regions that had existed since the mid-1980s. Consistent with
Chinese practice, Yuan shares responsibility for the Theater with a
political commissar, Army General Wei Liang. Nonetheless, Admiral
Yuan’s selection as TC commander is a major event in PLA history, and
a step toward abandoning the traditional Chinese mentality that land
outweighs sea. The accompanying passages discuss this change and its
implications.
Unlike the old Military Regions, which were staffed primarily
by Army personnel and in peacetime directly commanded Army
units in their areas of operation, the five new Theater Commands
are joint headquarters composed of personnel from all services.
TCs are responsible for operations (战区主战), which includes
“responding to security threats in their strategic directions, maintaining
peace, deterring wars and winning battles,” as noted in the second
accompanying passage.
Vice Admiral Yuan’s selection to become commander of the Southern
Theater Command is truly a historic development for the PLA. During
this round of reform, as the Army is reduced in size and the other
services increased to better balance the distribution of forces, Yuan’s
assignment as TC commander is another major step in breaking the
“big army’s” influence, as the third passage points out. It is likely only
a matter of time before an Air Force general or another Navy admiral
is assigned to command another coastal Theater or perhaps even the
Central Theater Command.
At 60 years of age, Vice Admiral Yuan is the same age as his
American contemporary, Admiral Harry Harris, Jr., commander of the
US Pacific Command. Yuan joined the PLA Navy in 1976 and trained
at the Qingdao Submarine Academy, located in the North Sea Fleet
(NSF) area of responsibility. Afterward, he was assigned as a submarine
crew member in Qingdao. In 1982, he served as the base torpedo chief
and then executive officer on a submarine, most likely a nuclear attack
Han-class submarine. In 1990, he became a submarine captain and
apparently stayed in that position until 2003 when he was promoted to
chief of staff of the 1st Submarine Base at Qingdao. Four years later
he became base commander, followed by assignments as NSF chief of
staff in 2010 and NSF commander and concurrent Jinan MR deputy
commander in 2014. He was promoted to rear admiral in 2008 and vice
admiral in 2015. End OE Watch Commentary (Blasko)

“After the new military services system is
established, the reshuffled Theater Commands
system can shake off the former ‘big army’ style
and build the joint operational commanding
institutions that are more suitable for modern
warfare.”
Source: “China’s three naval fleets have new commanders,”
Chinamil, 22 January 2017. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2017-01/23/content_7464479.htm
“Vice Admiral Yuan Yubai, former commander of the North
China Sea Fleet, was promoted commander of the Southern
Theater Command...”
...
“The personnel reshuffle in the Navy showed a distinct feature
that theater-level leaders are appointed across regions. […] This
reshuffle also reflected that high-level leaders are transferred at
shorter intervals.”
Source: “President Xi announces establishment of five PLA
theater commands,” Chinamil, 1 February 2017. http://english.
chinamil.com.cn/news-channels/china-military-news/2016-02/01/
content_6884069.htm
“Xi pointed out that the theater commands are responsible for
such missions as responding to security threats in their strategic
directions, maintaining peace, deterring wars and winning
battles, and will play significant roles in safeguarding the overall
situations concerning the national security strategy and the
military strategy.”
Source: “Considerations for replacing Military Area Commands
with Theater Commands,” Chinamil, 3 February 2017. http://eng.
chinamil.com.cn/news-channels/2016-02/03/content_6888462.
htm
“After the new military services system is established, the
reshuffled Theater Commands system can shake off the former
“big army” style and build the joint operational commanding
institutions that are more suitable for modern warfare.”

OE Watch | May 2017

26

ASIA-PACIFIC
The Evolution of the PLA’s Red-Blue Exercises
by David C. Logan
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol.17, Issue 4, dated 14 March 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/evolution-plas-red-blue-exercises/

OE Watch Commentary: In the summer of 2016, the Chinese People’s Liberation
Army (PLA) completed the most recent round of its “Stride” (跨区) exercises, a series
of large-scale military training exercises that prominently feature simulated opposing
force confrontations. These exercises provide indicators of the capabilities and threat
perceptions of the PLA. In addition, the 2016 Stride exercises featured a number of
changes to improve the realism of the exercises. The accompanying passages point out
some important aspects of these exercises.
In the US and other Western countries, the “Red” force typically represents the
adversary, but in China, the designations are reversed, with “Red” units representing
the PLA and “Blue” units representing the opposing force. Despite the potential of
Red-Blue exercises, the PLA has failed to fully exploit them. Past exercises were
overly scripted and designed more to bolster the reputation of the participating troops
rather than improve their operational readiness. In recent years, however, the PLA has
attempted to expand, systematize, and professionalize the use of Red-Blue exercises.
For example, as the first accompanying passage demonstrates, in the Stride
exercises, reports have highlighted the success of a First Group Army armored brigade
during an annual exercise which includes “a military scenario countering Taiwanese
independence,” noting that they “successfully penetrated the Blue Forces’ central
base...” The reference to Taiwan suggests that perhaps confrontation exercises are
conducted with an eye to a future contingency involving Taiwan.
As the second passage notes, one Red Force unit from the Southern Theater
Command struggled with intense electromagnetic interference in an effort to simulate
a more realistic battlefield, especially conditions of challenging electronic warfare. The
2016 Stride exercises featured a number of other changes to improve the realism of
the exercises. While participants in previous Stride exercises were recommended by
superior command units, last year’s participants were chosen at random from the Army
units of each of the Theater Commands. In the past, Red Forces were only assigned
offensive roles, but last year were responsible for both offense and defense. More of
the exercise was conducted at night and there was a deliberate attempt to incorporate
the use of “new type” forces such as “special forces, technological reconnaissance,
aerospace reconnaissance, and electromagnetic interference.”
The recent reforms to the military’s Red-Blue exercises will likely help improve the
training and operational capabilities of the PLA, as well as the Chinese military’s own
understanding of the tactics of potential foreign adversaries. At the same time, the
growth and professionalization of the PLA’s Red-Blue exercises also provide a valuable
source of information about the threat perception and future trajectory of the PLA. The
equipment, tactics, and objectives of the participating troops will reveal the kinds of
scenarios PLA anticipates are most likely in the future. End OE Watch Commentary
(Logan)

“During the first OPFOR exercise,
which annually is responsible for
a military scenario countering
Taiwanese independence, the
1st Group Army “an armored
brigade”—demonstrated superior
combat capability, and successfully
penetrated the Blue Forces’ central
base, ending the exercise”

Source: “朱日和演习首战：对台一线部队
攻入蓝军核心阵地 (Zhu and the First Battle:
The First Line of Troops into the Blue Army
Core Positions),” Sina.com, 21 July 2016. http://
mil.news.sina.com.cn/china/2016-07-21/docifxuhukv7041022.shtml
“During the first OPFOR exercise, which annually
is responsible for a military scenario countering
Taiwanese independence, the 1st Group Army ‘an
armored brigade’—demonstrated superior combat
capability, and successfully penetrated the Blue
Forces’ central base, ending the exercise...”
Source: Xi Yazhou, “朱日和演习，不是个游戏
(Zhu Rihe Exercise, They Are Not a Game),” 观
察者 (The Observer), 24 July 2016. http://www.
guancha.cn/XiYaZhou/2016_07_24_368645_s.
shtml.
“Furthermore, a certain unit in the
Southern Theater Command modified its own
communications network. It became the only unit
to preserve unimpeded communications on Zhu
Rihe’s ‘complex electromagnetic environment’
battlefield. Actually their method was to replace
their firmware, and install their self-compiled smart
router app. Strictly speaking, this network is still at
risk, but in the midst of real combat, it is effective.”

“... a certain unit in the Southern Theater Command ... became the
only unit to preserve unimpeded communications on [a] ‘complex
electromagnetic environment’ battlefield.”

OE Watch | May 2017

27

ASIA-PACIFIC
A Russian View on US-North Korean Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Escalating tensions on the Korean
peninsula have sparked regional concern about the eventual
breakout of military conflict over the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) swiftly advancing nuclear-missile
capabilities. A recent article published in Russia’s Nezavisimaya
Gazeta provides a Russian perspective of the US strategy
surrounding the DPRK’s nuclear-missile program and suggests
possible ways forward in achieving a peaceful, diplomatic
solution.
The article demonstrates how Russia interprets the US’
consideration of “all options” to the North Korean problem as
entailing direct military action, especially when such statements
by government officials are paired with the annual large scale
training exercises of Key Resolve and Foal Eagle conducted by
the US and the Republic of Korea (ROK). This perception was
likely reinforced by the reported redirection of the USS Carl
Vinson Aircraft Carrier from Australia to the Korean Peninsula
in early April.
The accompanying passage claims that the DPRK’s
acceleration of its nuclear and missile programs is
understandable, as they are likely attempting to develop nuclear
missile capabilities to a point where the US would deem the
risks of any military intervention as “unacceptably high.”
The author assesses that the behaviors of all powers involved
will likely follow the historical pattern of a lack of dialogue,
demonstrations of military power, and increased sanctions
imposed on the DPRK—a pattern that could result in armed
conflict.
The article outlines critical steps for achieving a peaceful
solution, which includes a “moratorium on actions causing
the other party the greatest concern,” recognition of the
DPRK’s security concerns as legitimate, and pursuing separate
negotiations for nuclear and missile programs in phases. The
author argues that the success of the Iran deal established
a framework for such negotiations and demonstrated that a
seemingly unattainable compromise is achievable for all parties
involved, despite the differences between the Korean and
Iranian cases. End OE Watch Commentary (Galluzzi)

“There is a high probability of the situation
developing per the well-known scenario:
rejection of dialogue—DPRK missile firings
and nuclear tests—new UN Security Council
sanctions plus additional sanctions of the
United States and its allies. The logical finale of
such a scenario could be a broad-based armed
conflict with a high degree of likelihood of the
employment of weapons of mass destruction
right at our borders in the Far East.”

Source: Zhebin, A. Z. “Korean Peninsula Could Become Test-ofStrength Proving Ground for US, PRC,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta
Online, 6 April 2017. https://www.opensource.gov/portal/server.
pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_0_200_203_121123_43/content/Display/
CEL2017040637546981#index=1&searchKey=25881654&rpp=10
It is no secret that the United States has recently been actively discussing
the idea of preemptive strikes against facilities of the DPRK’s nuclearmissile program. During the recent trip of US Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson to Asian countries it was aired for the first time at the official
level, although shrouded in diplomatic words to the effect that the United
States is considering “all options” in relation to the DPRK. These options
are being intensively rehearsed at the joint American-South Korean
military exercises being held off the DPRK’s borders.
…
It is hardly any wonder that in this situation the North Koreans speeded
up their nuclear-missile program. It would appear that Pyongyang is
intent on achieving as quickly as possible results which persuade the
United States and its allies that the damage from a choice of strong-arm
option would prove for them unacceptably high.
…
There is a high probability of the situation developing per the wellknown scenario: rejection of dialogue—DPRK missile firings and nuclear
tests—new UN Security Council sanctions plus additional sanctions of
the United States and its allies. The logical finale of such a scenario could
be a broad-based armed conflict with a high degree of likelihood of the
employment of weapons of mass destruction right at our borders in the
Far East.
…
Korean matters coming to be at a top place in the American-Chinese
dialogue confirms that the peninsula is now one of the most intricate knots
of Chinese-American contradictions, and it is not inconceivable that it
could become a proving ground for a test of strength between the United
States and the PRC.
…
Realistic approaches to a settlement of the situation could include:
•

Recognition by all parties of the expediency of a temporary
moratorium on actions causing the other party the greatest concern
as a necessary intermediate stage to halt the development of the
situation per a negative scenario;

•

Recognition of the rationality of a separate solution of the missile and
nuclear problems… and of the DPRK’s legitimate security concerns,
[consenting] to discuss and settle the issues involved here in phased
fashion

On the whole, just as structurally and chronologically devised a
deal as was struck with Iran is needed to settle the Korean problem.
Granted all the differences between the Korean and Iranian cases, the
main lesson of the Iranian deal for Korea is that compromise, which,
owing to the practically opposite positions of the United States and
Iran, originally seemed unattainable, in the end, given the political
will, patient diplomacy, and, at times, “compulsion to peace” of the
principal disputants by the other participants in the negotiations, proved
achievable.
OE Watch | May 2017

28

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Plan to Develop its Strategic Emerging
Industries: Tap into Private Investors
OE Watch Commentary: The
Chinese government used to guard
certain technologies from the private
sector, but as the accompanying article
discusses, it is now opening up more
industries to private investors. These
include the strategic industries of
oil drilling and defense technology,
the latter of which is also considered
an emerging industry. The reasons
given for the opening up are to “boost
development efficiency and stimulate
investment growth.”
According to the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China’s official
website, strategic emerging industries
accounted for about 8% of the country’s
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2015.
By allowing the private sector a wider
access to these industries, China hopes
to help meet its goal of increasing the
output of strategic emerging industries
to 15% GDP by 2020. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“Widening access for private capital to enter these industries, together
with improved regulation, will both boost development efficiency and
stimulate private investment growth.”
Source: “More Sectors to Open Up for Private Investment,” Xinhua, 10 April 2017. http://english.
gov.cn/news/top_news/2017/04/10/content_281475622160710.htm

More Sectors to Open Up for Private Investment
China will open up more industries, including oil drilling and defense technology, to private
investors to cope with slowing private investment growth, Xinhua-run Economic Information Daily
reported Monday….
“Widening access for private capital to enter these industries, together with improved regulation,
will both boost development efficiency and stimulate private investment growth,” Li [“Widening
access for private capital to enter these industries, together with improved regulation, will both
boost development efficiency and stimulate private investment growth,” Li [Wei, head of the
Development Research Center of the State Council] said.
Growth in private investment slowed to 3.2 percent year on year in 2016, 6.9 percentage points
lower than in 2015, due to poor performance in manufacturing, service and mining sectors, as well
as continued price decline of investment in fixed assets. But the downward trend was reversed after
the government moved to spur growth, with private investment recording growth of 6.7 percent in
the first two months of the year.
China aims to increase output of strategic emerging industries to account for 15 percent of GDP
by 2020.

Potential for Lone-Wolf Attacks on the Rise in Southeast Asia
OE Watch Commentary: Asian news sources are
expressing concern over a potential rise in lone-wolf
terror attacks in Southeast Asian countries. This is
due to the fact that, as the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) loses ground in Syria and Iraq, some
Southeast Asian fighters are returning to their home
countries. The accompanying excerpt discusses this
concern.
The article quotes Ayob Khan Mydin Pitchay,
head of counter-terrorism for Malaysia’s Special
Branch, who says that as it becomes more difficult
for ISIS followers to go to Syria, “We are now
seeing more and more lone-wolf attacks as IS has
called for its followers to launch attacks in their
home countries if they cannot make it to Syria.”
Concern over ISIS carrying out attacks is not
limited to Southeast Asia. As the article points out,
the more ISIS loses its footing over Syria and Iraq,
the more members could be driven back to their
original countries “everywhere in the world,” where
they might plan further attacks. (Also see: “Can ISIS
Gain a Stronghold in the Philippines?” OE Watch,
March 2017.) End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“IS has called for its followers to carry out attacks
everywhere in the world. This will include their home
countries after they return home…”
Source: Amy Chew, “Threats of Lone-wolf Attacks Rising in Southeast Asia,”
Channel News Asia, 10 April 2017. http://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/
asiapacific/threats-of-lone-wolf-attacks-rising-in-southeast-asia/3641922.html

Threats of Lone-wolf Attacks Rising in Southeast Asia
The key factor in the heightened risk is that Islamic State (IS) is losing ground in
Syria and Iraq, which is resulting in some Southeast Asian fighters returning to their
home countries. At the same time, extremists in this region tempted to travel to the
Middle East to go and fight for IS are finding it harder to do so, forcing them to look
closer to home to carry out attacks.
“It is very difficult now for IS followers to go to Syria. We are now seeing more and
more lone-wolf attacks as IS has called for its followers to launch attacks in their
home countries if they cannot make it to Syria,” Ayob Khan Mydin Pitchay, head of
counter-terrorism for Malaysia’s Special Branch, told Channel NewsAsia.
“… members of IS are no longer capable of protecting their families and wives over
there (in Syria),” said Nasir Abas, former leader of Jemaah Islamiyah, the group
behind the devastating 2002 Bali bombings.
“IS has called for its followers to carry out attacks everywhere in the world. This will
include their home countries after they return home,” said Nasir.
OE Watch | May 2017

29

ASIA-PACIFIC
Strategic Issues China Faces in Military Informatization
OE Watch Commentary: The topic of
information warfare in China can be traced to
the mid-1980s book Information Warfare by
Shen Weiguang. However, detailed discussion
and analysis of the topic did not take root until
the 1991 Gulf War. While China has been
analyzing the topic and striving to enhance its
combat power through informatization, there are
still significant challenges, as the accompanying
article discusses.
The Chinese military has made great progress
in pursuing informationization. However, it
still falls behind more advanced countries in
technology and user capability. One of the key
issues is that there is a discrepancy between the
actual technology, which the article describes as
“having become highly technology intensive”
and the country’s military requirements in its
combat units, which the article describes as
still “at a rather low level.” Another issue is that
China does not effectively match technological
know-how with technological capability.
According to the article, “some people with
technology know-how remain in academies
and do not know about the actual requirements
in combat forces, while people working on the
frontlines of military operations are short of
technological capability.”
The key, according to the authors, is not to
start with the development and implementation
of the technology, but rather to first study
the requirement at the command and control
level. What are the tactical and operational
requirements? Of course, this could prove to be
challenging as China has had no real combat
experience over the past three and a half
decades. According to the authors, “the evolution
of war has now entered the stage of informatized
warfare. War demands are driving the unceasing
and continuous upgrading for informatization.”
That being the case, China might continue to
struggle to maintain pace with other, more
experienced countries until it gains more
experience itself. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

“The purpose of understanding
informatization is... to take aim
at actual operations and to...
defeat opponents.”

The emblem of People’s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force.
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3APLASSF.svg, public domain.

Source: Ni Xin and Li Xin, “军事信息化建设的战略问题 (Strategic Issues in Military
Informatization),” Xuexi Shibao, 29 March 2017. http://www.studytimes.cn/ZYDX/
JSGF/2017-03-29/8840.html

Strategic Issues in Military Informatization
The evolution of war has now entered the stage of informatized warfare. War demands
are driving the unceasing and continuous upgrading of informatization. In particular, our
military’s informatization has not yet been completed and is facing a greater competition
pressure. The process of informatization per se is developing at accelerating speed. On
one hand, information technology is continuously developing in the direction of getting
more and more smarter, being directly related to war, and gaining greater value in
making contributions to winning wars… As things stand in our military’s informatization
drive, we are urgently in need of making strategic adjustments on the basis of war
thinking, and should carefully consider how to advance the process of informatization in
the context of new technologies, which keep emerging, so as to step up informatization
efforts on the basis of the policy and system advantages of civil-military integration.
The purpose of understanding informatization is not to “showcase” the advanced
features of technologies. The goal is to take aim at actual operations and to serve the
purpose of defeating opponents.
In the final analysis, our military informatization must not take the path of first
determining technology and then merging it into tactics; instead, we should strengthen
our technology-related thinking on the basis of reasonably determining the actual
operation requirements, do the utmost to improve our technology reserves, and more
importantly, orient technological development to the actual needs in military operations,
let technology-related thinking serve operations-related thinking, thus truly turning
informatization into an effective means of winning in war.
OE Watch | May 2017

30

ASIA-PACIFIC
An Insightful Indian Analysis on China’s Warfare Strategies
OE Watch Commentary: Due to tensions
resulting from decades of border disputes, India has
long kept a close eye on neighboring China, studying
every aspect of its military operational capability.
In one such study, the author argues that, along with
expanding its military globally, China’s focus has
shifted from the tactical to the operational level of
war. The accompanying excerpts describe some key
points made in this insightful analysis.
First, China is hoping to replace the United States
as the leading power, while downplaying its military
might, “which is little match to the United States.”
It plans to do this through the One Belt, One Road
(OBOR) initiative, which has two components. As
the article discusses, the land component called
the “Silk Road Economic Belt” would run across
the Eurasian landmass, while the sea component
called the “21st Century Maritime Silk Road” would
straddle across the Western Pacific and Indian Ocean
region.
Next, the breakdown of China’s four headquarters
under the Central Military Command (CMC) into 15
departments implies that China needed to streamline
its previous departments for more focused results
and monitoring. It also needed new players, which
were not needed before since “the PLA’s roles and
missions were limited to continental defense.”
Regarding technological advancements, the author
points out that China is striving to develop its space,
electromagnetic, and cyber capability rather than
focusing on building up its capability in land, air, and
sea. Due to the United States military’s supremacy in
land, air, and sea since World War II, and given the
huge disparity between the two countries’ defense
spending, China likely does not feel it can catch up in
the foreseeable future.
In a discussion about transparency, the author
points out that, along with increasing its military’s
global roles, the country has become more
transparent since 2008 by setting up an official
spokesperson system in the Ministry of National
Defense. He goes on to explain that a PLA officer
had told him that it is no longer possible to hide
capabilities in modern times, so “it is best to hide
intentions.”
Finally, wars are fought on three levels: strategic,
operational, and tactical. China is focused on
optimizing its operational level of war, which, as
the author explains, is where the outcome of war is
decided. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“China believes that by making strides in the new
battlefields, it stands a better chance of challenging US’
military supremacy — through asymmetric, non-contact, and
psychological warfare.”
Source: Pravin Sawhney, “Chinese Warfare Strategy,” Force Online, 1 April 2017.
http://www.forceindia.net/ChineseWarfareStrategy.aspx
In a unique approach to replace the US as the leading power, China has decided
to play on its economic strength, while downplaying its military might which is
little match to the US. This it hopes to do through the One Belt, One Road (OBOR)
which has two components. The land component called the Silk Road Economic
Belt would run across Eurasian landmass, while the sea component called the 21st
Century Maritime Silk Road would straddle across the Western Pacific and Indian
Ocean region criss-crossing Asia, Africa and Europe through a network of roads,
rails, coastal and port infrastructure and oil and gas pipelines, through policy
coordination, and unimpeded trade and monetary circulation supported by the Chinabacked Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) New Development
Bank, Asian Infrastructure and Investment Bank (AIIB), Silk Route Fund, and so on.
The breakdown of four headquarters into 15 departments of the Commission implies
two things: one, previous departments which were perhaps unwieldy have been
streamlined for more focused results and monitoring. And two, new subjects have
been added which were earlier not needed since the PLA’s roles and missions were
limited to continental defence. For example, the Office for International Military
Cooperation has been necessitated by the PLA’s new role in support of the OBOR
project. The task of this agency is increased military cooperation, counter-terrorism,
and so on, between the PLA and security forces of countries on China’s OBOR map.
Similarly, the Discipline Inspection Commission would ensure zero corruption within
the PLA. Officers of this agency would regularly visit command headquarters and
field formations to audit disciplinary cases, and submit a report card regularly to
the CMC. This would ensure a corruption-free PLA and even more importantly a
corruption-free image of the PLA abroad.
The Science of War: On technology advancement, China has adopted the unique
roadmap to focus on the three new battlefields (domains) of the 21st century, namely,
space, electromagnetic and cyber, rather than the three traditional ones of land, air
and sea. China believes that by making strides in the new battlefields, it stands a
better chance of challenging US’ military supremacy — through asymmetric, noncontact, and psychological warfare. In the traditional battlefields, the US has been the
superpower since the end of World War II, and given the huge disparity between the
annual defence allocations (USD 600 billion to China’s USD 152 billion) and militarytechnology base of the two, a catch-up in the foreseeable future is not possible for
China.
Since the world’s focus on China was clearly in two areas of defence and diplomacy,
PLA officials rather than foreign service officer took lead in interacting with the
world. The reason for this was explained to me by a senior PLA officer. He told me
that since in today’s world it is not possible to hide capabilities, it is best to hide
intentions. And the PLA was best placed to discuss capabilities and national security
matters.

OE Watch | May 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
The Philippines Eyes an End to the NPA Insurgency
OE Watch Commentary: While Abu Sayyaf’s grisly beheading of a
German captive in February 2017 and its other attacks in the Philippines gain
much attention, the Philippine security forces still recognize the Communist
New People’s Army (NPA) as the number one threat in the country.
According to the excerpted article in Philstar from 6 March, this threat
assessment is based on the length of the insurgency, which began in 1968, and
the number of people who have died in NPA-related violence, which totals
more than 30,000.
The country’s National Security Adviser, Hermogenes Esperon Jr., sees an
opportunity for peace due to the ideological obsolescence of the NPA. As the
article points out, he says that Communist governments have fallen around
the world and even China, which is still led by the Communist Party, has
opened up to capitalism and foreign markets. He therefore sees a possibility to
negotiate an end to the war with the NPA on grounds that a political solution
can grow out of the NPA’s realization that its original goals are no longer
attainable.
The article describes a recent ceasefire, which was concluded in August
2016 but failed due to issues of mistrust, not ideology. The NPA considers its
members in prison to be political prisoners and expected the government to
release them. When this did not happen the NPA took up arms once again.
Philippine President Duterte responded by declaring an all-out war on the
NPA and warned Philippine troops to expect an ambush at any moment and
not to be complacent given the risk of NPA assassination squads.
Nonetheless, steps towards peace continue, with negotiations taking place in
Rome in February 2017. Indeed, it is possible that the Philippine government,
like the National Security Advisor, believes that time is on its side and that the
NPA may soon recognize this too. A similar case may be seen in Colombia
where after several decades of insurgency, a peace with the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) was concluded in 2016. The NPA, like the
FARC, no longer has the legitimacy that Communist ideology afforded it in
decades past and is thus experiencing a downturn in recruitment.
What the National Security Advisor seeks, then, according to the article, is
to understand what is motivating the remaining several thousand NPA fighters
beyond issues such as feudalism and fascism, which he argues are irrelevant
today. If this is done, then the final steps to peace can be achieved. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The problem with these communists is
that they are still talking about imperialism
when we are no longer a colony. They are
talking about feudalism and fascism, when
we are not fascists. I think the communists
should also update themselves on what they
really want.”
Source: “Communists still top security threat – Esperon,”
Philstar, 6 March 2017. http://www.philstar.com/
headlines/2017/03/06/1678359/communists-still-top-securitythreat-esperon
The communists are still the country’s top security threat,
according to National Security Adviser Hermogenes Esperon
Jr. Esperon stressed the brand of communism the leftist
groups are pushing is an old issue. “The problem with these
communists is that they are still talking about imperialism
when we are no longer a colony. They are talking about
feudalism and fascism, when we are not fascists.” He said
even China, which is the leading communist country in the
world, has opened up to foreign markets and to the idea of
capitalism.
Esperon however said that even if communists pose the
biggest national security threat, there are political solutions
to the problem. Duterte restarted peace talks with the
communist rebels that had been on and off for 30 years.
The two sides separately declared ceasefires in August, and
the informal arrangement largely held as they continued
discussions in Rome last month. The communists terminated
their self-declared truce after accusing the government of
failing to release all political prisoners and encroaching on
rebel-held areas. Duterte replied by scuttling the peace talks
and declaring an all out war against the communist rebels.

China’s Concept of Military Strategy

By Timothy L. Thomas

China’s concept of military strategy is very different from
that of the United States. This article examines the various
components of the strategic thought of the People’s
Liberation Army and how its theory of strategy
can be applied in contemporary times.
Among other things, the article
offers US analysts a template
for confronting Chinese
strategy.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/China/China’s%20Concept%20of%20Military%20Strategy.pdf
OE Watch | May 2017

32

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
The Aftermath of the St. Petersburg Metro Bombing
OE Watch Commentary: The announcement from
Russian authorities that Akbarjon Jalilov, a young
man originally from Kyrgyzstan, was the bomber who
carried out the attack on the St. Petersburg metro on
3 April brought significant attention to Central Asian
migrants living in Russia. The accompanying excerpted
articles report on the bombing from Russian and Kyrgyz
perspectives, and shed light on an issue that will likely
shape the aftermath of the attack.
The article from Russian Kommersant shows how
Russian media reported Jalilov as a native of Kyrgyzstan
who had Russian citizenship and was “allegedly involved
with the Islamic State.” Russian officials have been
investigating whether or not he had traveled to Syria and
the article reports that there are “around 2 thousand people
from Kyrgyzstan in the ranks of [the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria] ISIS,” though this has been previously reported
as a high estimate.
There was increased attention on Central Asians in
Russia even before the attack. There have been a number
of reports about the recruiting efforts of ISIS in Russia
in addition to attention on Central Asians following
terrorist attacks in Istanbul, Turkey, including the assault
on Atatürk International Airport and the New Year’s Eve
shooting at a nightclub. The truck attack in Sweden which
took place a few days after the bombing, and which was
allegedly conducted by an Uzbek, likely also contributed to
the increased attention.
The article from Kyrgyz source Kloop reports that “Six
people were arrested in St. Petersburg on suspicion of
recruiting people for the terrorist organizations ‘Jabhat
al-Nusra,’ the Islamic State and others” and that these
groups targeted Central Asians. The article also includes
a quote from the head of a diaspora group that “document
checks of migrants from Kyrgyzstan have become more
frequent.” This is worth noting alongside the statement
from Kyrgyzstan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs which
“refutes the information that Akbarjon Jalilov is ‘a citizen
of Kyrgyzstan’” and notes that “he permanently lived in
Russia.” While Kyrgyz government officials were quick
to cooperate with their Russian counterparts on the
investigation, these statements suggest that they are also
trying to put some distance on any connection with Jalilov.
Lastly, the article from the Central Asian news source
Fergana News discusses a statement from Alexander
Bortnikov, the head of the Russian Federal Security
Service (FSB) on how “the backbone of terrorist groups is
made up of citizens of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS), who arrive in Russia in waves of labor
migration.” Ultimately, Central Asians in Russia (Russian
citizens or migrant workers) are likely to come under
increased scrutiny, and the implications of this will shape
the aftermath of the attack. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz Republic
refutes the information that Akbarjon Jalilov is “a citizen of
Kyrgyzstan.”
Source: Sergeiyev, Nikolai. “Смертника выдала голова (The suicide bomber
gave up a head),” Kommersant, 4 April 2017. http://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/3261557
The attack in the metro of St. Petersburg, which killed 14 people and wounded
about 50 others, was the action of a lone suicide bomber. According to the
Investigative Committee of Russia, it was carried out by a 22 year old native
of Kyrgyzstan Akbarjon Jalilov, who had Russian citizenship and was allegedly
involved with the Islamic State...There are now around 2 thousand people from
Kyrgyzstan in the ranks of ISIS, almost twice as many, for example, as those
from Dagestan…
Source: Isayeva, Begimay. “Петербург: Шесть человек задержали по
подозрению в содействии терроризму (St. Petersburg: Six people have been
arrested on suspicion of facilitating terrorism),” Kloop, 5 April 2017.
https://kloop.kg/blog/2017/04/05/peterburg-shest-chelovek-zaderzhali-popodozreniyu-v-sodejstvii-terrorizmu/
…Six people were arrested in St. Petersburg on suspicion of recruiting people
for the terrorist organizations “Jabhat al-Nusra,” the Islamic State and others.
According to the investigation, since 2015 the detainees recruited mostly natives
of Central Asia, who came to Russia for work…Against the backdrop of the
terrorist attack in St. Petersburg, document checks of migrants from Kyrgyzstan
have become more frequent. “Most of them with the correct documents will
be fine, but they are still worried…” said the head of Kyrgyz diaspora in St.
Petersburg Kochkorbai Kutunayev…
Source: “МИД КР: Акбаржон Джалилов не получал паспорт гражданина
Кыргызстана (Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Akbarjon Jalilov did not received a
passport as a citizen of Kyrgyzstan),” Zanoza.kg, 4 April 2017.
http://zanoza.kg/doc/355221_mid_kr:_akbarjon_djalilov_ne_polychal_pasport_
grajdanina_kyrgyzstana.html
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz Republic refutes the information
that Akbarjon Jalilov is “a citizen of Kyrgyzstan.”…The Ministry claims that
Jalilov never received a passport as a citizen of Kyrgyzstan, because at the age
of 16 in 2011, he received a passport of the Russian Federation as part of his
application and petition of his father, a Russian citizen. From this time period
until now, he permanently lived in Russia…
Source: “Россия: Глава ФСБ назвал трудовых мигрантов из стран СНГ
«костяком террористических групп» в России (Russia: the head of the FSB
named migrant workers from the CIS states “The backbone of terrorist groups”
in Russia),” Fergana, 11 April 2017. http://www.fergananews.com/news/26256
…Alexander Bortnikov said on April 11, “The results of an analysis of existing
information testify that the backbone of terrorist groups is made up of citizens
of the CIS, who arrive in Russia in waves of labor migration.”
OE Watch | May 2017

33

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
The Russian-South Ossetian Military Merger
OE Watch Commentary: The self-proclaimed
Republic of South Ossetia has maintained its
small army since the end of the August 2008
Russian-Georgian War, in addition to the
Russian units garrisoned at Tskhinvali. As the
accompanying excerpted articles report, the
South Ossetian government recently finalized an
agreement that would merge some of its Armed
Forces into Russia’s and there are a couple of
things in the articles that provide insight into
how this will take place.
The agreement had been under consideration
for over a year and one of the issues that
reportedly held it up is noted in the Civil
Georgia article by the breakaway republic’s
leader, Leonid Tibilov. Tibilov said that “Only
[individual] servicemen and not units will enter
the Russian army” as there had been a concern
that all of South Ossetia’s forces would be
absorbed into Russia’s. Tibilov estimates that
“100-150” soldiers will pass selection and that
any who do not, “will remain in their own units.”
The article from Svobodnaya Pressa includes
a brief description of the forces in South Ossetia,
both indigenous and Russian. It notes that South
Ossetia has “two rifle battalions,” “motorized
rifle and reconnaissance battalions” as well as
“two spetsnaz companies.” There have been
discussions in other media that Russia will
simply recruit the most capable South Ossetian
soldiers, who may end up serving in another
military district and not in South Ossetia.
Service in the Russian Armed Forces could open
up the path to Russian citizenship, but as the
article notes, all members of the South Ossetian
forces are already “in possession of Russian
citizenship.” The article mentions that Russia has
“eight battalions” deployed in the region. This
certainly provides a deterrence, but if the South
Ossetians are looking to maintain a “…small, but
maneuverable army,” the number of qualified
soldiers who leave for the Russian Armed Forces
will be an important factor. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“It is important that the
servicemen who will not pass the
selection [in the Russian Army],
will remain in their own [South
Ossetian] units.”

South Ossetian forces in Tshkinvali in May, 2009.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASouth_Ossetia_parade.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

Source: “Moscow, Tskhinvali Ink Military Agreement,” Civil Georgia, 3 April 2017.
http://civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=29986
Moscow and Tskhinvali signed a new defense agreement on March 31 “On the Order of
Inclusion of Certain Units of the Armed Forces”, “ formalizing the merger of the region’s
military units into the Russian armed forces.”… “Moscow will admit the South Ossetian
army personnel, who are in possession of Russian citizenship, for military service at the
Russian military base in breakaway South Ossetia. “At the same time, they will be eligible
for all the guarantees and benefits provided to the Russian servicemen...”
According to the agreement, the South Ossetian army will be integrated into the Russian
military command structure in two ways: some detachments will join the Russian
military base, while the remaining forces will be reduced by a corresponding number
of servicemen and the figure, as well as “the tasks and the structure,” will have to be
agreed with the Russian Federation.… Leonid Tibilov spoke on the matter a day earlier
as well. In his interview with Russian daily Kommersant, the South Ossetian leader, ...
remembers his meeting with Vladimir Putin in March 2016 and noted that he saw “ full
understanding” in the Russian President “that South Ossetia should have its own, albeit
small, but maneuverable army.”…Tibilov stated that the document does not entail the
incorporation of the “whole units” of the region’s army. “Only [individual] servicemen
and not units will enter the Russian army and these servicemen ... will be listed in the
Russian units,” he explained. “At the initial stage, we are talking about 100-150 soldiers,”
Tibilov went on. “It is important that the servicemen who will not pass the selection [in
the Russian Army], will remain in their own [South Ossetian] units…
Source: Mardasov, Anton. “Осетинский спецназ пополнит ряды российской армии
(Ossetian special forces will reinforce the ranks of the Russian Army),” Svobodnaya
Pressa, 14 March 2017. http://svpressa.ru/war21/article/168142/
…The armed forces of South Ossetia are made up only of ground forces. They consist
of two rifle battalions (200-250 men each), a motorized rifle and reconnaissance
battalions, one material and technical support battalion, and two spetsnaz companies.
For comparison, in the composition of the 4th military base of the Russian Armed Forces
deployed in the territory of the Republic of South Ossetia, there are eight battalions.
OE Watch | May 2017

34

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
A Russian Perspective of 21st Century War
OE Watch Commentary: Military
Thought (Военная мысль) prides itself
on being the oldest and most influential
theoretical publication of the Russian
Ministry of Defense. This monthly
publication dates from the Tsarist period,
and while the title has changed over the
decades, it remains the primary Russian
“thick journal” where military theory and
related topics are discussed. Its editorial
board is comprised of senior military
academics and leaders from both the
Ministry of Defense and General Staff.
The January 2017 issue included an
article titled “The Evolution of the Nature
and Content of the Concept of ‘War’ in
the XXI Century,” by two retired officers,
now academics, S. G. Chekinov and S.
A. Bogdanov. The authors maintain that
despite all the hype over possible new forms
of war (i.e. contactless, network-centric,
information, hybrid, etc…), the actual
essence of war has not changed. They begin
by describing how war has been defined
in the past, then affirm that this classical
definition (“an act of violence, using force
upon the enemy to fulfill our will”) remains
valid today. The authors then dissect and
examine how new concepts of war measure
against the classical understanding.
The authors agree that prior to actual
armed conflict, an enemy will try to
influence the opponent by every sort
of non-violent means (e.g. economic,
information, diplomatic, intimidation,
etc…) but that armed violence has been, is,
and will remain the chief characteristic of
war—even in the 21st century. Given this
assertion, they claim that it is incumbent
upon the Russian political and military
leadership to develop countermeasures
against both these non-violent means, but
most importantly, against armed violence,
and to “continue to strengthen its security,
primarily by improving its military
organization.”
While the authors’ description and
discussion over the concept and evolution
of war merit consideration, their analysis
regarding Russia’s probable enemy in the
21st Century prompts concern. They claim
that the West, “having already taken a
strong commitment to the establishment of
their world domination” is determined to
become “the global super-society” where it
can impose its values and way of life upon
others. The authors assert that “Russia
will remain the enemy of the West in the
ongoing World War of this new type.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: S. G. Chekinov and S. A. Bogdanov, “Эволюция сущности и содержания понятия
“война” в XXI столетии (The Evolution of the Nature and Content of the Concept of “War”
in the XXI Century),” Военная мысль, January 2017. https://dlib.eastview.com/browse/
doc/48113925
War in human history has always played a huge role in determining the fate of peoples
and states. In modern conditions the world is changing rapidly, and is characterized by the
weakening, deformation, and fragmentation of the global security system, which has led to
the rise of chaos in international relations…. Despite the variety of approaches to defining the
essence and content of war, the classical approach to the definition of this term is based on the
formulas described by Clausewitz in the XIX century. One of them, the most common, treats war
as “an act of violence, using force upon the enemy to fulfill our will.” The other is more specific
and more widely known: “War – is not just a political act, but also a true political instrument,
a continuation of political relations, conducting them by other means.” At the same time,
Clausewitz sees military force as the main driving force of war, and most importantly, different
from other [political] means….
…In this connection, for several years within the Russian expert community there has been
talk about the need to expand the concept of “war.” Some military theorists have pointed to the
feasibility of revising the object and the subject of military science. The belief that the subject
of military science is war, and its main subject - the armed struggle, in their opinion, no longer
corresponds to reality….
…In our opinion, it is premature to change the interpretation of the concept of “war.” It always
has been, and will always be required to be carried out with the use of certain types of weapons
and constitutes an organized armed struggle among peoples, states, alliances, coalitions. Of
course, during any war there will be used non-military forms of struggle, especially informationthat materially affect the character of the armed struggle. Moreover, the organizational and
technical possibilities of their effective implementation have increased dramatically. However,
the main characteristic of war is violent action, i.e. the use of armed force….
…In the context of the deep and comprehensive social transformations of the XXI century, there
have appeared a lot of scientific categories that have no recognized relation with the processes
of war and armed conflict…. Very often there are categories for naming these new wars:
“traditional warfare”, “non-contact warfare”, “information war”, “network-centric warfare”,
“hybrid warfare”, “Cold War”, “environmental war” and others.…In our opinion, all these
categories erase the distinction between the true and false understanding of war. When they are
used, the concept of “war” soon adopts countless meanings. Most of them disguise the objective
reality that the term is intended to reflect. This cannot but cause confusion in social and political
relations, and within the problem of inter-state warfare….
…It should be noted, that since the end of the Cold War, the West’s struggle against our country
has never stopped. It continues and has entered a new stage: they have begun to use elements
of “color revolutions.” To the means of the Cold War have been added elements of traditional
war, as well as new forms of influence, such as sabotage operations on an enormous scale in the
political and economic spheres. Elements of the “color revolutions” have been spread to other
regions of the world - the Middle East and the Balkans. There are serious reasons to believe that
humanity has already entered a new era of global war, war of a new type….
…Currently, the Western countries are integrating into this global super-society, having
already taken a strong commitment to the establishment of their world domination….
…Although the Western world, which leads the global super-society, has achieved a lot,
even more than they expected at the beginning of the Cold War, it cannot rest on its laurels.
Therefore, Russia will remain the enemy of the West in the ongoing World War of this new type.
The West will calm down only when our country and our people have been relegated to a state
worthy of ridicule and contempt….
…But no one can win a war, being unarmed. That means we need to arm ourselves,
strengthening our national defense, improving the combat capability of the Armed Forces.
“Today, we see that some countries are increasingly transforming their policies towards the
unlimited, pre-emptive, military actions,” asserts Russian President V. V. Putin. “In this regard,
Russia will continue to strengthen its security, primarily by improving its military organization
...”
OE Watch | May 2017

35

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
New Special Forces Training Center in Chechnya
OE Watch Commentary: As reported a
couple months ago (“Chechen MP Battalion in
Aleppo: The Russian Perspective,” OE Watch,
March 2017) a military police unit, comprised
mainly of ethnic Chechens, served to help
secure the Syrian city of Aleppo. This unit has
since returned to Russia. According to an article
published in the Russian business news source,
RBK Online, the Chechen battalion in Syria
were trained by “instructors of the International
Training Center for Special Purpose Forces
from Gudermes,” a new training center located
about 25 miles east of the Chechen capital,
Grozny. The article describes the background
and some of the facilities of this center which is
slated to officially open in 2018.
According to the article, this Special Forces
training center will be somewhat unique, in
that it “is private and is not subordinated to any
ministry,” and allegedly funded by “Chechen
businessmen who have achieved considerable
success in Moscow, Saint Petersburg, and other
parts of the country.” While the author does
not specify the exact ownership of this new
training facility, it does point out that the “idea
of creating the center came to Chechen leader
Ramzan Kadyrov about four years ago.”
Once fully operational, this special forces
training center will train “servicemen from
Rosgvardiya [Russian National Guard], the
Defense Ministry, or other security structures”
upon a contractual basis. The planned training
facilities will include “a military township with
an area of over 400 hectares (approx. 1,000
acres) with its own runway, reservoir, and the
world’s biggest shooting ranges (4,000 square
meters).” Among other training facilities, it
will include a pool, gym, a tactical city, a wind
tunnel, and parachute complex. The center’s
training staff includes “veterans of the elite Alfa
and Vympel units,” as well as “veterans of the
Armed Forces General Staff Main Directorate
(former GRU).”
The article concludes by describing the
location and cost of other special forces training
facilities around the world, but does not divulge
how much the training will cost at the new
facility in Chechnya. For centuries, Chechens
have had the reputation as fearless and skilled
fighters. This new training center will now
allow them to share some of their fighting skills
with others—but at a market price. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The structure is private
and is not subordinated to
any ministry, but Chechen
businessmen ‘who have
achieved considerable
success in business in
Moscow, Saint Petersburg,
and other parts of the
country’ are investing funds
in its construction ‘at their
own wish’”

Chechen Leader, Ramzan Kadyrov.

Source: Kremlin, http://www.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/47177/photos, CC by 4.0

Source: Inna Sidorkova, “Спецназ подготовят в Гудермесе (Spetsnaz
Will Train in Gudermes),” RBK Online, 17 March 2017. http://www.rbc.ru/
newspaper/2017/03/17/58c6c2ba9a79470d5909cdf6
…Instructors of the International Training Center for Special Purpose Forces from
Gudermes trained the military police battalion based in Chechnya before its dispatch
to Syria in December 2016, RBK was told by Daniil Martynov, head of the center, aide
to Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov for the security system, and deputy head of the
republic’s Rosgvardiya [Federal Service of National Guard Troops] Directorate….
…The Gudermes center whose instructors trained the Chechen battalion in Syria is due
to open in 2018, Martynov noted. The structure is private and is not subordinated to any
ministry, but Chechen businessmen “who have achieved considerable success in business
in Moscow, Saint Petersburg, and other parts of the country” are investing funds in its
construction “at their own wish,” Martynov stated.
The center will be based at a military township with an area of over 400 hectares with its
own runway, reservoir, and the world’s biggest shooting ranges (4,000 square meters), the
center’s press service told RBK. The main building will host lectures in IT and medical
training and will include a pool and a gym. The center’s premises include a “tactical
city,” wind tunnel, and parachute complex. A total of 40 facilities will be opening for
mock battle with terrorists in an urban setting during both day and night. Bodyguards
will also train there on a private basis. The republic’s authorities are not disclosing the
cost of training at the center, because “the project is still not operating as a business,”
Martynov said.
The idea of creating the center came to Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov about four
years ago, Martynov stated.
According to him, the core of the team of trainers are “guys” with whom Martynov
“served in Alfa, the overall composition of the training team is 32 people. Twelve of them
are senior instructors, veterans of the elite Alfa and Vympel units, recruited to perform
special and highly complex operations (prevention of terrorist attacks, the release of
hostages). The center’s 12 instructors include veterans of the Armed Forces General Staff
Main Directorate (former GRU)….
When it comes to training of servicemen from Rosgvardiya, the Defense Ministry, or
other security structures, in case the center and the security departments have to sign a
contract, Murakhovskiy said….
…Thanks to the project, the West will have more to say about Chechnya, military expert
Ivan Konovalov stated.
OE Watch | May 2017

36

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Training Russian Military Journalists
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past decade,
Russian media coverage of military topics has increased
significantly. Besides the media dedicated solely to
covering the Russian military (i.e. Zvezda TV, Krasnaya
Zvezda newspaper, etc…), regular Russian media coverage
(especially TV) frequently include reports on the latest
military training, new equipment and current operations.
Russian media consumers are fed a steady diet of how the
Kremlin is strengthening the military to better protect the
country’s interests.
As in other countries, the Russian reporters who cover
these stories are often civilian journalists, with little or no
military training. As the excerpt from the pro-Kremlin
media source, Izvestiya, points out, this is based on a
decision made under former Defense Minister Serdyukov,
whereby military journalists would no longer be trained by
the military, but instead, would attend the Voronezh State
University (VGU) School of Journalism. This decision was
part of a larger reform effort to contract out non-military
functions and to streamline the military’s education
system. However, as the excerpt points out, the decision to
train military journalists at this university has now been
deemed a failure, and the military will resume training
journalists within its own education system.
The article points out that besides the higher cost of
training a military journalist at a civilian university, there
were problems with actually enlisting the graduates of this
program into the military. The article describes how, out of
the first class of 10 students, “only three graduates of the
VGU special group went to serve in the army.” To support
the decision to transfer the responsibility of training
military journalists to the military education system,
the article quotes “Military expert Vladislav Shurygin,”
who asserts that “the profession of ‘military journalist’
originates primarily with the word ‘military’... training
such a specialist under the auspices of a civilian institution
is impossible. All the country’s senior military experts
came from the army.” Shurygin goes on to emphasize
that “special training is needed” to teach future military
journalists how “to grasp and analyze the situation in
depth.”
Today’s Kremlin leadership has made military
preparedness a top priority, and to ensure that military
topics are reported thoroughly and accurately, the military
has reassumed training of its military journalists. It is
unclear, however, whether these military-trained journalists
will be trained to provide a critical assessment or perhaps
question the wisdom of any military decision when the
situation warrants. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The profession of ‘military journalist’ originates
primarily with the word ‘military’…”
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, Bogdan Stepovoy, “Военных журналистов вернули
в строй (Military Journalists Back in the Ranks),” Izvestiya Online, 16 March
2017. http://izvestia.ru/news/670862
The Defense Ministry and the Russian National Guard have resumed the
training of military journalists, whose last graduation was in 2013. It is
once again planned to instruct specialists under the auspices of the Military
University’s Journalism Department. Officer appointments in the military
news media were cut during the military reform announced by ex-Defense
Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov. As a result, the majority of graduates, instead of
assignments to the editorial boards of military newspapers and journals and the
press services of districts and the fleets, were assigned to platoon-commander
appointments.
Izvestiya was told in the Military University and the Main Personnel
Directorate of the Defense Ministry that a decision of department chief Sergey
Shoygu on the recruitment of 20 candidates for the Military Journalism
Department has at this time already been made. Ten of them will be schooled
at the request of the Federal National Guard Troops Service (FSVNG). The
rest will be taken for Defense Ministry service. On completion of the course of
instruction, they will all be accorded the rank of lieutenant and will be issued a
diploma showing their military occupational specialty — military journalist….
“Military institution” is the key concept in this context. Following Anatoliy
Serdyukov’s reforms, the training of military journalists was given to civilian
institutions of higher learning. In 2007 this possibility was acquired by
Voronezh State University (VGU). A group of 10 students, who were instructed
in the “military journalism” program, was formed under its auspices….
The instruction of a commercial student in the VGU School of Journalism costs
approximately R80,000 a year. The Defense Ministry has paid the institution
for a 10-man group approximately R1.4 million a year. The “military students”
additionally received a scholarship from the defense department amounting to
R5,000 a month here. But, as Izvestiya was able to learn, only three graduates
of the VGU special group went to serve in the army in the time that the special
school was in operation.
Military expert Vladislav Shurygin, a graduate of the Department of
Journalism of the L’viv Higher Military-Political School (it was at this time
part of the Military University), believes that the decision to begin the training
of military journalists under the auspices of the military institution is very
much right…. “The profession of ‘military journalist’ originates primarily with
the word ‘military’,” Vladislav Shurygin observed. “That is, he is someone
who knows the system and examines it. Training such a specialist under the
auspices of a civilian institution is impossible. All the country’s senior military
experts came from the army. There are military reporters, of course. These
are people who can report from a trouble spot, talk about some events in the
Armed Forces. But in order to grasp and analyze the situation in depth, special
training is needed…

OE Watch | May 2017

37

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Military Parades and Economic Discontent
OE Watch Commentary: Strengthening Russia’s
armed forces remains a top Kremlin priority, and
the Victory Day commemoration (9 May) provides a
profound reminder of the importance of maintaining
robust and combat-ready military forces. This year’s
tribute is certain to be a large and impressive display
of Russian military might. As the first excerpt
from the official Russian government newspaper,
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, points out, some 10,000 military
personnel, along with more than 100 various weapon
systems will participate in the parade on Red Square
in Moscow. Recognizing the Soviet victory in the
Great Patriotic War (WW II) is a nation-wide affair,
with “the 9 May military parade being held in 28
Russian cities.”
While there is no question that the Russian military
has grown considerably stronger over the past decade,
various problems remain. The second excerpt from the
usually-pro Kremlin source, Военно-промышленный
курьер (Military-Industrial Courier), describes the
growing economic dissatisfaction among military
retirees. The author contends that military pensions
have failed to keep up with inflation, and that military
retirees are being “discriminated against on the basis
of having served in the military.” According to the
excerpt, some state pensioners are more equal than
others (i.e. “federal state civil servants”) and have
enjoyed a higher level of pension-indexing over the
past few years.
The author points out that such favoritism is
unconstitutional and “undermines faith in state
authorities, the higher command, and in the fairness
of Russian laws among defenders of the Motherland,
veterans and members of their families.” Such
treatment might convince “ordinary citizens…not to
send their sons to the army.” The article concludes on
a somewhat ominous note, pointing out that the “real
size of pensions in Russia will decline over the next
three years.” This decline will “cause an increase in
social tension, which, whether the authorities want or
not, will have to be taken into account. Especially on
the eve of the presidential elections of 2018.”
Falling fossil fuel revenues, Western economic
sanctions, endemic corruption combined with poor
demographics and other factors have placed a strain
on the Russian economy and the country’s pension
system (to include military retirees). Regardless
of these tensions, the Kremlin political leadership
remains determined to strengthen, modernize, and
parade the country’s growing military might. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Negative emotions are intensifying against state officials,
ordinary citizens are wondering whether to send their sons
to the army…”
Source: Dmitry Grigoriyev, “Появилось видео первой репетиции Парада
Победы в Алабино (The video of the first rehearsal of the Victory Parade in
Alabino),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 5 April 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/04/05/reg-cfo/
poiavilos-video-pervoj-repeticii-parada-pobedy-v-alabino.html
The parade practice was attended by about 10,000 soldiers…. Military officials
also noted there were approximately 100 pieces of equipment which took part in
the rehearsal...[of] the 9 May military parade being held in 28 Russian cities.
Source: Oleg Falichev, “Антиармейские санкции: Служба в Вооруженных
Силах стала основанием для дискриминации (Anti-Army sanctions: Service in
the Armed Forces became the basis for discrimination),” Военно-промышленный
курьер, 27 March 2017. http://vpk-news.ru/articles/35878
…In 2012, pensions were raised for military reserve personnel and retirees.
In accordance with the decision then made, they had to grow by two per cent
annually to achieve the statutory size. But these obligations are not fulfilled
by the state, and with unrestrained price increases, inflation even ate up the
payments previously made. Legislators and the government systematically violated
paragraph 2 of Art. 19 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation. In fact, we
are talking about pensioners being discriminated against on the basis of having
served in the military.
…We can partly understand the dilemma of state officials: anti-Russian sanctions,
the fall in production, problems with the collection of taxes. But then all pensioners
should bear the burden. However, some people found themselves in a privileged
position. The freezing of indexation and the introduction of a lowering factor did
not affect the following categories of military pensioners, including members of
their families: Federal state civil servants….
…By these actions, the legislators and the government of the Russian Federation
diminished the role and special status of military service established by the
Constitution of the Russian Federation, thereby permitting discrimination against
military pensioners and persons of equal rank on the basis of their social status…
…Further delaying the decision to create an equal pension system undermines
faith in state authorities, the higher command, and in the fairness of Russian
laws among defenders of the Motherland, veterans and members of their families.
“Negative emotions are intensifying against state officials, ordinary citizens are
wondering whether to send their sons to the army…as it is obvious that being
an “effective manager” is more profitable and prestigious than protecting the
Motherland;…
…Only desperation prompts veterans to apply to higher authorities in search
of truth and justice. As for the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, it
certainly fights for the rights of servicemen, but now, due to the situation in Syria
and the east of Ukraine, it is not up to it….
…this injustice will cause an increase in social tension, which, whether the
authorities want or not, will have to be taken into account. Especially on the eve of
the 2018 presidential elections.
OE Watch | May 2017

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Buying “Proof” of Military Service
OE Watch Commentary: One of the more popular Russian radio
programs that deals with military topics is “Военное ревю” (Military
Review), which is hosted by two retired colonels, Viktor Baranetz
and Mikhail Timoshenko. The hour-long program airs daily on the
Комсомольская правда (Komsomolskaya Pravda) radio station. In the
usual format, Colonels Baranetz and Timoshenko briefly introduce a
topic and then field and answer questions from the radio audience.
The introductory topic for the 11 April program was titled: “How
much does it cost for a draft dodger to gain proof of military service?”
During his opening remarks, Colonel Baranetz bemoaned the fact that
with the start of the Spring 2017 conscript campaign, the internet is
filled with sites where those who want to buy “proof” of their military
service can do so for as little as 25,000 rubles (approximately $450).
Baranetz points out that not too long ago, such a document could cost
upwards of $20,000. He goes on to suggest that with such large sums,
there was likely collusion in this draft-dodging scheme among officials
involved with the conscript campaign (as many reportedly drove
luxury cars).
Colonel Baranetz asks his partner, how such draft-dodging services
can be openly advertised on the internet, “right under the nose of the
authorities.” Colonel Timoshenko believes that the problem stems from
lack of both effective legislation and enforcement mechanisms. He
gives some examples of recently poorly designed legislation and points
out that legislators often do not discuss all the intricacies of laws until
they are already enacted. According to Timoshenko’s logic, because
the laws are poorly drafted, they are equally poorly enforced.
Even with those who can buy their way out of mandatory military
service, the Spring 2017 draft campaign (which runs from 1 April until
mid-July) will likely meet its target of conscripting 142,000 one-year
conscripts into the Russian military ranks. While these new draftees
will do their share to strengthen Russia’s overall military capability,
deeper questions surrounding corruption will continue to hamper the
country’s development. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“How much does it cost these days to purchase a
military ticket [proof of military service]?”
Source: Viktor Baranetz and Mikhail Timoshenko, “За какую
цену уклонист может купить в России военный билет (How
much does it cost a draft-dodger to buy a military ticket),”
Komsomolskaya Pravda radio, 11 April 2017. http://www.kp.ru/
radio/26664/3686141/
“The Spring draft campaign began on 1 April and when you now
turn on the Internet you find its filled with sites on how to avoid
military service…”
“How much does it cost these days to purchase a military ticket
[proof of military service]?”
“The going rate is about 25,000 rubles, and that’s not even the
cheapest….”
“I recall at one time it cost upwards of $20,000 dollars…and some
within the draft commission were driving Mercedes…”
“What laws do you think that these services [those that advertise
on the Internet] are breaking?”
“At the very least, it is treason.”
“How is it that all this occurs right under the nose of the
authorities?”
“It might stem from our legislators being so mixed up…they create
poor laws which are next to impossible to enforce…. Consider the
recent law which mandates that Glonass being installed on all new
cars in Russia…do you think someone who just bought a Bentley
will have it installed?.... our legislators enact poorly written laws
which are difficult to enforce….”

“The going rate is about 25,000 rubles, and
that’s not even the cheapest….”

The Syrian Crisis from a Neighbor’s
Perspective: View from Turkey
by Karen Kaya
What started out as internal turmoil in Syria in March 2011 turned
into a regional crisis, which then turned into an international
crisis. The crisis in Syria is now affecting the surrounding region,
most critically Syria’s neighbors, who have all had to contend with
instability at their borders. This article analyzes the Syrian crisis
from Turkey’s perspective, discussing the direct security threats that
it poses to Turkey. The article focuses on the following four themes:
Border security and the spill-over effects of internal clashes; Turkey’s
concerns regarding the formation of an autonomous Kurdish region
in northern Syria; its concerns regarding the PKK expanding its base
and influence; and the risk of Turkey having a jihadi presence on
its border along with becoming a transit point for Islamic militants
going to join the fighting in Syria.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Syrian-Crisis-View-from-Turkey.pdf
OE Watch | May 2017

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Arming the Icebreakers
OE Watch Commentary: As Russia moves to
increase Arctic traffic through Russian waters, it
makes sense to provide some clout to the crew. As
the accompanying article from Izvestia discusses,
military icebreakers will be equipped with the latest
AK-176МА artillery “stealth” installations. The
AK-176MA is the Navy’s first automatic gun mount
made using “stealth” low radar signature technology.
It is a rapid firing 152mm automatic gun that fires
16 kilometers. It will be interesting to see how well
this auto cannon performs in extreme cold. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Dimitri Litovkin, “Military Icebreakers Will Get Invisible Guns;
New Artillery Systems Against Aerial, Sea, and Land Targets Are Invisible to
Enemy Radar,” Izvestia, 17 March 2017. http://izvestia.ru/news/670571
“The latest AK-176МА artillery “stealth” installations will equip “military
icebreakers” —Arctic zone patrol ships of project 23550. The lead ship of
this series is due to be delivered to the Navy in 2019. The sailors will get a
standardized combat unit combining the capabilities of a tugboat, patrol ship, and
icebreaker. The ship will be able both to operate in the tropics and to break ice
up to 1.5 meters thick. But, most important, it will be able to carry out artillery
strikes against marine, coastal, and even aerial targets.”

The AK-176MA is the Navy’s first automatic gun mount made using “stealth”
low radar signature technology. Unlike previous generations of similar systems
which had round or oval contoured turrets, the new gun is enclosed with straight panels. They make the gun mount less visible to enemy
radar.
The gun will be incorporated in future icebreakers and will be placed in the forecastle of the ship. The AK-176MA artillery mount is the
latest product from the Saint Petersburg Arsenal engineering plant. The gun is aimed by a digital control system. The artillery magazine
underneath the gun mount holds 76 152-millimeter shells. The gun’s automation and ammunition feed make it possible to fire at a rate of 125
rounds per minute. Thanks to the barrel cooling system, a long series of up to 75 rounds can be fired. When firing at surface or shore targets
the effective firing range is 16 kilometers.
According to Nadezhda Malysheva, development director of PortNyus Information and Analysis Agency, the patrol ship has no counterparts
in terms of overall technical performance. It is designed for protection and monitoring of the Arctic water resources, escorting and towing
apprehended vessels to port, accompanying and assisting support vessels, participating in rescue operations, transporting special cargoes in
containers on the upper deck, and also firefighting for floating and onshore facilities.
“Modern icebreakers today face much greater demands than similar vessels previously” Nadezhda Malysheva noted. “Icebreakers have
to not only break the ice and guide ships, but also perform auxiliary functions: rescue and engineering work and freight supply. Standard
multirole patrol ships which combine several support functions and are of ice class are becoming ever more in demand by the Navy.”
The construction of standard multirole ice-class vessels is the result of active development of the military infrastructure in the Arctic. The
Ministry of Defense was given this task by Supreme Commander in Chief Vladimir Putin.

“The latest AK-176МА artillery “stealth”
installations will equip “military icebreakers” —
Arctic zone patrol ships of project 23550. The lead
ship of this series is due to be delivered to the Navy
in 2019. The sailors will get a standardized combat
unit combining the capabilities of a tugboat, patrol
ship, and icebreaker. The ship will be able both
to operate in the tropics and to break ice up to 1.5
meters thick. But, most important, it will be able to
carry out artillery strikes against marine, coastal,
and even aerial targets.”

Russian, Canadian, and US icebreakers.

Source: By LCDR Steve Wheeler via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AThree_
icebreakers_—_Yamal%2C_St_Laurent%2C_Polar_Sea.jpg, public domain.

OE Watch | May 2017

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Winter Training in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: Arctic
observers were wondering what the
Russian response would be to the
Norwegian Exercise “Viking 2017.” The
Norwegian Arctic exercise included small
contingents of US and British forces.
Apparently Russia chose an understated
response compared to years past. As
the accompanying article from The
Independent Barents Observer discusses,
Russia conducted some low-level ground
force activities and a game of submarine
tag in the Barents Sea. The Arctic Council
conducted its meeting in Archangelsk,
Russia after the exercises and it was
probably a good thing not having this
important meeting with any major Arctic
military activities on-going. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“While Norwegian, British

and American soldiers
exercised in Finnmark,
Russia has demonstrated
underwater stealth
technology in a submarineto-submarine kill exercise.”

Source: Thomas Nielsen, “Nuclear subs played cat-and-mouse game in Barents Sea,”
The Independent Barents Observer, 11 March 2017. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/
security/2017/03/nuclear-subs-played-cat-and-mouse-game-barents-sea
Around 8,000 soldiers trained for winter combat in Norway’s western Finnmark, Norway’s
northernmost county, mainly operating along the coast to the Norwegian Sea in the west and the
Barents Sea to the north.
Across the border to the east, on Russia’s Kola Peninsula, Russian soldiers conducted field
firing in the Pechenga region a few dozen kilometers from the border with Norway. According to
the Russian Ministry of Defense, the training is a part of an army competition. Russia’s recently
established Arctic Brigade’s soldiers are also preparing for exercises in deep snow and low
temperatures.
More advanced, out in the Barents Sea, two nuclear powered submarines have been playing
one of the most serious war games submarines can be involved in; hunt-and-kill each other.
At least one of the two submarines, the ballistic missile carrier “Yury Dolgoruky” is armed
with nuclear weapons. Each of the 16 Bulava missiles on board can carry six nuclear warheads.
The other vessel, “Obninsk” is a 27 years old Viktor-class multi-purpose submarine that might,
or might-not carry tactical nuclear weapons.
Russia’s Defense Ministry stated that the most difficult part of the two submarine’s maneuvers
in the Barents Sea was torpedo firing at underwater targets using dummy warheads.
The “Yury Dolgoruky” is the only Borei-class vessel in operation with the Northern fleet.
Russia’s TASS news agency states that the developers have managed to achieve maximum
stealth capability by using a hydraulic propeller placed in a special ring nozzle that operates
like a water pump receiving a stream flow.
“Borei-class submarines can detect targets under the water while out of reach of sonar used by
any of the enemy’s warships,” TASS noted.
The Defense Ministry did not say where in the Barents Sea the cat-and-mouse game took place.

Yuri Dolgoruky submarine and control room (inset).

Source: Photos courtesy of Russian Ministry of Defense, from The Independent Barents Observer, https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2017/03/nuclear-subs-played-cat-and-mouse-game-barents-sea, CCA-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | May 2017

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
ETA Shows in France
OE Watch Commentary: OE Watch last
mentioned ETA (Euskadi Ta Askatasuna translated
as Basque Homeland and Freedom) three years ago
when several members had been arrested (“Is ETA
Still Around?” OE Watch February 2014). Now it
looks even closer to the end of the road for what is
left of the organization. ETA activists and some
self-styled ‘artisans of peace’ set up a surrender
of weapons ceremony in the city of Bayonne, in
Southwestern France. (It was not a direct turnin; they gave directions to the authorities leading
to weapons caches) Many Spanish observers,
including in the government, weren’t quite buying
it, characterizing the event as political theatre. As
the references exemplify, many Spaniards, especially
victims of ETA violence, are opposed to amnesty
for members of the group, which had been placed on
the US Department of State list of foreign terrorist
organizations in 1997. They see the supposed
disarmament as incomplete, insincere, and as just part
of a media stunt intended to help gain concessions
from the present or future Spanish government for
ETA prisoners as they complete jail time. In any
case, it seems ETA is in its nadir if not twilight. End
OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“There was no impunity for the
ETA when it stopped killing and
there is not going to be any now.”

Map of Gascony.

Source: By Larrousiney (Wikipedia fr), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMapOfGascony.png, GFDL (http://
www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)

Source: Libertad Digital, “Las víctimas, ante la ‘fiesta’ de ETA: ‘La ley se
tiene que aplicar a todos’ (The Victims, about the ETA’s ‘fiesta’: ‘The law has
to apply to everyone),” Libertad Digital and esRadio, Madrid, 8 April 2017.
http://www.libertaddigital.com/espana/2017-04-08/las-victimas-ante-la-fiestade-eta-la-ley-se-tiene-que-aplicar-a-todos-1276596622/?utm_source=2&utm_
medium=newsletter&utm_campaign=newsletter.
“In declarations to esRadio, Consuelo Ordóñez, president of COVITE
(victims’ organization), expressed herself regarding the terrorist band’s farce
in the south of France, with the staging of the disarmament. As she explains
it, they live ‘in considerable pain’ that this is happening ‘because they are
making a fiesta out of a supposed disarmament with the sole objective of
whitewashing the crimes.”
Source: Agencias, “El Gobierno: ‘El desarme de ETA es una operación
mediática para disimular su derrota’ (The Administration: ‘The ETA’s
disarmament is a media operation intended to fake its defeat’),” ABC
España, 8 April 2017. http://www.abc.es/espana/abci-reacciones-desarmeeta-201704081328_noticia.html.

ETA NO.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ETA_NO.jpg
autor Midir — open use

“‘There was no impunity for the ETA when it stopped killing and there is
not going to be any now.’ This is the clear message that the minister of the
Interior, Juan Ignacio Zoido, has wanted to send this morning, and he once
again classified the ‘day of disarmament as a ‘dog and pony show’.”
OE Watch | May 2017

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Stockholm Terror Attack Shows New and Old Trends
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 April, a 39-year old man from Uzbekistan
hijacked a brewery truck and rammed it into people in a business district
in the center of Stockholm, Sweden, killing four. The excerpted article in
Sweden’s Aftonbladet from the same day includes reactions from Swedish
security officials, who say that the perpetrator of the truck attack was already
a “person of interest” to the police.
He had, for example, previously expressed positive views about the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and “liked” images of the victims of the Boston
marathon on Facebook. He had been reported to the Security Service by
someone who considered him to be threatening. As the first accompanying
passage from Swedish Expressen reports, it has since been revealed that the
attacker was, in fact, in contact with ISIS on the social media application
WhatsApp directly before the attack. His application for asylum had been
rejected and he was ordered to be deported. This may have played a role in
triggering him to launch an attack.
The excerpted article shows the difficulty of tracking down potential
terrorists who do not overtly exhibit signs that they will carry out an attack
imminently, but who otherwise support terrorist organizations rhetorically.
Various Swedish leaders nonetheless expressed confidence that Sweden
would recover from this incident and remain safe. Indeed, an attack on a soft
target like this one involving what appears to be a lone attacker is difficult
to prevent, but Sweden deems its response to have been successful. The
suspect was arrested shortly after the attack, explosives in the truck were
immediately defused safely, and raids were carried out on the home of the
attacker, where other individuals were detained (it is unclear if they knew of
the attack in advance or assisted in putting together the explosive).
This attack also highlights some new trends in terrorism in Europe. The
attacker, for example, at 39-years old is older than the typical terrorist,
especially those who have been involved in ISIS-directed or related attacks.
The attacker’s profile resembles the 52-year old attacker in central London
one month earlier, who rammed a car into civilians and stabbed to death a
police officer there. This attack in Stockholm also seems to have involved
elements of the attack by a Tunisian on Berlin’s Christmas market in 2016
in which the attacker also hijacked a truck and rammed it into civilians,
killing more than 10 people. Ramming itself was first used in an attack in
Nice, France on its Bastille Day in July 2016, so there appears to be repetition
among different attacks throughout Europe. In terms of nationality, this
attack is also notable because the attacker was Central Asian. The attack
in Stockholm comes off the heels of a suicide bombing one week earlier by
a young Kyrgyz male in the Saint Petersburg metro in Russia. (See: “The
Aftermath of the St. Petersburg Metro Bombing,” in this issue.) End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Påstådd Akilov-chatt ifrågasätts (Alleged Akilov
chat questioned),” Expressen.se, 10 April 2017. http://
www.expressen.se/nyheter/akilovs-is-chatt-fore-och-efterterrordadet/
Terror Suspect Rakhmat Akilov had received bomb
instructions from an IS-supporters - and had the parts with
them in the truck, according to a chat published by several
Russian media.
Source: “Attack in central Stockholm: 4 dead - explosives
found in lorry,” Aftonbladet, 7 April 2017. http://www.
aftonbladet.se/nyheter/a/KJOR5/attack-in-central-stockholm4-dead-explosives-found-in-lorry
At 2:53 pm, Friday afternoon, police were alerted to
Drottninggatan, a main shopping street in downtown
Stockholm. An hour later Swedish prime minister Stefan
Löfven stated that Sweden has become the scene for an
apparent terrorist attack. A lorry was, in what seems to be a
deliberate attack, driven several blocks along the pedestrian
street hitting and running over several people. The lorry then
drove straight into the storefront of the Åhléns department
store, a main spot for Friday shoppers in the Swedish capital.
Shortly thereafter the lorry caught fire. At least four people
have been killed in the attack and there is ”a large number of
wounded”. The Swedish government offices, situated a block
from Drottninggatan, approximately 700 meters from where
the attack took place, were evacuated and all ministers put
to safety. Police urged people to stay away from downtown
Stockholm and to avoid large crowds.
One man was arrested around 8.30 pm in the town of Märsta
outside Stockholm. A source tells Aftonbladet that the man
claims to be responsible for the attack, and that he resembles
the person on the pictures, previously acknowledged as a
”person of interest”. Aftonbladet’s sources have identified the
arrested man as a 39-year old man of Uzbek citizenship. In his
social media accounts the man has expressed positive views
of the terror organisation IS, and also ”liked” a picture on
Facebook of bloody victims taken seconds after the explosion
at the Boston Marathon in April 2013.

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the
state became independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation
with Russia, the United States and other partners, but there have also been internally driven efforts that could
have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past several years has been the increase in the
number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have contract soldiers
make up 99% of the Armed Forces by the end 2016. While the result has yet to be announced, an examination
of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been
progressing and the impact this could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central
Asian region.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein_-_Transition_in_the_Armed_Forces_of_Kazakhstan_-_From_Conscripts_to_Contract_Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | May 2017

43

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Lucas Winter

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

New Generation Media and Militias: A Case Study in
Russia’s November 2015 Search and Rescue Operation
On the morning of 24 November 2015, two Russian Sukhoi Su24M2 “Fencer” bombers took off from the Hmeimim (Khmeimim)
Airbase near the city of Jablah, in the Syrian province of Lattakia. The
bombers were supporting a Syrian government offensive in the province’s north, on the border with Turkey. After 20 minutes patrolling
the skies in nearby Idlib Province they turned west to bomb rebel positions in the forested hills of the Turkmen Mountain, near the border.1
At 0924 local time, shortly after the Sukhois dropped the first of two
payloads, a Turkish fighter jet shot one of them down. Turkey claimed
that the Russian bombers had crossed into Turkish airspace and,
despite repeated warnings, failed to change course.2 Russia disputed
both claims, saying that its aircraft were ambushed in Syrian territory
and received no prior warning.3
The Fencer’s two crewmen, a pilot and a navigator/weapons systems
operator, both ejected safely. Rebel video shows them parachuting
down at some distance from one another. The first hint that the ensuing combat search and rescue (CSAR) operation might be unconventional came when Lt Col Oleg Peshkov, the pilot, was shot and killed
before reaching ground. He was killed by a group of Turkmen nationalists linked to the Free Syrian Army (FSA) who called themselves
the “10th Brigade” of the FSA’s “2d Coastal Division.”4 They quickly
uploaded short videos of themselves capturing the dead pilot. A few
days later Peshkov’s remains were handed back to the Russian military,
via the Turkish government.
Captain Konstantin Murkakhtin, the navigator, drifted into a neutral zone separating Syrian rebels and loyalists, in an area known as
Qizil Dagh in Turkish and Jabal al-Ahmar (Red Mountain) in Arabic,
near the rebel-held mountain village of Atira and overlooking both
Syrian and Turkish territory. The nearest Syrian government positions
- the town of Kassab, Observation Point 45 and the Firnliq Forest were all several kilometers away to the north and west. According to
Russian military reports, Murkakhtin activated his radio beacon and
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) were immediately sent to pinpoint
his location. A spokesman for the Turkmen militia that shot and killed
the Su-24’s pilot claimed on al-Jazeera News to have Murkakhtin in
custody.
Russian leadership dispatched a CSAR team from Hmeimim approximately 15 minutes after the crash report. The Su-24’s crash site
lay some 50 kilometers north of Russia’s Syrian command center. It
could be reached quickly and with limited flight over rebel territory.
According to the Russian military, two Mi-8 (Mi-8AMTSh Hip) transport helicopters were dispatched, each carrying around eight Russian
marines from the naval infantry’s 810th Brigade based in Hmeimim,
in addition to two crewmen. The Mi-8s were escorted by Mi-24 helicopter gunships (“Crocodiles”).5
The route chosen led the CSAR team through a triangle bounded by the rebel-held towns of Salma, Rabi’a and Ghamam, where a
Syrian loyalist offensive was underway. Russian command may have
been unaware of the pilot’s precise location when the CSAR team took
flight, and this was likely the best path available toward the crash site
on such short notice. At the triangle’s entrance near the junction of
the “old” and “new” Lattakia-Idlib Highways (Highway 4 and Highway M4 respectively), the rescue team came under small- and medium-arms rebel anti-aircraft fire.6 Rebels forced one of the Mi-8s to
turn back; Russian marine Aleksandr Pozynich was killed onboard.
A second Mi-8 was forced to land in a clearing between rebel- and
government-held positions. According to a regime supporter’s Face-

SPECIAL
ESSAY

book page, there were two crewmen and seven Russian marines in
the downed helicopter.7 The team took cover in a nearby building.
Russian forces were now faced with a tactical recovery of aircraft and
personnel (TRAP) mission to extricate the Mi-8 and its team, on top
of the mission to find and rescue Murkakhtin.
A crew from the Abkhazian Network News Agency (ANNA News)
happened to be embedded with “Naval Commandos” from a loyalist
militia known as the “Desert Hawks” or “Desert Falcons” (Suqur al-Sahara), near the clearing where the Mi-8 landed. ANNA is a privately
owned Russian-speaking YouTube channel known for documenting
combat from the Syrian government perspective. The loyalist militia
fighters were conducting surveillance in the area as part of the offensive to reclaim the Salma-Rabi’a-Ghamam triangle.
The Desert Hawks were created in 2013 following the Syrian government’s privatization of petroleum infrastructure protection. They
were previosuly commanded by an elite soldier from the Syrian military’s Republican Guard (who was killed in November 2014) and financed by brothers Mohammed and Ayman Jaber, regime tycoons and
the dominant players in Syria’s steel industry. The Naval Commandos
were a Desert Hawks spinoff operating in territory controlled by the
Jabers in Lattakia Province.
The Jabers’ troops had witnessed the Russian Su-24 go down in the
distance earlier that morning. As a result they were in direct communication with their leader and likely on alert. When the Mi-8 went
down in front of the Naval Commandos team, Ayman Jaber claims to
have dispatched, on his own initiative, two teams totaling around 40
men to bring the Russian crew to safety. Receiving cover from machine guns, ZU23 anti-aircraft guns, and Russian helicopter gunships,
the rescue team safely extricated the stranded Russians. Around ten
minutes later rebels from the FSA’s “1st Coastal Division” destroyed
the damaged aircraft with an anti-tank guided missile (ATGM).8
Murkakhtin was rescued many miles to the north the following day,
at 0240 local time. According to the Russian Defense Ministry, the
operation to rescue him lasted 12 hours.9 Details are scant. To begin
with, it is unclear whether or not rebels had captured Murkakhtin;
the “rescue operation,” according to some accounts, was a negotiation
for his release after Syrian forces surrounded his captors. The favored
account in loyalist media is that Syrian Air Force Intelligence Special
Forces, with Russian support, penetrated several kilometers into rebel
territory to rescue the pilot after nightfall.10 Syrian forces played the
leading role and were subsequently honored by the Russian military
for their role in the CSAR and TRAP operations.
Official accounts of rescue missions are often sanitized and polished
to serve as morale boosters, and this was no exception. Sympathetic media portrayed the operation to rescue Murkakhtin as a heroic
success, embellishing the story with elements from the Mi-8 rescue.
Russia Today, for instance, opened an article conflating the two operations, titled “No Man Left Behind: Dramatic Details Emerge of
Downed Su-24 Pilot Rescue,” as follows: “Gripping new details of the
rescue of the downed Russian Su-24 pilot have been revealed. The details are straight out of the movie, Black Hawk Down, and reveal how
Russian Marines saved the pilot in a breath-taking frontline op involving a fierce shootout with militants.”11

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2017

44

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Lucas Winter

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: New Generation Media and Militias: A Case
Study in Russia’s November 2015 Search and Rescue Operation
When news broke that the Su-24M2 had been shot down, all eyes
were focused on Russia’s strategic response to Turkish actions. Russia’s ability to patch together successful CSAR (Murkakhtin) and
TRAP (Mi-8 team) missions, despite the geopolitical distractions and
given Russia’s light footprint in Syria, can be attributed to quick decision-making and strong relationships on the ground.

to back up their claims. They also played a direct operational role as
liaison between the Russian and Arabic-speaking troops during the
TRAP mission. Jaber explained how his forces “were given a password” to reassure the Russians they were friendly forces; the “password” turned out to simply be the Russian word for “friend” (droog),
used at the suggestion of the Russian-speaking ANNA News crew.16

It helped that conditions were favorable for the initial CSAR mission to succeed. The Turkish Air Force, which had downed Murkakhtin’s plane, was not expected to target the rescue force. A corridor of
friendly territory connected the Russian base and the periphery of the
crash site. The crash site was close to the Russian base at Hmeimim.
The rebels in the area were more likely to negotiate than a more hardline group such as the Islamic State. Competent Syrian forces were
stationed nearby. Under more challenging circumstances, Russia’s
hasty CSAR mission may have led to greater fatalities and a loss of
credibility.

ANNA belongs to a new generation of war reporting spawned by
social media and the Syrian War. It was founded when the Syrian uprising first escalated (July 2011) and has expanded to also cover events
in Ukraine. Its cameramen and reporters have embedded with Syrian
loyalist units in a variety of settings, producing informative reports
filmed in high-definition. Its crews include retired Russian military
volunteers.17 ANNA reporters have uploaded videos of themselves
applying bandages to an injured Syrian soldier, riding in tanks on the
outskirts of Damascus, traversing the desert to document anti-ISIS
offensives, exploring vacated rebel tunnels, and more.

Russia’s response to the Sukhoi shoot-down, after the rescue missions, included strategic measures targeting Turkey and intensifying
military action in Syria.12 In terms of rescue operations, Russia publicly requested assistance from the US for CSAR operations in Syria, a
move motivated as much by political as by military considerations.13
Russian military leadership claimed to have started an intensive CSAR
training program around the time of its Syrian intervention, though it
is unclear whether this program’s graduates were deployed to Syria.14
In January 2016 Russia deployed its latest-model Ka-52 helicopter
gunships to Syria to help “conduct combat search-and-rescue operations [CSAR]” according to Russia’s TASS news agency.15 Following
their role in the TRAP mission, the Desert Hawks became one of
Russia’s favored Syrian partners. The last of these measures may well
be the most consequential.

Despite the absence of a direct or intentional link with the Kremlin,
ANNA is a useful asset to Russian military efforts in Syria. According
to Marat Musin, its founder, a Russia-based economist from Abkhazia, ANNA aims to “counter the advanced information technologies
that are used by al-Qaida to make insurgents in the Middle East look
like freedom fighters.”18 In the November 2015 TRAP and elsewhere,
ANNA’s crews have transcended this informational role, at times acting
like informal advisers to Syrian troops.

During the TRAP mission, Russian forces and the Desert Hawks
coordinated effectively in real-time and without prior planning. The
direct involvement of Desert Hawks leader Ayman Jaber meant that
quick and consequential decisions could be made without seeking
approval from Syrian Army command, given Jaber’s direct access to
regime leadership. Jaber became personally involved in the operation;
video uploaded to YouTube showed him welcoming the rescued Russian forces to his compound, from where they were returned safely to
Hmeimim.
The ANNA crew played an effective informational role by establishing the baseline narrative of what took place, with video evidence

1.

2.

The forested Turkmen Mountain are located in northern Lattakia Province,
between the port cities of Lattakia (Syria) and Antakya (Turkey), in an area
known in Turkish as Bayırbucak. The area gets its name from the Syrian
Turkmen who live there (along with other minority groups). Turkey’s Hatay
Province along the border is in Syria called the “lost province” of Iskanderun
and depicted as part of Syrian territory in maps there. There are an estimated
27 Turkmen villages with 80,000 residents on the Syrian side of the border.
Luke Harding. “Shooting Down of Russian Jet – How the Day Unfolded.”
The Guardian, 24 November 2015. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://www.
theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/shooting-down-of-russian-jet-how-theday-unfolded

ANNA is a private media entity that has thrived in Syria’s irregular,
decentralized battlefield. It is one of many social media ventures that
wield as much, if not more, influence on the Syrian conflict than do
traditional journalists.19 In the TRAP operation, ANNA’s crew helped
bridge the linguistic and cultural gap between Russians and Syrians.
Their actions may have been critical to the time-sensitive mission’s
success.
A key takeaway from the November 2015 rescue operation is that
on the Syrian battlefield, non-traditional media and irregular forces
usually operate at an advantage over their conventional counterparts.
In irregular conflict settings more generally, ad hoc decentralized decision-making often trumps central planning. Conventional forces and
traditional media outlets face structural disadvantages when operating
in battlefields like the Syrian one, in part because information moves
faster and is harder to control. Social media have empowered new
actors and accelerated the pace and scope of information emanating
from the battlefield; forces wishing to control the narrative must adapt
accordingly.
3.

4.

5.

“Speech of the Chief of the Main Operational Directorate of the General Staff
of the Russian Armed Forces Lt. Gen. Sergei Rudskoy on Provocative Actions
of the Turkish Air Force.” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, Air
Force Group in Syria, 24 November 2015. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://eng.
syria.mil.ru/en/index/syria/media_briefings/in_detail.htm?id=12066685@
morfPressConferenceNew and http://eng.syria.mil.ru/en/index/syria/news/
more.htm?id=12066900@egNews&_print=true
Turkish citizen Alparslan Celik publicly took credit for the shooting. He recanted
and was acquitted after being investigated for the act in Turkey. Celik belongs
to the right-wing Turkish irredentist “Grey Wolves” and had been fighting
against the Syrian government in the Turkmen Mountain along with other
members of the group.
At least two Mi-8s and one Mi-24 were involved. Some media accounts claim
there were three Mi-8s, others more than one Mi-24. The total number of
helicopters involved in the CSAR did not appear to exceed five.

(continued)

OE Watch | May 2017

45

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Lucas Winter

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: New Generation Media and Militias: A Case
Study in Russia’s November 2015 Search and Rescue Operation
An article on sofrep.com claims that rebels most likely used 12.7, 14.5 and
23mm cannons (the last of these incorrectly referred to as 22mm in the
article). It is unclear whether rebels also had 57mm rounds. “Inside Russia’s
Mission to Rescue its Pilots.” Sofrep News, 26 November 2015. Accessed 19
July 2016, https://sofrep.com/44881/inside-russias-mission-to-rescue-itspilots/
7. “Russian Fighter Killed During the Operation… Loyalist Sources Publish
Details on Assad Militia Rescue of Russian Force Encircled While
Trying to Rescue Pilots,” Aks al-Ser, 25 November 2015 (in Arabic).
Accessed 19 July 2016, http://www.aksalser.com/news/2015/11/25/%
D9%85%D9%82%D8%AA%D9%84-%D8%B9%D9%86%D8%B5%D8%B1%D8%B1%D9%88%D8%B3%D9%8A-%D8%AE%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B9%D9%85%D9%84%D9%8A%D8%A9%D9%85%D8%B5%D8%A7%D8%AF%D8%B1-%D9%85%D9%88%D8%A7/
8. Footage available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hb38RucXeQQ
(Accessed 19 July 2016).
9. “Downed Su-24 Pilot Found ‘Safe and Sound’, Taken to Hmeymim Base.”
Sputnik News, 25 November 2015. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://sputniknews.
com/military/20151125/1030713848/downed-jet-pilot-safe-airbasehmeymim.html
According to the Russian Defense Ministry, he was rescued after 12 hours.
He was likely brought back safely to Kassab and from there taken to the
Hmeimeim Airbase at around 0200 local time, 16 hours after the crash.
10. “Syrian Paper Recounts Rescue of Downed Russian Pilot.” AFP, 26 November
2015. Accessed 19 July 2016, https://www.yahoo.com/news/syrian-paperrecounts-rescue-downed-russian-pilot-115703479.html?ref=gs
11. “No Man Left Behind: Dramatic Details Emerge of Downed Su-24 Pilot
Rescue.” RT, 27 November 2015. Accessed 19 July 2016, https://www.rt.com/
news/323527-details-su24-pilot-rescue/
6.

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

12. In addition to political measures targeting Turkey, Russia expanded and
intensified its bombing campaign immediately following the incident. The
Russian military also deployed advanced weaponry to Syria, including the
S-400 anti-air defense missile system. Additional fighter jets were brought in to
escort the ground-attack aircraft. See Dave Majudar. “Next Up for Syria: Even
More Lethal Russian Military Hardware,” National Interest, 30 November 2015.
http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/next-syria-even-more-lethal-russianmilitary-hardware-14467
13. Brian Everstine. “Russia Wanted US CSAR.” Air Force Magazine Daily Report,
26 February 2016. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://www.airforcemag.com/
DRArchive/Pages/2016/February%202016/February%2026%202016/RussiaWanted-US-CSAR.aspx
14. Maksymilian Dura. “Air Strikes in Syria and Russian Propaganda.” Defence24, 2
October 2015. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://www.defence24.com/266090,airstrikes-in-syria-and-russian-propaganda#
15. Nikolai Novichkov. “Russia to Deploy Ka-52 Helicopters to Syria.” HIS Jane’s
Defense Weekly, 18 January 2016. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://www.janes.
com/article/57253/russia-to-deploy-ka-52-helicopters-to-syria
16. Footage available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tay0-z0lBBs
(Accessed 19 July 2016).
17. Ivan Nechepurenko. “’Crazy Abkhaz’ Journalists Cover Syria Frontline.”
The Moscow Times, 13 March 2013. Accessed 19 July 2016, http://www.
themoscowtimes.com/news/article/crazy-abkhaz-journalists-cover-syriafrontline/476903.html
18. Ibid.
19. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights (SOHR) is perhaps the best example
of this phenomenon. SOHR has become the authoritative voice on events in
Syria for those opposing the Assad government. It is run by a Syrian expat from
his home in Coventry, England.

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media
that our analysts believe give
military and security experts an
added dimension to their critical
thinking about the Operational
Environment.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/oewpastissues.html
OE Watch | May 2017

46

