fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #3
April 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
5
6
7
8
8
9

10
11
12

Perspectives on Russian Motives in Libya
Border Security: Protecting Turkey’s Border with Syria
Will Turkey Buy S-400s From Russia?
Iran’s IRGC Unveils Drone Program
Iran Claims New Minesweeping Capabilities
IRGC Conducting Training by Fire in Syria
Iran: New Valfajr Torpedo Launched from Ghadir
Submarine
Syrian Government Intensifies Military Recruitment
Campaign
Tunnels and IEDs: ISIS Defense and Withdrawal from alBab
Yemen: Sana’a Government Claims Domestic UAV
Production

AFRICA
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Somali Government Opposes UAE’s Base in Somaliland
South Africa: Foreigners Unwelcome
South Sudan: A Fragmenting Military?
Uganda Tries to Break the Terrorist – Ivory Connection
Boko Haram’s Teenage Female Suicide Bombers
Nigeria’s $11 Billion Railroad Project Backed by China
ISIS Carves a Niche in Puntland

LATIN AMERICA
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

‘Odebrecht’ and the Forum of Sao Paulo
Creative Guerrilla Disarmament
FARC Demobilization Zones
Guillermo Lasso
Guatemala to Move Soldiers from Cities to Border
Regions
Guatemala’s Evolving Political Scene and its Fight
against Corruption
Mexican Drug Cartels and the FARC Peace Process
Battling Crime in the Darien Region

ASIA-PACIFIC
28
29
30
30
31
32
33
34

MINURSO
MINUSMA
MONUSCO
UNAMID
UNFICYP
UNIFIL
UNMIL
UNMISS
UNOCI
UNTSO

China Announces Reform of Military Ranks
China’s Contribution to Peacekeeping Operations:
Understanding the Numbers
Evolving Political Dynamics between China, Thailand
and Japan
China’s Pursuit of Artificial Intelligence
Kim Jong Nam’s Death Points to a Growing Biological
Weapons Capability
DPRK Suffers Critical Shortages and Low Morale
Rohingya Insurgents Boast Their Capabilities
Perspectives on a Sino-Vietnamese Thaw in the South
China Sea

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
35
36
37

Assessing Russian Influence in Central Asia
Pakistan’s War on Terror
The Impact of Azerbaijan’s Air Defense System Deals
with Israel

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
38
39
41
43
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
52
53
54
55

The Growing Role of the Russian Military Police Corps
Russia Increasing Numbers of Active and Reserve
Positions
GIS Seen as Key Enabler for Automated Command and
Control
Differing Views from Moscow on Global Lightning 2017
Russia’s First Color Revolution?
Zapad 2017-A Threat to Belarus?
Honoring Russian Soldiers Killed in Chechnya
Better Qualified Contract Soldiers
NATO as Paper-Tiger?
Russian Armed Forces Deploy a New Radio System
Norwegian Signal to Russia?
Another Norwegian Arctic Exercise
Russia’s Icebreakers Staying Busy
A Second Arctic Air Defense Division
Gerasimov’s Fifth Speech at the Academy of Military
Science
Russia’s Defender of the Future

SPECIAL ESSAY
56

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Chinese Military Deploys: Gaining Ground through
Peacekeeping in the Global Arena

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil
ON THE COVER: A Chinese peacekeeper attends a medal parade ceremony in
Bukavu, South Kivu. Some 230 Chinese peacekeepers are part of MONUSCO’s
military force. Photo MONUSCO/Myriam Asmani (Copyrights free).

Sources: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:A_Chinese_peacekeeper_attends_a_medal_parade_ceremony_in_Bukavu,_South_
Kivu_%2810761340676%29.jpg

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 3

April | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Karen Kaya
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Asia-Pacific

Kenneth Allen
Dennis Blasko
Steven Galluzzi
Cindy Hurst
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Tyler Gartner
Les Grau
Tim Thomas

				

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Keith French

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Perspectives on Russian Motives in Libya
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passages from Turkish
and Middle Eastern sources provide
perspectives on Russian calculations in
Libya. Both passages point to Russia’s
presence in the Mediterranean and
Egypt as important factors in these
calculations.
The first passage discusses that
General Khalifa Haftar, who controls
eastern Libya, is in need of weapons to
circumvent the arms embargo and to
overcome the resistance that he faces in
Benghazi and other parts of Libya. It
notes that General Haftar has turned to
Russia for this (after being rejected by
the West), and paid two visits to Russia
recently, seeking an agreement. The
passage claims that an agreement was
reached, and then “on 12 January 2017
a Russian aircraft carrier reached the
waters of eastern Libya.” The author
notes that, “Russia may make a risky
strategic move and use the same model
it applied in Syria, in the Western
Mediterranean. On this point, it is being
noted that Russian military officials have
been conducting studies on establishing
a naval base in an area close to Libya’s
border with Egypt.”
The second passage discusses four
factors which may provide a context
for Russia’s moves in Libya. First
the author claims that Moscow has a
general interest in stabilizing the region.
Second, he notes that Russia has an
interest in assisting Egypt and bolstering
Cairo’s regime, where “President Abdel
Fattah al-Sisi’s ideological affinity,
which concentrates on confronting the
Muslim Brotherhood, makes them even
more attractive to Moscow.” Third, he
notes Russia’s Mediterranean policy
and that from Russia’s perspective, “a
friendly or loyal regime in Libya could
emerge as part of the Russia-dominated
axis of Damascus, Cairo and Tripoli.”
Finally, he notes that the “economic
interests of Russian businesses striving
to gain a foothold in new markets”
should be considered. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“... it is possible that Russia may make a risky strategic move and
use the same model it applied in Syria, in the Western Mediterranean.
Russian military officials have been conducting studies on establishing a
naval base in an area close to Libya’s border with Egypt.”
Source: Emrah Kekilli, “5 Soru: Rus Gemileri Bati Akdeniz’de (5 Questions: Russian Ships in
the Eastern Med),” SETA (Political, Economic and Social Research Institute), 31 January 2017.
https://www.setav.org/5-soru-rus-gemileri-bati-akdenizde/
Why are Russian ships in Libya’s waters?
General Khalifa Haftar, who militarily controls the eastern part of Libya, had paid a second
visit to Russia in November 2016 (the first visit was in June) and met with both Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov and the Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu. His high-level reception in
Russia, while his official status in Libya is controversial... was interpreted as Russia taking
a new stance on Libya. Haftar, who has been leading one of the military camps who have
been fighting in Libya since mid-2014, was in search of ways to address his weapons problem
[given the weapons embargo against Libya]. On this point, Haftar’s then-Chief of the General
Staff Abdulrezzak el-Nazuri had- with the help of Egypt- come together with Russian officials
in February 2015, during Russian President Vladimir Putin’s visit to Cairo, and requested
weapons. In this context, it is not hard to guess that Haftar’s visits to Russia included requests
for weapons assistance and mutual cooperation. Following these meetings, on 12 January
2017, a Russian aircraft carrier reached the waters of eastern Libya.
What claims are made about the Russia-Haftar alliance?
It is known that Haftar is entering into regional and international alliances to expand his
area of control in Libya and consolidate his power. Haftar is supported by Egypt, Jordan, and
the UAE. Nevertheless, in the eastern part of the country, he faces serious resistance inside
Benghazi, Derne and Cufra, and he is unable to overcome this resistance. In addition, the
western part of the country is anti-Haftar; while the south is divided among the two camps. So
despite the internal and external support, Haftar is unable to take control of the country. In
this context, he is working to obtain weapons, and if possible, find a global power to support
him. Haftar and the political branch of the coalition which he leads.... requested arms from
Western countries but their requests were turned down. It is in this context that Haftar has
contacted the Russians. Despite denials by Russian officials and Haftar’s representatives, it
is being claimed that Haftar and representatives of “Russian Rosoboroexport” have signed a
weapons deal. This deal calls for Haftar purchasing $2 billion worth of weapons from Russia.
The equipment that is planned to be purchased is reported as ten SU-30, six SU-35, four TAK130 training aircraft, S-300 air defense systems, and T-90 tanks. It is also being reported that
the maintenance of the T-72 model tanks would be conducted by Russians.
When one considers that Russia has long been using SU-24s close air support and SU-25
strategic operation aircraft in Syria, it follows that [Russia] may want to use SU-30, SU-35 and
YAK-130 aircraft in Libya.
...
What’s more is that, it is being analyzed that, it is possible that Russia may make a risky
strategic move and use the same model it applied in Syria, in the Western Mediterranean. On
this point, it is being noted that Russian military officials have been conducting studies on
establishing a naval base in an area close to Libya’s border with Egypt.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Perspectives on Russian Motives in Libya
Source: Vasily Kuznetsov, “What is Russia’s thinking on Libya?” Al Monitor.com, 5 March 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/en/
originals/2017/03/russia-libya-sarraj-foreign-policy-putin-hifter.html
First, the list includes Moscow’s general line aimed at stabilizing the region.
...
Second, add to the mixture Russian-Egyptian relations, which require specific measures to transform mutual affinity into a solid alliance,
with Egypt’s regional position being strengthened. A weak Egypt, Moscow argues, will further destabilize the Middle East, as historical,
geographical and demographic forces have predetermined the country’s key role. Assisting Egypt in handling Libya constitutes a means of
bolstering Cairo’s regime.
...
Third, the agenda encompasses Russia’s Mediterranean policy and the country’s ties with European Union member states. According to an
informed source, Europe has but once given signals to the Kremlin that the refugee-affected countries are seeking Russia’s active involvement
in Libya’s affairs, which in the long run could improve relations between Moscow and Brussels.
At the same time, a friendly or loyal regime in Libya could emerge as part of the Russia-dominated axis of Damascus, Cairo and Tripoli.
...
Fourth, economic interests of Russian businesses striving to gain a foothold in new markets must also be considered.
..the dialogue with [Cairo] represents [Russia’s] paramount interest. Hafter’s and Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi’s ideological
affinity, which concentrates on confronting the Muslim Brotherhood, makes them even more attractive to Moscow.

The Libya-Egypt border.

Source: http://www.history.army.mil/brochures/egypt/p12(map).jpg

OE Watch | April 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Border Security: Protecting Turkey’s Border with Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Since the start
of the Syrian crisis, neighboring Turkey has
been directly impacted due to the 560-mile
long border it shares with Syria. Clashes
have frequently spilled over into Turkey, and
terrorist attacks by fighters of the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) have resulted
in the deaths of many Turks. To address this
situation, Turkey has been devising border
security strategies since early 2016. The
concept targets ISIS fighters operating mostly
from Syrian territory and Kurdish militants
operating both from northern Iraq and Syria.
The accompanying passages discuss several
recent border security measures as part of
this concept. These include the indigenously
produced Cobra 2 armored vehicles used
for early warnings and patrol; surveillance
and reconnaissance ‘balloons’, and the
construction of a concrete wall.
The first passage discusses how the Turkish
military has started to use the domestically
produced “Cobra 2” armored vehicles,
patrolling alongside the security wall on the
border with Syria. The Cobra 2, which can
carry nine people, is equipped with a radar
system, target detection system, and thermal
camera system integrated to the vehicle. The
vehicle can “see the other side of the border
easily thanks to a camera system that can be
raised up to 12 meters.”
The second passage discusses the new
surveillance and reconnaissance balloonsalso called ‘mini-zeppelins.’ The balloons
will detect terrorist activity and illegal
crossings along Turkey’s borders with
Syria (and Iraq). They will also perform
intelligence transmission, surveillance and
reconnaissance and early warning missions.
The passage notes that they are similar
to “Lockheed Martin’s Persistent Threat
Detection System, a tethered aerostat-based
system in use by the US Army since 2004.”
The system is being developed by Turkish
defense company Aselsan.
The third passage notes additional security
measures along the Syria border, such as
“a fixed wall, a surveillance tower, lighting
systems and trenches.” It claims that, “as a
result of these efforts, smuggling with horses
and vehicles have nearly ended; and illegal
crossings have been reduced by 40%.” The
wall, which is currently half-way complete,
is intended to be 510 miles long. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“...for security [along the

Turkey’s new Cobra 2 armored vehicle along the
security wall (under construction) at the border.

Source: http://www.yeniakit.com.tr/haber/yerli-uretim-kobra-2-ilk-kez-kullanildi-286062.html

Turkey-Syria border], a fixed
wall [has been erected], a
surveillance tower [built],
lighting systems [erected] and
trenches have been dug. As a
result of these efforts, smuggling
with horses and vehicles have
nearly ended; and illegal
crossings have been reduced by
40%.”

Source: “Milli üretim ‘Kobra 2’ler sınır hattında (National production ‘Cobra 2’s along the
border),” Hurriyet.com, 2 March 2017, http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/kobra-2ler-sinir-hattinayerlestirildi-40382759
The Turkish military has started to use domestically produced “Cobra 2” armored
vehicles as part of its technological border security assets, patrolling alongside the underconstruction security wall on the border with Syria. [The Cobra 2s] can see the other side
of the border easily thanks to a camera system that can be raised up to 12 meters. ...The
Cobra 2 has a radar system, target detection system, and thermal camera system integrated
to the vehicle, which can carry nine people.
Source: Burak Ege Bekdil, “Turkey to develop surveillance balloons for border protection,”
Defense News, 6 February 2017. http://www.defensenews.com/articles/turkey-to-developsurveillance-balloons-for-border-protection
Military electronics specialist Aselsan, Turkey’s largest defense company, is developing two
different types of surveillance and reconnaissance balloons — also called mini-zeppelins —
to mainly be used along the country’s southeastern borders with Iraq and Syria.
The balloons are expected to function like Lockheed Martin’s Persistent Threat Detection
System, a tethered aerostat-based system in use by the U.S. Army since 2004. The PTDS is
equipped with multimission sensors to provide long endurance intelligence, surveillance,
reconnaissance and communications, and was in support of coalition forces in Afghanistan
and Iraq.
Aselsan is hoping to develop the “Water Drop” and the “Global” to detect terrorist activity
and illegal crossings along Turkey’s borders with Syria and Iraq. The balloons will perform
intelligence transmission, surveillance and reconnaissance and early warning missions,
company official said.
Source: “TSK’nın yeni zırhlısı Kobra-2 sınır hattında devriyede (The new armoured [tank]
of the Turkish Armed Forces Cobra-2 is on patrol at the border),” Mynet.com, 3 March
2017. http://www.mynet.com/haber/guncel/tsknin-yeni-zirhlisi-kobra-2-sinir-hattindadevriyede-2910710-1
In addition, for security, a fixed wall [has been erected], a surveillance tower [built],
lighting systems [erected] and trenches have been dug. As a result of these efforts,
smuggling with horses and vehicles have nearly ended; and illegal crossings have been
reduced by 40%.
OE Watch | April 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Will Turkey Buy S-400s From Russia?
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 February, Turkey’s
Defense Minister announced that Turkey was searching for
systems to protect itself against missile and air attacks and
that Russian S-400s were a leading contender, adding that
significant progress had been made in talks with Russia.
The accompanying passages
from Turkish sources discuss
this prospect, statements by
government officials regarding it,
and discussions surrounding it.

“Right now, the Russian S-400s appear to be the most
possible [option]. We have made significant progress.”

The first passage points out the
Defense Minister’s comments that
Turkey needs permanent systems
to protect itself against air attacks.
He notes that the main focus is to
eventually develop an indigenous
air defense system. But in the
meantime, he notes, “we have
spoken with different countries
and different companies. Right
now, the Russian S-400s appear
to be the most possible [option].
We have made significant
progress.” Regarding NATO
member states’ reactions over
the possible deal, Işık says, “I
think they will understand. Some
NATO countries also have nonNATO systems,” likely referring to Greece’s S-300s from Russia.
The second passage, from an article by respected journalist Fikret Bila, reports that the
topic was also on the agenda during Turkish President Erdoğan’s meeting with Russian
President Putin in Moscow on 9-10 March. He discusses Erdoğan’s comments on the
plane ride back from Moscow and points out that, “in response to criticism that Turkey’s
acquisition of S-400s or any non-NATO defense systems would not be aligned with the
NATO concept, [Erdoğan] responded, ‘Being a member of NATO does not mean that we are
not independent.’”
Turkey’s search for a long-range air and missile defense system is not new. Previously,
in late 2013, Turkey had announced its decision to start talks with a Chinese firm to coproduce such a defense system. The contract was awarded to the China Precision Machinery
Export-Import Corporation (CPMEIC), a company that was under sanctions for violating
the Iran, North Korea and Syria Nonproliferation Act. Furthermore, NATO members had
expressed concern and warned of compatibility issues between the Chinese-made system
and NATO systems. In November 2015, Turkey cancelled the deal with China and declared
its goal to develop its own air defense systems with its own resources.
In light of this background, the author of the third passage asks the question of whether it
is realistic to discuss air defense cooperation with another non-NATO member. He writes,
“While the debates during the contract awarded to the Chinese company are still fresh
in [people’s] minds, how reasonable and realistic is it to go down a path of purchasing air
defense systems from Russia?” The author also claims that the approach that “If the West
doesn’t give it to us, we’ll buy it from Russia,” is not realistic. He reminds readers the
importance of NATO for Turkey’s defense, pointing to the Patriot missiles and the Aegis
ships in the Eastern Mediterranean, as part of the NATO Missile Defense Shield. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

— Turkish Defense Minister
Fikri Işık

The S-400 air defense system.

Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/?q=node/449

Source: “Bakan Fikri Işık’tan S400 açıklaması
(Minister Fikri Işık’s S400 Declaration),”
CNNTurk.com, 22 February 2017. http://www.
cnnturk.com/turkiye/bakan-fikri-isiktan-s400aciklamasi
Regarding the air defense system that Turkey
is thinking of purchasing, [Turkish Defense
Minister Fikri] Işık said “Turkey is in need of
systems to protect itself against missile and air
attacks. We currently meet our needs through
NATO. But Turkey needs permanent systems
to protect itself against air attacks. We are
focusing on developing our own air defense
system. We have started a program. But until
now, we have spoken with different countries
and different companies. Right now, the
Russian S400’s appear to be the most possible
[option]. We have made significant progress.
But we are not signing anything tomorrow.”
Regarding NATO member states’ reactions
over the possible deal, Işık replied, “I think
they will understand. Some NATO countries
also have non-NATO systems.”

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Will Turkey Buy S-400s From Russia?
Source: Fikret Bila, “S-400 arayışının altındaki mesaj (The message
beneath the S-400 search),” Hurriyet.com, 12 March 2017. http://
www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/fikret-bila/s-400-arayisinin-altindakimesaj-40392288

Source: Mustafa Kibaroğlu, “Rusya ile savunma işbirliği
ihtimali (The possibility of defense cooperation with
Russia),” Al Jazeera Turk, 18 October 2016. http://www.
aljazeera.com.tr/gorus/rusya-ile-savunma-isbirligi-ihtimali

The Russian S-400 Option

“While the debates during the contract awarded to the
Chinese company are still fresh in [people’s] minds, how
reasonable and realistic is it to go down a path of purchasing
air defense systems from Russia, and how much does this
initiative address Turkey’s long-term needs?”

The search for alternative air defense systems, from [options] other
than NATO, was evident in President Tayyip Erdoğan’s visit to Moscow.
Erdoğan said that Turkey has long been searching for air defense systems
and reminded that the US, France, China and Russia had submitted
proposals. He noted that Russia maintains its proposal and that studies
and initiatives regarding these systems with Russia were on-going. He
added that these studies also included the S-400s. In response to criticism
that Turkey’s acquisition of S-400s or any non-NATO defense systems
would not be aligned with the NATO concept, he responded, “Being
a member of NATO does not mean that we are not independent.” He
reminded that Greece also uses Russian missiles.

We’ll Take Care of Ourselves
Erdoğan continued as follows, in response to questions on the issue:
“Everyone can form their defense system. If we are not able to acquire
these possibilities within NATO, then we are in a position where we [have
to]take care of ourselves. While we are a NATO member, we can have
agreements with Russia.”

Iran’s IRGC Unveils Drone Program
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article
from Tasnim News, an Iranian state news outlet, reports that
Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps’ (IRGC) Ground
Forces have developed a drone program. The article features
an interview with the IRGC Ground Force Commander
Brigadier General Mohammad Pakpour, who discusses the
program.
According to the article, the IRGC Ground Force
conducted military drills in central and eastern Iran with
their latest drones, known as “Payambar-e Azam 11 (The
Great Prophet).” The military exercises were meant to
show the IRGC Ground Force’s military might as well as
advancements in their drone program. Pakpour says that they
have “set up a drone center and organization, which has bases
in operational areas, and is currently active.” The program
is designed to execute military missions, even though the
drones can carry out both civilian and military operations.
In a subsequent report by Press TV, another Iranian
state news source, Iranian officials claim that their drone
capabilities match Western technology. They reference
the October 2016 debut of a combat UAV, “Saeqeh”
(Thunderbolt), which is a long-range drone with the capacity
to carry four smart and precision-guided bombs. According
to the accompanying excerpt, “Saeqeh” is Iran’s stealth UAV
modeled after the US RQ-170 Sentinel stealth aircraft, which
was reportedly downed by Iranians in 2011. End OE Watch
Commentary (Keshavarz & Bunker)

....
The approach that “If the West doesn’t give it to us, we’ll
buy it from Russia,” is not just up to Turkey’s decision. “...
it should not be forgotten that NATO’s “missile shield”...
provides air defense for parts of Turkey (excluding its east
and southeast). For the part of Turkey that is outside of the
protection of the missile shield... the Alliance has deployed
Patriot batteries... With the expansion of the range of the
SM-3 missiles.. on the Aegis ships belonging to the US
Navy in the Eastern Mediterranean, Turkey’s eastern and
southeastern regions are envisioned to be protected under the
Missile Defense Shield as of 2018....Thus, ...NATO’s presence
and contribution to Turkey’s defense cannot be ignored.”

Source: “Neroo-e Zameene Sepa-e Pasdaran Sazman-e Pahbadi
Tashgeeldad (The IRGC’s Ground Forces Launched a Drone
Program),” Tasnim News Agency, February 26, 2017, https://
www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/12/08/1339411/‫یورین‬‫ینیمز‬-‫هاپس‬-‫نارادساپ‬-‫نامزاس‬-‫یداپهپ‬-‫لیکشت‬-‫داد‬

IRGC Ground Force conducted military drills in central and eastern
Iran with their latest drones, known as “Payambar-e Azam 11 (The Great
Prophet).”
Source: “Mohammad-e Pakpour gofte ke nero-e zameen sépah az tashkeel-e
pahband dar manategh-e amaleeyatee pahyegah dar-ad (Mohammad Pakour
said that IRGC Ground Forces developed a drone program),” IRGC Ground
Force Commander, Brigadier General Mohammad Pakpour interview with
Tasnim News Agency, 26 February 2017. https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/
news/1395/12/08/1339411/‫یورین‬-‫ینیمز‬-‫هاپس‬-‫نارادساپ‬-‫نامزاس‬-‫یداپهپ‬‫لیکشت‬-‫داد‬
“We…have set up a drone center and organization, which has bases in
operational areas, and is currently active,” Commander of IRGC Ground
Forces Brigadier General Mohammad Pakpour [said].
Source: “Neroo-e Zameene Sepa-e Pasdaran Sazman-e Pahbadi Tashgeeldad
(The IRGC’s Ground Forces Launched a Drone Program),” PressTV, 26
February 2017. http://www.presstv.ir/DetailFa/2017/02/26/512158/IranIRGC-Drone
Amir Ali Hajizadeh, Commander of IRGC Air Force, believes that the new
drone program is as elite as those of Western countries. He also said that
they developed technologies that are better than their enemies.
OE Watch | April 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Claims New Minesweeping Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian military holds annual war games to
showcase its latest capabilities and technologies. This year, it conducted the
Velayat-95 war games in both the Persian Gulf and northern Indian Ocean.
Among the marquee capabilities the Iranian navy claims to have acquired was
a combined sonic and magnetic approach to de-mining, utilizing both ships
and helicopters. The accompanying article from Fars News discusses this
capability.
The article claims that, on the second day of the Velayat-95 war games,
the Iranian military successfully completed combined de-mining operations
utilizing helicopters, minesweepers, and sonic and magnetic demining
devices. The article claims that Iran now has a capability that hitherto only the
United States had, by saying, “This technology was previously monopolized
by the Global Arrogance [United States] yet now the strategic special naval
forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran also possesses it.”
The Iranian announcement may be less than meets the eye, however. This
technology is currently beyond Iran’s capabilities, and there is no evidence
that it has yet achieved it. Such demining capabilities, however, are a priority
for the Islamic Republic. While many Western officials discuss the Strait of
Hormuz in terms of periodic Iranian threats to close that strategic waterway,
the Iranian military lacks the ability to deny access to the Strait for more than
a day. Simply put, the ability of the US (and other) navies to clear both mines
and eliminate missile batteries is definitive. For all their bluster, however,
Iranian policymakers recognize that a closure of the Strait of Hormuz by any
other power would leave them vulnerable as it would prevent the export of oil
and import of gasoline upon which the Iranian economy depends. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Demining at sea is one of the hardest
types of helicopter operations.”
Source: “Amaliyat-e Takibi Minrubi Sawti va Maghnatisi
Tawsat Balgerdha-ye Niru-ye Darya-ye Artesh Surat Gereft
(Combined Magnetic and Sonar Minesweeping Conducted
by Navy Helicopters),” Fars News, 27 February 2017. http://
www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13951209001589

Iran Tests New Minesweeping Capabilities
According to a report of the Fars News correspondent,
on the second day of the Velayat-95 war games, combined
de-mining operations utilizing helicopters, minesweepers,
and sonic and magnetic demining devices were successfully
completed.
This technology was previously monopolized by the Global
Arrogance [United States] yet now the strategic special
naval forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran also possesses
it. Demining at sea is one of the hardest types of helicopter
operations. This provides the ability to neutralize the mines
planted in different arrays and in different ways using
different sensors and technologies to create a safe waterway
for the movement of warships and commercial shipping.

IRGC Conducting Training by Fire in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad
Zarif has regularly insisted that the Iranian military is not fighting in Syria
but only providing background support for the Syrian army. However, he
has been unable to hide the growing casualties suffered by Iranian forces
in Syria from the Iranian audience let alone the international community.
Indeed, the excerpted article from the Persian language service of Radio
France Internationale cites an Iranian press outlet affiliated with the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) acknowledging 1,000 casualties as of May
2016, a figure that has only grown in the intervening months.
According to the article excerpted here, an IRGC general has now
acknowledged that the IRGC is sending recruits to the frontlines of Syria in
order to train and gain firsthand experience in battle. The IRGC decision to
send cadets to Syria is likely based on several factors: First, IRGC cadets who
survive Syria will gain experience they can utilize elsewhere—in Iraq, Yemen,
and perhaps Bahrain—augmenting the lethality and effectiveness of the next
generation of the IRGC. Second, exposing cadets to the frontline of battle is a
means to imbue them with the revolutionary fervor which the older generation
of the IRGC experienced during the Iran-Iraq War (1980-1988) but which the
IRGC leadership worries society has lost. The passage notes that, “after the
Iran-Iraq War, this is the first time the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps are
involved in a real war and actual battles outside Iran’s borders.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“At least one hundred students have
been sent to the scene of battle”

Source: “Daneshjuyan-e Sepah Pasdaran beh Suriye
Azam Shodehand (IRGC Students have been deployed
to Syria),” RFI.fr, 23 February 2017. fa.rfi.fr/‫نایوجشناد‬‫هاگشناد‬-‫هاپس‬-‫نارادساپ‬-‫هب‬-‫هیروس‬-‫مازعا‬-‫دناهدش‬-20170223/
‫هنایمرواخ‬

IRGC Students Deployed to Syria
Gen. Morteza Safari, one of the commanders of the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, said that at least one
hundred of these students have been sent to the scene of
battle in Syria in order to gain experience in a real war,
and of these, a number of students were killed, and others
were wounded, and others stayed for longer at the front
of the Syrian civil war. After the Iran-Iraq War, this is
the first time the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps are
involved in a real war and actual battles outside Iran’s
borders. According to the Tasnim News Agency, affiliated
with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, as of last
May, 1,000 Iranians had been killed fighting in Syria.
OE Watch | April 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: New Valfajr Torpedo Launched
from Ghadir Submarine
OE Watch Commentary: Iran claims that the 95 foot-long Ghadir-class submarine
has both stealth technology and can launch missiles and torpedoes simultaneously.
While this may be an exaggeration, the submarine can nevertheless threaten not
only civilian shipping but also military vessels given the Persian Gulf’s relative
shallowness and narrowness. The excerpted article from Fars News reports on the
operation of the Ghadir-class during the Valfajr-95 war games.
The article is significant because it discusses the operation of the Ghadir-class in
the deeper waters of the northern Indian Ocean. As the Iranian military establishes
a greater network of logistical support—in Sudan, Syria, and perhaps Sri Lanka as
well—the demonstrated ability to launch Valfajr torpedoes could widen the threat
posed by Iranian submarines.
The Valfajr torpedoes, introduced in 2011 and produced since 2015, reportedly carry
a nearly 500 pound explosive warhead. In October 2015, Iranian Defense Minister
Hossein Dehghan told a press conference in Tehran that, “What makes Valfajr torpedo
stand apart from other similar products in the world is the short preparation time in
the supporting and firing units; a characteristic which leads to a remarkable increase
in tactical capability and a quick response from surface and subsurface combat units.”
While it is unclear whether the Valfajr is as smart as Dehghan claims, the Iranian
navy’s decision to showcase both the Ghadir and the Valfajr suggest that they see both
as increasingly central to the Iranian naval doctrine as well as area denial strategies.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The navy’s newest torpedo for the
first time was fired from the Ghadir
submarine.”
Source: “‘Valfajr,’ Jadidtarin Asdar-e Artesh az
Zirdaryaye Ghadir Shalik Shod (‘Valfajr,’ the newest
torpedo fired from the Ghadir submarine),” Fars
News, 28 February 2017. http://www.farsnews.com/
newstext.php?nn=13951210000444

Ghadir Submarine Launches Valfajr
Torpedo
According to a report by the Fars News Agency,
on the final day of the Valfajr-95 naval war games,
submarines traveled to an area 100 kilometers from
the coast and using a detecting system, tracked the
surface warship, and by firing torpedoes, successfully
destroyed the targets. According to the report, during
the operation, the Valfajr torpedo, the navy’s newest
torpedo, for the first time was fired from the Ghadir
submarine and successfully destroyed its surface
target.

Iranian Valfajr Torpedo.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Valfajr_Torpedo_by_Tasnimnews_01.jpg

OE Watch | April 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syrian Government Intensifies Military Recruitment
Campaign
OE Watch Commentary: The Syrian
government recently launched an energetic
and multi-faceted recruitment drive in areas
under its control. The goal is to staff the
Russia-backed 5th Corps, whose formation
was announced in November 2016 (For more
information, see: “The Syrian Army’s ‘5th
Corps’,” OE Watch, January-February 2017).
Students, government employees, trade union
members, refugees, internally displaced
persons (IDPs), businessmen, former rebels,
loyalist militiamen and military-age males
are all being targeted in different ways.
Throughout government-held territory,
billboards, text messages, pamphlets, TV ads,
and sermons in state-sanctioned mosques
extol the virtues of joining this new formation.
According to the first accompanying
passage, although the 5th Corps offers higher
salaries and better benefits than most other
loyalist militias, “few volunteered for the
corps” following its initial announcement
last November. One bright spot for the
Syrian government has been the formation
of several “Baath Brigades” that will join the
corps. These brigades are made up largely of
students recruited through local branches of
the Baath Party, including in Kurdish-majority
Hasaka Province and Druze-majority Sweida
Province.
A further source of manpower, mentioned
in the second accompanying passage, are
military-age males from rebel-held areas that
have signed truces or been retaken by the
government. According to the third passage,
residents of communities on the outskirts
of Damascus that were recently recaptured
by the government are being blocked from
returning to their homes unless they join the
5th Corps. In other parts of the country, local
authorities are forcing eligible government
employees to join the 5th Corps or risk being
suspended without pay.
Alongside the new recruits, the 5th Corps
intends to bring most of the loyalist militias
under the Syrian military’s command.
Fighters registered with National Defense
Forces (NDF) militias in Hama, for instance,
are to join the 5th Corps. As the fourth
accompanying passage notes, various other
powerful loyalist militias are also to be folded
into the new formation. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“… The regime

is working toward
dissolving all
local militias that
emerged in the past
five years …”

Recruitment Image for the
5th Corps.

Source: Source: Syrian Defense Ministry, http://
www.mod.gov.sy/index.php?node=433&cat_
id=15&vid=4742

Source:
‫”بهدف تحديد الوالء… سلطات النظام تجمع استبيانات موظفيها في حماة‬
(With the Goal of Determining Loyalties… Regime Authorities Gather Questionnaires from
Employees in Hama),” All4Syria, 6 March 2017. http://www.all4syria.info/Archive/393115
Regime forces have recently resorted to a general mobilization within government
institutions. Government employees are being forced to register with the 5th Assault Corps
and any employee who refuses to do so is suspended from their job without pay… According
to al-Hamawi regime forces and loyalist militias took this step since few volunteered for the
corps and despite the material incentives promised to them, as well as university students
whose professors and directors were instructed to encourage students to join the corps.
Source:
‫ القصة الكاملة للفيلق الخامس‬..‫”وزارة الدفاع تفشل وحزب البعث يتدخل‬
(Defense Ministry Fails and Baath Party Intervenes.. The Full Story of the 5th Corps),”
al-Dorar al-Shamiya, 3 February 2017. http://eldorar.com/node/108512
Following the regime’s failure to recruit young men from large cities, it began to target
youth in small towns in rural Damascus, Homs and Hama, most notably al-Tal, Qudsiya
and al-Hama, where rebels recently signed truces with the regime. The regime did not stop
there, but instead involved the Baath Party in this. The party most notably appealed to the
people of Sweida…
Source:
‫”النظام السوري يشترط إنضمام أهالي وادي بردى الى “الفيلق الخامس” مقابل عودتهم الى مساكنهم‬
(The Syrian Regime Conditions Return of Wadi Barada Residents to their Home on
Enlisting in the 5th Corps),” souriatnapress.net 23 February 2017. http://www.
souriatnapress.net/archives/31286
The Syrian regime has conditioned allowing the people of Wadi Barada to return to their
homes on their joining the 5th Corps. The residents were displaced last month after a fierce
military campaign by regime forces and Hizbullah…
Source:
‫”موظفو حماة في “الدفاع الوطني” إلى “الفيلق الخامس‬
(Hama Employees from the NDF to the 5th Corps),” Enab Baladi, 24 February 2017. http://
www.enabbaladi.net/archives/133441
Hama’s security committee issued an internal required directive calling on all public sector
employees belonging to the NDF to return to their positions, in preparation for their joining
the 5th Corps in one month… The regime is working toward dissolving all local militias that
emerged in the past five years, including the Bath Battalions, the NDF, the Desert Hawks,
and the Naval Commandos, and folding them into the 5th Corps.
OE Watch | April 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Tunnels and IEDs: ISIS Defense and Withdrawal from al-Bab
OE Watch Commentary: In February
2017, Turkish-backed Syrian rebel
forces finally took the Syrian city of
al-Bab (as part of the “Euphrates Shield
Operation”), after being bogged down
for months by defenders of the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) at the city’s
edge. The accompanying passages from
Arabic sources highlight the importance
of IEDs and tunnels for ISIS’s defense
of, and eventual withdrawal from al-Bab.
According to the first passage,
IEDs and tunnels “played a pivotal
role in delaying the military victory”
of Turkish-backed forces in al-Bab;
along with civilian human shields
and suicide vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices (SVBIED). Al-Bab’s
subterranean environment can be
easily exploited, as it “resembles other
Syrian cities built long ago, with layers
of construction one upon another.”
In addition to hiding out in the city’s
ancient catacombs and tunnel systems,
ISIS used drainage tunnels to supply
al-Bab and subsequently withdraw from
it. According to the second passage, one
of the tunnels had been “expanded to fit
vehicles.”
As the second excerpt notes, ISIS has
continually worked to improve its IED
production facilities, and in al-Bab they
left behind a large number and variety of
IEDs, including “Gypsum IEDs” which
are covered to resemble natural rocks
and “Ruler IEDs” which “consist of two
long ruler-like pieces.” Following ISIS’s
withdrawal, Turkish-backed forces found
a workshop where the “Gypsum IEDs”
were being produced en masse.
Those hoping for ISIS final stands
in urban areas may be disappointed.
Many of the same elements the group
employs to defend cities and towns,
including human shields, IEDs, and
tunnels, also facilitate ISIS’s retreat
from areas it can no longer hold. Before
abandoning their positions, ISIS forces
deploy “specialized rapid deployment
groups for planting IEDs” in areas it is
abandoning. The victors are thus left to
deal with largely destroyed and virtually
ungovernable population centers
teeming with IEDs. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“… tunnels, trenches
and minefields
surrounding the city
played a pivotal role
in delaying military
victory…”

Tunnel found on the outskirts of
Damascus, March 2017.

Source: Syrian Defense Ministry Instagram Account, https://
www.instagram.com/p/BRIzioiD2hC/?taken-by=syrian.
defense.ministry

Source:
‫ خط فاصل يرسم حدود السيطرة‬:‫”معركة الباب بمراحلها األخيرة‬
Mohammed Amin. “Battle for al-Bab in Final Stages: Definitive Dividing Line of Control.”
al-Araby al-Jadid, 12 February 2017. https://goo.gl/7XHUCV
Operation Euphrates Shield, which began last August, made major gains including regaining
large swathes of territory along the Syria-Turkey border. It was halted at the border of ... al-Bab,
where it faced unprecedented resistance from ISIS to defend the strategic city. The presence of
over 70,000 civilians in the city, as well as tunnels, trenches and minefields surrounding the city
played a pivotal role in delaying military victory. ISIS also used suicide bombers to wear out
opposition and Turkish forces and kill and injure tens of them over the past two months.
Source:
‫”لماذا طالت معركة الباب؟‬
“Why did the Battle for al-Bab Drag On?” al-Modon, 1 March 2017. https://goo.gl/lXCFdw
“Mines and tunnels everywhere” is how one might describe al-Bab after it was liberated by
“Euphrates Shield” from ISIS… ISIS planted IEDs throughout the entire city, in unexpected
places, using camouflaged mines, most importantly those known as “Gypsum IEDs” which are
in the shape of natural rocks. They also hid mines in cookware and teapots. “Ruler IEDs” used
on roads to stop vehicles and personnel consists of two long ruler-like pieces; when a vehicle
or person goes by them they explode… The group has specialized rapid deployment groups for
planting IEDs. Most of the cities that ISIS withdraws from still suffer until now from the IED
nightmare… For its resistance throughout the duration of the al-Bab battle the group also relied
on ancient caves, ruins and underground chambers built thousands of years ago, using them as
tunnels for supply lines and to withdraw. Al-Bab resembles other Syrian cities built long ago,
with layers of construction one upon another… Following al-Bab’s liberation, opposition forces
discovered a network of tunnels of various lengths linking ISIS-held territory in al-Bab with the
town of Tadef, Bazaa, and Qabasin. One had been expanded to fit vehicles, while most others
could fit a person. The group greatly benefited from ancient Roman tunnels in the area that link
most of East Aleppo’s towns to one another.
Source:
‫ تعرف عليه‬..‫”الدولة” يستخدم تكتيكا جديداً في معركة الباب‬
(ISIS’s New Tactics in the al-Bab Battle),” Baladi News, 4 February 2017. https://goo.gl/
BqEusK
Refugees from the city of al-Bab said that ISIS used water drainage tunnels after expanding
them for military use, employing them to move between al-Bab and neighboring villages.
Anatolia Press Agency quoted refugees as saying that ISIS gunmen used water system tunnels
that linked al-Bab to Tadef and Qabasin for transport and to avoid airstrikes.
OE Watch | April 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Yemen: Sana’a Government Claims
Domestic UAV Production
OE Watch Commentary: In late February 2017, the
Huthi-led government based in Sana’a showcased what
it claimed were four indigenously produced UAVs. Two
of the drones resemble designs used by the US Army
(AeroVironment Raven RQ-11 and Puma RQ-20) while
the third seems based on a commercially available kit
(Skywalker X-8). The fourth UAV is an Iranian Ababilmodel miniature attack drone, similar to ones employed in
recent years by both Hizbullah and Hamas. As highlighted
in the accompanying passages from Yemeni and Saudi
media sources, there is disagreement on the significance of
these new weapons.
Screenshot from ceremony unveiling new Yemeni UAVs, February 2017.
Opponents of the Sana’a government dismissed the event
Sources: al-Masira, War Media, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wWaCEHJob1I
as showmanship and propaganda. They
Source:
‫”طائرات الحوثي المسيّـرة تثير انتقادات اليمنيين وسخريتهم‬
questioned whether the UAVs were actually
Adel Abdullah. (Huthi ‘UAVs’ Elicit Criticism and Satire in Yemen),” al-Hayat, 5 March
functional and argued that Yemen presently
2016. https://goo.gl/u8mdLu
lacks the infrastructure and know-how to
manufacture drones. The author of the first
“Manufacturing such aircraft requires comprehensive infrastructure and various
passage contends that if the planes are indeed
specializations that are not currently available in Yemen.” The source added that the Huthis
functional, they are probably manufactured
had obtained these aircraft in the same way they had obtained the unmanned speedboats…
abroad, and their impact on the battlefield
“ foreign support for the Huthis”… “The aircraft do not have much value in war and will
is limited. On the other hand, for Huthi
not bring them victory or give a party complete dominance. Their role is mostly limited to
supporters, the UAVs represent an important
photographing, monitoring and determining targets, while also attacking limited targets.
upgrade in capabilities. As the second
Naturally this is important, but hardly decisive, and these aircraft can be tracked and shot
passage notes, UAVs can help improve
down.”
artillery targeting and intelligence gathering.

In late January, pro-Huthi fighters were
spotted preparing to launch a small UAV
near the port city of Mokha. According to the
official news agency of the UAE, the drone
was as Iranian made and “was destroyed by
an air to surface missile in coordination with
the UAE Air Force operating in Yemen.” The
GCC coalition may eventually develop costeffective methods to counter these simple
drones. Until then however, their presence
will increase the GCC coalition’s costs in
more than one way. As the final pro-Huthi
passages notes, GCC and allied forces must
now “be careful and conceal weapons,
equipment and ammunition stockpiles to
avoid detection.”
Building a sustainable indigenous defense
manufacturing base is an important goal for
the Huthi Movement. Their most notable
efforts to date involve the production of
several rocket artillery systems based on
Iranian designs and modifications of Sovietera missiles from government stockpiles.
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫رئيس المجلس السياسي األعلى يفتتح المعرض االول للطائرات المسيرة بدون طيا‬
(Supreme Political Council President Visits First UAV Exhibition),” 26 September
Newspaper, 26 February 2017. http://www.26sep.net/news_details.
php?sid=125624&lng=arabic
On display were the basic models of the first batch of production… their technical and
battlefield capabilities in artillery targeting, observing and pinpointing massing of adversary
forces and equipment, relaying updates to the missile and artillery units as well as the
support and assessment teams.
Source: “Arab Coalition Forces with help of UAE Air Force destroys Iranian made
unmanned aircraft in Mokha, Yemen,” Emirates News Agency (WAM), 28 January 2017.
http://wam.ae/en/details/1395302593921
The aircraft was at a mobile launching platform, intended to target Yemeni forces…
Yemeni forces detected the aircraft during surveillance of North Mokha Area, adding that
the aircraft was about to take off for its mission when it was destroyed by an air to surface
missile in coordination with the UAE Air Force operating in Yemen.
Source:
‫الطائرات بدون طيار محلية الصنع تكشف فاعليتها في تهديد قوى العدوان ومرتزقته‬
(Domestically Manufactured UAVs Prove Their Effectiveness Against the Attackers and
Mercenaries),” Yemeni Ministry of Information, 2 March 2017. https://goo.gl/UwuMlu
An anonymous source told the Yemeni News Agency SABA that the soldiers and
mercenaries of enemy forces on all fronts will have to be careful and conceal weapons,
equipment and ammunition stockpiles to avoid detection from the military and Popular
Committees’ highly effective surveillance craft…
OE Watch | April 2017

12

AFRICA
Somali Government Opposes UAE’s Base in Somaliland
OE Watch Commentary: The UAE’s decision to establish a base in the
breakaway republic of Somaliland has attracted the ire of the Somali government.
As the accompanying passage discusses, plans are in the works for Somalia to file
a legal case against the Persian Gulf nation, claiming that the base violates Somali
sovereignty; though it is not clear where they would file such a case.
The passage notes that the Somali government’s auditor general “blasted the UAE
for violating Somalia’s national and territorial integrity, demanding that the Persian
Gulf state withdraw from the deal.” According to the passage, the auditor general
is not only criticizing the UAE for violating Somali sovereignty but is also accusing
Somaliland officials as well as Somalia’s former President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
of accepting bribes to allow the base to be approved.
Somaliland declared itself independent from Somalia in 1991 following the collapse
of the Somali government. While a democracy and relatively peaceful, it has not been
recognized as a sovereign nation by any country. However, despite this lack of formal
recognition there have been numerous business deals with its government, including
one with a Dubai based company for a 442 million dollar upgrade to the port of
Berbera through which Somaliland exports a large number of livestock to the Middle
East. As the passage notes, Berbera is also where the UAE is establishing its military
base; intending to use it for anti-Yemen operations as part of the Saudi-led coalition
waging war in that country.
The Somaliland base would not be the UAE’s only one in Africa. The country
already has a base in the Eritrean port city of Assab. However, the Somaliland base,
located only 90 kilometers from Yemen, would better
enable the UAE to tighten the existing blockade
on Yemen.
So far despite protests from
the Somali government
that Somaliland does not
have the right to enter
into such deals, the
plans for a base
there appear to be
moving forward.
Somalia, which
spent much of the
time since 1991
in chaos, has
often been angry
with Somaliland,
which during
the same period,
was peaceful and
growing into a hub
of commerce. The
Somali government is
angry once again, and
once again Somaliland is
proceeding anyway. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Somalia’s internationally-backed
government is reportedly planning to
file a legal case against the rulers of the
United Arab Emirates (UAE) for setting
up a military base in the unrecognized
breakaway republic of Somaliland.”
Source: “Somalia plans to file legal complaint
against UAE over Somaliland base,” Shabelle
News (Somalia), 16 February 2017. http://www.
shabellenews.com/2017/02/somalia-plans-to-filelegal-complaint-against-uae-over-somaliland-base/
Somalia’s internationally-backed government is
reportedly planning to file a legal case against the
rulers of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for setting
up a military base in the unrecognized breakaway
republic of Somaliland.
The UAE, which is part of a Saudi Arabian-led
military coalition waging war on Yemen since 2015,
intends to use the Berbera base for its anti-Yemen
operations.
[The Somali government’s Auditor General] Farah
said Emirati officials had bribed officials in
Somaliland to get the deal through. He
accused senior officials in Somaliland
and the government of Somalia’s
former President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud of approving
the deal for the sake of
“illegitimate private
gains.”
He also blasted the
UAE for violating
Somalia’s national and
territorial integrity,
demanding that the
Persian Gulf state
withdraw from the
deal.
Disputed territories
within a disputed territory.
Somaliland claims the
entire area of the former
British Somaliland, the dark
and light green areas. However,
the light green area is disputed
by another unrecognized
autonomous state, Maakhir in the
northern section of the light green
and below that by Puntland, another
self–declared autonomous state. Somalia
lays claim against all these areas.

Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | April 2017

13

AFRICA
South Africa: Foreigners Unwelcome
OE Watch Commentary: The recent spate of
attacks against Nigerians, Somalis and other African
immigrants living in South Africa has brought the
issue of xenophobia to the forefront in the country.
As the accompanying article relates, this is not a new
phenomenon for South Africa, having taken root about
ten years ago and often overlooked by
the country’s leaders. To be sure, many
South Africans welcome their fellow
Africans, but there is no denying that the
violence perpetrated against foreigners
is significant. While the numbers are
unconfirmed, the article reports that 14
Somalis were killed in the Western Cape
Province just within the first few weeks of
2017. Other nationalities have suffered a
similar fate.
This xenophobic violence has become
a major issue for African countries that
have substantial numbers of their citizens
living in South Africa. In 2015 it was even
on the agenda of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU); right
there with discussions about al-Shabaab
terrorists and hate groups. It would be
embarrassing for the AU to tackle it
again. However, there are certain parallels between
2015 and 2017. Following xenophobic violence in 2015,
some countries boycotted or expelled South African
businesses. Threats to again employ such measures
have resurfaced in 2017 as countries are clearly
frustrated with South Africa’s failure to stop these
attacks.
There have been some measures implemented,
including faster police response times, that have helped
mitigate a portion of the violence. This however only
addresses the symptoms but does not get to the root of
the xenophobia problem, which according to the article,
is the fact that “political leaders legitimize rather
than challenge xenophobic attitudes.” As the passage
discusses, one glaring example of this is President
Zuma’s decision “to allow a recent violent march in
Pretoria to go ahead on the basis that it was a protest
against crime, including drug-dealing and prostitution,
rather than against foreigners.”
The violence against immigrants has been attributed
to three factors: xenophobia, criminal opportunism
and, as often happens when economies falter,
scapegoatism. All are hard to combat, and in failing to
do so vigorously enough, South Africa has tarnished
its reputation on the continent. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“The latest outburst of xenophobic violence in South
Africa’s political capital, Pretoria, and commercial capital,
Johannesburg, is once again reverberating across the
continent.”

South Africa has struggled with xenophobia over the past ten years. In 2008 Burundian
refugees, including those pictured here, lived in the open after they were evicted from a
shelter, one they had moved to following xenophobia related attacks.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: Peter Fabricius, “Xenophobia again jeopardizes South Africa’s interests
in Africa,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 2 March 2017. https://
issafrica.org/iss-today/xenophobia-again-jeopardises-south-africas-interests-inafrica
The latest outburst of xenophobic violence in South Africa’s political capital,
Pretoria, and commercial capital, Johannesburg, is once again reverberating
across the continent.
It could be offered, in mitigation, that xenophobia is on the rise everywhere in
the world, and also that it tends to target relatively wealthy countries like South
Africa, which are magnets for immigrants.
He [African Diaspora Forum Chairperson Marc Gbaffou] deplored the decision
by President Jacob Zuma and the government to allow last Friday’s violent march
in Pretoria to go ahead on the basis that it was a protest against crime, including
drug-dealing and prostitution, rather than against foreigners.
Gareth Newham, Head of the Crime and Justice Programme at the Institute
for Security Studies (ISS) agrees that a big part of the problem is that political
leaders legitimise rather than challenge xenophobic attitudes. He cites Zuma’s
statement that ‘we cannot close our eyes to the concerns of communities that
most of the crimes, such as drug-dealing, prostitution and human trafficking, are
allegedly perpetrated by foreign nationals.’
The Somali Community Board of South Africa said, by early February, 14
Somalis had been killed in the Western Cape alone, though this has not been
confirmed.
OE Watch | April 2017

14

AFRICA
South Sudan: A Fragmenting Military?
OE Watch Commentary: South Sudan’s military, the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) is multiethnic, encompassing South Sudan’s two
predominant tribes, the Dinka and the Nuer, two formally rival groups. As the
accompanying passage discusses, several high profile officers have recently
quit, citing domination of the Dinka (which the President happens to be)
that extends to promotions and other spheres of military life. Complicating
matters are claims that a pro-government Dinka militia, ‘Mathiang Anyor,’ has
infiltrated the SPLA. The latest officer to resign, Brigadier General Kamila
Otwari Aleardo, describes
the country as suffering from
“the cancer of tribalism.”

“The latest to resign is Brig-Gen Kamila
Otwari Aleardo, a former commander of
the Logistics Support Brigade, who quit
on February 21, saying that the country is
suffering from ‘the cancer of tribalism.’”

The SPLA was born in
1983 out of Sudan’s southern
region. It was mostly
Christian and animist,
fighting for independence
from the country’s majorityMuslim northern section.
Independence for South
Sudan came in 2011, followed
shortly thereafter by a civil
war, with the two opposing
sides roughly composed of
the Dinka, of which President
Salva Kiir is a member, and
the Nuer, of which the former
vice president, Riek Machar,
belongs.
Back when the SPLA was
waging war against Sudan
for independence, there was a sense of unity in purpose among the then
guerrilla fighters. Despite serious and widespread interethnic conflicts that
predated independence, there was a common enemy in the form of Sudan that
helped disparate ethnic groups join together. But when Sudan agreed to allow
South Sudan to choose its own path, Sudan ceased as an enemy, and South
Sudan’s fragile unity started to fray. Trying to keep the new nation together,
the inaugural government incorporated representatives from both the Dinka
and the Nuer, with Salva Kiir as president and Riek Machar as vice president.
This eventually failed, with Kiir accusing Machar of plotting a coup and
Machar subsequently leading opposing forces. The fighting has left the country
shattered, with untold numbers dead and claims of ethnic cleansing and sexual
violence.
Two other top SPLA commanders besides Alearado have resigned from the
SPLA in recent weeks. As the accompanying article relates, the government
claims that those who left did so because they were being investigated and are
using claims of ethnic discrimination as “smokescreens.”
Though the last ceasefire broke down, there are peace initiatives in the
works. It is unknown what role, if any, these recent resignations will play as
South Sudan tries once again to form a unified nation. They are, however, a
reminder of how difficult that quest will be. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

In 2011 South Sudanese generals celebrated newly won independence
from Sudan. Today some high ranking South Sudanese officers claim the
military is suffering from tribalism.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: Fred Oluoch, “President Kiir faces fresh rebellion
as senior military officers resign,” The East African, 27
February 2017. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/
Kiir-fresh-rebellion-South-Sudan-senior-military-officersresign/2558-3830282-7h5h6y/index.html
South Sudanese President Salva Kiir is facing a series of
defections from the army as other communities accuse him
of favouring his Dinka community in promotions.
However, the government has dismissed the claims of
tribalism as smokescreens.
The latest to resign is Brig-Gen Kamila Otwari Aleardo, a
former commander of the Logistics Support Brigade, who
quit on February 21, saying that the country is suffering
from “the cancer of tribalism.”
The opposition say that the resignations are signs that
President Kiir is failing to keep the country together in the
face of fresh fighting that began in July last year, which has
since spread to Western, Eastern and Central Equatoria.
OE Watch | April 2017

15

AFRICA
Uganda Tries to Break the Terrorist – Ivory Connection
OE Watch Commentary: Uganda wants to decrease if not totally stop the trafficking
of elephant ivory across its borders. As the accompanying article discusses, Uganda’s
goals are twofold: to protect its elephant herds; and to stop the ivory trade which is
helping fund terrorist groups. These include Somalia’s al-Shabaab and the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA)- a homegrown group which wreaked havoc in northern
Uganda for two decades. (The LRA is now reportedly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where it supports itself by poaching on the large but declining elephant
population there.)
The article notes that 40,000 elephants are dying every year and that only 400,000 are
left in Africa. It thus claims that “in ten years, the elephant will be gone.” It also states
that “new UN reports indicate that one of the biggest funding sources for the LRA or
Al-Shabab and their affiliates is actually ivory, poached in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Central Africa or Chad.”
Both the European Union and China have agreed to do more to curb the demand for
ivory. But with ivory now surpassing the trafficking of narcotics for funding criminal
enterprises – a claim made by the article - stopping poaching and trafficking will not
be easy. Uganda however, is determined to fight this scourge that threatens its elephants
and funds terrorists. Stiffer prison sentences for those caught trafficking are presently
being debated. Meanwhile the Ugandan park rangers, who are on the frontlines, are
ramping up to prepare for the more sophisticated poaching operations that appear
inevitably to becoming their way. They are considering purchasing drones and body
armor. They are also establishing an intelligence unit to gather information on poachers.
If this sounds like war, it is. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“New UN reports indicate that one
of the biggest funding sources for
LRA or Al-Shabab and their affiliates
is actually ivory, poached in DR
Congo, Central Africa or Chad.”
Source: Christian Basl, “Uganda: Seguya - EU
Must Introduce a Strict Ban On Ivory Trade,”
The Observer (Uganda), 3 March 2017. http://
allafrica.com/stories/201703030422.html
“Because almost 40,000 elephants are dying
every year. There are only 400,000 left. So, in ten
years, the elephant will be gone.
First, there is definitely a link between poaching
and terrorism. New UN reports indicate that
one of the biggest funding sources for LRA or
Al-Shabab and their affiliates is actually ivory,
poached in DR Congo, Central Africa or Chad.
In the last few years, ivory has overtaken drugs
as a source of funding for criminal networks”.

Uganda is trying to stop the trafficking of ivory across its borders. Here confiscated poached ivory is being
destroyed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, preventing it from making its way further north.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | April 2017

16

AFRICA
Boko Haram’s Teenage Female Suicide Bombers
OE Watch Commentary: Boko Haram (BH), the radical Islamic
terrorist group in Nigeria whose name in English means “Western
education is forbidden,” can apparently be very stingy, even when
planning one of its signature attacks. As the accompanying article
relates, the group pays extremely little to
young females to be suicide bombers.

“…the Islamic militant group was paying young
girls less than $1 to carry out its suicide bombing
attacks.”

As the passage discusses, this was
discovered when two teenage girls
were on their way to attack a crowded
marketplace in the Nigerian city of
Maiduguri. For three days they wore
suicide vests before finally gathering
the courage to head to the city center.
However, before they could reach their
final destination, soldiers intervened,
stopping them for acting suspicious.
When commanded to remove their vests,
one girl complied but the other did not
and was shot dead. The amount the
surviving girl reported she had been paid
for the attack…less than a dollar.
The passage notes that a Nigerian
military spokesman claimed these attacks
are a sign of desperation by BH. This
may be true, given that the group has had
a series of setbacks in recent months at the hands of the armed forces.
However, the fact remains that since the insurgency began in 2006,
the group has left at least 20,000 dead and over 2.6 million displaced.
These recent attacks – or attempted attacks – by young girls and
others have left the population on edge. Unfortunately a dollar can
sow a great deal of fear .
Reports of a female suicide bomber inevitably raised questions
about whether she was one of the Chibok girls, the group of
schoolgirls kidnapped by BH in April 2014. A few have escaped,
been rescued, or freed, but most remain missing. The captured girl
apparently was not one of them and neither was her companion.
However, the media will likely continue to ask if there is a Chibok
schoolgirl involved whenever there is a successful or attempted
suicide bombing in Nigeria by a female. The question is warranted,
since one in five suicide bombers is believed to be a child and three
quarters of those are girls. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Boko Haram uses kidnapped teenage girls as suicide bombers. This one was
reportedly killed by Nigerian troops a year ago. She had not reached her target.
Source: Terrormonitor.org https://twitter.com/Terror_Monitor/status/713639852932218880/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw

Source: “Boko Haram Suicide Bombers Paid Less Than $1 to Carry
Out Suicide Attacks,” News24Wire, 8 March 2017. http://www.
news24.com/Africa/News/watch-boko-haram-suicide-bomberspaid-less-than-1-to-carry-out-suicide-attacks-20170308
The captured young woman ripped her suicide vest off after being
commanded to by police, but her companion was shot dead after
apparently refusing to do so.
The commander leading the Nigerian military’s theatre operations
against Boko Haram extremists was quoted saying he believed the
tactic was a sign of the group’s “increasing desperation.”
According to SkyNews, the Islamic militant group was paying
young girls less than $1 to carry out its suicide bombing attacks.

The Adaptive Transformation of Yemen’s Republican Guard
by Lucas Winter

This paper presents an analytical summary of the Yemeni Republican Guard’s adaptation to changing conditions in Yemen
following the 2011 resignation of Ali Abdullah Saleh. The Yemeni Republican Guard has effectively amalgamated with Huthi
forces into a hybrid that pairs young, ideologically motivated foot soldiers with trained operators of heavy weaponry and advanced equipment. This is similar in structure to successful fighting groups emerging from the battlefields of Syria and Iraq,
and may provide a template for the type of forces that will define the region’s operational environment for years to come.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Small_Wars_Journal_-_The_Adaptive_Transformation_of_Yemens_Republican_Guard_2017-03-07.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

17

AFRICA
Nigeria’s $11 Billion Railroad Project Backed by China
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 March, Yemi Osinbajo, the
acting President of Nigeria announced that Nigeria and China would
conclude negotiations for the Lagos-Calabar railroad venture in June
of this year. As the accompanying article reports, this is a $11.12
billion project, which will have significant economic impact for
Nigeria.

“The Chinese Government and Chinese Exim
Bank have always proved to be a reliable partner
to the Nigerian Government.”

The passage states that once completed, the project is expected to
open up the southwestern part of the nation to additional commerce
with a particular boost to the agricultural sector. It will also be used
to move passengers, who currently spend large amounts of time in
gridlock on bad roads. Being a massive undertaking, the rail line will
be constructed in segments, and as part of a larger plan to provide
increasing rail transportation to many parts of the country. With
many of those lines connecting to Lagos, this African megacity can
expect to become even more mega.
Chinese-Nigerian economic ties have been fraught at times. China
has been willing to invest in certain large projects deemed too risky
by Western businesses. On the other hand, low cost Chinese products
flooding the Nigerian market have resulted in massive layoffs in
Nigeria’s textile sector, causing a backlash and enmity among many
Nigerians towards the Chinese. Poor quality Chinese electrical power
strips, outlets, and wires blamed for numerous fires in Lagos have
not helped the situation. Nevertheless, the two countries are moving
forward with this rail venture.
Though Nigeria will be providing part of the funding for the
project, it is unclear whether China is providing just a loan or a
combination of a loan and investment. Confusing the situation is that
oftentimes Chinese loans to Africa, especially for large projects such
as this one, have contractual stipulations that Chinese firms must be
hired for at least part of the construction project. This lack of clarity
is one reason why it is difficult to quantify exactly how much China
invests in Africa, even though China is probably the single largest
bilateral source of investment in the continent. What is known,
however, is that it is huge, and ranges from individuals starting small
restaurants to large companies with government backing investing
enormous sums in mining, energy, manufacturing and railroads.
China is making lucrative deals in Africa, and such deals often build
closer ties between both parties. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Nigeria plans to invest heavily in rail lines in the coming years, with many of them
connecting to the megacity Lagos, destined to become even more mega.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: Gboyega Akinsanmi and Benneth Oghifofg, “China to
Finalize $11bn Lagos-Calabar Rail Deal in June,” This Day (Nigeria),
8 March 2017. https://www.thisdaylive.com/index.php/2017/03/08/fgchina-to-finalise-11bn-lagos-calabar-rail-deal-in-june/
“The acting President, Yemi Osinbajo, said on Tuesday [that] the
federal government and the People’s Republic of China would round
off negotiations on the Lagos-Calabar rail project estimated at
$11.117 billion in June.
He said the proposed extension of the Lagos-Ibadan Rail Project
would go a long way to open up the economy of the South-west as
well as facilitate regional integration and growth.
“We are looking forward to a fast and efficient service between
Lagos and Ibadan within the projected time frame which is on or
before December 2018”.

The Lagos-Calabar rail.

Source: http://www.nigeriagists.com/2016/07/federal-govt-signs-china-11117bn.html

“We made provision for matching funds in 2016 budget to
complement the concession loans obtained from the People Republic
of China. The Chinese Government and Chinese Exim Bank have
always proved to be a reliable partner to the Nigerian Government.
We have the entire Lagos Kano rail track as well as the Lagos
Calabar railway track in the 2017 budget,” he added.”
OE Watch | April 2017

18

AFRICA
ISIS Carves a Niche in Puntland
OE Watch Commentary: On 8 February, the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) claimed responsibility for an attack on a hotel in Bosaso,
located in Somalia’s northeastern semi-autonomous state of Puntland. A
pro-government militia had reportedly been staying at the hotel, which is
commonly frequented by government officials. The accompanying passage
from a Somali news source discusses the attack and claims that ISIS is
trying to make inroads into Puntland, an area where al-Shabaab had been
the predominant militant until recently.
The article points out that this is the first time ISIS has claimed an attack
in a major city in Puntland. It claims that ISIS is trying to make inroads into
Puntland, where al-Shabaab has historically been the chief militant group.
Nonetheless, al-Shabaab’s current presence in Puntland is relatively small,
as the group concentrates most of its resources and personnel on strongholds
in southern Somalia. Pro-ISIS militants in Somalia who defected from alShabaab, may therefore be trying to carve out a niche in Puntland because
they would not be able to compete with al-Shabaab’s larger presence in
southern Somalia. Given that al-Shabaab kills those who defect to the ISIS
camp, they may also want to have their own niche, away from al-Shabaab.
Carving out such niches appears to be the strategy of pro-ISIS militant
“start-ups” in other regions where al-Qaeda affiliated groups are wellestablished. In Afghanistan the declared ISIS province has found a niche
in Nangarhar Province, where the Taliban presence is minimal. In northern
Burkina Faso, pro-ISIS militants have carved out a niche where al-Qaeda
in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) has not historically had a strong presence.
If this trend of carving out niches continues, it is possible ISIS will seek to
form other groups in other places in Africa, where there are ISIS supporters,
such as the Swahili Coast of Kenya and Tanzania, or Senegal. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The hotel raid signals ISIS’s desire to
make inroads in a region dominated by rival
al-Qaeda-affiliated al-Shabab militants.”
Source: “Somalia: ISIL claims responsibility for attack on
Village Hotel in Bosaso,” Garowe Online, 8 February 2017.
http://www.garoweonline.com/en/news/puntland/somalia-isilclaims-responsibility-for-attack-on-village-hotel-in-bosaso
ISIS has claimed responsibility for the attack on Village Hotel
in Bosaso, the commercial hub of Puntland region, that killed
4 pro-government forces on election day, Garowe Online
reports. ISIS released a statement claiming responsibility for
the hotel raid, which left six people, including two attackers
dead. The terror group’s statement said ISIS fighters stormed
the Village Hotel in Bosaso in the early hours frequented with
foreigners and Puntland state officials, and killed at least four
security guards. During the attack, two attackers were shot
dead by the security guards of the hotel as they attempted
to fight their way into the building, while other four gunmen
involved in the raid are reported to have escaped. This is the
first attack by pro-ISIS militants in a major city in Somalia’s
northeastern semi-autonomous state of Puntland.... The
Village Hotel raid signals ISIS’s desire to make inroads in a
region dominated by rival, al-Qaeda-affiliated al-Shabaab
militants who carried out several assassinations in Bosaso
last year.

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media
that our analysts believe give
military and security experts an
added dimension to their critical
thinking about the Operational
Environment.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/oewpastissues.html
OE Watch | April 2017

19

LATIN AMERICA
‘Odebrecht’ and the Forum of Sao Paulo
OE Watch Commentary: In December 2016, Brazil’s
largest construction company pleaded guilty to having bribed
government officials to secure public works contracts. The
scandal’s exposure led to the ouster of President Dilma Rouseff,
and has led to investigations throughout Latin America, including
in Colombia, Peru, Argentina and others. The shorthand for
the scandal is ‘Odebrecht,’ named after the Brazil-based global
construction conglomerate at the heart of it. The accompanying
passages discuss ‘Odebrecht’ and offer Latin American
perspectives on it.
The first accompanying reference notes that Odebrecht pleaded
guilty to charges “arising out of their schemes to pay hundreds
of millions of dollars in bribes to government officials around
the world.” It points out that “Odebrecht ... used a hidden but
fully functioning business unit—a ‘Department of Bribery,’ so to
speak—that systematically paid hundreds of millions of dollars to
corrupt government officials in countries on three continents...”
The second reference, from an on-line Colombian news blog,
is an editorial written from an anti-communist ideological
perspective. Though partisan, it outlines a significant forensic
correlation, and highlights salient features in current Latin
American politics and irregular warfare. The excerpt suggests that
the scandal is traced to the two top leaders of Brazil’s political
hard left, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rouseff. The author claims that
this “demonstrates the murky character of the governments of the
socialism of the XXI century, guided by the Forum of Sao Paulo.”
The Forum, founded by Fidel Castro and Lula da Silva, is a
hemisphere-wide umbrella of Marxist-Leninist organizations,
established in the early 1990s to find ways to move forward after
the collapse of the Soviet Union. The Forum mounted electoral
efforts that succeeded in taking the reins of many governments
at the national, departmental and local levels throughout Latin
America. As the third accompanying passage, from a popular
Colombian radio outlet claims, the ‘ways’ for progress on which
the forum landed featured parasitic attachment to government
contracts and programs, black market trade (especially of illegal
drugs) and direct extortion payments. The excerpt claims that
“Odebrecht construction company paid money to the FARC for
the past twenty years for being allowed to carry out several works
in Colombia.”
The final excerpt from Caretas, the leading weekly Peruvian
newsmagazine, provides an example that suggests that the
tentacles of the corruption scheme reached in many directions. It
notes that “Odebrecht...is a disproportionately large construction
company due to its public contracts,” and that “...if its fall drags
down Graña and Montero and other Peruvian construction
companies,” we might see a crisis like “that of 1999...”
When two of the region’s largest economies, Brazil and
Argentina, began to sink (and the region’s ideological pendulum
began to move right) the leftist grip on the reins of the
government executive branches of those two countries loosened.
When the pro-Bolivarian parties lost control, the corruption
scheme came increasingly to light. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: “Odebrecht and Braskem Plead Guilty and Agree to Pay at Least
$3.5 Billion in Global Penalties to Resolve Largest Foreign Bribery Case
in History,” U.S. Department of Justice, 21 December 2016. https://www.
justice.gov/opa/pr/odebrecht-and-braskem-plead-guilty-and-agree-payleast-35-billion-global-penalties-resolve
“Odebrecht S.A. (Odebrecht), a global construction conglomerate
based in Brazil, and Braskem S.A. (Braskem), a Brazilian petrochemical
company, pleaded guilty today and agreed to pay a combined total
penalty of at least $3.5 billion to resolve charges ... arising out of their
schemes to pay hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes to government
officials around the world.
...
“Odebrecht and Braskem used a hidden but fully functioning
Odebrecht business unit—a ‘Department of Bribery,’ so to speak—that
systematically paid hundreds of millions of dollars to corrupt government
officials in countries on three continents,” said Deputy Assistant Attorney
General Suh.”
Source: Ariel Peña, “‘Lucha Ideológica’: Odebrecht y el Foro de Sao
Pablo (Ideological Struggle: Odebrecht and the Forum of Sao Paulo),”
Minuto30, 6 February 2017. http://www.minuto30.com/odebrecht-y-elforo-de-sao-pablo/599378/.
“It is said that corruption has no political color, but what is powerfully
called to our attention is that Lula Da Silva, who was the intermediary ...
of Odebrecht since he assumed the presidency in 2003, was financed by
that construction company along with his successor, Dilma Rouseff, which
demonstrates the murky character of the governments of the socialism of
the XXI century, guided by the Forum of Sao Paulo, a creature birthed to
keep marxism-leninism from dying after the fall of the Berlin Wall,....”
Source: Editors, “Odebrecht habría pagado dinero a las Farc por más de
20 años, según medio brasileño (Odebrecht had paid money to the FARC
for more than 20 years according to a Brazilian news organization),”
Radio RCN, Bogotá, 4 March 2017, http://www.rcnradio.com/
internacional/odebrecht-habria-pagado-dinero-a-las-farc-por-mas-de-20anos-medio-brasileno/.
“The News magazine Veja revealed that the Odebrecht construction
company paid money to the FARC for the past twenty years for being
allowed to carry out several works in Colombia. … According to the
journal’s reporters, the payments began in the 90s and they asked
monthly for permission to continue the contracts in those sites where the
guerrilla was operating. The Office of the Attorney General informed that,
‘The payments began happening in the decade of 1990 and with a range
of 50,000 to 100,000 dollars per month’,…”
Source: Editors, “Efecto Odebrecht (The Odebrecht Effect),” Caretas, 2
March 2017, http://caretas.pe/sociedad/78383-efecto_odebrecht.
“The possibility of a rupture in the payment chain has begun to make
the finance sector nervous…Odebrecht, now accosted financially and in
penal court, is a disproportionately large construction company due to
its public contracts. According to some, if its fall drags down Graña and
Montero and other Peruvian construction companies, we might come to a
crisis as severe as that of 1999…”
OE Watch | April 2017

20

LATIN AMERICA
Creative Guerrilla Disarmament
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying Colombian sources
provide a negative view of the
FARC demobilization process
(when compared to the supportive
descriptions from the government
and elite Colombian press). If these
sources at all accurate, the FARC
demobilization process may be more
challenging than we might hope. The
sources indicate that the agreement
the government struck with the FARC
included the establishment (within
the existing government’s personnel
protective service, the UNP) of a new
force of 1200 armed personnel to
protect the leaders of the FARC and
its new political party. According
to these sources, that force would be
filled with current fighters from FARC
ranks, and be equipped and armed
by the government. Meanwhile, it
also appears from these sources that
the process of the promised FARC
weapons turn-in is not completely
transparent, and that the FARC
leaders unilaterally decided that the
FARC units would not disarm until
the FARC leaders were completely
satisfied that their amnesty had been
perfectly achieved. If we were to
give credence to the analyses of
these sources, then not only are the
guerrillas not turning in all their
weapons, the Colombian taxpayers
are going to supply them a substantial
number of new weapons. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“The government has promised the guerrilla group that 1200 men from its
ranks will form part of the UNP.”
Source: Vanesa Vallejo, “Guerrilleros de FARC: de asesinos a escoltas armados y pagados por el
Estado colombiano (FARC Guerrillas: from murderers to armed escorts paid by the Colombian
State),” Pan Am Post, 28 February 2017. https://es.panampost.com/vanessa-araujo/2017/02/28/farcde-asesinos-a-escoltas-estado/.
“…In addition to the discontent that such a condition can bring to the Colombian people, who have
to pay for the FARC’s political party as well as its security structure, there is another startling and
demeaning fact. The government has promised the guerrilla group that 1200 men from its ranks
will form part of the UNP [government protective service analogous to the US Secret Service] and
they will be the bodyguards of the party and of the leadership of the FARC.”
Source: Beatriz de Majo, “Entrega de armas: oscuridad total (Weapons hand-over: total darkness),”
El Republicano Liberal, 25 February 2017. http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/columnista/
entrega-armas-oscuridad-total_82669#.
“Let’s say the arsenal of weapons and munitions that are found in the hands of the criminals rises
to more than 80,000 units, in order to begin with a reasonable figure given that nobody knows
the actual number. A source from the military engineers assures that around 30,000 of these
correspond to long arms, that is, rifles and machine guns, rifles and grenade launchers, while
between 15,000 and 20,000 would include pistols, revolvers and grenades…This same collaborator
is among those who believe that also unknown is the number of militia, or support networks, or
who composes them, because that forms part of the clandestine element of this type of structures,
such that, if they have weapons among them, the total number of weapons as well as their type is
unknown.”
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Las Farc inventan pretextos para no entregar las armas (The FARC
are inventing pretexts to not turn-in weapons),” Periodismo sin Fronteras, 28 February 2017. http://
www.periodismosinfronteras.org/las-farc-inventan-pretextos-para-no-entregar-las-armas.html.
“…The other idea that is circulating these days is that ‘the country saw’, as Semana says, the
ingress of ‘every one of 6,961 men of the guerrilla’ in those zones. Ridiculous. The country has not
seen anything. Only a scant few photos and some short videos. That is all….To all of that they are
adding another condiment, the most dangerous: they want a new chronogram for the supposed turnin of weapons. This operation has been postponed by the FARC with the sophistry that they would
not turn in a single weapon until ‘amnesty’ is fully awarded to them….”

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of the Lone
Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of low-level guerrilla
combat as told by the survivors. They cover fighting from the cities
of Grozny and Argun to the villages of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and
finally the hills, river valleys and mountains that make up so much
of Chechnya. Dodge Billingsley, the primary author was embedded
with Chechen guerrilla forces after the first war, so he knows the
country, the culture, the key actors and the conflict. Yet, as a Western
outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and objectivity. Fangs
of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is becoming
modern and future war.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf

OE Watch | April 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA
FARC Demobilization Zones
OE Watch Commentary: The agreement reached by
the FARC with the government of Colombia involves the
movement of uniformed, armed FARC units to a set of
what is evidently a final total of 19 veredas. The vereda
(generally comparable in scale to a rural township in the
United States) is the fourth-tier administrative entity in
Colombia, within the municipio (generally comparable
to US county). Analysts of the war and of what is being
optimistically billed as the post-conflict will want to take
note of and record the locations of these spatial entities.
In the demobilization context they are referred to as
Zonas Veredales Transitorias de Normalización. The
sequence of cognates is variously translatable, but the
key words remain: Zone, Transitory and Normalization.
Much is being made in Colombia of how they are being
improved, organized, run, what they cost, and etcetera.
The first accompanying reference gives the names
of the departments, counties and 20 of the candidate
veredas chosen mid-2016. [At publication time we are
not sure which of the 20 was dropped] The arguments
surrounding the question of which veredas were to be
selected included FARC leaders’ concerns for the safety
of the FARC elements during the transition process. The
locations appear to correlate with major smuggling and
escape corridors, as well as with areas of sanctuary and,
perhaps, affinity populations. Military analysts will
find many articles regarding the practical and political
difficulties involved in the so-called demobilization
process. Throughout they will want to analyze the internal
and regional spatial meaning of these veredas to consider
if their control by the FARC gives the FARC leaders any
additional advantage in maintaining impunity for illicit
activities and the acquisition of political power, or if the
distribution of FARC elements to those locations actually
weakens the overall strategic position of the organization.
This analysis should be made in the context of the power
advantage given to or wrested from the larger Bolivarian
movement of which the FARC is part. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Colprensa, “Gobierno y Farc reducen a 20 las zonas veredales para
desmovilización (Government and FARC reduce to twenty the veredal zones
for demobilization),” Colprensa, 15 September 2016. http://www.elpais.com.
co/elpais/colombia/proceso-paz/noticias/gobierno-y-farc-reducen-27-zonasveredales-para-desmovilizacion.
This is where the veredal zones will be located:

Departamento
Municipio
Guajira
Fonseca
Cesar
La Paz
Norte de Santander Tibú
Remedios
Ituango
Dabeiba
Antioquia
Anori
Vigía del Fuerte
Choco
Ríosucio
Córdoba
Tierra Alta
Tolima
Planadas
Buenos Aires
Cauca
Caldono
Corinto
Policarpa
Nariño
Tumaco
Putumayo
Puerto Asís
Cartagena del Chaira
Caquetá
La Montañita
San Vicente Caguan
Tolima
Villarica
Arauca
Arauquita
Mesetas
Meta
Vista Hermosa
La Macarena
San José del Guaviare
Guaviare
El Retorno

Vereda
Pondores (PTN)
Los Encantos (ZVTN)
Caño Indio (ZVTN)
Carrizal (ZVTN)
Santa Lucia (ZVTN)
Llano Grande (ZVTN)
El Carmin (PTN)
Vidri (PTN)
Brisas/La Florida (PTN)
Gallo (PTN)
El Jordan (ZVTN)
El Ceral, Robles (ZVTN)
Los Monos (ZVTN)
Cominera (PTN)
Betania/La Paloma (ZVTN)
La Variante (ZVTN)
La Pradera (ZVTN)
La Esperanza (ZVTN)
El Carmen (ZVTN)
Mira Valle (PTN)
Guanacas (ZVTN)
Bocas del Ele (ZVTN)
La Guajira (ZVTN)
La Reforma (ZVTN)
Yarí (ZVTN)
Charras (ZVTN)
La Colina (ZVTN)

[ZVTN stands for the Zona Veredal Transitoria de Normalizacion, and PTN
is a Punto Transicional de Normalizacion. The latter are much smaller (four
hectare) intermediate points.]
Source: El País and Colprensa, “Culminó movilización de las Farc a las zonas
veredales (Movement of the FARC to the veredal zones culminated), “ El País
and Colprensa, 19 February 2017 http://impactocna.com/culmino-movilizacionde-las-farc-a-las-zonas-veredales/

Source: Twitter. Conflicto y paz @conflictoAlDia

The operation began this past January 28 with the redeployment of FARC
structures from the 36 temporary pre-aggregation zones toward the 19 zones
and points of transition. The redeployments were done on foot, by vehicle, and
by boats accompanied by the MM&V [unit of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia called the ‘Mechanism for Monitoring and Verification’] and the Public
Force.
OE Watch | April 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA
Guillermo Lasso
OE Watch Commentary: Ecuadorans will have held their secondround presidential elections on 2 April. The two finalist candidates are
Lenín Boltaire Moreno Garcés and Guillermo Alberto Santiago Lasso
Mendoza. As it concerns most OE Watch readers, the two represent,
respectively, a continuation of the Bolivarian (pro-Venezuela/pro Cuba/
marxist-socialist) policies of the incumbent Bolivarian regime of Rafael
Correa, and a free market-oriented classical liberal. This commenter
has little faith in the sparse polling data that exists, but if we give some
weight to a general impression gained from social media and to the
appreciation of a general ideological swing around the continent, then
Mr. Lasso may very well win. Although Lenín Moreno handily won
the first round by a margin of ten percentage points, it appears that
more of the votes that went to the third, fourth and fifth candidates
in the first round would go to Guillermo Lasso based on ideological
voting records of the parties. Still, Lenín Moreno has all the advantages
of incumbency, including potential vote tampering, and he is not an
unattractive candidate personally. Lenín Moreno is also known as a
humorist. It is curiously humorous that his first name so summarizes
what many Ecuadorans expect of him ideologically and politically. He
was Rafael Correa’s vice president for six years, so is tightly identifiable
with the views, policies and intrigues of the current president. A vote
for Mr. Moreno would be a vote for continuity at a moment when the
public mood in South America as a whole seems to be swinging away
from the left.
As the second source indicates, among the changes that a Guillermo
Lasso victory might bring is the possible end of sanctuary for Julian
Assange in the Ecuadoran embassy in London. Probably more
consequential to observers within the region, however, would be a
precipitous decline of Ecuadoran support to the Maduro regime in
Venezuela.
Given Ecuador’s muddled electoral math at the time of this writing,
complicated public psychological factors, potential for electoral
fraud and the dubious quality of polling, we find it difficult to make
a prediction based on any weight of evidence, scientific reasoning or
experience. We recur then to a fellow with a modest Internet following,
who seems to have correctly predicted the first round, and who may
have as good a finger on the Ecuadoran electoral pulse as anyone. End
OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“The winner will be…Guillermo Lasso.”

Guillermo Alberto Santiago Lasso Mendoza

Source: https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guillermo_Lasso#/media/File:Guillermo_Lasso_perfil_vertical.jpg

Source: “Profecía Elecciones Electorales 2 Vuelta del Ecuador
(destrucción total) (Prophesy for the Ecuadoran Elections in the
2nd Electoral Round),” Que Pedo WEY, 9 February 2017. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=MCT6JIxvYTA
“...The winner of these elections will be Guillermo Lasso....”
Source: Sputnik, “Presidente Correa: Asilo de Assange depende
de quién gane las elecciones en Ecuador (President Correa:
Assange asylum depends on who wins the election in Ecuador),”
Ecuadorinmediato, 20 March 2017. http://www.ecuadorinmediato.
com/index.php?module=Noticias&func=news_user_
view&id=2818816116.
“…Lasso has said explicitly that, if he wins the elections, he will
remove Julian Assange from the Ecuadoran embassy…”

“…Lasso has said explicitly that… he will remove
Julian Assange…”

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA
Guatemala to Move Soldiers from Cities to Border Regions
OE Watch Commentary: Guatemala has the eighth
highest murder rate in the world. According to the
government, there were 6,072 murders across the country
in 2014 alone. In addition, the number of people who
‘disappeared’ increased 207% in four years from 2009
to 2013. These numbers are due to constant gang turf
battles involving up to 14,000 members from the MS-13
and 18th Street Gang. The government has used both
police and soldiers to enforce security in Guatemala City
since 2000, but violence has not ceded. At the same
time, drug trafficking activities along border regions
and in rural areas have flourished as a direct result of
limited resources. The accompanying passages from
Latin American sources discuss how the Guatemalan
government plans to use soldiers and police to address
this problem.
According to the first passage, “2,100 soldiers will be
relocated from Guatemala City to border regions where
they will conduct counter-drug operations. In December
2017, another 2,100 soldiers will be re-located to perform
the same tasks in areas to include Petén, Jutiapa, Zacapa,
Huehuetenango and San Marcos.” Guatemala hopes
to take control of its shared 962-kilometer border with
Mexico that runs from San Marcos to the northern
sector of Petén. The second excerpt further highlights
the importance of securing this region given the rampant
criminal activity within it.
The Guatemalan government also has plans to
supplement security in Guatemala City with the departure
of the soldiers over the course of 2017. First, 4,000 new
police officers will be brought onto the force. In fact,
just last year, 2,200 new officers graduated and have
been added to the ranks of the 37,000 officers that work
to protect Guatemala’s 16,000,000 residents. According
to the third passage, their work has been effective so
far. Furthermore, the departure of soldiers from the
city is going to be gradual in order to give police a
chance to adjust to changing conditions and their new
responsibilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... 2,100 soldiers will be relocated from Guatemala City
to border regions where they will conduct counter-drug
operations.”
Source: “Guatemala retirará de las calles a 4.200 soldados que velan por la
seguridad (Guatemala to Remove 4,200 from Security Duties in the City),” El
Confidencial, 01 February 2017. http://www.elconfidencial.com/ultima-hora-envivo/2017-01-02/guatemala-retirara-de-las-calles-a-4-200-soldados-que-velanpor-la-seguridad_1103293/
“According to a Guatemalan military spokesman, 2,100 soldiers will be
relocated from Guatemala City to border regions where they will conduct
counter-drug operations. In December 2017, another 2,100 soldiers will be relocated to perform the same tasks in areas to include Petén, Jutiapa, Zacapa,
Huehuetenango and San Marcos. One of the first desired outcomes of these
strategic moves is to take back control of security along Guatemala’s... border
with Mexico.”
Source: “Guatemala: Soldados van a vigilar dos mil kilómetros (Guatemala:
Soldiers Will be Responsible for Monitoring 2,000 km of Border),” Prensa Libre,
26 January 2017. http://www.prensalibre.com/guatemala/politica/soldados-van-avigilar-dos-mil-kilometros
“To cover Guatemala’s entire border region, the country would need more than
30,000 soldiers. At present, they have 22,000 for this particular task. Even with
the 4,000 reinforcements that will come from Guatemala City, emphasis will be
placed along Guatemala’s shared border with Mexico where at least 104 illegal
crossing points exist. From these areas, drugs and weapons move freely and
criminal organizations such as Los Zetas are operational there.”
Source: “Guatemala retirará sobre 4 mil soldados de las calles (Guatemala to
Remove 4,000 Soldiers from Street Patrols),” Periodico la Perla, 17 January
2017. http://www.periodicolaperla.com/guatemala-retirara-4-mil-soldados-lascalles/
“Guatemala’s Minister of the Interior reported that the National Civil Police
are ready to carry out investigations and intelligence gathering as evidenced
by the dismantling of 80 criminal groups in 2016 and the arrest of 700 criminal
elements.”

River Flotillas in Support of Defensive Ground Operations: The Soviet Experience
Lester W. Grau
In the history of warfare, ground and naval forces frequently have to cooperate. There are usually problems putting
these two forces together since their missions, equipment, training, communications and mutual unfamiliarity get
in the way. These problems are common during transport of ground force equipment and personnel aboard naval
vessels, exacerbated during amphibious landings and assaults and very difficult when operating together along major
rivers. This article analyzes the Soviet history of defensive river flotilla combat during the first period of the Great
Patriotic War (World War II against Germany). It outlines missions, the operational environment, lessons learned,
the command and control problems experienced between naval and ground forces and the challenges of conducting
such operations.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/River_Flotillas_in_Support_of_Defensive_Ground_Operations_-_The_Soviet_Experience.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA
Guatemala’s Evolving Political Scene and its
Fight against Corruption
OE Watch Commentary: In the last few
years, Guatemala was witnessed unprecedented
events. First, in September 2015, President
Otto Molina resigned from his position after
accusations that he was involved with organized
crime groups and widespread corruption.
Second, high level officials, both military and
political, have been arrested for their roles in
these accusations and some have since been
jailed. These are unprecedented for the simple
fact that fighting corruption in Guatemala
has been difficult given the close links
between politicians and organized crime. The
accompanying passages discuss how this aspect
of Guatemala may be changing.
The first passage quotes a former government
official as saying that fighting corruption
in Guatemala has been difficult given that
“politicians and organized crime mutually
benefit from one other.” As in many Latin
American countries, corruption is deeply
embedded in the governmental system and
change is nearly impossible. Those in power
will do anything to maintain their position and
keep the local populace from fighting against it.
However, this was not the case for Guatemala.
As the second excerpt notes, in April of 2015,
Guatemala’s middle class forged a close alliance
with peasant and indigenous groups and pushed
for change. Other organizations such as the
International Commission Against Impunity
in Guatemala also played a role in forcing the
resignation of former President Molina and
gathering momentum for change.
In the wake of Molina’s arrest, the government
began a new election process and surprisingly,
former comedian Jimmy Morales was elected as
Guatemala’s new president. Many open sources
such as the third accompanying passage claim
that Morales found himself at the right place at
the right time to be elected as president given his
lack of political experience. The excerpt further
indicates that he identified himself as “neither
corrupt nor a crook” during his campaign which
is exactly what the country was looking for.
The fourth passage discusses that his first year
as president has been difficult, given that rooting
out decades of corruption is not an easy task. It
notes however that he has made some positive
changes in the country despite fierce opposition
to change by the former governing elites. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Morales found himself at the right place at the right time. He
had no political baggage, and introduced himself as ‘neither
corrupt nor a crook’ during his campaign.”
Source: “Puede ser que al crimen organizado o parte de el lo hayamos elegido en los
comicios de 2011 (It is Possible that Organized Crime Groups Played a Part in 2011
Elections),” El Periodico, 27 February 2017. http://elperiodico.com.gt/pais/2017/02/27/n
“Edgar Gutiérrez spoke with El Periódico about how the relationship between
organized crime and political power has evolved in Guatemala. Gutiérrez, who served as
foreign chancellor during the administration of former President Alfonso Portillo, says
Guatemala has reached a stage where politicians and organized crime mutually benefit
from one other, making the fight against corruption that much more difficult”
Source: “Un movimiento de ciudadanos contra la corrupción (Citizen’s Movement
Against Corruption in Guatemala),” El Periodico, 15 April 2015. http://elperiodico.com.
gt/aniversario2015/un-movimiento-de-ciudadanos-contra-la-corrupcion/
“The movement that began in April forged an unprecedented alliance of different
groups. Guatemala City’s middle class, long reluctant to speak out, began joining forces
with peasant and indigenous groups. Eventually, the nation’s church and business
leaders also took the side of the protesters to demand change to include the resignation of
President Otto Molina.”
Source: “Jimmy Morales gana la presidencia de Guatemala (Jimmy Morales Wins
Presidential Elections in Guatemala),” Infolatam, 25 October 2015. http://www.
infolatam.com/2015/10/26/jimmy-morales-gana-la-presidencia-de-guatemala/
“Morales found himself at the right place at the right time. He had no political baggage,
and introduced himself as “neither corrupt nor a crook” during his campaign. Instead,
Guatemalans remember him as someone who made them laugh and encouraged them
to pursue their dreams. In electing him, they have also sent a clear message as to what
they expect in the future: no more power-hungry politicians and corruption. Instead, they
want forward-thinking leaders who they can trust to usher in fresh ideas.”
Source: “Promesas de Jimmy Morales sometidas a un análisis de cumplimiento (An
Analysis of Jimmy Morales Campaign Promises),” Prensa Libre, 09 January 2017. http://
www.prensalibre.com/guatemala/politica/las-promesas-de-jimmy-morales
“Some analysts argue it is too severe to qualify Morales’ first year as negative,
especially considering that he inherited huge challenges in the country plagued with
insecurity, poverty and corruption. Perhaps Morales’ biggest achievement has been
the increase in the percentage of Guatemalans who now have access to free medicines,
which, according to official figures, is at almost 84 percent. Morales made an
unexpected pick for Minister of Health in July by appointing Lucrecia Hernandez Mack,
a progressive activist and daughter of murdered human rights defender Myrna Mack.
Morales’ administration has also managed to reduce the homicide rate by 5 percent,
according to the National Civil Police, which registered 4,520 homicides in 2016, 258
fewer than the 2015 total of 4,778 or a rate of 29.5 per 100,000 inhabitants.”

OE Watch | April 2017

25

LATIN AMERICA
Mexican Drug Cartels and the FARC Peace Process
OE Watch Commentary: Mexican drug
cartels and the Armed Revolutionary Forces
of Colombia (FARC) have worked together
for years to traffic weapons and drugs. Now,
given the peace negotiations with the FARC in
Colombia, trafficking dynamics in the region
are likely to change. The accompanying
passages from Latin American sources
discuss how the dismantling of the FARC
may affect the cocaine business in the region.
Interestingly, not one source suggests that
production will stop. There appears to be no
doubt that some other group will step in and
take over operations.
As the first excerpt indicates, the FARC’s
dismantling could have grave effects on the
cocaine business as less product means less
business. However, the excerpt also infers
that despite agreements with the government,
the FARC may continue providing cocaine to
Mexican cartels.
The second and third passages discuss ways
in which the cocaine business will continue.
For example, the second passage asserts that
other criminal organizations both inside
and outside Colombia will fill the vacuum
left by the FARC. These groups include
the Bandas Criminales gang (BACRIM- a
group of many criminal groups), the National
Liberation Army (ELN), and other Brazilian
organizations who see FARC’s dismantling
as their opportunity to seize control of one of
the largest cocaine markets in the world. The
third piece looks at the situation differently
and hints that some dissident FARC members
may join the ranks of the ELN as they have
maintained a loose alliance since 2008. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“One fear is that after peace, autonomous FARC fronts will stay
put in the jungle, having forged their own relationships with mafia
and cartels such as BACRIM where they will be completely able to
oversee the growth, manufacture, and shipment of cocaine.”
Source: “Paz en Colombia, cocaína y cárteles mexicanos (Peace in Colombia, Cocaine, and
Mexican Cartels),” El Proceso, 17 December 2016. http://www.proceso.com.mx/446834/
paz-en-colombia-cocaina-carteles-mexicanos
“Those who will be most affected by the dismantling of the FARC will be Colombian and
Mexican criminal organizations as less cocaine to traffic signifies less business for both.
For this reason, a Colombian national police anti-narcotics officer indicated that both
groups will do whatever possible to maintain current exportation levels.”
Source: “Cárteles mexicanos, desafío del posconflicto colombiano (Mexican Cartels: A
Challenge to the Post-Conflict Era in Colombia),” El Proceso, 12 December 2016
http://www.proceso.com.mx/433984/carteles-mexicanos-desafio-del-posconflictocolombiano
“One fear is that after peace, autonomous FARC fronts will stay put in the jungle, having
forged their own relationships with mafia and cartels such as BACRIM where they will be
completely able to oversee the growth, manufacture, and shipment of cocaine. This scenario
is likely as Colombian National Police indicate that BACRIM and the ELN have served as
key cocaine distributors to their Mexican counterparts along with the FARC for years.”
Source: ”¿Qué efecto tendrá el proceso de paz con las FARC en el narcotráfico
colombiano? (What Effect with the FARC Peace Process have on Drug Trafficking
Operations in Colombia?),” BBC Mundo, 01 March 2017. http://www.bbc.com/mundo/
noticias-39007892
“Another possibility is that FARC soldiers with a stronger desire to hold onto their fields
rather than make peace could take their coca-knowledge and their holdings to the National
Liberation Army (ELN), another communist guerrilla group with a similar history. The ELN
was founded in the 1960s and headed for a long time by leftist Roman Catholic priests. It’s
now a designated terrorist organization with ties to drug smugglers. Although ideologically
similar, ELN and FARC have not always gotten along, but they formed a loose alliance
after 2008.”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is about a
broader set of conflicts than just ‘insurgency.’ In
its 144 sections, Geoff Demarest raises new and
overlooked concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up debate and
critical thinking. As Geoff Demarest puts it: “I hope
that some of the ideas in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

26

LATIN AMERICA
Battling Crime in the Darien Region
OE Watch Commentary: The Darien Gap (along the
border of Colombia and Panama) is one of the most difficult
areas for authorities to monitor due to its impregnable forest
and lack of roads. This region is also home to an estimated
40,595 hectares of coca plants which represents 42% of
Colombia’s total production. The accompanying passages
discuss the challenges to battling crime in this region.
The first passage discusses that the region is a virtual
“expressway” for groups that traffic weapons, drugs,
gold and migrants, including Front 57 of the FARC
(Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), its dissidents
and “The Urabenos” (a drug trafficking neo-paramilitary
group). It notes that the region is home to “nearly 30
corridors that unite the economies of the underworld
between Colombia” and that they are “highly coveted.”
According to an agent quoted in the passage, the region is
so difficult to control that the only way agents are capable
of getting to the area is by helicopter, through infiltration,
or by disguising themselves as fishermen or peasants.
The second passage discusses Colombian authorities’
concerns for the coming fiscal year regarding this region.
One of their main concerns is the possible demobilization
of the FARC, as they are expecting other criminal
organizations to exploit routes not just in the Darien
Region, but throughout the country. Another concern is
that without a radical reduction of illicit crops, “it will be
impossible to stop this dynamic of the corridors, because
this is due to a very active market.” Moreover, as the
passage notes, “the groups that operate in the corridors
have great power to corrupt officials.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“...at least half of the 2,005 organized crime structures
detected in Colombia exert influence on some of [the
Darien Gap’s] sections, including guerrillas. In addition
to multiple jungle trails, tributaries and mouths, it offers
exit routes to the Pacific Ocean, for the export of cocaine
or the importation of weapons.”
Source: “Corredores de crimen (Criminal Corridors),” El Colombiano,
26 February 2017. https://www.pressreader.com/colombia/elcolombiano/20170226
“The Darien Gap is just one of the nearly 30 corridors that unite the
economies of the underworld between Colombia and for that reason are highly
coveted. It forms part of a more extensive route that ends up intertwining
the Colombian Pacific Coast, from Choco to Narino and Ecuador. The
importance of this link is ...that at least half of the 2,005 organized crime
structures detected in Colombia exert influence on some of its sections,
including guerrillas. In addition to multiple jungle trails, tributaries and
mouths, it offers exit routes to the Pacific Ocean, for the export of cocaine or
the importation of weapons.
....
To get there (to the Darien Region), we have to do it by helicopter or by
infiltrating ourselves with facades, that is, disguising ourselves as fishermen
and peasants, traveling in chalupas [boats] and on foot,” says the agent.
The illegal groups operating in the region since 1980 maintain strategic
surveillance points, which anticipate the advances of the commandos.”
Source: “Autopistas de las economías ilegales (The Highway Systems
of Illegal Economies),” El Colombiano, 26 February 2017. http://m.
elcolombiano.com/autopistas-de-las-economias-ilegales-LF6034872
“With the demobilization of the FARC in progress, the concern for the
corridors is being reactivated in the forces of the State, as they are a booty
for the economy and logistics of any criminal organization. Whoever occupies
them first, gets to know them and dominates them will have the lead. Thinking
of these concerns, John Marulanda, a former member of the military and
security analyst, says there are four factors that make it difficult for the Public
Force to dominate mobility corridors in the coming year:
1) The Public Force is still occupied in the process with the FARC, we will
have to wait for them to surrender their weapons in order to target the
uniformed men in the takeover of those areas.
2) If there is no radical reduction of illicit crops, it will be impossible to stop
this dynamic of the corridors, because this is due to a very active market.
3) The groups that operate in the corridors have great power to corrupt
officials.
4) The budget for defense will be reduced by 40 percent, which will limit
investment in technology.

Colombian Jungle.

Source: https://www.pexels.com/photo/colombia-jungle-plant-river-61114/

OE Watch | April 2017

27

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Announces Reform of Military Ranks
by Kenneth Allen
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol.17, Issue 2, 6 February 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/china-announces-reform-military-ranks/

OE Watch Commentary: The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is not satisfied with
its organizational structure and has been trying to adjust it to create a more effective
joint war fighting capability. 2016 saw dramatic restructuring of the former four General
Departments and seven Military Regions, and the demobilization of 300,000 troops and
support staff. The next phase includes reforms of the officer rank and grade systems,
which are being implemented to address a number of systemic problems such as
corruption. As China increases its international military engagement, another element—
the mismatch between Chinese ranks and those used by most other countries, has become
a driver of the reforms. The accompanying excerpt discusses China’s plans to address this
mismatch by building a rank-centered military officer system.
Speculation about such a move began soon after the initial announcement of the
broader reforms in September 2015. In November 2016, Bowen Press, citing PLA sources,
reported that, effective 1 August 2017, the 90th anniversary of the founding of the Red
Army, the PLA would reform its basic unit structure. This will mainly affect the Army
by completing the conversion of all remaining divisions to brigades with subordinate
battalions and abolishing all regiments. The Bowen report also stated that the senior
colonel rank would be replaced with a new one-star brigadier general, and all other
general ranks would receive an additional star.
The first official confirmation of such plans was reported in mid-December by General
Zhang Yang, a member of the Central Military Commission and Director of the CMC
Political Work Department. As the accompanying excerpt notes, Yang told members
of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress that “China will build a
rank-centered military officer system that is fit for the construction of a modern armed
force and, furthermore, that military rank will reflect officers’ capabilities, identities
and status.” He added that ranks would determine career development and that the
appointment system would be rebuilt to promote “excellent” officers and professional
training.
There are two driving forces for change, both of which are based on visual interests.
First, as part of the PLA’s growing military foreign relations program, senior PLA officers
wearing three stars are not necessarily seen as co-equals when they interact with their
foreign counterparts who are wearing four stars. Placing greater emphasis on officer
rank contributes to the PLA’s goal to be seen as an integral part of the global military
community. Second, when officers engage each other during meetings where they do not
know each other, they can immediately see where they fit into the organizational structure
and can easily address each other by their rank.
The announcement raises three prominent questions: What will the new rank system
look like? Will the PLA abolish or adjust its current grade system? When will the
revised system begin? While the answers to these questions remain uncertain, given this
announcement, there is little doubt that significant changes affecting the PLA’s rank and
grade systems will soon take place. The big question is how these changes will affect the
way the PLA trains and fights. End OE Watch Commentary (Allen)

“When delivering a report to the
top legislature on the adjustment
of relevant laws during the
reform, Zhang said military rank
will reflect officers’ capabilities,
identities and status, and that
officers’ career development will
be based on military rank.”
Source: “军官制度将进行体系重塑：建立
军衔主导的军官等级制度” (China to Build
Rank-Centered Military Officer System),
ChinaMil Network, 19 December 2016, http://
www.81.cn/dblj/2016-12/19/content_7413971.
htm
China will build a rank-centered military
officer system, a senior officer said Monday.
Zhang Yang, a member of the Central Military
Commission (CMC) and head of the Political
Work Department of the CMC, said the move
is part of reform of the military officer system.
The rank-centered military officer system is
fit for the construction of a modern armed
force, Zhang told members of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress.
When delivering a report to the top legislature
on the adjustment of relevant laws during the
reform, Zhang said military rank will reflect
officers’ capabilities, identities and status,
and that officers’ career development will be
based on military rank. An officer selection
and appointment system will be built in a
bid to choose excellent officers, Zhang said,
adding that a training and exchange system
focusing on professional capabilities will be
set up. A welfare guarantee system for military
professionals is another part of the military
officer system reform, as is a decommissioning
and resettlement system, Zhang said.

PLA rank insignia.

Source: Adapted from https://mn.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%A4%D0%B0%D0%B9%D0%BB:China_PLA.jpg

OE Watch | April 2017

28

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Contribution to Peacekeeping Operations:
Understanding the Numbers
by Dennis J. Blasko
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol.16, Issue 18, 5 December 2016, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-contribution-peacekeeping-operation-understanding-numbers/

OE Watch Commentary: China’s participation in UN Peacekeeping Operations (PKO) has
received considerable media attention for the past several years as Beijing’s international profile has
expanded. To be sure, of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, China contributes
the largest number of military and civilian personnel to these missions. According to UN statistics,
as of 31 August 2016, China provided 2,436 troops, 30 military experts, and 173 police for a total
of 2,639 personnel out of just over 100,000 uniformed and civilian personnel from all countries
performing PKO duties. While the Chinese government and military have certainly been serious
in their commitment to supporting UN peacekeeping operations, a close look at the numbers reveal
important nuances. The accompanying passages demonstrate that, with the help of the foreign
media, Beijing has garnered maximum political and propaganda value from a relatively smaller
investment in personnel and money.
The PLA’s contributions to UN PKO missions are an excellent example of the “Three Warfares,”
consisting of media (or public opinion) war, psychological warfare, and legal war, in practice. By
participating in UN-mandated missions, the Chinese government can maintain it has a legal basis
for its actions and is not violating its long-held national policy of non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries. Both China’s own media and the foreign media report on these missions,
especially if PLA forces receive accolades from the host country or UN officials and when PLA
soldiers are killed or wounded in the performance of their duties. The level of media attention
also permits the PLA to conduct psychological operations demonstrating its commitment to UN
principles and the creation of a peaceful international environment.
For example, as the first accompanying passage notes, President Xi Jinping attracted a lot of
attention when he announced at a meeting of the UN General Assembly in September 2015 that,
“China will contribute 8,000 troops for a United Nations peacekeeping standby force.” However, no
details of who would man that force and exactly what it will do were released publically. A year later,
as excerpted in the second passage, a Defense Ministry spokesman could only report that China was
still “in the process of registering these 8,000 personnel.” Regardless of what the status and mission
of that 8,000 force actually is, the pledge is reported in international media as China becoming “a
major player in peacekeeping,” as the third excerpt’s title suggests.
Furthermore, the vast majority of units and personnel deployed to UN PKO missions have been
from engineering, transport, and medical units. Their main tasks have been to construct and
maintain infrastructure, such as roads, bridges, airports, water, and power facilities, perform mine
clearing activities, and provide medical (including sanitation and epidemic prevention), search,
rescue, and evacuation, and logistics support in their mission areas. While they are authorized to
protect themselves if attacked, most deployed troops have not been combat troops.

Source: “China’s Xi says to commit
8,000 troops for U.N. peacekeeping
force,” Reuters.com, 28 September
2015. http://www.reuters.com/
article/us-un-assembly-chinaidUSKCN0RS1Z120150929
“China will contribute 8,000 troops
for a United Nations peacekeeping
standby force, China’s President
Xi Jinping told the United Nations
General Assembly on Monday, a
move that could make it one of the
largest players in U.N. peacekeeping
efforts.”
Source: “China to complete
registration of 8000-personnel
standby peacekeeping force at UN,”
Chinamil.com.cn, 30 September
2016. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2016-09/30/content_7284660.
htm
“So far, the Chinese side has
already completed the training of
over 500 peacekeepers from various
countries, and in the near future,
we will complete the registration
of the 8000-personnel standby
peacekeeping force at the UN,
Yang Yujun, spokesman for China’s
Ministry of National Defense (MND)
said on Thursday.”

While the units involved and their higher headquarters still receive benefits from these missions,
these experiences, for the most part, do not replicate actual combat experience and are distributed
mainly within engineering and logistics forces. The number of infantry and other combat personnel
deployed on all missions over the past four years probably amounts to less than 2,000 personnel.
Likewise, the amount of funds the Chinese government contributes to these efforts is a minor
fraction of overall government expenditures.

Source: Barbara Crossette, “As
China Becomes A Major Player
In UN Peacekeeping, Will It
Respond To Crises?,” Huffington
Post, 19 August 2016. http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/barbaracrossette/as-china-becomes-a-major_b_11582954.html

Nevertheless, China gains significant propaganda value out of its minimal investment. Chinese
participation in UN PKO missions are a significant element of the PLA’s long-term modernization
process, but need to be kept in proper perspective. While providing some PLA units the relatively
infrequent opportunity to operate beyond the borders of China and enhancing the PLA’s confidence
in itself and its prestige both at home and abroad, peacekeeping missions do not substitute for the
kind of warfighting experience necessary for future mid or high-intensity combined arms and joint
operations. End OE Watch Commentary (Blasko)

“In coming weeks, the Chinese
are expected to ... reveal Beijing’s
overall plans for an 8,000-member
standby, quick-response force of
troops and police.”

OE Watch | April 2017

29

ASIA-PACIFIC
Evolving Political Dynamics between
China, Thailand and Japan
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying editorial
offers insight into some of the evolving political dynamics
in Southeast Asia. Authored by an associate professor at
Kyoto University’s Center for Southeast Asian Studies and
published in the Japan Times, the article expounds Japan’s
growing commitment to Thailand, and claims that it is an
effort to counter China’s growing influence in the region.
The article first discusses some facts about JapaneseThai relations. It notes that Japan is held in high regard by
Thailand because, despite having voiced concern over the
Thai military regime, it has never imposed official sanctions
against the junta. The two countries have also been great
trading partners. Up until 2015, “Japan was Thailand’s
second-largest importer and third-largest exporter.”
However, it claims that “as Thailand is increasingly
drawn into the Chinese orbit, Japan has proposed myriad
investment projects to win over the junta.”
It then discusses Sino-Thai relations, pointing out SinoThai relations have flourished over the years and that
currently, “Sino-Thai military links are among some of the
most developed in the region - second only to Myanmar.” In
light of the long-time animosity shared between Japan and
China, as long as the junta maintains control over Thailand,
it will not be surprising to see an increased political tug-ofwar. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The need to protect its interests and to compete with
China explains Japan’s active policy vis-a-vis Thailand.”
Source: Pavin Chachavalpongpun, “China’s Shadow Looms Large in JapanThailand Relations,” Japan Times, 3 March 2017. http://www.japantimes.
co.jp/opinion/2017/03/03/commentary/japan-commentary/chinas-shadowlooms-large-japan-thailand-relations/#.WL7NNz-7qvN

China’s Shadow Looms Large in Japan-Thailand Relations
Japan is still the only country in the Group of Seven industrial nations to
roll out the red carpet for the Thai junta. The need to protect its interests
and to compete with China explains Japan’s active policy vis-a-vis Thailand.
Up to 2015, Japan was Thailand’s second-largest importer and third-largest
exporter. As Thailand is increasingly drawn into the Chinese orbit, Japan
has proposed myriad investment projects to win over the junta. To counter
the Chinese rail project in Thailand, Japan has offered the government ¥170
billion in loans for a similar railway scheme.
Japan is monitoring closely Sino-Thai political-security ties, which have
also been upgraded over the years. Since the early 1980s, Thailand has
purchased armaments and military-related equipment under this partnership
at “ friendship prices.” Sino-Thai military links are among some of the most
developed in the region — second only to Myanmar, China’s once quasi ally.
In 2010, China proposed joint defense exercises and military exchanges to
the Thai leaders, hoping to catch up with the U.S.’ military relations with
Thailand.

China’s Pursuit of Artificial Intelligence
OE Watch Commentary: Beijing recently gave the
green light for the creation of China’s first ‘national
laboratory for deep learning,’ which, according to the
excerpted article, “could help China surpass the United
States in developing artificial intelligence (AI).” Deep
learning can be understood as software that attempts
to mimic the part of the brain that processes sight and
hearing in mammals. The idea is to create software
with a decision-making capability, one that can
ultimately rival the human brain.
China’s tech giant Baidu will lead the group and work
with Tsinghua University, Beihang University, (北京
航空航天大学 also translated as Beijing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics), China Information and
Communication Research Institute, China Electronic
Technology Standardization Institute and other units.
They plan to draw on the strengths and advantages of
each to promote an all-encompassing development of
China’s “deep learning technology and application field
in production, learning, research standardization, and
application.” China’s goal, according to the article, is to
boost its competence in artificial intelligence,” and to
help the country “make bigger waves in the competitive
field of AI,” which is “often regarded as a holy grail of
the digital era.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “China’s First ‘Deep Learning Lab’ Intensifies Challenge to US in
Artificial Intelligence Race,” South China Morning Post, 21 February 2017. http://
www.scmp.com/tech/china-tech/article/2072692/chinas-first-deep-learning-labintensifies-challenge-us-artificial

China’s first ‘deep learning lab’ intensifies challenge to US in
artificial intelligence race
Beijing has given the green light for the creation of China’s very first ‘national
laboratory for deep learning’, in a move that could help the country to surpass the
United States in developing artificial intelligence (AI).
The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) recently approved
the plan to set up a national engineering ‘lab’ for researching and implementing
deep learning technologies. The lab will not have a physical presence, instead
taking the form of a research network predominantly based online.
The lab is expected to help China make bigger waves in the competitive field of
AI, a technology often regarded as a holy grail of the digital era and a key area
in which Chinese researchers and enterprises are rapidly closing the gap on their
western counterparts.
“About 40 per cent of the leading AI research papers in the world are published
by the Chinese. The really top-level AI experts are still those from North America
and the UK, but the Chinese are expected to get better and better with their quick
learning and the improvement of platforms they work for,” said veteran tech
investor Lee Kai-fu, founder of Chinese venture capital firm Sinovation Ventures.
“The large number of science and engineering college students in China give the
country a unique advantage in AI development.”
OE Watch | April 2017

30

ASIA-PACIFIC
Kim Jong Nam’s Death Points to a Growing
Biological Weapons Capability
OE Watch Commentary: The 13
February assassination of Kim Jong Nam,
Kim Jong Un’s half-brother has been highly
publicized. However, one angle that has not
been considered, but is worth pointing out is
North Korea’s possession of, and ability to
use biochemical substances as weapons.
According to the following excerpted
article, North Korea is believed to have
almost 40 types of chemical agents and
pathogens that it can use as biological
weapons. It is also thought to be “operating
biological weapons research, cultivation,
and production facilities in 17 locations.”
The article quotes an official from the Korea
Institute of Defense Analyses as saying that
North Korea is believed to possess the third
largest stockpile of chemical weapons after
the United States and Russia. While North
Korea and Malaysia have been trading
blows over the death of Kim Jong Nam, the
more pressing issue should be the North’s
development of biological weapons. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“It is believed that North Korea possesses the third-largest stockpile
of chemical weapons, after the United States and Russia.”
Source: Kim Kwi-ku’n, “‘김정남 독살’, 北 생화학물질 무기화 능력 보여줘(
종합) (Kim Jong Nam’s Poisoning’ Demonstrates the North’s Ability to Weaponize
Biochemical Substances),” Yonhap, 21 February 2017. http://www.yonhapnews.co.kr/
bulletin/2017/02/21/0200000000AKR20170221147651014.HTML

‘Kim Jong Nam’s Poisoning’ Demonstrates the North’s Ability to Weaponize
Biochemical Substances
North Korea is thought to be operating biological weapons research, cultivation, and
production facilities in 17 locations, including the Biological Research Institute No. 1 under
the State Academy of Sciences in Pyongyang, the Microbiological Research Institute in
P’yo’ngso’ng, the Germ Weapons Research Institute in Paengma-ri, P’ihyo’n County, North
P’yo’ngan Province, the Plant No. 25 in Cho’ngju, North P’yo’ngan Province, and the Germ
Research Institute in So’nch’o’n, North P’yo’ngan Province.
A KIDA [Korea Institute for Defense Analyses] official said, “North Korea has the capability
to mass-produce various types of chemical weapons and drop them all over the Korean
Peninsula,” and added that “it is believed that North Korea possesses the third-largest
stockpile of chemical weapons, after the United States and Russia.”
It is presumed to possess six types of nerve agents, including sarin (GB) and V-agent
(V-series); six types of blister agents, including sulfur mustard (HD) and lewisite (HL);
three types of blood agents, including hydrogen cyanide (AC); two types of choking agents,
including phosgene (CG); and eight types of vomiting and tear agents.

Source: Adapted from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_North_Korea.svg, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Biohazard_symbol_%28red%29.svg, and https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Skull_and_crossbones.svg

OE Watch | April 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
DPRK Suffers Critical Shortages and Low Morale
OE Watch Commentary: A recent article in
Japan’s Tokyo Shimbun newspaper provides an
assessment of the North Korean People’s Army’s
(NKPA) readiness, based on an analysis of
approximately 1,300 DPRK military documents.
The article claims that the documents reveal poor
morale, critical supply shortages and a general
disenchantment with Kim Jung Un’s continued
emphasis on military might over the quality of
North Koreans’ daily lives.
As the accompanying article claims, DPRK
units lack adequate food to conduct training. It
notes that “in 2012, because of a lack of food,
only 25 percent of the reserve forces were made
to participate in a light infantry company’s field
training, but even with that limited number,
on the third day many left the training due to
the food shortage.” In addition, commanders
lack the basic equipment necessary to exercise
command and control over subordinate units and
to communicate with each other. As the excerpt
discusses, exposure to and desire for other
cultures is spreading throughout the force. As
units begin to see how other cultures live, they
find their current situation less appealing and
question huge defense expenditures like missile
launches.
The article states that Kim Jung Un is not
only aware of the increasing dissatisfaction and
desertion within the ranks of the NKPA, but also
understands how a weakening of the military
threatens his national defense strategy and the
stability of his regime. It quotes him as saying
“If the military deteriorates and collapses, our
fatherland will be blown away like sand.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Galluzzi)

“The North Korean military
is the “Revolutionary Armed
Forces,” and it is the backbone
for maintaining the regime. The
documents [obtained by the Tokyo
Shimbun newspaper] clearly show
the weakening of the military.
That is an extremely negative turn
for not only the defense of North
Korea but also the maintenance of
the Kim Jong Un regime.”

Source: Shirouchi, Y. “北朝鮮軍の内部文書 物不足が軍紀揺るがす(North Korean
Army Internal Documents Reveal Growing Misconduct by Troops),” Tokyo Shimbun
(Morning Edition), 24 February 2017. http://www.tokyo-np.co.jp/article/world/
list/201702/CK2017022402000125.html
Some 1,300 internal North Korean
military documents obtained by the
Tokyo Shimbun provide a first-hand
picture of incidents and accidents
frequently occurring within the [North
Korean] military. Behind this situation
is a seemingly endless list of problems,
including serious food and materiel
shortages, officers criticizing the regime,
and the influx of South Korean culture
through movies, music, and so on. “If
the military deteriorates and collapses,
our fatherland will be blown away like
sand,” the military’s supreme commander
Kim Jong Un reportedly said, his remark
indicating his strong sense of crisis about
the North Korean military.

Korea Central News Agency’s images of a proud,
disciplined fighting force like this likely portray
an inaccurate description of the DPRK’s soldier
readiness.
Source: http://www.rfa.org/english/news/korea/pig-10272015105603.html

…
In July 2012, because of a lack of food, only 25 percent of the reserve forces were made
to participate in a light infantry company’s field training, but even with that limited
number, on the third day many left the training due to the food shortage.
…
Since military units do not have electrical chargers for transceivers, 85 percent of the
transceivers do not work…Although 140 kilometers of wire is needed for communications,
only ten kilometers is available. If a war suddenly breaks out, it will not be possible to
transmit orders. Self-procurement of materiel in short supply is required, leading to
crime.
…
According to a document dated June 2013, a unit commander said, “What can we do
about satellites being frequently launched despite the fact that people’s daily lives are so
hard? They should promptly resolve the daily life problems.” This shows that criticism
is extending to the launching of satellites, which is effectively the launching of ballistic
missiles.
…
Kim Jong Un rebuked the military for having many political schools that practice
“Hailing Yang, while practicing Yin.” This phrase means that they “pretend to obey but
secretly betray.”
…
Kim Jong Un ordered the eradication of “aberrant lifestyles,” in which people view and
listen to “impure materials,” but according to a North Korean source, interest in and
desire for different cultures is spreading in the country.
…
The North Korean military is the “Revolutionary Armed Forces,” and it is the backbone
for maintaining the regime. The documents clearly show the weakening of the military.
That is an extremely negative turn for not only the defense of North Korea but also the
maintenance of the Kim Jong Un regime.
OE Watch | April 2017

32

ASIA-PACIFIC
Rohingya Insurgents Boast Their Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: For years, the Burmese army faced little resistance as
it destroyed Rohingya villages and pushed Rohingyas from Burma into Bangladesh.
However, this lack of organized resistance may be changing. The accompanying article
discusses a newly formed Rohingya militant group and their guerilla strategy aimed at
challenging the Burmese army.
The excerpted article in the Bangladeshi Dhaka Tribune features an interview with a
member of the newly formed Rohingya militant group, the Faith Movement, or Harakah
al-Yaqin in Arabic. The reporter carried out the interview by secretly walking for hours
to the movement’s headquarters near the Burma-Bangladesh border. The commander
of Harakah al-Yaqin and his deputy described their guerilla strategy aimed at defeating
the Burmese army to the reporter. The militants have already started attacking remote
border posts of the army to steal arms. Despite rumors that the movement receives
funding from and training in the Gulf region, the commanders say they are self-reliant.
Nonetheless, they claim to be trained by a leader with experience in guerilla warfare,
presumably from outside Burma. In one of the most recent attacks, the commander says
villagers provided them with food and shelter and even joined in the fighting. If true,
this suggests that the movement maintains a sizeable level of popular support within the
Rohingya communities along the Burma-Bangladesh border.
The commander recognizes that negotiations are taking place about the Rohingya
issue in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and in the Organization
of Islamic Conference (OIC) to pressure Burma to change its policies towards the
Rohingya. Malaysian leaders have argued that the issue is no longer an internal affair
for Burma because the flow of refugees is having an impact on other countries in
the region. Moreover, Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak has argued that if the
Rohingya crisis is not contained, it could allow the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) to infiltrate and radicalize the Rohingya, which would also pose a problem for
the region.1 ISIS has already carried out and claimed several attacks in Bangladesh
on bloggers, atheists, Hindus and on foreigners at a popular café in Dhaka. The
commander says the negotiations are not working, and thus claims a need to take up
arms to add pressure.
The commander says the militants are ready to fight until the last drop of blood, but
despite their determination, they recognize they have limitations. In particular, they
have no defense against aerial strikes from Burmese helicopters. These air strikes force
them to retreat and wait for ground combat. The advantages of the Burmese army make
it unlikely that it will be changing its policies as a result of the militants’ activities.
However, the existence of these militants could influence the external negotiations,
which could force Burma to make concessions or reduce pressure on the Rohingya in
the country. Alternatively, in the absence of a resolution to the conflict, other countries
in the region or in the OIC may agree to take in more Rohingya refugees while
providing more humanitarian aid to Rohingya communities that are displaced in Burma
and Bangladesh, as Malaysia has done. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
http://www.scmp.com/news/asia/southeast-asia/article/2051572/pm-najib-leads-malaysian-protest-against-genocide-rohingya

1

“You cannot imagine how some of
the Rohingya villagers cooperated
with us. Some even joined us in the
attacks with bamboo.”
Source: “We will fight until the last drop of
blood,” Dhaka Tribune, 7 January 2017. http://
www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/lawrights/2017/01/10/will-fight-last-drop-blood/
The now-in-hiding Harakah al-Yaqin fighters
are practicing extreme caution these days when
speaking with any outsider. The final meeting
place turned out to be amid a forest in the no
man’s land between Bangladesh and Myanmar.
Taking the blindfold off, this correspondent came
to meet three other Harakah al-Yaqin members,
one of whom claimed to be the second-in-command
of Ata Ullah, the Harakah al-Yaqin spokesperson
as seen in videos released by the group.
The second-in-command began the conversation
by claiming that Harakah al-Yaqin was not a
terrorist group. He admitted that Harakah al-Yaqin
was, in fact, responsible for the series of attacks
on Myanmar Border Guard Police outposts along
Bangladesh-Myanmar border on October 9. “Our
aim was to loot their arms and ammunition for
our guerrilla training,” he said. He said they were
trained by Ata Ullah and some other senior leaders
of Harakah al-Yaqin who are trained in modern
guerrilla war tactics.
In the four months before the attacks, Ata
Ullah and his men also tried to convince local
villagers to support their movement. All the arms
and ammunition gave them a stronger footing
in Rakhine, but in two weeks – according to the
leader – they took a hit when the Myanmar Army
launched the crackdown on Rohingyas.
He said there was no question of surrendering.
“We will fight until the last drop of our blood is
spilled.”

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the state became
independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation with Russia, the United
States and other partners, but there have also been internally driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact.
One of these efforts over the past several years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in
the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end
2016. While the result has yet to be announced, an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up
of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the impact this could have on the capabilities of
the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein_-_Transition_in_the_Armed_Forces_of_Kazakhstan_-_From_Conscripts_to_Contract_Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

33

ASIA-PACIFIC
Perspectives on a Sino-Vietnamese Thaw
in the South China Sea
“Sino-Vietnamese and Sino-Philippine relations
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article discusses a Chinese
perspective on why China and Vietnam have been able to come to a
diplomatic thaw over their disputes in South China Sea. The article
from the Chinese-language Lianhe Zaobao, claims that the thaw
is due to the shared Communist ideology of both the Chinese and
Vietnamese governments, which allows for greater communication and
understanding between the countries.
The article also credits Nguyễn Phú Trọng, who became the
Vietnamese Communist Party General Secretary in January 2016,
for the thaw. Nguyễn Phú Trọng is considered to be in the pro-China
camp in the Vietnamese government. He made his first visit of 2017 to
China on 8 January, which was also the first visit of a foreign leader
to China in 2017. This suggests a high symbolic priority given to the
visit. Indeed, the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman referred to
Nguyễn Phú Trọng as a “comrade” (tongzhi) in typical Communist
Party parlance.
According to the article, in addition to the shared ideology and
Nguyễn Phú Trọng’s role, another reason for the thaw is the precedent
that China’s relations with the Philippines has set. Since Rodrigo
Duterte became the president of the Philippines, there has been a
gradual cooling of tensions over the South China Sea. Duterte has
expressed pro-Chinese positions on foreign policy. The article suggests
that this may lead to progress between China and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on a Code of Conduct for the South
China Sea.
The article notes, however, that there are limitations to Vietnamese
engagement with China. In particular, Vietnam is committed to
developing relations with and not alienating the US and Japan.
According to this view, Vietnam seeks to reach a balance of power,
or equilibrium, between diplomatic relations with China on the one
hand and diplomatic relations with the US and Japan on the other. In
addition, the thaw is not stopping Vietnam from pursuing Russian
and Indian weapons systems that improve its asymmetric capabilities
against China. Thus the thaw between China and Vietnam can be seen
as building goodwill while both countries, and especially Vietnam,
prepare for the worst. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

will not only help cool down the South China Sea
issue, but also help push China and ASEAN to
make new progress on the negotiations on the
South China Sea Code of Conduct, which is good
for China and ASEAN.”
Source: “越共总书记阮富仲访华 发扬中越传统友谊(Vietnamese
Communist Party General Secretary Ruan Fuzhong Visits
China and Develops Sino-Vietnamese Traditional Friendship),”
Zaobao, 11 January 2017. http://www.zaobao.com.sg/news/china/
story20170111-712390
Because China and Vietnam have the Communist Party in power,
the two countries have greater ideological consistency, and there
are more channels for communication. Moreover, Ruan Fuzhong
[Nguyễn Phú Trọng] has always been regarded as the “pro-China
camp” of representatives. Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman
Lu Kang yesterday called Ruan Fuzhong a “comrade” at a press
conference. He said that this was Ruan Fuzhong’s first visit to
China after becoming General Secretary of the Communist Party of
Vietnam on 12 January 2016, and China attaches great importance
to it.
For China, Vietnam and the Philippines are two very important
countries to resolve the South China Sea issue. Sino-Vietnamese
and Sino-Philippine relations will not only help cool down the South
China Sea issue, but also help push China and ASEAN to make
new progress on the negotiations on the South China Sea Code of
Conduct, which is good for China and ASEAN.
Analysts believe that although Vietnam attaches importance to
relations with China, Vietnam will not as a result of the development
of relations with China alienate the United States or Japan. Vietnam
is clear that with the United States and Japan and other major
powers maintain a balance acceptable to all parties, which is more
beneficial to Vietnam.

The Syrian Crisis from a Neighbor’s
Perspective: View from Turkey by Karen Kaya
What started out as internal turmoil in Syria in March 2011 turned into a regional
crisis, which then turned into an international crisis. The crisis in Syria is now affecting
the surrounding region, most critically Syria’s neighbors, who have all had to contend
with instability at their borders. This article analyzes the Syrian crisis from Turkey’s
perspective, discussing the direct security threats that it poses to Turkey. The article
focuses on the following four themes: Border security and the spill-over effects of
internal clashes; Turkey’s concerns regarding the formation of an autonomous Kurdish
region in northern Syria; its concerns regarding the PKK expanding its base and
influence; and the risk of Turkey having a jihadi presence on its border along with
becoming a transit point for Islamic militants going to join the fighting in Syria.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Syrian-Crisis-View-from-Turkey.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

34

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Assessing Russian Influence in Central Asia
OE Watch Commentary: As the Russian
economy has struggled over the past couple
of years, Russian economic investment and
security assistance for countries in Central Asia
have decreased. The accompanying excerpted
article by a noted Kazakh political and security
analyst discusses Russian economic and security
partnerships in the region. The author argues
that Russia is losing influence to China because
it is spending less money, while China has been
increasing its economic presence in the region. He
assesses that in the absence of enough economic
investments, Russia’s military presence in Central
Asian states may not be sufficient to keep their
loyalty. He writes that Russia, “has not yet realized
that it is impossible to hold onto loyalty only
through the military – it is necessary to also buy
it.”
The author focuses on Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan
as two places where Russia is losing the most
ground to China and notes that each hosts a
Russian military base. He notes that “military aid
[is given] instead of payments” for Tajikistan’s
agreement with Russia for the 201st Motorized
Rifle Division (MRD). He points out that in “2016
Chinese direct investments totaled 60 percent of
foreign investments in Tajikistan,” while “Russia’s
share in total investments amount to 8 percent.”
He also mentions that Kyrgyzstan’s President
Almazbek Atambayev hinted that the Kant airbase
“could be closed after the end of the (current)
lease.”
In both Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, China has
been stepping in as Russia has cut funding for
a number of aid projects. The article points out
that “like Tajikistan, with the decline of Russian
investments, the Kyrgyz leadership relies on the
expansion of an economic partnership with China.”
For example, the Russian government cut funding
for hydroelectric dams in Kyrgyzstan. China is
reportedly interested in funding these projects
and has been active in security assistance as well.
In 2016, China began constructing facilities for
Tajikistan’s Border Guards.
In the past, Central Asian governments have been
able to persuade Russia to increase its development
funding when others like China make offers to step
in. If the Russian economy rebounds soon, it is still
possible for Russia to increase payment for Kant in
addition to other investments. But the amount that
Russia invests will be determined by how much
China is willing to spend and how Central Asian
governments respond to China. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“In 2016 China’s direct investments totaled 60 percent of foreign
investments in Tajikistan... For comparison, Russia’s share in total
investments amount to 8 percent...”

A Russian Su-25 sits on display at a public event at the Kant Airbase, outside Bishkek Kyrgyzstan.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kant_%28air_base%29_05.jpg

Source: Satpayev, Dosym. “Россия теряет Центральную Азию (Russia is losing
Central Asia),” Ratel, 28 February 2017. http://www.ratel.kz/outlook/rossija_terjaet_
tsentralnuju_aziju

Russia is losing Central Asia
…Vladimir Putin chose only Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan out of the five
Central Asian states for the visit…Moscow’s relations with Turkmenistan are strained,
and with Uzbekistan, are at the stage of mutual “probing.” The trio are members of
the CSTO and Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan also belong to the Eurasian Economic
Union…According to officials, one of Putin’s main goals of the visit to Almaty was to
discuss international issues with the leadership of Kazakhstan, including the Syrian
settlement…Putin also hinted that Russia counts on the support of Kazakhstan as a nonpermanent members of the UN Security Council…
The visit to Tajikistan by the Russian president comes at a difficult time in relations
between the two: the rapid decline in Russian investment alongside the rise of
economic and political activities of China in Tajikistan…Russia remains the guarantor
of Tajikistan’s security against external threats: the 201st Russian (Motorized Rifle
Division) base is still there. Another question is whether the Russian military will
guarantee security for Rahmon against internal threats, if the elite of Tajikistan become
less loyal to the Kremlin…Tajikistan and Russia signed an agreement to extend the
base until 2042…military aid (is given) instead of payments for the base…In 2016
China’s direct investments totaled 60 percent of foreign investments in Tajikistan…For
comparison, Russia’s share in total investments amount to 8 percent…
…Moscow is only worried about the loyalty of the future president of Kyrgyzstan
to Russia…(Atambayev) said that although Russia will remain a strategic partner
of Kyrgyzstan, the state must rely on its own forces. He also hinted that the Russian
military base (Kant) could be closed after the end of the lease…It is possible that by
stating that, Bishkek decided to start the next round of negotiations, including an
increase in financial support…Like Tajikistan, with the decline of Russian investments,
the Kyrgyz leadership relies on the expansion of an economic partnership with China…
Russia has not yet realized that it is impossible to hold onto loyalty only through the
military – it is necessary to also buy it…
OE Watch | April 2017

35

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Pakistan’s War on Terror
OE Watch Commentary: Pakistan has suffered
multiple terrorist attacks in recent months, including a
suicide bomber who killed over 90 people at a shrine
in Sindh Province on 16 February. In response to these
attacks, on 22 February, the government of Pakistan
launched Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad (‘Elimination of
Discord’). The accompanying excerpted articles discuss
this operation and associated government policies.

“Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad was announced in the
aftermath of a fresh resurgence in terror attacks in
Pakistan”
Source: “Pakistan Army launches ‘Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad’ across the country,”
Dawn, 22 February 2017. https://www.dawn.com/news/1316332/pakistan-armylaunches-operation-radd-ul-fasaad-across-the-country

The first accompanying article from Dawn—one
of Pakistan’s most widely read daily newspapers—
claims that Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad will aim to
“indiscriminately eliminate terrorism” and “consolidate
gains” from previous operations. The article quotes an
official from the Inter-Services Public Relations (the
public relations branch of Pakistan’s Armed Forces)
as saying that “the effort entails conduct of Broad
Spectrum Security / Counter-Terrorism operations by
Rangers in Punjab, continuation of ongoing operations
across the country, and a focus on more effective
border security management.”

Pakistan Army launches ‘Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad’ across the
country

The article notes that the operation is a continuation
of the National Action Plan (NAP), which had been
formulated after the attack on Army Public School
Peshawar in December 2014. NAP has been criticized
“for its apparently half-hearted implementation,”
and for failing to reduce and eliminate terrorism.
The article mentions how the NAP included a
requirement that provinces across Pakistan form their
own counterterrorism task forces. However, with
NAP’s failure to address the problem, some former
government officials had called for increased funding
and support for provincial security forces. As Operation
Radd-ul-Fasaad continues to unfold, there could be a
more active role for provincial security forces.

Earlier in the day, the federal government had approved a request forwarded
by the Government of Punjab for the deployment of Rangers personnel in
the province…(they) would be given policing powers to conduct intelligencebased operations against militants, wherever required and with full authority.
Additionally, at the start of the week, Finance Minister Ishaq Dar had informed
Senate that the army had been empowered to act against terrorists across the
border if it had concrete evidence that Afghan soil had been used to launch recent
attacks in the country…

The Dawn article discusses that Operation Radd-ulFasaad will be carried out across the country with an
emphasis on border security. Operations from the past
several years only took place in a particular region,
such as operations in the Swat District (Operation Raii-Haq in 2007 and Rah-i-Rast in 2009) and in North
Waziristan (Operation Zarb-i-Azb in 2014).

Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad was announced in the aftermath of a fresh resurgence
in terror attacks in Pakistan…On Feb 16, the shrine of Sufi saint Lal Shahbaz
Qalandar in Sehwan was struck by a suicide bomber affiliated with the militant
Islamic State. The worst in the recent flurry of militant activity in Pakistan, it saw at
least 88 killed and more than 300 injured after a suicide bomber targeted devotees
during the evening dhamaal…

Finally, the statement from Pakistan’s Finance
Minister “that the army has been empowered to act
against terrorists across the border if it had concrete
evidence that Afghan soil had been used to launch
recent attacks” is significant. The article from The
News International shows that Pakistan’s Armed Forces
have already carried out a cross-border strike. The
strike also took place before Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad
officially started. If the operation is as extensive as it
claims to be, cross-border strikes into Afghanistan will
be worth watching. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

Pakistan Army on Wednesday launched ‘Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad’ across
the country, Inter-Services Public Relations, the army’s media wing, said in a
statement. Radd-ul-Fasaad — which translates roughly to ‘elimination of discord’
— will aim at indiscriminately eliminating the “residual/latent threat of terrorism”,
consolidating the gains made in other military operations, and further ensuring
the security of Pakistan’s borders…”The effort entails conduct of Broad Spectrum
Security / Counter-Terrorism (CT) operations by Rangers in Punjab, continuation
of ongoing operations across the country, and focus on more effective border
security management,” the ISPR said…Pursuance of the National Action Plan will
be the hallmark of this operation,” it added.

Operation Radd-ul-Fasad has been announced as a continuation of the National
Action Plan (NAP), the ISPR said in its Wednesday notification. Widely criticized
for its apparently half-hearted implementation, NAP had been formulated after
the devastating attack on Army Public School Peshawar in December 2014…The
provinces were further instructed under NAP to raise a counter-terrorism force
under a dedicated command structure.

Source: “Pakistani forces pound terrorist camps in Afghanistan,” The News
International, 18 February 2017. https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/187186Pakistani-forces-pound-terrorist-camps-in-Afghanistan
Pakistan security forces pounded the camps of Jamaatul Ahrar terrorist group
across the border in Afghanistan on Friday night and destroyed four camps and
a training compound, military sources said. The strikes were conducted hours
after Afghan Embassy officials were summoned to the Pakistan Army’s General
Headquarters (GHQ) in Rawalpindi, where they were handed over a list of 76
terrorists orchestrating terrorist activities in Pakistan from the Afghan soil…
Meanwhile, the security forces have launched full-scale track down against
terrorists after recent spate of terror attacks in the country and killed over 100…
OE Watch | April 2017

36

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
The Impact of Azerbaijan’s Air Defense System
Deals with Israel
OE Watch Commentary: On 17 December
2016, Azerbaijan’s Defense Minister
announced that Azerbaijan had reached an
agreement with Israel to purchase an unknown
number of batteries of the Iron Dome air
defense system. While the system is not yet in
service with the Azeri Air Force, news of its
planned acquisition alongside other equipment
purchases from Israel, is already having an
impact on air defense in the Caucasus. The
accompanying excerpted articles from Azeri
and Russian sources discuss this impact.
The article from the Azeri source Haqqin
claims that Azerbaijan acquired the Iron Dome
air defense system. However, there have been
questions about the acquisition, particularly
since Israeli officials never confirmed the
sale. Also, there have been no reports that
delivery of any batteries took place. The piece
reports on a recent successful test by the Israeli
defense firm Rafael on a new missile for the
Iron Dome. The article also discusses that the
primary radar for the Iron Dome- the EL/M2084- “detects the trajectory of an enemy
missile and decides whether to shoot it down.
If radar determines that the missile is flying
toward residential areas or strategic targets, the
fire control center gives a command to launch.”
The article from the Russian source
Rosbalt discusses another radar system that
Azerbaijan has purchased from Israel: the
Green Pine radar system (designated EL/M2080). According to the article, this prompted
Moscow to deploy the “Nebo-M” radar system
at its military base in the Armenian city of
Gyumri. Both radar systems are made by Elta,
a subsidiary of Israel Aerospace Industries,
though the Green Pine has a larger effective
range than the EL/M-2084.
The Rosbalt article notes that Azerbaijan
signed a defense contract with Israel worth
an estimated $5 billion, but this is actually
multiple contracts spread out over several
years. Nevertheless, Azerbaijan’s security
cooperation with Israel is significant and
almost equal to contracts signed with Russia,
which the article notes are also “worth $5
billion.” The article also notes that this
cooperation between Russia and Azerbaijan
has, in the past, concerned Armenia, which
“Moscow ‘reassured’ by providing it the
Iskander.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“Russia deployed the

“Nebo-M” radar system
at its military base in
the Armenian city of
Gyumri. According to the
expert, this was Moscow’s
response to Azerbaijan’s
acquisition of the Israeli
Green Pine radar.”

An Iron Dome battery launches a missile to intercept a rocket fired from the Gaza Strip in November 2012.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flickr_-_Israel_Defense_Forces_-_Iron_Dome_Intercepts_Rockets_from_the_Gaza_Strip.jpg

Source: Gasanov, Spartak. “Как Азербайджан будет обороняться от армянских ракет?
(How will Azerbaijan defend itself against Armenian rockets?),” Haqqin, 26 February
2017. https://haqqin.az/news/93561

How will Azerbaijan defend itself against Armenian rockets?
Israel carried out a successful test of the “Iron Dome” air defense system, equipped
with the new “Tamir” missile…Note that the results of the test of the new missile for the air
defense system, acquired by Azerbaijan, exceeded expectations…The tests were carried out
by the Israeli Ministry of Defense and Rafael Advanced Defense Systems. The “Iron Dome”
shot down several ground-to-ground missiles, launched from different distances…The main
task of the “Iron Dome” can be summed up as this – the multiple purpose radar system
EL/M-2084 detects the trajectory of an enemy missile and decides whether to shoot it down.
If radar determines that the missile is flying toward residential areas or strategic targets,
the fire control center gives a command to launch…
Source: Dzhorbenadze, Irina. “Зачем России чужое небо (Why does Russia have foreign
skies?),” Rosbalt, 27 January 2017. http://www.rosbalt.ru/world/2017/01/27/1586817.html
…Georgian, Armenian, and Azerbaijani sources relayed information from the Russian
military expert Yevgeny Damanstev, that Russia deployed the “Nebo-M” radar system at its
military base in the Armenian city of Gyumri. According to the expert, this was Moscow’s
response to Azerbaijan’s acquisition of the Israeli Green Pine radar. The Russian radar
will be able to control a large section of airspace over Turkey, Iraq, Syria, and Georgia…
…the location of the “Nebo-M” system on the territory of Armenia answers more to
the interests of Yerevan. Azerbaijan has the modern and especially effective Israeli antiaircraft missile system, Iron Dome. This allows it to counter the operational-tactical
Iskander system…As for Azerbaijan, there were no official statements on the deployment
of the “Nebo-M”…In the past, Moscow and Baku signed a defense contract of Russian
arms worth $5 billion. This information shocked Armenia, which Moscow “reassured” by
providing it the Iskander and other weapons. Azerbaijan has also signed a contract with
Israel, also for $5 billion…
OE Watch | April 2017

37

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Growing Role of the Russian Military Police Corps
OE Watch Commentary: Established in 2015,
the Russian Military Police Corps is a relatively
new institution within the Russian Armed Forces, to
combat corruption and ensure discipline. It is intended
to uphold law and order, provide physical security,
conduct investigations into acts of disciplinary and
general criminal misconduct, and ensure traffic
safety. The accompanying article from Krasnaya
Zvezda features an interview with Lieutenant General
Vladimir Ivanovsky, Chief of the Military Police
of the Russian Defense Ministry, and discusses the
growing role of the new Russian Military Police
Corps.
In certain situations, the Military Police provide
protection for victims, witnesses, and other
participants in criminal proceedings such as service
personnel, military court judges, and military
prosecutors. The Military Police have assumed
control of Ministry of Defense disciplinary units
and garrison guardhouses (jails). Russian Military
Police are also considered an agency of inquiry in
the Armed Forces, which gives them the authority to
conduct inquests. The approximately 10,000 strong
Military Police Corps operates under the authority of
the Russian Armed Force’s Prosecutor General and
his subordinate military prosecutors. This command
relationship allows the Military Police to cordon off
or blockade military garrisons and areas without
consulting the unit commander.
Unlike other Russian military reforms, such as
the establishment of a special operations forces
component, this reform is intended develop an
institution quite similar to its Western counterparts
in both form and function. Lieutenant General
Ivanovsky’s description of the military police’s
duties as traffic controllers, security guards, criminal
investigators, prison guards, and peacekeepers will
sound very familiar to military policemen in the West.
Apparently, the introduction of the Military Police
Corps has been quite successful, as Lieutenant
General Ivanovsky mentions that establishment of air
and naval components of the Military Police Corps
is under consideration. In addition, a mobilization
reserve capacity is in the works. The Russian
Military Police will also have their own training
program similar to other branches of arms (motorized
rifle, engineer, etc.) that will consist of a 4-year
military academy to educate/train new lieutenants.
Contract Soldiers will attend a 2 year, 10-month
course at the training at the Ryazan Higher Airborne
Command School, or a shorter course at regional
training facility. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“The total strength of the military police numbers around
10,000 today. Its structure embraces the Main Directorate
of the Military Police as the central military administrative
agency...”
Source: Aleksandr Aleksandrov, “Military Police: New Challenges,” Krasnaya
Zvezda Online, 22 February 2017. http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/
item/32349-voennaya-politsiya-novye-zadachi
[Aleksandrov] Today the
regulatory framework governing
the activities of the military
police has been approved, and
the composition, structure, and
missions of the police have been
determined. Can the process of
constituting the military police
now be regarded as complete?
[Ivanovsky]…Right now work to
establish and upgrade the military
police structure, including at
military bases located abroad,
is continuing. I emphasize: The
battalions performing missions
in the Syrian Arab Republic
constitute the first line-unit
subunits of military police…The
results of combat instruction and
the experience gained in Syria
Chief of the Main Directorate of Military Police of
will help us to identify clearly the the Russian Ministry of Defense, Lieutenant General
Ivanovsky.
range of missions and to apply the Vladimir
Source: Image Courtesy Russian Ministry of Defense
requisite changes to the structure
of the line-unit subunits.
[Aleksandrov] Talking of the Syrian experience, what missions are the military
police subunits tackling in the combat operations zone?
[Ivanovsky] In the Syrian Arab Republic the military police are subordinate to
the Center for Reconciliation of the Opposing Sides and are performing primarily
peacekeeping missions — supporting humanitarian actions, providing security for
medical establishments, escorting freight. In addition, military police subunits are
tasked with providing security for officials of the Russian Federation’s Ministry
of Defense and the Coordination Center for Reconciliation of the Opposing Sides
on Syrian Arab Republic Territory, and with protecting aircraft and important
facilities.
[Aleksandrov] What assets do the Russian Federation Armed Forces’ military
police have at their disposal today?
[Ivanovsky] The total strength of the military police numbers around 10,000
today. Its structure embraces the Main Directorate of the Military Police as the
central military administrative agency, the regional military
(continued)
police directorates and regional motor vehicle inspectorates in
OE Watch | April 2017

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Growing Role of the Russian Military
Police Corps
each military district and in the Northern Fleet, and the territorial agencies of the military police. There are over 140 garrison commandant’s
offices and around 100 military motor vehicle inspectorates. In addition, the military police incorporate two disciplinary battalions, stationed
in Nizhegorodskaya and Chitinskaya Oblasts. Security and protection issues are the responsibility of the office of the commandant of security
and protection which is also a structural subdivision of the military police.
[Aleksandrov] What does the military police’s arsenal comprise from the standpoint of the specifics of the missions being tackled? Are
there any plans to expand it — by means of an air component, for instance?
[Ivanovsky]…As far as an air component is concerned, we are currently conducting scientific research envisaging the shaping of a military
police armament program. In the course of this work we will be examining both air and naval components for the military police.
[Aleksandrov] Staffing is an important issue. How do things stand with regard to personnel selection and training?
[Ivanovsky] Over the course of five years we have been able to establish a mechanism for the selection of candidates to serve in the military
police. Whereas early on we were having to recruit candidates for service from whomever — so to speak — happened to be available, we
are now taking into consideration the qualitative characteristics of the future military police personnel…Our main issue now is that of cadre
training. The military police do not currently have their own educational establishment. We invite officers from among the troops and conduct
their retraining at military educational establishments operated by the Defense Ministry.
For warrant officer and officer training this year we plan to conduct the first recruitment of officer candidates based on the Combined-Arms
Academy of the Russian Federation Armed Forces or the Ryazan’ Higher Airborne Command School. Warrant officers will receive training
lasting two years and 10 months, and for officers — four years of training…
We plan to establish our first training subunit — a military police training battalion — in Vladikavkaz for the training of soldiers and NCOs
serving on a contract. That said, we are not abandoning the training of specialists at existing district training centers. We are cooperating
actively with the Military University of the Russian Federation’s Ministry of Defense on matters of the training of military investigators. In
addition, two departments of military science — at the Moscow Academy of the Russian Federation’s Investigation Committee and the AllRussia State University of Justice — are preparing a mobilization reserve for the military police.

Russia Increasing Numbers of Active and Reserve Positions
OE Watch Commentary: The “New Look” or “Serdyukov” reforms conducted from
2008-2012 reduced the number of officer billets in the Russian Armed Forces from 335,000 to
150,000. The Russian Federation has recently started to add some of these positions back into
the ranks, likely due to the reintroduction of new divisions and combined arms armies into the
force structure that require many personnel. The accompanying passages discuss these efforts.
The first accompanying passage from the Russian Defense Ministry features comments by
Colonel General Viktor Goremykin, Chief of the Main Personnel Directorate of the Russian
Defense Ministry, who discusses the issue of filling officer positions. He highlights that Russia
is now recruiting reserve officers and commissioning qualified contract NCOs and warrant
officers to fill active duty officer vacancies. He states that “...consideration is being given to
the need both for manning new formations... and filling scarce specialties, including flying
specialties.”
The article from Rossiyskaya Gazeta explains a new bill in the Russian parliament to expand
enlisted reserve capacity in the Russian Armed Forces. This expansion will be implemented by
allowing individuals to be inducted into the reserve with valid military occupational specialties
(MOSs) after graduating from civilian vocational schools and completing some correspondence
courses. This bill will presumably reduce the conscript pool, but could significantly increase
the number of (relatively) well trained enlisted personnel that could be called upon if required.
Although these enlisted personnel are not likely to acquire combat arms MOSs, they would
have technical skills (mechanics, welders, electronic technicians, etc.) that would be valued in
combat service support units. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: “Special Conference of Chiefs
of Personnel Entities of Russian Armed
Forces Held in Moscow,” Russian Ministry
of Defense Online, 2 February 2017. http://
function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.
htm?id=12110631@egNews

Special Conference of Chiefs of
Personnel Entities of Russian
Armed Forces Held in Moscow
A special conference of chiefs of personnel
entities of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces was held in the Defense Ministry.
Chief of Russian Defense Ministry Main
Personnel Directorate Colonel General
Viktor Goremykin, who spoke there,
called on personnel officials to look
for nonstandard and unconventional
approaches to filling officer positions.
“I would like to stress above all that the
most important task of 2016 — preserving
(continued)
cadre potential and
OE Watch | April 2017

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russia Increasing Numbers of Active and
Reserve Positions
ensuring the requisite level of manning all categories
of servicemen with professional cadres — has been
accomplished,” Goremykin declared. He noted
that this result was achieved despite the increased
authorized strength of officers, the increase in the
list of positions being filled by contract servicemen,
as well as the small size of graduations from military
educational institutions. “Acceptance on military
service of reserve officers and of those from among
servicemen of lower categories (contract personnel)
with a higher education continues to be priority
sources of manning with officer cadres for now,”
Goremykin said.
The Chief of the Main Personnel Directorate of the
military department stressed that “on the whole all
sources allowed us to accept over 11,000 officers
on military service in 2016, which is essentially
comparable with the total graduation from Defense
Ministry VUZ’s [military high schools].”
“We believe this work will remain urgent in 2017
as well, essentially until the beginning of fullfledged graduations from our VUZ’s. In addition,
in the current year it appears advisable to focus
efforts on looking for and implementing other such
nonstandard, unconventional forms of filling officer
positions,” Goremykin said, designating the range of
tasks.
At the same time he stressed that “the most
important task in future manning of troops with
officers unquestionably is the training of military
cadres in Defense Ministry VUZ’s.”
“VUZ’s will be fully up to strength in 2017. That
said, consideration is being given to the need both
for manning new formations [soyedineniye] and
filling scarce specialties, including flying specialties,
and to requirements of the RF National Defense
Management Center,” Goremykin noted…

“Acceptance ... of reserve officers
and of ...[contract personnel] with
a higher education continues to be
priority sources of manning with
officer cadres for now.”
— Chief of Russian Defense
Ministry Main Personnel
Directorate,
Colonel General Viktor
Goremykin

Chief of Russian Defense Ministry Main Personnel Directorate Colonel General Viktor Goremykin.
Source: Image Courtesy Russian Ministry of Defense

Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Bypassing the Barracks to Become a Soldier: There
Will Be Even More Students of Higher Educational Institutions Who Have Gone
Through the Army by Correspondence,” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 30 January
2017. https://rg.ru/2017/01/30/novyj-zakonoproekt-umenshit-chislo-studentovprizyvnikov.html
The State Duma adopted a bill in the first reading which expands the practice
of student training in Army and Navy specialties. Defense Ministry schools and
academies will help them master military science. Young people will be able to
receive the rank of private, seaman, sergeant, and petty officer of the reserve from
a civilian higher educational institution (VUZ) without separation from studies,
and they will not have to serve like ordinary draftees.
Such a military preparatory arrangement already is in effect in institutes and
universities where there is a military department, but now it is planned to extend
it to VUZ’s without a specialized educational structure. According to the bill,
students up to 30 years of age who are studying by correspondence in a federal
state VUZ without a military department will be permitted to conclude a contract
with military training centers which Defense Ministry schools and academies
have. But before that the health of all reservist candidates will be evaluated in
military commissariats at their place of residence, because sick soldiers are not
needed either in active-duty formation or in the mobilization troops…
It is understandable that the Defense Ministry would like to have as many
privates and sergeants with diplomas as possible in the draftee formation.
The generals, however, also are no less interested in the presence of a welltrained mobilization reserve. And to solve this problem, commanders agreed to
“correspondence-course” service for students, especially as there are enough
other draftees in Russia and contract personnel now are being assigned to the
most important and technological positions in the Army…
Their list as well as the number of students studying in Army VUZ’s will be
determined in the military department. The important thing here will be an
inventory of Armed Forces cadre requirements for “H-hour,” i.e., in a period
of threat to Russia. Defense Minister/States Secretary Nikolay Pankov earlier
declared that there is an extraordinarily great demand for that form of training.
It is planned to involve over 20,000 students in the program for training reserve
privates and sergeants. On the whole, 60,000 young people are covered by all
forms of “military training” in Russia…
OE Watch | April 2017

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
GIS Seen as Key Enabler for Automated
Command and Control
“The troops have now practically given up on
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation has long had
a strong cartographic tradition. Computer technology significantly
lagged behind the West in Soviet times, but since the collapse of
the Soviet Union, the Russian military has rapidly transitioned
from paper to digital mapping technologies. The Russian military’s
geospatial information systems (GIS) are a core component of
automated command and control systems (ACUs).

The accompanying interview in Krasnaya Zvezda, the Chief of
the Topographic Directorate of the General Staff, Colonel Aleksandr
Zaliznyuk, explains how the Russian Armed Forces are fielding
GIS technologies. The article discusses some of the capabilities of
these systems, the relationship of GIS to ACU, and how Russian
GIS is being used in the Syrian campaign. The article from Russian
Ministry of Defense discusses the use of precision surveying and
GIS technologies to provide highly accurate 3D digital positional
models in field conditions.

paper maps completely. Planning and calculations
are done using electronic topographic maps
and geoinformation applications…All these
measures significantly increase productivity of a
commander’s command and control work and the
effectiveness of employing arms and equipment.”
— Chief of the Topographic
Directorate of the General Staff,
Colonel Aleksandr Zaliznyuk

In the Russian Armed Forces, tactics used at the battalion level
and below consist of well-rehearsed battle drills. The Russian
military believes that ACUs provide a capability for the rapid
dissemination of orders to subordinate forces (Russian battalionlevel operation orders usually consist of just a map and a few notes).
The intent of these ACUs is to speed the Russian military decision
making process so that Russian units are executing orders, while
their adversary is still planning and generating orders. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Chief of the Topographic Directorate of the General Staff- Colonel Aleksandr Zaliznyuk.
Source: Image Courtesy Russian Ministry of Defense

Image source: Image
Courtesy Russian Ministry
of Defense

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2017

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: GIS Seen as Key Enabler for Automated
Command and Control
Source: Aleksandr Aleksandrov, “Military Topography ‘Digitized’,” Krasnaya Zvezda Online,
08 February 2017. http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/item/32181-voennaya-topografiya-vtsifre
[KZ] Formation of large data arrays and introduction of electronic maps require a
completely different approach to software and hardware. To what extent has the pool of
military topographer equipment been adapted for the new digital medium?
[Zaliznyuk] The processing and storage of digital materials, including Earth remote sensing
data, require the presence at Topographic Service facilities of state-of-the-art computer
systems with a speed in the tens of gigaflops and a distributed databank system with a data
capacity of hundreds of terabytes, and in the near future also of petabytes… It is planned
to complete the creation of electronic cartography centers before the end of 2018 from the
RF Armed Forces General Staff up to and including each combined-arms (tank) army…
In addition, state-of-the-art mobile cartographic and geodetic complexes are coming into
the troops. They include the PNGK-1 mobile navigation-geodetic complex [подвижный
навигационно-геодезический комплекс], which permits determining coordinates and altitudes
of geodetic network stations and points on the terrain along troop movement routes and
monitoring the geodetic tie-in of elements of troop battle formations using satellite navigation
and in an autonomous mode. The new PTsTS mobile digital topographic system [подвижная
цифровая топографическая система] performs tasks of creating and updating topographic
maps by digital methods and preparing and issuing topogeodetic information media…
Development of the Volonter [Волонтёр] advanced mobile multipurpose topographic-geodetic
complex will conclude next year and it will begin coming to the troops in 2019. The main
distinguishing feature of this complex is the capability of performing essentially the full range
of tasks of topogeodetic, navigational, and geoinformation support under field conditions. The
complex will increase the promptness and effectiveness of providing topogeodetic information
in operations by military force elements of various levels and will support their employment of
precision-guided munitions.
[KZ] What confirms the high effectiveness of introducing electronic topographic maps in
the troops and the use of geospatial information in automated command and control systems
(ASU)?
[Zaliznyuk] The troops have now practically given up on paper maps completely. Planning and
calculations are done using electronic topographic maps and geoinformation applications.
Standardization of formats supports an exchange of graphical data among military command
and control entities. All these measures significantly increase productivity of a commander’s
command and control work and the effectiveness of employing arms and equipment. Thus, the
use of electronic maps and software of the Integratsiya and Operator geoinformation systems
supported a transition to paperless technologies of developing graphic documents in the course
of command and staff and special tactical exercises. A characteristic example is the use of
digital cartographic information in the Unified System for Command and Control and Fire
Control at the Tactical Echelon in strategic exercises Kavkaz, Zapad, and a number of others…

Source: “Western Military District
Military Topographers Construct 3D
Positional Models in Field Conditions,”
Russian Ministry of Defense Online,
27 January 2017. http://function.
mil.ru/news_page/country/more.
htm?id=12109696%40egNews&utm_
medium=more&utm_source=rnews
A tactical special exercise has been
conducted with a Western Military
District Topographic Service subunit
which is stationed in the Voronezh
Oblast; during the exercise, the
specialists constructed threedimensional models of position areas in
field conditions.
With the aid of the latest “Orion”
[Орион], “Veshka” [Вешка], and
“Leyka” [Лейка], navigation equipment
and a height and elevation measuring
instrument, the military topographers
made a geodesic survey of facilities and
military proving ground landmarks on
the terrain and subsequently mapped
them on electronic charts. The margin
of error for indications on the charts
in the process of mapping them in field
conditions is up to 5 cm to 1 square
meter, which makes it possible to define
coordinates with great accuracy and to
use them for aiming various artillery
systems and inflicting aerial strikes in
diverse modes of battle. During the
exercise, the WMD Topographic Service
subunit personnel reconnoitered and
precisely detailed an area of more than
100 sq km over a three-day period…

[KZ] Tell about this in more detail if possible. What issues were being worked out by the
RF Armed Forces General Staff Military Topographic Directorate during topogeodetic and
navigation support to the Russian Group of Forces in Syria?
[Zaliznyuk] Electronic topographic maps of various scales, electronic and analog
photographic maps, special electronic and click-to-enlarge analog maps, and electronic maps
of major cities were created to provide the Group with geospatial information. Special maps
and photographic documents of terrain of all Syrian Arab Republic territory were updated,
issued, and transferred to the Group of Troops (Forces)…

Source: Image Courtesy Russian Ministry of Defense

OE Watch | April 2017

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Differing Views from Moscow on Global Lightning 2017
OE Watch Commentary: USSTRATCOM’s recent “Global
Lightning 2017” exercise has been met with divergent Russian views.
The excerpts from the two accompanying articles discuss differing
Russian views on the purpose of Global Lightning 2017.
The article from the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya describes
USSTRATCOM’s recent “Global Lightning 2017” scenario as
involving a hybrid conflict in Europe that escalated into a global
nuclear war between Russia and the United States. The article also
features an interview with Former Chief of Staff of the Strategic
Rocket Forces, Colonel General (ret.) Viktor Yesin, who claims that
this exercise was much larger than normal. He also claims that it
involved the US taking more assertive actions as a show of force to
deter Russia. He notes that “...the launching of five ballistic missiles is
an indicator of a full-blown exercise. ... This may be a response to the
strategic nuclear forces exercise which we conducted in October.”
Interestingly, the article from the more centrist Russian source,
Pravda, features a much different perspective on the purpose of
the exercise. The article features an interview with the Head of
the Center for Military Forecasting of the Institute for Political and
Military Analysis, Anatoliy Tsyganok, who argues that the exercise
was intended more for domestic political reasons, than to prepare for
war against Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Nikolay Surkov, “United States Nuclear Forces Prepare
for War in Europe: Pentagon’s Strategic Command Holds Largest
Exercise in Recent Years,” Izvestiya Online, 28 February 2017.
http://izvestia.ru/news/667465
Last week the American military reviewed the results of the U.S.
Strategic Command’s (USSTRATCOM) exercises held from 7 to 17
February. The responsibilities of the Strategic Command include
strategic deterrence, the conducting of a “global strike” (with
nuclear and non-nuclear assets), space operations, and ballistic
missile defense. During these maneuvers, which were named Global
Lightning 2017, operations were rehearsed involving a conflict
with another nuclear power in the European Theater of Military
Operations (TVD)… According to mass media information, the
Global Lightning 2017 scenarios went further and assumed the
escalation of a hybrid conflict in the European TVD into a global
conflict involving the use of nuclear weapons. However, in this
TVD the strategic forces of the United States have only one possible
enemy: Russia. It is noteworthy that although previously exercises
of the Strategic Command usually rehearse a particular version
of combat operations (for example, the inflicting of a disarming
nuclear strike against a potential aggressor or a retaliatory nuclear
strike), this time the use of all possible variants was rehearsed…
Former Chief of Staff of the Strategic Rocket Forces Viktor Yesin
confirmed in a conversation with Izvestiya that the current series of
Global Lightning exercises was unique in its scope and selection of
a notional enemy. “These exercises assume a regular and planned
nature. They have been conducted since the time of the Cold
War, but under other names,” noted the general.
(continued)

“I believe this [Global Lightning 17] is a routine
exercise, nothing more.”— Head of the Center for Military
Forecasting of the Institute for
Political and Military Analysis,
Anatoliy Tsyganok

Head of the Center for Military Forecasting of the Institute for Political and Military
Analysis, Anatoliy Tsyganok.
Source: http://politpuzzle.ru/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Anatolij-TSyganok.jpg

Source: “US Nuclear Forces Prepared for War Against Russia,”
Pravda Online, 28 February 2017. https://www.pravda.ru/news/
world/28-02-2017/1325939-nuclear-0/
The United States held the largest-scale exercise of strategic
nuclear forces in recent years. According to the scenario, a hybrid
conflict in Europe develops into a global nuclear war with US
involvement…
Why is the United States “rattling” the saber in front of Russia?
What does the United States want to show us and is it preparing
for actual war? Anatoliy Tsyganok, head of the Center for Military
Forecasting of the Institute for Political and Military Analysis and a
professor of the Academy of Military Sciences, answered Pravda’s
questions.
[Pravda] What does this exercise indicate? Is the United States
preparing for war in Europe?
[Tsyganok] I don’t think so. The fact is that 10 years ago and 20
years ago the Americans always were doing everything to assess the
threat of Russia and China. Moreover, 10 to 15 years ago they were
saying: “Let’s hit 10, 20, 30 targets in the Soviet Union.”
Strictly speaking, Russia’s threat to the Americans already is
historical. This exercise is routine. Judging from everything, when
they constantly say that Russia allegedly is a threat to America, this
is a bluff for the American citizen, although probably the Russians,
too, 60 percent I would say, believe NATO is a threat to Russia…
I believe this [Global Lightning 17] is a routine exercise, nothing
more.
OE Watch | April 2017

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Differing Views from Moscow on Global
Lightning 2017
“These exercises assume a regular and planned nature. They
“However, this year they are distinguished by
their larger scale. The launching of five ballistic
missiles is an indicator of a full-blown exercise.
Usually long-range aviation is also exercised.
This may be a response to the strategic nuclear
forces exercise which we conducted in October.”
…In Viktor Yesin’s opinion, if the information
regarding the linkage of the current exercises
specifically to a hypothetical conflict in Europe is
confirmed, this must be taken very seriously. “The
standard scenario for such exercises assumes that
a situation evolves in one region or another which
leads to the use of a nuclear weapon. However,
previously they attempted to avoid linkage to the
European TVD or they rehearsed purely defensive
scenarios,” added the former chief of staff of the
Strategic Missile Troops.

have been conducted since the time of the Cold War, but under
other names…However, this year they are distinguished by
their larger scale. The launching of five ballistic missiles is an
indicator of a full-blown exercise. Usually long-range aviation is
also exercised. This may be a response to the strategic nuclear
forces exercise which we conducted in October.”
— Former Chief of Staff of the Strategic Rocket
Forces, Colonel General (ret.) Viktor Yesin

In the estimation of observers, conducting
large-scale strategic forces exercises against
the background of a crisis in Russian-American
relations is evidence that urgent measures
are necessary to lower tensions and resolve
contentious issues — especially in the arena of
European security.

Former Chief
of Staff of the
Strategic Rocket
Forces, Colonel
General (ret.) Viktor
Yesin.
Source: http://ceness-russia.org/
data/page/p650.jpg

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein_-_Compendium_of_Central_Asian_Military_and_Security_Activity.pdf

OE Watch | April 2017

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s First Color Revolution?
OE Watch Commentary: One hundred years
ago, Russia headed down a revolutionary path
which has had a profound and long-lasting impact
on the country’s development. This year, Russians
are re-examining those factors which led to the
collapse of the tsarist dynasty and the subsequent
Bolshevik seizure of power. Given the current
anti-American climate, some Russian authors now
assert that the US was the nefarious force which
sparked the first “color revolution” in February
1917. According to a recent article in MilitaryIndustrial Courier, a journal with a readership
of influential Russian military strategists, “the
US likely played the decisive role in ordering the
Russian elite to depose the tsar during the February
Revolution.”
As the accompanying passages from the article
demonstrate, the author’s argument is based upon
a distorted perspective of history. The primary
objective of the article is to “prove” once again
that the US has had eternal designs upon not only
achieving global hegemony, but also on weakening,
humiliating, and if possible, chopping up Russia.
The author claims that the US was the “hiddenhand” responsible for starting World War I, fearing
that Germany would form an alliance with Russia,
and that the war would ultimately “force Europe to
be subject to America.” This strategy would also
force Russia to “become subordinate to America,
depriving it of sovereign development prospects.”
To circumvent logic and historical fact, the author
uses backward logic, maintaining that the US
must have been responsible for the tsar’s removal
because otherwise it would have no pretext to enter
the war. Recognizing the provisional government
as the legitimate authority in Russia after the tsar’s
abdication, allowed Washington to enter the war
under the slogan “war for democracy.” He writes
that this move would have been impossible had
“the tsarist government remained in Russia.”
Russian writer Anton Chekhov once remarked
that “Russians adore the past, hate the present, and
fear the future.” This article indicates that not only
do Russians adore the past, but some are willing
to distort the country’s history to better align with
the current propaganda. The publication of such
a tendentious view of history in an otherwise
respectable publication also suggests that the
paranoia and anti-American sentiments in Russia
remain at a dangerous level. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“…the US likely played the decisive
role in ordering the Russian elite to
depose the tsar during the February
Revolution….”

Saint Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow.

Source: https://www.goodfreephotos.com/russia/moscow/
full-view-of-moscow-cathedral-russia.jpg.php

Source: Sergey Brezkun, “Первая ‘цветная’: Февральская революция в России
потребовалась Соединенным Штатам, чтобы вступить в войну (The first ‘color’:
The February Revolution in Russia was necessary for the United States to enter
the war),” Военно-промышленный курьер, 22 February 2017. http://vpk-news.ru/
articles/35299
…The February Revolution intertwined not only various internal factors, but also
a number of external trends, reflecting the economic and geopolitical interests of
various groups of influence in the world, their objective being to weaken Russia as
much as possible, and then crush it….
…The influence of America was objectively the most important, for even though the
US did not formally enter WW I until April 1917, it was the main writer and director….
Accordingly, the overseas footprint in the events of 1917 in Russia is much greater
than is usually presented.
…Moreover, the US likely played the decisive role in ordering the Russian elite to
depose the tsar during the February Revolution….
…By the early 20th century, the world situation was such that the main threat to
America’s plans, or more precisely, the threat to the most cosmopolitan circles of
the world’s elite, was Germany, and in the medium-term perspective - its alliance
with Russia. Therefore, it was necessary to pit the two powers against each other,
Russian arms to weaken the Germans and vice-versa. Thus, all of Europe would be
weakened, forcing Europe to be subject to America. In such a manner, Russia would
also become subordinate to America, depriving it of sovereign development prospects.
The goal could only be achieved by war in Europe. And this was done to secure US
interests. From the summer of 1914, the confrontation began between the Entente and
the Triple Alliance, while the United States was formally neutral. Only in April 1917,
did the US enter Europe, formally - as allies of the Entente, but in reality - as the
aggressors….
…The US plans for Russia in the early twentieth century have not been well
documented, but the essence of the “hidden-hand” has been gradually revealed….
…I must say that by 1917 in Russia had accumulated a lot of both overt and covert
pro-American lobbyists, formal and informal political agents, professional spies and
representatives of private capital, however, firmly spliced with the US government
apparatus…. With regard to the US entry into the war, Harper (20 years after the
event) wrote: “By the middle of April, we were participants in the war, and of course,
American entry into the war was facilitated by the Russian revolution. It was hard to
use the slogan ‘war for democracy’ if the tsarist government remained in Russia.”
OE Watch | April 2017

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Zapad 2017-A Threat to Belarus?
OE Watch Commentary: Formally, Russia and Belarus
are close allies. Plans to create a “union-state” remain on
the books and the two countries share a similar history,
culture and language. Economic tensions, however,
have weakened the relationship over the past few years.
Belarus remains largely reliant on Russia for energy and
this dependency has been the source of arguments over
pricing and supply. The Kremlin’s more aggressive foreign
policy and the continued violence in Ukraine have also
aggravated the relationship and increased wariness among
the leadership in Belarus towards Russia. While Belarus
has hosted talks among the warring parties to resolve the
Ukrainian conflict, Minsk has yet to recognize Russia’s
annexation of Crimea. Minsk has also not recognized the
border changes stemming from the 2008 conflict with
Georgia, or the independence of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. From the Kremlin’s perspective, Belarus has not
been acting like a trusted, supportive ally.
In light of these tensions, the upcoming Zapad [West]
2017 joint military exercise between Russia and Belarus,
scheduled for September 2017, has taken on additional
significance. The brief accompanying excerpt from the
Russian source, Gazeta.ru, describes a recent statement
by the Belarusian Minister of Defense, Lieutenant General
Andrey Ravkov, where he warns people not to be “alarmed
at the redeployment of Russian military equipment.” The
passage also addresses rumors that this exercise could serve
as a pretext for aggression against Belarus. General Ravkov
insists that such speculation “is no more than an attempt
by some marginal structures to gain political dividends
or to boost their rating by exploiting the BelarusianRussian relationship.” He goes on to emphasize that “the
Zapad-2017 joint strategic exercise, by definition, poses
no threat to our country’s sovereignty” nor does it pose
a “threat to Western states and is not directed at third
countries because it is of a defensive nature.”
General Ravkov goes on to acknowledge “that Moscow
is Minsk’s strategic ally in building a shared defense
space, and the forthcoming maneuvers represent one form
of training for the combined grouping.” He concludes by
stressing that “the Zapad-2017 joint strategic exercise, by
definition, poses no threat to our country’s sovereignty.”
Given the current economic and political tensions between
the two countries, such assurances may be warranted. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The Zapad-2017 joint strategic exercise, by definition,
poses no threat to our country’s sovereignty.”
Source: Rafael Fakhrutdinov, “Армии России и Белоруссии встретятся на
Западе (Armies of Russia and Belarus Will Meet in the West),” Gazeta.ru, 23
February 2017. https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2017/02/23/10541177.shtml
Minsk has denied there is any danger posed by joint Russian-Belarusian
exercises and has cautioned against speculation around the theme of the
building of a military alliance by the “ fraternal” countries. NATO has
previously expressed concern about the transparency of the information on
these maneuvers being staged by the Union State.
Belarusian Minister of Defense Andrey Ravkov has described the statements
about and heightened attention to the Zapad-2017 [West] military exercise
being held jointly with Russia as speculation in the pursuit of higher ratings.
He also urged people not to be alarmed at the redeployment of Russian military
equipment….
…The minister advised those people paying increased attention to the exercise
to study Minsk’s Military Doctrine, in accordance with which first place among
the priority areas in Belarus’s coalition military policy is given to strengthening
the system of collective security and the continued development of relations with
Russia.
“The hysteria being whipped up by individual ‘experts’ just lately regarding
the alleged potential occupation of Belarus by Russian troops is no more than
an attempt by some marginal structures to gain political dividends or to boost
their rating by exploiting the Belarusian-Russian relationship theme,” the
military official said.
He added that in line with the decision of both countries’ presidents, Vladimir
Putin and Aleksandr Lukashenko, these exercises are conducted every other
year alternately on the territory of Belarus and Russia. Ravkov acknowledged
that Moscow is Minsk’s strategic ally in building a shared defense space, and
the forthcoming maneuvers represent one form of training for the combined
grouping.
“The sphere of military and military-technical cooperation between Belarus
and Russia has been and remains one of the drivers behind the development
of our ties, and military cooperation demonstrates precisely the level of
collaboration that ought to exist between fraternal peoples.
“The Zapad-2017 joint strategic exercise, by definition, poses no threat to our
country’s sovereignty,” the head of the military department pointed out. The
exercises, as he put it, also pose no threat to Western states and are not directed
at third countries because they are of a defensive nature and are addressing
only issues relating to strategic deterrence…

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Honoring Russian Soldiers Killed in Chechnya
“...these soldiers died fighting the scourge of
international terrorism”

OE Watch Commentary: Last month marked
the 17th anniversary of one of the bloodiest
battles in modern Russian military history. On
29 February-1 March 2000, the 6th Company,
104th Regiment, 76th (Pskov) Guards Airborne
Division, was overrun by Chechen fighters, wiping
out nearly the entire unit. 84 of the 90 soldiers
in this Russian company were killed, while
reported losses among the Chechens have ranged
from 200-1500. The circumstances surrounding
this battle and the exploits of the 6th Company
have been the subject of many books and films.
To commemorate this event, a new memorial
was erected at the site of the battle in Chechnya.
The accompanying passages from Russian and
Chechen sources discuss the dedication ceremony,
and provide valuable context of current ChechenRussian relations.
As the first excerpt points out, the memorial is
inscribed with the name of an ancient Greek god
of Nika [Victory] and along the base is dedicated
“to the fallen.” The dedication ceremony, held on
2 March, was attended by political leaders, family
members of the fallen, soldiers and veterans from
the airborne unit in Pskov.
The second excerpt is a link to Chechen TV
coverage of the dedication. The video points out
that for many of the family members of the fallen
Russian soldiers, this was the first time they had
travelled to battlefield in Chechnya. During the
dedication, Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov
honored those Russian soldiers who had sacrificed
their lives “fighting the scourge of international
terrorism.” Kadyrov went on to claim that not only
had the Chechen people suffered most from this
war, but neither the Chechens nor the Russians
were responsible for the conflict. Kadyrov
neglected to mention that at the time of this battle,
his clan was actively fighting against Russian
forces. In what has become a standard refrain
among the Kremlin propagandists, Kadyrov
asserted instead that Western secret services were
the ones guilty of provoking this struggle.
To honor those who died in this brutal war is
certainly a step in the right direction. This new
memorial suggests that Russian-Chechen enmity
has been largely resolved and that relations are
now on a more solid and productive footing.
However, framing the Chechen conflict as solely
a fight against international terrorism sponsored
from abroad, not only distorts the historical
record, but may also prevent healing the wounds
of this war. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

New war memorial for Pskov airborne soldiers killed in Chechnya.
Source: Pskov.ru

Source: В Чечне открыли поклонный крест на месте гибели псковских
десантников (In Chechnya, a worship memorial was dedicated on the site where Pskov
paratroopers perished),” Interfax, 2 March 2017. http://www.interfax.ru/russia/552066
A memorial was installed in Chechnya at the spot where 84 commandos of the 6th
Company of the 76th Air Assault Division perished, as reported by the press service of
the Administration of the Pskov region.
The memorial was dedicated on Thursday in the village of Ulus-Kert, Shatoysky
district, where at an altitude of 776 meters, on 1 March 2000, paratroopers of the
76th Airborne Assault Division under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Mark Mark
Yevtyukhin guards were killed in an unequal battle with the superior forces of the
enemy.
The dedication ceremony of the memorial was attended by the delegation of the
airborne troops of Russia- Pskov region, members of the families of the dead soldiers
(many of whom were at the spot of death of their loved ones for the first time), the
leadership and the people of Chechnya.
The monument to the fallen soldiers is an image in granite stone with a height of
2.6 meters and weighing 10 tons…. On the cross is inscribed “Nika”, which means
“victory” and at the bottom - “In Memory to the Fallen.” Since the paratroopers who
died belonged to different faiths, the memorial holds sacred signs that are universal
for different religions: solar motives, the image of the world tree, the symbol of life and
death….
Source: “Кадыров установил Поклонный крест в честь псковских десантников
(Kadyrov established a memorial in honor of the Pskov airborne),” Youtube, 2 March
2017. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTuMre5yErs
[Chechen Leader Ramzan Kadyrov] …”these soldiers died fighting the scourge of
international terrorism. The Chechen people suffered most from this war…the entire
region was destroyed…. The soldiers who died were protecting the territorial integrity
of Russia. But this war was not the Chechen’s fault. It was planned by the secret
services in Western and European countries…”
OE Watch | April 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Better Qualified Contract Soldiers
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian leadership
appears to have taken another step toward manning the
military ranks with professional rather than conscript
soldiers. According to the brief accompanying excerpt,
the Russian parliament has sponsored legislation which
would allow “men who have completed secondary
professional education” to enlist as contract soldiers.
Under the current regulations, one is eligible to enlist
as a contract soldier only after satisfying their one-year
conscript obligation. This new legislation will apparently
waive this requirement for those possessing unique
technical skills.
As the excerpt points out, this “innovation will
make it possible to fill the most sought-after technicalgrade military posts and to boost the effectiveness
of arms and military equipment use.” The proposed
law will also help to “create an additional source for
replenishing the mobilization personnel reserve with
trained specialists.” The article specifically addresses
whether such legislation “could be considered as a step
toward abolishing draft military service.” The military
spokesperson would not go that far, insisting instead that
it “should be considered as a step toward downsizing the
institution of draft service.” The article did not mention
the specific skills which quality for contract service.
The Russian leadership has worked hard over the
past decade to raise the prestige and quality of life for
those who serve in the military. To operate sophisticated
military equipment, the military wants to attract the
highest qualified personnel. This proposed legislation,
combined with an overall sluggish economy, may also
induce highly qualified college graduates to enlist as
contract soldiers. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Men who have completed secondary professional
education before being drafted will be permitted to serve
under contract.”
Source: Tatyana Samakhina, “Дума разрешила служить по контракту людям
со средним профобразованием (The Duma Has Permitted People with
Secondary Professional Education To Serve under Contract),” Rossiyskaya
Gazeta Online, 17 February 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/02/17/duma-razreshilasluzhit-po-kontraktu-liudiam-so-srednim-profobrazovaniem.html
Men who have completed secondary professional education before being
drafted will be permitted to serve under contract. The State Duma accepted the
cabinet of ministers’ amendments to this effect at the first reading.
At present, entry into military service under contract without having completed
draft military service is open only to male citizens who are not in the reserve
and to draft servicemen who have higher education….
…The draft law also proposes granting the right to conclude a military
service contract to people enlisting for service in the RF Armed Forces, the
RF National Guard troops, the MChS [Ministry for Affairs of Civil Defense,
Emergency Situations, and Elimination of Natural Disasters], the RF Foreign
Intelligence Service, and the state security agencies.
The innovation will make it possible to fill the most sought-after technicalgrade military posts and to boost the effectiveness of arms and military
equipment use. One further argument is that this law “will create an additional
source for replenishing the mobilization personnel reserve with trained
specialists.”
The deputies asked the Defense Ministry representative whether this bill could
be considered as a step toward abolishing draft military service.
“It cannot be considered as a step toward its abolition, but it can and should
be considered as a step toward downsizing the institution of draft service,”
Pankov stated….

Suheil al-Hassan and the Syrian Army’s Tiger Forces
By Lucas Winter

This paper looks at the genesis, evolution and growth of the Syrian Army’s “Tiger
Forces” and their leader Suheil al-Hassan. The paper shows how Hassan has played
an important role since conflict began in 2011. It attributes his transformation from
special forces commander to leader of military campaigns to an ability to harness the
Syrian Army’s full infantry, artillery and airpower better than any other loyalist field
commander. Given the Syrian Army’s manpower shortages, rampant corruption and
rivalry-laden bureaucracy, this is no small feat. Al-Hassan has become a key symbol
in the Syrian loyalist camp, able to project more combined arms power than
anyone else in Syria. His success on the battlefield comes less from tactical or
strategic insights than from his ability to thrive within the loyalist camp’s opaque
and rivalry-laden bureaucracy. For this he has become a symbol to regime
supporters, proof that the war can be won by working within the system.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Small_Wars_Journal_-_Suheil_al-Hassan_and_the_Syrian_Armys_Tiger_Forces_-_2016-07-22.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
NATO as Paper-Tiger?
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Kremlin’s
current narrative, NATO presents an existential threat to Russia.
Within the Russian media, frequent comparisons are made to
the current disposition of NATO military forces and those of
Nazi Germany during World War II. The possible expansion
of NATO to include Georgia and Ukraine was portrayed in the
darkest light and served as the essential pretext for Russia’s
armed aggression against these countries. Since the annexation
of Crimea in March 2014 and Russia’s continued armed
involvement in southeastern Ukraine, the Russian public has
been fed a steady diet of anti-NATO propaganda.
Contradicting current Russian propaganda, the author of the
excerpted article which appeared in Military-Industrial Courier,
a journal with a readership of Russian military strategists,
claims that instead of a military threat, NATO is no more than
a paper tiger. He asserts that having largely disarmed and
succumbed to liberal thinking, NATO is weaker today than it
was in 1991. The author goes on to suggest that Europeans fell
into liberal complacency after the USSR collapsed, mistakenly
believing they had attained “complete military security.” The
author contends that this complacency, combined with “leftliberal ideology with its tolerance and political correctness
has completely disarmed Westerners mentally.” He claims that
“heroism and self-sacrifice, without which it is impossible to
fight, are no longer encouraged in the West, but are regarded as
frankly shameful.”
Many Western analysts have posited that by exaggerating
NATO’s military prowess and distorting its mission, the
Kremlin-supported Russian media has helped to legitimize
the current administration’s hold on power. Such an approach
reinforces the belief that democratic procedures are less
important when national security is at stake. While the author is
not associated with Russia’s military leadership, the publication
of such an article in one of the more authoritative military
journals, may suggest that Russia is growing more confident
regarding the use of its military power. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“…left-liberal ideology with its tolerance
and political correctness has completely
disarmed Westerners mentally.”
Source: Alexander Khramchikhin, “Армия импотентов;
Североатлантический альянс добивают либеральные идеи (An
impotent army: The NATO Alliance is being finished off with liberal
ideas),” Военно-промышленный курьер, 15 February 2017. http://vpknews.ru/articles/35206
Millions of Russian citizens don’t just believe in the possibility of NATO
invasion, but expect it to start anytime soon. Various scenarios of such
aggression are described on the pages and screens of domestic media….
In fact, these are reports from a parallel world. To the reality in which we
live, they do not have any relation. The probability of an attack by aliens
is greater. Knowing nothing about aliens, we must assume that it is not
zero. However, we know enough about NATO to be certain: the possibility
of aggression on its part at this moment is exactly zero, without tenths or
even hundredths of a percent.
Voices are sometimes heard among realists. One of the largest Polish
newspapers, in connection with the Crimean events of March 2014, wrote
these remarkable words: “Thank you Putin for another reminder to us
that the current NATO - it is not even a paper tiger, but a soap bubble.”
…One would again be reminded that the current NATO, which has 28
countries, without exception, in all categories of technology is many
times weaker than the NATO of 1991, which included 16 countries…. The
reasons for this are several. One of the main, the strong psychological
wound among Europeans after two world wars. Second, …a significant
increase in quality of life and a sharp decline in the birth rate. The third
reason was the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union, which
in the West created a feeling of complete military security. Finally, leftliberal ideology has had a huge effect….
…left-liberal ideology with its tolerance and political correctness has
completely disarmed Westerners mentally. Heroism and self-sacrifice,
without which it is impossible to fight, are no longer encouraged in the
West, but are regarded as frankly shameful….

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further, he has
taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian territory
that was taken, from his perspective, illegally. This
book describes Putin and the military’s use of various
strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s new equipment
and reform initiatives, and Putin’s geopolitical quest
for influence in the Arctic and Ukraine. Included in the
discussion are some of the unintended consequences
of his actions (negative world opinion, sanctions, NATO
responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | April 2017

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Armed Forces Deploy a New Radio System
OE Watch Commentary: As electronic
warfare has developed, the need for electronic
countermeasures has become central to military
communications. The Russian armed forces may have
found an answer to electronic countermeasures and
eavesdropping in a new system unveiled at IDEX2017: the R-187-P1Ye Azart portable multimode radio.
A recent article published in the Russian government
newspaper, Rossiyskaya Gazeta, outlined the new
system and the implications it brings for the Russian
armed forces.
According to the excerpt, the new radio system is
being developed by Angstrem, a Russian company
that specializes in tactical communications, and
is made with software and hardware components
developed and manufactured in Russia. It is designed
to operate under battlefield conditions including
“enemy electronic countermeasures.” According
to the excerpt, with its unique Russian-designed
software capabilities, the new Russian radio system is
immune to interception or eavesdropping by outside
forces. The system is also said to have GLONASS
(Global Navigation Satellite System) and GPS
capabilities that could pinpoint the operator and
update the operator’s position in real-time.
According to the excerpt, the system has already
been deployed with the Russian military and is
compatible with around 250 other types of Russian
communication equipment, improving the Russian
armed forces’ communications interoperability.
Most importantly, the system will make Russian
military communications immune to interception
or eavesdropping in the future. End OE Watch
Commentary (Gartner)

“This mode rules out any possibility of communication
jamming or signal intercept/direction-finding, which provides
a high degree of information protection and communication
system stability.”
Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “В России разработали радиостанцию, сигнал которой
нельзя перехватить (Russian Develops Radio Set with Uninterceptable Signal),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 21 February 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/02/21/specialistyrazrabotali-radiostanciiu-kotoruiu-nelzia-perehvatit.html
Scientific Production Association Angstrem, which specializes in the field of
tactical radio communication and secure communication technologies, developed
the radio communication system using a new Russian-made electronic component
base. At its foundation lies the R-187-P1Ye Azart portable multimode radio with
software-defined architecture (SDR). The system allows for setting up a tacticalechelon command and control radio communication subsystem and provides for
the interference-free sharing of information in any conditions, including enemy
electronic countermeasures.
A unique software solution of the new Russian radio set is its operating frequency
pseudo-random tuning mode with a speed of 20,000 hops per second. This mode
rules out any possibility of communication jamming or signal intercept/directionfinding, which provides a high degree of information protection and communication
system stability.
The radio simultaneously supports both GLONASS and GPS satellite systems, with
the ability to determine the coordinates of a subscriber’s location and share data in
automatic and manual mode. Using the radio as a repeater allows for a multifold
increase in communication range. And using the portable-version Angstrem-VE
radio makes it possible to create a sophisticated tactical unit communication system
with a range of at least 500 kilometers.
The radio is already in use in the Russian Armed Forces and it has confirmed its
stated specifications, including as regards reliability. Usage experience has shown
that the Angstrem radio is compatible with more than 250 kinds of radio equipment
of various types and generations.

A Small Box That’s a Big Deal: How Latin
American Countries Are Using CubeSATs
and Why it Matters
by Kevin Freese
The Army is the Defense Department’s largest space user and
the space domain is an essential part of the current and future
operational environment. A relatively new satellite technology
– the CubeSAT – is now making it easier for countries such as
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay to launch their space
programs. By facilitating traditionally non-spacefaring nations
to develop space programs, CubeSATs will give such nations a
greater voice in international space policies and laws. For the
United States, this will mean increased necessity to take the
interests of other nations into consideration when operating in
space.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/SWJ_-_A_Small_Box_Thats_a_Big_Deal_-_How_Latin_American_Countries_Are_Using_CubeSATs_and_Why_it_Matters.pdf
OE Watch | April 2017

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Norwegian Signal to Russia?
OE Watch Commentary: As the
accompanying article from the Independent
Barents Observer reports, Norway is pulling
its military intelligence site away from the
Russian border. The announcement came
two days before the Norwegian Ministry of
Defense launched the Viking 2017 military
exercises on its border with Russia.
The passage notes that the border town
of Kirkenes has been a stronghold for
Norwegian military intelligence since
1947. It discusses that the border town
has housed several key installations and
facilities for decades. The border town is
close to Russia, which the article refers to
as “the resurgent power with which Norway
has an increasingly complex and difficult
relationship.” The plan is to move personnel
to Vadsø, located about 100 miles northwest.
Norway has been trying to be a good
neighbor during increasingly tense times,
but there is no indication whether or not this
is part of being a good neighbor. The article
quotes Norwegian Head of Intelligence as
saying that “the Intelligence Service must
adjust its activities to the assignments given,
the challenges we have and the challenges
we see coming.” As the article mentions, the
town of Kirkenes is not happy about losing
a military installation that has been part of
its economy since 1947. The members of the
site are probably not too happy to be moving
to a more remote town with fewer attractions
and a two hour drive to the Kirkenes airport.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Atle Staalesen and Thomas Nilsen, “Norway moves military intelligence away
from Russian border,” The Independent Barents Observer, 1 March 2017. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/2017/03/norway-moves-military-intelligence-away-russian-border

Norway moves military intelligence away from Russian border
The military intelligence has been stationed ... outside Kirkenes since 1947.
The Secret Service reduces its personnel and activities in the border town of Kirkenes which
for decades has been a stronghold for Norwegian military intelligence. The border town has
housed several key installations and facilities. Close by is Russia, the resurgent power with
which Norway has an increasingly complex and difficult relationship. Now, the Service is
cutting activities in the area. Instead, personnel will be moved to Vadsø, the town located a
two-hour drive to the northwest.
Head of Military Intelligence Morten Haga Lunde stated that the re-structuring does not
imply any staff cuts. “It is not a reduction of capacity, but rather a geographical change in
the region.” He did not want to comment on the reasons for the decision. “The Intelligence
Service must adjust its activities to the assignments given, the challenges we have and the
challenges we see coming. Modernization and improved efficiency is a continuous process
for the Intelligence Service.”
Kirkenes town Mayor Rune Rafaelsen confirmed that he met with intelligence representatives
and discussed the re-organization of the service. “I am very disappointed about the decision
to move jobs away from Kirkenes.”
The intelligence facilities in Kirkenes have long been considered top priority and the reorganization consequently comes as a surprise.
The Brønnøysund State Register Centre still lists Kirkenes Station, the local Kirkenes
intelligence division, as a separate legal entity. However, the website of the Norwegian
Armed Forces no longer includes Kirkenes Station among its units. Instead, the Kirkenes
facilities are subordinated to a new Varanger Station, a structure which includes both
Kirkenes and Vadsø.
According to the website, “the Military Station Varanger is a listening and observation
station. It also has responsibility for an administrative and support element at Høybuktmoen
and a [data] collection unit at Viksjøfjell, both of them located in the municipality of SørVaranger”.
The Kirkenes Station was established in 1947, while the Vadsø Station followed in 1951.

Elevenes Border Station at the Sør-Varanger Garrison.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Garnisonen_i_S%C3%B8r-Varanger_at_Elvenes.jpg

OE Watch | April 2017

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Another Norwegian Arctic Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 March, the Joint
Viking 2017 military exercise kicked off in Norway. As
the accompanying passage discusses, Joint Viking is
a national Norwegian exercise (not a NATO exercise),
but includes some 700 soldiers from the United States
Marine Corps, United States Army and the British
Royal Marines. In the past, these fellow NATO nations
sent observers, not players. The exercise’s main goals
are to noted as “practicing crisis management and the
defense of northern Norway.” A total of 8,000 service
personnel will participate.
When Norway conducts an Arctic exercise, Russia
responds. Norway’s announcement of a March 2015
exercise in Finnmark involving 5,000 Norwegian
service personnel was met with a Russian response of
an unannounced exercise involving 38,000 soldiers,
3,360 vehicles, 41 naval vessels, 15 submarines and
110 aircraft. Russian Military Districts and fleets far
removed from Norway were brought on higher alert
status and moved forces to the Arctic. In 2016, Norway
conducted no exercises in the Far North, but Russia
still conducted a ground forces exercise involving
some 5,000 combatants and 500 combat vehicles a few
kilometers from its border with Norway. The Russian
response to this exercise is sure to prove interesting.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Norway kicks off exercise in Finnmark,” The
Independent Barents Observer, 3 March 2017. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/
security/2017/03/norway-kicks-exercise-finnmark

Norway kicks off exercise in Finnmark
British and American forces are integrated when the Armed Forces test their
ability to maneuver across great distances in the Arctic winter.
Joint Viking 2017 is a national Norwegian exercise, but includes some 700
soldiers from the United States Marine Corps, United States Army and the British
Royal Marines. Starting on Monday, 6 March, the exercise main goals are to
practice crisis management and the defense of northern Norway. A total of 8,000
service personnel will participate, the majority deployed in Finnmark county in
an area that stretches from Alta and Lakselv by the fjords to to the inland towns of
Karasjok and Kautokeino. The exercise will not include East-Finnmark, Norway’s
border area with Russia’s Kola Peninsula.
The Norwegian Armed Forces feel that it is important to operate in natural and
challenging surroundings in order to solve their missions optimally. Finnmark
offers demanding topographic and climatic conditions in addition to great
distances, which give the soldiers an opportunity to practice logistical support to
the units. The army, navy and air-force will participate in the exercise that will last
until March 16th.
Last autumn, more than 5,000 Russian soldiers with 500 armored tanks and
vehicles took part in a powerful exercise in the Pechenga rayon, a few kilometers
from the border with Norway. Pechenga houses the Northern fleet’s 61st Naval
infantry brigade and the 200th Independent Motor Rifle Brigade.

Russia’s Icebreakers Staying Busy
OE Watch Commentary: The
Russian icebreaker fleet on the
Northern Sea Route was hard
pressed to handle the demand
during 2016. There was a
considerable increase in domestic
shipping to haul cargo and
construction material to the new
port of Sabetta (in the Ob River
estuary) and northern oilfields.
The accompanying passage
from the Independent Barents
Observer discusses the growing
shipping in this route and the
reasons behind it. It suggests
that new industrial projects and
the militarization of Russian
Arctic waters are key factors. For
example, Sabetta is being built
as a Liquid Natural Gas (LNG)
production facility and port.
Military shipping during the
period was also heavy as Russia
continues to build and renovate
Arctic bases and airfields. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Icebreaker escorts up 100%

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Icebreaker escorts up 100%,” The
Independent Barents Observer, 27 February 2017. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/arctic/2017/02/icebreaker-escorts-100

In 2016, a total of 420 vessels loaded with 5.29 million tons of cargo were escorted on the Northern Sea
Route, according to Rosatomflot, the Russian state icebreaker company. That is up more than 100 percent
from the previous year. In 2015, icebreakers escorted a total of 195 ships with 2.04 million tons of cargo.
A lion’s share of the growing shipping is linked with the development of new industrial projects, among
them the Yamal LNG and the Novy Port oil field. As many as 120 ships visited Sabetta, the new Yamal
LNG sea port on the northeastern end of the Yamal Peninsula in 2016. Most of them needed assistance
from Rosatomflot.
The militarization of Russian Arctic waters also adds to the load on the icebreakers. In 2016, numerous
shipments were made to the new military bases on archipelagos like the Franz Josef Land, New Siberian
Islands, Severnaya Zemlya and Wrangel Island.
The newest of the nuclear-powered vessels, 50 Let Pobedy [50 Years of Victory] conducted the largest
number of operations. In the period from August 2016 to early February 2017, the vessel escorted 99
ships. It will soon be out of service for a while. When it returns from its ongoing voyage in mid-March,
the ship will undergo a planned round of upgrades in a local dry dock, according to ship captain Dmitry
Lobusov.
In the last part of 2016, Rosatomflot’s capacity was strained following the repair and service on the
«Yamal», a ship built in 1993. According to the company, the ship was back in duty in Arctic waters only
in February of this year.
Russia currently has a total of four icebreakers in operation. In addition, the Rosatomflot operates the
«Sevmorput», the nuclear-powered container ship, which was upgraded and re-installed in the fleet in
2016.
Capacity will soon improve. The new and powerful «Arktika», currently under construction in the Baltic
Yard near St. Petersburg, is due for sailing in the fall of this year.
OE Watch | April 2017

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
A Second Arctic Air Defense Division
OE Watch Commentary: Russia
continues to expand her defenses in the
Arctic region. She is now expanding her
air defense coverage of the polar approach
to Russia by adding a second air defense
division in 2018. The accompanying
article from Izvestiya discusses this plan.
According to the article, the new
division will incorporate some of the radar
stations and facilities of the existing 1st
Air Defense Division to expand radar
coverage and air defense depth for Russia.
Apparently, the 1st Air Defense Division
will focus on the vital Kola Peninsula
which contains Murmansk, Severomorsk,
the Northern Fleet Headquarters and ports
and the bulk of the strategic submarine
fleet. Russia shares the Kola Peninsula
with Finland and Norway. The new
division will cover the rest of the Russian
north from the island of Novaya Zemlya to
the Chukotka Peninsula opposite Alaska.
As the article points out, the shortest
distance between North America and
Russia is the polar route. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“The Ministry of Defense
will deploy an air defense
division in the Arctic next
year. The new formation will
close Northern Russia from
Novaya Zemlya to Chukotka
with an impenetrable shield.
The division’s missile and
radio-technical regiments
will be able to detect and
destroy combat aircraft,
cruise missiles, and even
unmanned aerial vehicles.
It will be able to protect not
only arctic and subarctic
regions, but also will deny
the air enemy access to the
Urals and Moscow.”

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “New Air Defense Division Will Protect the
Arctic, Urals, and Moscow against Attack from the Direction of the North Pole,” Izvestiya
Online, 20 February 2017. http://izvestia.ru/news/666014
The Ministry of Defense will deploy an air defense division in the Arctic next year. The new
formation will close Northern Russia from Novaya Zemlya to Chukotka with an impenetrable
shield. The division’s missile and radio-technical regiments will be able to detect and destroy
combat aircraft, cruise missiles, and even unmanned aerial vehicles. It will be able to protect
not only arctic and subarctic regions, but also will deny the air enemy access to the Urals and
Moscow.
The new formation will include both newly activated military units as well as those already on
alert duty in the Arctic. Currently, the 1st Air Defense Division guards the polar skies against
enemy aircraft, cruise missiles, and UAVs. Its regiments cover The Kola Peninsula, the White
Sea, Arkhangel’sky Oblast’, and the Nenetskiy Autonomous Okrug. The division recently was
augmented with a surface-to-air missile (SAM) regiment stationed on Novaya Zemlya. The
division is armed with the most state-of-the-art weapons — S-400 Triumf and S-300 Favorit
SAM systems as well as the Pantsir short-to-medium range air defense missile-gun complexes.
Military historian Dmitry Boltenkov stated that “In Soviet Union times the famed 10th Air
Defense Army was on alert duty on the shores of the Arctic Ocean. It had not only SAM and
radio-technical units and formations, but also fighter-interceptor regiments. True, this air
defense army was repeatedly reduced during the 1990s and 2000s.”
Boltenkov believes that the new division will take control of the northern axis (from Novaya
Zemlya to Chukotka) and will provide long-range protection of Russia’s Central Economic
Region (including Moscow) as well as the Urals. The 1st Air Defense Division will concentrate
on defense of the Kola Peninsula and Northern Fleet bases located there. “There is no special
need to cover the stretch from Novaya Zemlya to Chukotka with SAM regiments, but it is
necessary to create continuous radar coverage. Therefore it is not the S-300 and S-400 SAM
systems that will be the main attack force of the new division, but the radar. I assume that they
will be stationed at advanced arctic outposts being newly established, possibly even on Temp
Airfield and the base on Kotelny Island.”
Former air defense officer Vladislav Shurygin noted that the United States and NATO always
considered the northern axis as most convenient for an attack on the USSR’s central industrial
region. “At first American strategic bombers with nuclear bombs aboard were supposed to
penetrate across the North Pole. Then the United States built air-launched cruise missiles,
which would be launched from the polar area. SAM regiments, radars, and Tu-128 and MiG31 long-range interceptors of the 10th Air Defense Army successfully parried this threat. But
a wholesale reduction began during 1993-1994, and a hole formed in the North that was not
covered by anything.”
Shurygin noted that the Ministry of Defense was able to adjust surveillance of the northern axis
in recent years to cover that hole. “Now offensive air weapons are being developed quickly.
Low-signature cruise missiles, stealth UAVs, hypersonic aircraft, and missiles are appearing.
Therefore a reliable air shield should close the northern axis. It will permit timely detection,
intercept, and defeat of the enemy.”

Source: “Arctic ice floe” by Paul Gierszewski (Gierszep) - Own work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 via Wikimedia
Commons - https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Arctic_ice_floe.jpg#/media/File:Arctic_ice_floe.jpg

OE Watch | April 2017

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Gerasimov’s Fifth Speech at the Academy
of Military Science
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 March, Russia’s Chief
of the General Staff Valeriy Gerasimov made his yearly
presentation to the Academy of Military Science. His
speeches to the Academy over the years have offered some
of the best insights into Russia’s overall military approach
to contemporary warfare and this one was no different.
The accompanying excerpts from the speech point out
that Gerasimov urges the Academy of Military Science to
prioritize the study of new forms of interstate warfare and
effective methods of countering them.
Gerasimov notes the importance of the “formation of
scenarios and long-term forecasts of the development of
military-political and strategic situations in the world’s
most important regions.” He also invites the Academy
of Military Science to play an active role in a roundtable
which will “discuss the problems of contemporary wars
and armed conflicts and their characteristic features and
peculiarities.” The roundtable will take place within the
framework of the scientific and business program of the
international military-technical forum Army 2017, which
will be held in August 2017.
In 2013, Gerasimov had discussed tendencies, forms and
methods of warfare; in 2014 the role of the General Staff;
in 2015 the organization of the Russia’s defense under
contemporary conditions; in 2016 the West’s use of hybrid
methods and how to counter them; and in 2017 (the official
title of the presentation has still not been made available)
the requirement to develop the proper forms and methods
of warfare. Thus he has returned to a topic he first stressed
in 2013, indicating its ongoing importance. A “form” is the
development of military organizations (joint, interservice,
special operations, etc.) and a method is composed of
weapons (tanks, hypersonic, reflexive control, etc.) and
ways to employ military art (indirect and asymmetric
operations, principles of war, etc.). End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“Above all, there is the study of new
forms of interstate warfare and the
elaboration of effective methods of
countering them. A topical task is the
formation of scenarios and long-term
forecasts of the development of militarypolitical and strategic situations in the
world’s most important regions...”
— Chief of the General Staff,
General of the Army
Valery Gerasimov.

Chief of the General Staff, General of the Army Valery Gerasimov.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Valery_Gerasimov_%282015-05-12%29.jpg

Source: “Valeriy Gerasimov, Chief of the Russian Armed Forces General
Staff, Takes Part in the Academy of Military Sciences’ Military Scientific
Conference,” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation Website, 4 March
2017. http://www.mil.ru.
“The performance of the urgent tasks of the country’s defense is impossible
without their thorough and preemptive scientific study,” Army General Valeriy
Gerasimov said. “This is why the role of military science remains an invariably
important and relevant practice.”
“Above all, there is the study of new forms of interstate warfare and the
elaboration of effective methods of countering them. A topical task is the
formation of scenarios and long-term forecasts of the development of militarypolitical and strategic situations in the world’s most important regions,” the
Chief of the General Staff Continued.
In his words, it is necessary to study the peculiarities of modern military
conflicts in a timely fashion and to elaborate methods on their basis for the
actions in various conditions of the organs of military command and control
and the troops. The problems of organizing and carrying out the relocation of
troops to remote theaters of military operations require separate study. Nor
are the general tasks of military science losing their topicality, but, on the
contrary, require further analysis.
Army Gen. Valeriy Gerasimov went on to invite the participants in the
conference to discuss the problems of contemporary wars and armed conflicts
and their characteristic features and peculiarities in the framework of the
scientific and business program of the international military-technical forum
Army 2017, which will be held in August this year.
“The question of defining the essence of war has not been laid to rest; it is
topical, and requires constant study and thorough analysis,” the chief of the
General Staff said. “With this aim in mind, in the framework of the scientific
and business program of the international military-technical forum Army
2017, a roundtable will be held on the topic ‘Contemporary Wars and Armed
Conflicts: Characteristic Features and Peculiarities.’”
In his opinion, the Academy of Military Sciences’ academics should play the
most active part in the work of the roundtable and forum. “It is essential to
continue work on the interdepartmental standardization of military-political
and military terms and definitions,” the chief of the General Staff added.
OE Watch | April 2017

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s Defender of the Future
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s
Advanced Research Foundation (ARF), the
equivalent of the US’s DARPA, is working
on a “Defender of the Future” project to
develop technologies that will change
the look and survivability of Russia’s
servicemen. The project’s leader Arkadiy
Petrosov recently discussed the effort with
RIA Novosti, offering insight about the
capabilities of the future Russian soldier.
As the accompanying passage discusses,
the project takes current Ratnik gear and
combines it with various robotic devices
and smart weapons on the battlefield. The
robotic devices will serve as “a personal
assistant that can help a person move,
destroy a target with a high degree of
precision, and evacuate from the battlefield
in the event of injury.” The piece notes
that the decision about whether to employ
a weapon will remain with the person; but
that “smart equipment quickly performs
calculations and provides the warrior
information and allows him not to have to
think about several logistical issues” while
making that decision.
The Ratnik system includes firearms,
sighting systems, body armor, electronic
communications and navigation systems,
and over 150 components, including
helmets, overalls, a headset with hearing
protection, protective glasses, and a joint
(knee and elbow) protection set. Ratnik’s
gear set also includes reconnaissance
instruments, a combat multifunction knife,
sniper and other types of rifles, camouflage
kits for winter and summer, optical and
thermal-imaging gun sights, and an
autonomous heat source. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“The soldier’s gear should be easy to use, not require frequent
recharging, and operate effectively in the harshest climates.
Integrated into the system will be secure, high-speed communication
and data sharing resources, individual protection against adverse
factors, adaptive camouflage, physiological data monitoring, and
the adjustment of a serviceman’s fighting ability. Combat robotic
complexes constitute a separate field of study that incorporates
developments in the fields of gesture control, neural interfaces, and
new machine learning algorithms.”
Source: Arkadiy Petrosov, “Technologies Will Change the Look of Russian Servicemen,” RIA
Novosti, 24 February 2017. http://ria.ru.
“The soldier of the future will be a sophisticated system, at the center of which will be a
person and which has elements that are structurally and functionally integrated for a common
purpose – to get the person outside the kill zone, reinforce his fighting power, and ensure the
preservation of life.
At the Advanced Research Foundation, we are realizing the comprehensive project “Defender
of the Future,” within the framework of which we are developing technologies directed toward
creating an advanced set of individual gear for the purpose of endowing the serviceman with
qualities that will ensure his dominance over the enemy.
Work on the comprehensive Defender of the Future project is structured according to a few
important principles. The first of these is the inclusion of sophisticated robotic devices directly
within the composition of the soldier’s combat gear in the capacity of a personal assistant
that can help a person move, destroy a target with a high degree of precision, and evacuate
from the battlefield in the event of injury. Another principle is autonomy; the soldier’s gear
should be easy to use, not require frequent recharging, and operate effectively in the harshest
climates. Integrated into the system will be secure, high-speed communication and data sharing
resources, individual protection against adverse factors, adaptive camouflage, physiological
data monitoring, and the adjustment of a serviceman’s fighting ability. Combat robotic
complexes constitute a separate field of study that incorporates developments in the fields of
gesture control, neural interfaces, and new machine learning algorithms.
The decision about whether to employ a weapon without question will remain with the person.
Smart equipment quickly performs calculations and provides the warrior information and
allows him not to have to think about several logistical issues; however, it does not relieve him
of responsibility.”

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | April 2017

55

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Cindy Hurst

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

The Chinese Military Deploys:
Gaining Ground through Peacekeeping in the Global Arena
INTRODUCTION
The year 2015 marked the 25th anniversary of China’s participation
in United Nations peacekeeping (UNPK) missions. Since 1990, over
30,000 Chinese peacekeepers have served in over 30 peacekeeping
missions around the world. At first China held an openly slow and
antagonistic viewpoint toward UNPK. Over time, however, the middle
kingdom has gradually changed its pace due to the evolving international situation and to further its foreign policy agenda. Recent missions indicate an even more dramatic shift toward the commitment of
its forces.
For example, on 26 March 2015 China sent a peacekeeping infantry battalion to Juba, South Sudan. This commitment of armed and
more capable personnel set a new standard and marked a profound
shift in the country’s attitude toward UNPK missions. China has long
held firm to its policy of not interfering in the domestic affairs of other
countries. Becoming directly involved in such operations could potentially be perceived as interference of some sort. However, it can just as
easily be defended through the fact that peacekeeping operations can
only move forward once all parties agree to them.
A closer look at China’s participation in UNPK missions offers
insights into a number of strategic variables that are driving Chinese
peacekeeping missions. First, with the absence of modern day conflict
experience (at least since the 1979 Sino-Vietnam war), China’s newly
acquired military technologies and capabilities remain untested under
contemporary conditions. Second, the country’s economy has grown
by leaps and bounds and is able to support these technological advances, which offers incentives to participate. In its peacekeeping missions,
China is able to put many of these capabilities, such as communications, logistics, and to a certain degree combat capabilities, to real-life
use under various scenarios. UNPK missions also offer definitive clues
about how Xi Jinping and the military intend to use peacekeeping to
further their objectives and goals as the country seeks global recognition and respect.

BACKGROUND: FROM CONDEMNATION OF UNPK
TO FULL PARTICIPATION
In a 1996 article titled “China and UN Peace Keeping: From Condemnation to Participation,” author Yongjin Zhang breaks apart the
evolution of China’s policy on peacekeeping into four periods. The
1950s and 1960s mark the period of condemnation. The decade from
1971 to 1981 marks the period of non-disruption, followed by the
period from 1981 to 1988, which marks the period of cooperation.
Finally, the period of participation (commitment) began in 1988.1
The period of condemnation was largely a result of the People’s
Republic of China’s (PRC) discontentment over its rejection to become
a member of the United Nations. The United Nations was established
in October 1945, following the end of World War II. At that time, the
five permanent members of the UN Security Council were the United
States, United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union, and the Republic of
China (ROC, known today as Taiwan). In 1945 the ROC, run by the
Kuomintang (KMT), governed all of China. At the end of World War
II a full-scale civil war broke out between the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) and the KMT, with the CCP becoming the eventual winner and the country was named the People’s Republic of China. However, the United Nations continued to recognize the ROC as one of the
five permanent members of the UN Security Council, even though the
PRC now ruled mainland China. This caused the country to greatly

SPECIAL
ESSAY

resent the United Nations and its Security Council members.
During the period of non-disruption, throughout the 1970s, despite
its entry into the UN Security council, the PRC persisted in its negative view of UNPK operations, opting to neither vote in resolutions
nor contribute monetarily. Then, in 1981, during the 36th session of
the UN General Assembly, Ambassador Ling Qing, China’s permanent
representative to the United Nations, announced that China would
take a positive and supportive position and give careful consideration to UNPK operations. This marked the beginning of the period
of cooperation, an important turning point in China’s policy toward
UNPK operations. In December of that year, when a mandate of the
UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was under consideration,
China cast its first affirmative vote for a resolution to set up UNIFIL,
although no Chinese troops were committed at that time.2 Zhang
explains that China’s change in its position came after the country’s
leadership conducted a thorough review of the changing international
political situation.
Finally, the period of participation began in 1988 when China
became a member of the UN Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Two years later, in 1990, China assigned its first five military
observers, joining 285 other international personnel, to the UN Truce
Supervision Operation (UNTSO), a mission that had been set up decades earlier to maintain a ceasefire during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War.3
In 1992 China committed its first organic military unit to a peacekeeping mission, dispatching an engineering corps of 400 personnel to
the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia, a mission that was active
between February 1992 – September 1993 to ensure the implementation of the Agreements on the Comprehensive Political Settlement of
the Cambodia Conflict.4 In 2003, China dispatched its first peacekeeping police force to Africa, sending them to Liberia.5 In 2004, China
committed its first anti-riot peacekeeping force, sending them to the
UN mission in Haiti.6 The Haiti mission also marked the first time
China participated in UNPK operations in the western hemisphere.
Despite its step up in participation, by October 2004, only 92 of
the approximate 50,000 active UNPK uniformed troops around the
world were Chinese. The country’s low level of participation prompted then UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to urge it to take a greater
peacekeeping role and responsibility. Annan argued that China’s role
in the missions should reflect its growing world status. As a result, by
mid-2006, the total number of Chinese global peacekeepers jumped to
approximately 1,500.
As the size of its peacekeeping forces grew, so too did the country’s
roles and responsibilities. In 2013, China committed its first security
troops, sending them to Mali.7 Then, in 2015 China sent its first ever
infantry battalion to a peacekeeping mission, sending them to South
Sudan in a combat zone.
By December 2015, China had become the 10th largest contributor to UNPK missions and the sixth largest contributor to the UNPK
budget. In a real paradigm shift, Chinese officials have since openly
aired their intention to increase the country’s global role and presence
through UNPK missions. China’s recent willingness to commit higher
numbers of peacekeeping forces as well as more capable and heavily
armed troops not only demonstrates a new way of thinking, it is also
an important step toward achieving the “China Dream,” a term popularized by President Xi Jinping. The “dream” is to build a moderately
prosperous society, a reformed military, and realize national rejuvenation of the country. Not only is peacekeeping an effective diplomatic
tool, but Chinese peacekeeping forces could potentially help protect
key Chinese assets.
(continued)
OE Watch | April 2017

56

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Cindy Hurst

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: The Chinese Military Deploys:
Gaining Ground through Peacekeeping in the Global Arena
INCENTIVES TO PARTICIPATE IN PEACEKEEPING
There are many reasons a country might opt to participate in
UNPK missions, outside of a desire to contribute to world peace. Possible reasons include protecting assets abroad, the opportunity to gain
real-life experience in military operations, an opportunity to gather
intelligence, a desire to spread diplomatic influence, and an opportunity for financial gain. Several of these reasons appear to have motivated
the PRC.

Protecting Assets Abroad
China’s leadership consistently emphasizes the importance of
engaging in bilateral relations that have a win-win scenario. It is not
unusual to see the country provide assistance or services when there
is an adequate return on investment. That return on investment for
China could be in the form of important natural resources.
China has generally been quick to contribute peacekeeping forces
to missions where it already has invested in natural resources, industry, and infrastructure. The 2015 white paper, China’s Military Strategy
specifically states that one of the strategic tasks of China’s armed forces
is to “safeguard the security of China’s overseas interests” and “to participate in regional and international security cooperation and maintain regional and world peace.”8 Areas of interest include energy and
natural resources, according to the document. Analysts have added
that Chinese interests also include the protection of overseas companies, their staff, and other Chinese nationals.9 It goes to reason that
these two actions work hand-in-hand. Instability in any given region
in which China has interests and investments puts them at risk.
Additionally, China’s foreign direct investments (FDI) abroad have
been experiencing a dramatic increase since the beginning of the new
millennium. According to a report released by the World Resources
Institute, in 2014 “China’s overseas investments, known as outward
FDI, rose 14.1 percent to $102.9 billion…”10 While China’s overseas
FDI is largely concentrated in Asia (68 percent of it), investments in
Africa, where most of Chinese peacekeeping forces can be found, are
increasing significantly. In 2004, China’s outward FDI in Africa was $1
billion. In 2013, that number rose to $24.5 billion. The largest amount
of investments in Africa went to the extractive industries (31 percent),
such as mining and oil extraction. Other areas include finance (20 percent), construction (16 percent), and manufacturing (15 percent).11

Military Experience through MOOTW, Gaining Intelligence, and Diplomatic Influence
China has placed great importance in achieving rapid military
modernization. Along with acquiring and developing the technology
necessary to maintain its progress toward modernization, China must
also build up its operational knowledge and capability with these new
systems and strategies. Participating in peacekeeping activities abroad
includes the use of important military applications, which can provide
key lessons for the PLA. According to Yang Zhao, commander of the
mission in Juba, South Sudan, “The peacekeeping missions are good
platforms for us (the PLA) to improve our training level. This is also a
chance for us to exchange experience with other armies.”12
Having not been involved in a major conflict since the 1979 Sino-Vietnam war, the next best opportunity to train is through military
operations other than war (MOOTW). Through MOOTW, China is

SPECIAL
ESSAY

able to apply its knowledge and capabilities in logistics, communications, cyber, etc…. to real life situations. In addition, China’s increased
peacekeeping activities have paralleled the PLA’s growing interest to
expand MOOTW both within the country and abroad.13
China has placed great importance in MOOTW, a concept that can
be found in key publications and white papers written about China’s
defense strategy. For example, in a 2015 white paper on military strategy, the authors write, “As a necessary requirement for China’s armed
forces to fulfill their responsibilities and missions in the new period as
well as an important approach to enhancing their operational capabilities, the armed forces will continue to conduct such MOOTWs as
emergency rescue and disaster relief, counter-terrorism and stability
maintenance, rights and interests protection, guard duty, international
peacekeeping, and international humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR). They will work to incorporate MOOTW capacity
building into military modernization and PMS [preparation for military struggle]…”14
Through MOOTW, China is also likely leveraging peacekeeping
operations to gain valuable intelligence and insight into the military
operations of other countries. Through its participation in UNPK, the
PLA has an opportunity to work with foreign militaries, which allows
it to learn about the operations and trends in advanced equipment and
technologies of other nations.
Finally, China has been increasing its participation in UNPK to
grow its diplomatic influence. With its growing economic status,
possessing the largest population, and being one of the five permanent
members on the UN Security Council, China is compelled to become
a more responsible party. Over the past few years China has repeatedly
highlighted the fact that it contributes more personnel to peacekeeping operations than any other permanent member of the UN Security
Council. According to a report released by Japan’s National Institute
for Defense Studies, China’s increasing participation in UNPK can
be “seen as an effective counterargument to the ‘China threat theory,’
because it highlights the country’s efforts to play a role in maintaining
peace and stability alongside other countries through UNPK.”15 Hence,
as China continues to press forward its agenda to expand internationally, reducing the “China threat theory” will raise international trust
and therefore more readily open international doors.

Financial Benefit: Peacekeeping to Earn Money
The most significant benefit to the top contributors of peacekeeping forces are economic ones. In July 2014, the United Nations was
paying the governments of countries contributing personnel to field
operations $1,332 per person per month.16 This serves as an excellent
opportunity for third world and developing countries to raise revenue,
which can be used to fund their militaries among other things. This
implies that much of the money never reaches the force itself.
Bangladesh and Ethiopia are the two top contributing countries.
Basic pay for a sergeant in Bangladesh with six years of service is
approximately $113 per month. A Captain with six years earns $236.
Even with special duty and incentive pay, after paying its peacekeeping
forces, the Bangladeshi government still makes a profit of over $110
million per year.
The total approved budget for worldwide peacekeeping operations
from July 2015-June 2016 was $8.27 billion.17 China currently is the
sixth biggest financial contributor for peacekeeping missions, contributing 6.68 percent, or approximately $549,128,000, following the United States (28.38%), Japan (10.83%), France (7.22%),

(continued)

OE Watch | April 2017

57

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Cindy Hurst

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: The Chinese Military Deploys:
Gaining Ground through Peacekeeping in the Global Arena
Germany (7.14%), and the United Kingdom (6.68%). For China,
which has the second largest economy in the world and is an important contributor to the overall peacekeeping budget, the financial gain
from such missions is not likely a key incentive drawing the country to
participate.

Figure 1: Top 10 countries contributing troops in 2015.

Two Case Studies
The United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
An analysis of the
current peacekeeping
operations vis-à-vis
China’s participation or
non-participation, can
offer clues as to what
might be driving the
country’s decisions and
how it plays into its overall economic, military,
and geopolitical strategy.
As Figure 2 indicates,
China is involved in 2/3
of the total UN missions
and 86 percent of Chinese peacekeepers are in
Africa. One of those missions is the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL).
Along the Gulf of
Guinea sits Liberia, a
low-income country
with great possibilities.
However, over the past
three decades the country has been plagued
with civil war and
government mismanage-

SPECIAL
ESSAY

ment, which destroyed much of its economy and infrastructure in the
1990s and early 2000s.
Upon successfully brokering a peace agreement between warring
parties in 1993, the UN set up the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL). China assumed a small role as military observer
in that mission. Following various delays in the implementation of the
peace agreement and overcoming a number of difficulties, the country
finally managed to put into effect a democratically elected government
in 1997, and UNOMIL came to an end.18 However, due to differences
between key party leaders, coupled with human rights abuses, harassment of political opponents, and an absence of security sector reform,
civil war in Liberia once again broke out in 1999.
In September 2003, the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) was established. Less than one month later and after a series of
setbacks prompted by Liberia’s recognition of Taiwan, China and the
African nation resumed diplomatic relations. Following these renewed
ties, foreign ministry spokeswoman Zhang Qiyue announced that
China would consider becoming an active participant in the UNPK
force in Liberia.19 Then, on 30 November, 2003, China sent a team of
peacekeeping police (five of them), to the country.20 On 9 December,
2003, 60 Chinese soldiers belonging to a transportation company, traveled to Liberia. China would go on to send another 490 peacekeepers,
which would include 180 more transportation personnel, a 275-person
sapper company, and 35 medical staff, to Liberia. These peacekeeping
forces were responsible for transporting UN peacekeepers and materials, constructing roads, repairing houses and airports, providing water
and electricity, and treating the wounded.21
Since reestablishing diplomatic ties with Liberia in 2003, China has
gone full throttle in its outreach, beginning with a list of contracts and

Figure 2: Global UN Peacekeeping Operations as of December 2015

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2017

58

SPECIAL ESSAY

By Cindy Hurst

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: The Chinese Military Deploys:
Gaining Ground through Peacekeeping in the Global Arena
support through peacekeeping operations. Chinese peacekeepers have
been heavily involved in UNMIL since the mission’s establishment.
Between December 2003 and April 2004, Chinese troops repaired
1,200 kilometers of road, built four camps for local armed personnel and two parking aprons, erected 21 bridges, revamped two water
disposal stations, and leveled off 70,000 square meters of land. The
medical squad treated 2,300 outpatients, hospitalized about 250 people
and operated on more than 50. The transportation squad transported
over 30,000 tons of materials and 70,000 people.22
As relations between Liberia and China grew, so too did the number of Chinese peacekeeping troops in the country. By 2006, having
started the third rotation of Chinese peacekeepers, 558 soldiers from
the Beijing Military Area Command and 120 People’s Liberation Army
(PLA) officers and men stationed in Inner Mongolia, made their way
to the African nation.23 They consisted of an engineer contingent, a
transportation contingent, and a medical contingent.24
According to the Liberia Ministry of Commerce and Industry website, in 2013 Liberia exported scrap metal, iron ore, and lumber to China, accounting for nearly 32 percent of the country’s exports. Liberia is
richly endowed with water, mineral resources, forests, and it possesses
an ideal climate for agriculture, all of which China continually seeks
to help sustain its growth and development in the years to come. In
addition, the country’s coastal location and having the infrastructure
in place, offer easy export routes to China from Liberia.
Today, China has a lot invested in Liberia and Liberia has continued
potential for China. Adding to the allure of the African nation, in February 2012, a potentially large accumulation of oil deposits was found
off its coast. While preliminary studies seemed positive, it would take
a number of years before development could begin, providing the
oil’s extraction is even economically viable. According to Stuart Lake,
Chief Executive Officer of African Petroleum, an independent oil
and gas exploration company headquartered in the United Kingdom,
a third-party assessment of the reserves off the coast of Liberia and
Ivory Coast indicate a net 58 percent increase in the site’s offshore reserve potential. This would raise estimates offshore Ivory Coast by 118
percent of previous estimates and Liberian estimates by 33 percent.25
According to the same report, in 2013, French oil exploration company Total discovered oil while drilling offshore Ivory Coast.
In 2014, trade volume between China and Liberia exceeded 425
million dollars and today, China continues to be an important development partner to Liberia.26 Over the past year, as the political situation has improved in Liberia, UNMIL has drawn down. Interestingly,
however, China’s rate of withdrawal has been slower than what has
been observed in most other countries providing peacekeeping forces
to the UNMIL. With the exception of Nigeria, all countries contributing peacekeepers, have withdrawn most or all of their support. China,
on the other hand, is withdrawing its manpower at a much slower
rate. In January 2013, the total number of peacekeepers in Liberia was
8,119. Of these, China contributed 584 formed police units, individual police, and contingency troops. In January 2014, out of 7,456
peacekeepers, 724 originated from China. In January 2015, 720 out
of 5,819 peacekeepers came from China. In January 2016, there were
514 Chinese troops out of the 4,679. Finally, in June 2016, the total
troop count was 1,952, out of which 284 were from China. This raises
a question as to why China has seemingly opted to maintain a proportionately higher presence up until the last moment. While it could
be simply random, it seems more likely to be an indication of China’s
commitment to continuing to support its relation with Liberia, and to
prove that China is a reliable partner.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Central African Republic: A Mission of Little to No Advantage to China?
While the preceding case study offers an example of China’s commitment to peacekeeping for its own benefit, China’s lack of commitment to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), shows a much
different angle. Six of 16 missions worldwide employ over 10,000
peacekeeping forces each. China is involved in all of these top manned
missions, except for MINUSCA. While China showed its support in
2014 for MINUSCA by voting to send 12,000 UN peacekeepers to the
Central African Republic (CAR)27 it has so far never contributed any
peacekeepers to the mission.
CAR has been plagued by decades of fighting and instability. In
2014, after months of violence, millions of people were on the brink
of starvation, thousands were believed to have died, and more than
half of the entire population was in dire need of humanitarian aid. The
United Nations had intervened on multiple occasions with MINUSCA
replacing an African Union-led International Support Mission to the
CAR.
Diamonds, uranium, timber, gold, and oil are among the natural
resources being exploited in the CAR, according to the CIA World
Factbook. Various articles have discussed a type of tug-of-war between
France and China for oil assets within CAR. However, it is unclear
whether or not China currently has any oil deals with the African
nation.
The most plausible reason for China’s non-committal of peacekeeping forces to MINUSCA is in the state of the country itself. The
CAR does not have an influential government and is one of the least
developed countries in the world. Transportation and electricity is extremely limited. The government has suffered repeated military coups
throughout the years. Governance is weak with some areas being outside the government’s control. Furthermore, the country, located in the
center of Africa, is completely landlocked, making transit for exports
an even more daunting challenge. With so little invested in the country and so much required to put into it before China can gain from a
relationship with the African country, China likely does not feel the
return-on-investment merits the risks involved or the efforts needed.
In every other mission in which China is involved, China benefits in some capacity. In some cases China benefits directly by being
a top recipient of critical natural resources. In other cases, countries
are believed to possess critical resources, but which have not yet been
exploited. Finally, China has also positioned itself in other countries
which, while they may not possess any significant resources that could
benefit China, due to their location and perhaps other variables, China
maintains strong ties and support to achieve a strategic and geopolitical advantage in the region.28

CONCLUSIONS
China is clearly planning to become a leading figure in UNPK.
In September 2015, while addressing the UN General Assembly, Xi
Jinping announced that China would build an 8,000-strong standby
peacekeeping force, adding that the country will join the new UNPK
capability readiness system, and “take the lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad.”29 He further stated that China would
train 2,000 foreign peacekeepers and carry out 10 mine-sweeping
assistance programs within the next five years. 30

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2017

59

By Cindy Hurst

SPECIAL
ESSAY

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US Government.

Continued: The Chinese Military Deploys:
Gaining Ground through Peacekeeping in the Global Arena

1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

3500

Number of Chinese Peacekeepers

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

Jan-15

Nov-15

Mar-14

Jul-12

May-13

Jan-10

Nov-10

Mar-09

Jul-07

May-08

Sep-06

Jan-05

Nov-05

Mar-04

Jul-02

May-03

Sep-01

Jan-00

Nov-00

Mar-99

Jul-97

May-98

Sep-96

Jan-95

Nov-95

Mar-94

Jul-92

May-93

Sep-91

0
Nov-90

There is no doubt that China plans to dramatically increase its involvement in international peacekeeping. What
is most striking is the country’s shift in attitude. Having
once been a nation refusing to show any support for peacekeeping missions, China went on to eventually contribute
military observers, followed by “force enablers,” such as
engineering, transportation, and medical companies, and
finally its first major infantry battalion.
China’s military leadership has opened the aperture on
its peacekeeping perspective. The traditional missions have
been upgraded to support a variety of operations that can
potentially offer strategic advantages in several areas. Primary goals of these expanded missions include protecting
national interests and assets, courting potential partners
with security, collecting intelligence on specific locations,
and, perhaps most important of all, gaining military experience in the use of long-range transport capabilities, logistic
support, communication links, and so on. Such missions
improve China’s international standing and support Xi Jinping’s focus on his “China Dream” of a strong military.

Sep-11

SPECIAL ESSAY

Figure 3: Growth in Chinese Peacekeeping Contribution 1990-2015.

Yongjin Zhang, “China and UN Peacekeeping: From Condemnation to
Participation,” International Peacekeeping, Vol 3, Issue 3, 1996.
Pang Sen, “A New Stage in the Development of China-UN Relations,”
Transformation of Foreign Affairs and the International Relations in China,
1978-2008, edited by Wang Yizhou, Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The
Netherlands, 2011, pp 158.
UNTSO had been established to help maintain a ceasefire during the 1948
Arab-Israeli War.
“The Diversified Employment of China’s Armed Forces,” Xinhua, 16 April 2013.
“Chinese Peacekeepers to Start for War-Ravaged Liberia on Nov. 30,” Xinhua,
27 November 2003.
“China to Send First Team of Anti-Riot Peacekeepers for Haiti,” Xinhua, 4 June
2004.
Hua Chunying, Press Conference on 27 June, Beijing Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of China (Transcript), 27 June 2013
“Full Text: China’s Military Strategy,” Xinhua, 26 May 2015.
Minnie Chan and Andrea Chen, “China Outlines Overseas Assets it will
Protect,” South China Morning Post, 26 May 2015.
Lihuan Zhou and Denise Leung, World Resource Institute, 28 January 2015.
Ibid.
News Clip on the PLA’s First Infantry Battalion Preparing for South Sudan,
CNTV, 12 March 2015.
Bates Gill and Chin-Hao huang, “China Spreads its Peacekeepers,” Asia Times, 4
February 2009.
“Full Text: China’s Military Strategy,” Xinhua, 26 May 2015.
“NIDS China Security Report 2014: diversification of Roles in the People’s
Liberation Army and the People’s Armed Police,” National Institute for Defense
Studies, Japan, 2014, p. 40.
“Financing Peacekeeping,” United Nationals Peacekeeping website, accessed
25 January 2016, <http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/operations/financing.
shtml>.
“Peacekeeping Fact Sheet,” United Nations Peacekeeping website, 31 August
2015.

18. “Liberia – UNOMIL Background,” UN Peacekeeping website, accessed 4 August
2016, <http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/past/unomilS.htm>.
19. “PRC FM Spokesman Hints at Willingness to Send Peacekeepers to Liberia,”
Agence France Presse, 14 October 2014.
20. “Chinese Peacekeepers to Start for War-Ravaged Liberia on Nov. 30,” Xinhua,
27 November 2003.
21. “60 Chinese Peacekeeping Soldiers Leave for War-Torn Liberia,” Xinhua, 9
December 2003.
22. “China’s First Group of Peacekeeping Troops in Liberia Returns Home,” Xinhua,
24 December 2004.
23. Bian Yu, “Inner Mongolia PLA Officers, Men Set out on Peacekeeping Mission,”
Neimenggu Ribao, 28 April 2006.
24. Guo Jianyue and Luo Luyun, “Chinese Peacekeepers Set Out to Liberia,”
Jiefangjun Bao, 19 April 2006.
25. Daniel J. Graeber, “West African Oil Reserves Revised Upward,” United
Press International, 26 January 2015, <http://www.upi.com/Business_
News/Energy-Industry/2015/01/26/West-African-oil-reserves-revisedupward/8821422269560/>.
26. The article has it listed as 4250 million US dollars, which is an obvious typo.
“Liberia: A New Milestone for China-Liberia Relationship,” AllAfrica, 28 October
2015.
27. “China Welcomes UN Peacekeeping Mission in CAR: FM Spokesman,” Xinhua,
11 April 2014, <http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/854005.shtml>.
28. A more comprehensive paper describing case studies describing China’s
commitment to other key peacekeeping missions is forthcoming and will be
made available on the FMSO website.
29. “China Voice: China Committed to World Peace with Practical Effects,” Xinhua,
29 September 2015.
30. Ibid.
31. Miwa Hirono, “Global Security Needs Combined Approach,” China Daily, 25
May 2011.

OE Watch | April 2017

60

CALL FOR PAPERS

CALL
FOR
PAPERS

MAD SCIENTIST
VISUALIZING MULTI-DOMAIN BATTLE 2030-2050
CALL FOR PAPERS
DUE 15 MAY 2017

CONFERENCE DATES

The United States Army is interested in your views on multi-domain battle (an
emerging concept between the Army & Marines in concert with Joint Forces to
help maintain American military dominance in the 5 domains: air, sea, land,
cyberspace, and space) from 2030 through 2050.
The Mad Scientist Initiative enables a continuous dialogue between the Army,
academia, policy institutions, and industry. The initiative uses crowd sourcing
techniques, an online speaker series, and conferences co-hosted with the
Nation’s premier academic institutions to better visualize the future.
The Georgetown event will focus on future multi-domain battle waged with near
peer competitors and non-state actors. We will visualize to 2050 and look back
to explore:
(1) What are the attributes of multi-domain battle in 2050?
(2) How will the roles of Leaders and Soldiers be different on this battlefield?
(3) What are potential ethical dilemmas created by emerging technologies?
(4) What are the most disruptive technologies on this battlefield; when will they
be militarized to scale?
(5) What effects do characteristics of a dense urban environment and “smart
cities” have on military operations and objectives beyond the ground level?
WHATS IN IT FOR YOU?
Publication in a military or academic journal
Top 2 authors will be invited to speak at the conference
GUIDELINES
- Submitted papers must be unclassified, unpublished, and cleared by your public
affairs office and operations security managers (USG& as applicable).
- 5000 word count or less and 12 point font.

25 & 26 July 2017

LOCATION
Washington, DC- Georgetown
University, Center for Security
Studies

EVENT FORMAT

2 days with scheduled speakers

NUMBER OF
PARTICIPANTS

In person – by invitation only –
(Approximately 100 guests)
-or byVirtual Attendance

HOW TO VIEW
TRADOC site:

www.tradoc.army.mil/watch

QUESTIONS?
Contact Allison Winer at 757-501-6154

allison.d.winer.civ@mail.mil
Be sure to visit our website at:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradocg2/mad-scientist/
Multi-Domain Information Paper
http://www.tradoc.army.mil/MultiDomain
Battle/docs/MDB_WhitePaper.pdf
Multi-Domain Video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SeUhkXI

TOPICS OF INTEREST
-Commanding in Multi-Domain Formations
-Human Machine Interface
-Robotics & Autonomous Systems
-Biohacking

-Hyper connected Dense Urban Environment
- Leaders & their Artificial Intelligence
-Ethical Dilemmas / Ethics
- Character of War

MJ1Q&feature=youtu.be

Co- Sponsored By

Send Submissions to: allison.d.winer.civ@mail.mil
TRADOC

Georgetown University

OE Watch | April 2017

61

