fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #2
March 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

The Strategic
Support Force:
Update and Overview
Page 55

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
LATIN AMERICA
19
19
20
21
22

MIDDLE EAST
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

A Russian Accident or Warning in al-Bab?
Turkey to Train 5,000 Syrian Police
Israel Unveils Anti-GPS Jamming System
Iran: US Presence in Bahrain in the Crosshairs?
Iran: Who Are Our Enemies?
Iran: Domestic Weapons Production up 69 Percent
Chechen Military Police in East Aleppo
ISIS Dummy Equipment: More Than Just Airstrike
Decoys
11 Jordan Braces for ISIS Retreat to the Syrian Desert

AFRICA

23
24
25
26
27

12 Why African Arms Embargoes Often Fail
13 A New Eye on Rebel Forces in Eastern DRC: Joint Followup Mechanisms
14 Zimbabweans Envious as Gambia’s President Goes but
Theirs Stays
15 Following Deadly al-Shabaab Attack, Some Kenyans
Rethink AMISOM Involvement
16 An Unfinished Operation: Neutralizing the LRA
17 The Changing Face of African Conflict
18 Keeping up the Operational Tempo Against Boko Haram

Arson Emerging as Insurgent Fashion?
Cuba’s State
Manuel Santos’ Ten Rules for Peace
Venezuelan Government Strategy
Trade Deals Hail New Cooperation between Argentina
and Japan
Argentina Purchases Israeli Military Equipment to
Monitor Drug Trafficking
MS-13 Gang Calls for Truce to End Violence
Unprecedented African Migration Reported in Central
America
Street Gangs and Forced Displacements in El Salvador
Brazilian Criminal Groups Seeking FARC Dissidents

ASIA-PACIFIC
28
29
30
31
32

DPRK Committed to Ballistic Missile Program
The Chinese Navy’s Growing Might
Xi Jinping: The Center of China’s Universe
Can ISIS Gain a Stronghold in the Philippines?
Territorial Dispute between Singapore and Malaysia is
Revived
33 China’s National Cyberspace Security Strategy
34 China Hails Progress Toward Military Reforms, Improved
Jointness
35 Bitcoin, Paypal and the Financing of Terrorism in
Indonesia

36 An Updated Look at Kazakhstan’s Defense
Acquisitions
37 Armenia Looks for Alternative Partners in Security
Cooperation
38 Gauging the Reaction to Pakistan’s Babur and Ababeel
Missile Tests
39 India and China: Arms Sales and the Delicate Balance
of Power

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

40 Iskander Turns 10, Modernization Scheduled
42 Principles of Russian Armor: Modularity,
Standardization, and Survivability
43 The Growing Role of DOSAAF and Private Military
Companies
45 Reporting Military Losses: Ukraine and Russia
46 Cossack Influence in Southeastern Ukraine
47 Growing Russian Military Presence Abroad
48 Chechen MP Battalion in Aleppo: The Russian
Perspective
49 Testing Russian Weapons in Syria
51 Expanding Russia’s Naval Base at Tartus, Syria
52 Operational Plans for Russia’s Naval Base on the
Mediterranean
53 Russian Hypersonic Weaponry
53 New National Guard Equipment: Electric-Shock Batons
54 Russia’s UAV Virtual Cellular Communication Tower

SPECIAL ESSAYS

55 The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
61 Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, and Deliver
the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.
Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil
ON THE COVER: Members of a Chinese military honor guard marching with the
emblem of People’s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force in the foreground.
Sources: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PLASSF.svg; https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese_honor_guard_in_column_070322-F-0193C-014.
JPEG

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 2

March | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Asia-Pacific

Steven Galluzzi
Cindy Hurst
Tim Thomas
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein
Jacob Zenn

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Tyler Gartner
Les Grau
Joseph McConnell
Tim Thomas

				

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Keith French

MIDDLE EAST

Top

A Russian Accident or Warning in al-Bab?
OE Watch Commentary: On 9 February,
a Russian airstrike in Syria killed four
Turkish soldiers and left 10 wounded in the
city of al-Bab. Russian President Putin called
Turkish President Erdoğan, acknowledging
that the Russian jets had carried out the
strike and offered condolences. The incident
came at a time when Turkey and Russia
are coordinating their military activities in
Syria, especially around al-Bab; and at a time
when the two countries, along with Iran, are
working together for a cease-fire in Syria.
The accompanying passages discuss the
incident from the Turkish perspective. While
official sources claim that the incident was
an accident, some analysts suggest that it was
a warning sign from Russia, who wanted to
signal to Turkey to stop advancing south.
The first passage quotes a Turkish
government official as saying that the incident
was an accident and points out his comments
that Russian officials had stated this as well.
The second passage discusses a statement by
the Turkish Armed Forces which also notes
that the incident was a mistake or accident.
However, the third passage suggests that these
are efforts by the Turkish side to downplay
the incident, and that Russia has offered no
formal apology. It points out that a Russian
official has instead pinned the blame on
Turkey saying that “...the [Russian] strikes on
terrorists, was guided by coordinates given
to them by our Turkish partners, and Turkish
servicemen should not have been present on
those coordinates...”
The fourth passage discusses that the
airstrikes which killed the Turkish soldiers
were a warning sign from Russia to Turkey.
The author, a retired Turkish ambassador
believes the incident marks a demarcation
line south of al-Bab and “shows that Turkey’s
Operation Euphrates Shield has reached the
limit acceptable to Russia and the Syrian
regime.” The author calls the incident a
“friendly-fire incident” and notes that it should
be seen as a warning in this context.
Whether it was an accident or not, as the
fourth passage notes, the operation has reached
a critical point, in which Turkish forces risk
coming face to face with Syrian regime forces.
This fact, coupled with the latest incident
makes it unlikely that Turkish and Free Syrian
Army forces will advance further south. End
OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Ankara is trying to downplay
the incident, clearly not wanting a
crisis with Moscow at this critical
moment in Syria. Turks, however,
are upset and confused, even
angry.”
Source: “Rus savaş uçağının Türk askerlerini vurmasına ilişkin hükümetten ilk açıklama
(The first official statement regarding Russian war plane hitting Turkish soldiers),”
Cumhuriyet.com.tr, 9 February 2017. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/siyaset/673543/
Rus_savas_ucaginin_Turk_askerlerini_vurmasina_iliskin_hukumetten_ilk_aciklama.html
“...Finance Minister Nihat Zeybekci, who answered parliamentarians’ questions at the
Parliament General Assembly, said that “It has been officially declared by statements made
by the Russian President and the Turkish Armed Forces that the Russian plan has hit our
soldiers by mistake.” Zeybekci [said], “I also believe that the bombing in al-Bab was a
result of a mistake...”
In response to the objections made in the General Assembly Hall, Minister Zeybekci said,
“This is the official statement. You can say it’s not so, I say this is the official statement, and
we can talk until the morning, but it is something that makes us all sad. Even if it’s unlikely,
it is within the realm of possibility that such mistakes take place in war zones.”
Source: “Rus savaş uçakları yanlışlıkla Türk askerlerini vurdu: 3 şehit, 11 yaralı - yeniden
(Russian war plans accidentally hit Turkish soldiers: 3 killed, 11 wounded--correction),”
Hurriyet.com.tr, 9 February 2017. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/rus-savas-ucaklari-yanlisliklaturk-askerlerini-40360932

Turkish Armed Forces Issued a Statement
The Chief of the General Staff issued a statement in the evening hours and said that a
Russian war plane had accidentally targeted a building, killing three [Turkish] soldiers and
wounding 11, including one in critical condition.
“On 9 February 2017, around 08.40, in the area of the Euphrates Shield Operation, a
war plane belonging to the Russian Federation, during an air raid targeting ISIS targets,
released a bomb which accidentally hit a building in which Turkish Armed Forces elements
were present, resulting in the death of three of our heroic soldiers and the wounding of 11 of
our heroic soldiers with one in critical condition.”
Source: Semih Idiz. “Can fragile Ankara-Moscow friendship survive Russian strike?,” Al
Monitor, 14 February 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/02/turkeyrussia-syria-cast-shadow-erdogan-putin-romance.html
Russia did not offer a full apology, trying instead to pin the blame for the incident on the
Turkish side. The Russian position was put forward hastily by Kremlin spokesman Dmitry
Peskov, who told the Russian media, “Unfortunately, our military, while carrying out strikes
on terrorists, was guided by coordinates given to them by our Turkish partners, and Turkish
servicemen should not have been present on those coordinates.”
...
Ankara is trying to downplay the incident, clearly not wanting a crisis with Moscow at this
critical moment in Syria. Turks, however, are upset and confused, even angry.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: A Russian Accident or Warning in al-Bab?
Source: Ünal Çeviköz, “ El- Bab ve ötesi (Al-Bab and beyond),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 13
February 2017. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/unal-cevikoz/el-bab-ve-otesi-40363738
...Another reason the battle over the city of al-Bab has become more critical is the fact that
the Syrian army has entered the city from the south. This means that Syrian opposition units
supported by Turkey and Syrian regime units will come face to face with each other soon. In
fact, it is being reported that the forces have started encountering each other, and that the
first armed conflicts between the sides have taken place.
This means that there is an increasing chance that, within the shrinking war zone in the city,
Turkey’s own units will come face to face with Syrian regime forces.
...
This shows that Turkey’s Euphrates Shield operation has reached the “acceptable”
limits established by Russia and the Syrian regime. There were signs that this limit was
approaching back when, on 24 November 2016, our units were attacked by Syrian [regime
forces]. The final signal came with Russia’s “ friendly fire” and the losses resulting from it.

“Turkey’s Euphrates Shield
operation has reached
the ‘acceptable’ limits
established by Russia and
the Syrian regime. ...The final
signal came with Russia’s
‘ friendly fire’ and the losses
resulting from it.”

Turkey to Train 5,000 Syrian Police
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey is taking
steps to ensure the security of its borders with
Syria will be protected after its Armed Forces
leave the country. Turkey has trained 450 Syrian
police to provide security in a border region,
with the goal of training a total of 5,000. The
objective is to ensure that gains made as part of
Operation Euphrates Shield, which the Turkish
Armed Forces launched (along with the Free
Syrian Army) on 24 August, will be long-lasting.
The accompanying passages from the Turkish
and Middle Eastern press discuss this initiative.
Operation Euphrates Shield was launched with
the goal to clear a certain part of the TurkishSyrian border (the key town of Jarabulus and its
surrounding region) from the Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and ensure that the Kurds
did not achieve territorial continuity among
their cantons. Jarabulus was wrested from ISIS
fighters as part of this operation, and now the
border town is slowly getting back on its feet.
Schools have reopened and some 7,700 Syrian
refugees have returned from Turkey. As the first
two passages discuss, the Turkey-trained Syrian
forces will be deployed to provide security in this
region.
The third piece discusses a video showing
a group of Syrian security forces dressed in
Turkish police uniforms, chanting “long live
Turkey, long live Erdoğan and long live a free
Syria.” The piece also quotes a Turkish security
expert as saying that the move is an attempt by
Turkey to ensure the presence of pro-Turkey
forces in northern Syria even
(continued)

“... Turkey wants to make sure that in the aftermath [of a peace
settlement] the territory that was cleared of IS on the one hand and
the Syrian Kurds, the PYD in particular - would be safe-guarded by
a pro-Turkey element of the Syria opposition...”
Source: “Türkiye’den Fırat Kalkanı sonrası hazırlığı: 450 polis eğitildi (Turkey prepares
for the day-after Euphrates Shield: 450 policeman have been trained),” Trsputniknews.
com, 23 January 2017. https://tr.sputniknews.com/ortadogu/201701231026884753-suriyeturk-polisi/
...Regions freed from terror organizations as part of the Euphrates Shield Operation will
be secured by Syrian security forces trained by Turkish police. ...The first group of 450
Syrians received police training in Mersin [Turkey] and are reportedly leaving for Syria
soon. The training is expected to continue and the number of Syrian police to be trained
is expected to go up to 5000.
‘Safe Zone Police’
Meanwhile, it is also reported that a similar training program is taking place in
Jarabulus [Syria] where the Turkish Armed Forces has established control. The goal
is to expedite civilians’ return to areas taken back from ISIS and protect civilians by
training ‘safe zone police’. The patrol forces will wear blue uniforms and start their
mission in Jarabulus.
Source: “Türk polisi üniformasını dahi verdi: Suriye’ye gidiyorlar (Turkish police even
gave their uniforms: They’re going to Syria),” Yeni Safak, 22 January 2017. http://www.
yenisafak.com/gundem/turk-polisi-uniformasini-dahi-verdi-suriyeye-gidiyorlar-2600813
As the advance of the Turkish Armed Forces in Syria continues as part of Operation
Euphrates Shield, civilians have started returning to areas freed from terror
organizations. Security in towns will be provided by Syrian security forces trained by
Turkish police... It is expected that the training will continue and the goal is to train some
5000 Syrian police.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: Turkey to Train 5,000 Syrian Police
if a peace deal is reached. The expert
points out that “...Turkey wants to make
sure that in the aftermath [of a peace
settlement] the territory that was cleared
of IS on the one hand and the Syrian
Kurds, the PYD in particular - would be
safe-guarded by a pro-Turkey element
of the Syria opposition.” The PYD is
the Democratic Union Party in Syria,
which Turkey considers an extension of
the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in
Syria. End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya)

Source: “Turkey trains and deploys hundreds of police to Syria,” Middle East Eye, 23 January
2017. http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/turkish-trained-syria-security-forces-be-deployedsyria-1261199803
A video posted by Yeni Safak newspaper on Sunday [22 January] showed a group of Syrian
security forces dressed in Turkish police uniforms, chanting “long live Turkey, long live Erdogan
and long live a free Syria.”
According to Turkish security expert, Sinan Ülgen, this move is an attempt by Turkey to ensure
the presence of pro-Turkey forces in northern Syria even if a peace deal is reached.... “...Turkey
wants to make sure that in the aftermath [of a peace settlement] the territory that was cleared of
IS on the one hand and the Syrian Kurds, the PYD in particular - would be safe-guarded by a proTurkey element of the Syria opposition,” explained Ülgen.

Israel Unveils Anti-GPS Jamming System
OE Watch Commentary: While Russia and
others are developing GPS-jamming systems,
Israel is one step ahead. The following
passages discuss Israel Aerospace’s recently
unveiled anti-jamming system, which will
allow uninterrupted operation even under
direct electronic attack. In the electronicwarfare battlespace, this will give Israel the
upper hand and the potential to export to many
air forces and armies who want to immunize
themselves against the threat of GPS-jamming.
As the first passage discusses, the system,
called ADA is an advanced system that protects
avionic systems from GPS jamming. It has
already been integrated into several systems
and platforms operating both in Israel and
abroad and will soon integrate into one of
the main platforms of the Israeli Air Force.
The piece notes that the ADA integration
will ensure the operational continuity of the
aircraft fleet, allowing avionic systems which
rely on satellite navigation systems to continue
uninterrupted operation even under direct
electronic attack, when the enemy uses GPS
jammers or other methods of interference.
The second passage notes that the unit is
about 20 cm by 20 cm and is a stand-alone
product that can be integrated into any airborne
or maritime platforms. The piece also quotes an
Israeli official as pointing out that “Considering
the operational challenges, we believe this
system has considerable export potential for
many air forces and armies who experience
GNSS jamming in combat zones.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: “Israel Aerospace unveils anti-jamming system,” Globes.co.il, 31 January
2017. http://www.globes.co.il/en/article-israel-aerospace-unveils-anti-jammingsystem-1001174573
Israel Aerospace Industries Ltd. has unveiled ADA - an advanced system that protects
avionic systems from GPS jamming. ADA has already been integrated into several
systems and platforms operating both in Israel and abroad and recently won a tender
from Israel’s Ministry of Defense, for integration into one of the main platforms of the
Israel Air Force.
The ADA integration will ensure the operational continuity of the aircraft fleet, allowing
avionic systems which rely on satellite navigation systems to continue uninterrupted
operation even under direct electronic attack, when the enemy uses GPS jammers or
other methods of interference.
Source: “IAI debuts GPS anti-jamming system,” Defense News, 31 January 2017. http://
www.defensenews.com/articles/iai-debuts-gps-anti-jamming-system
Measuring about 20 centimeters by 20 centimeters, the laptop computer-sized system
is based on the firm’s multichannel Controlled Reception Pattern Antenna (CPRA)
technology designed to render avionics systems immune to direct electronic attack
from GPS jammers or other methods of interference. The system consists of two major
elements: a GPS antenna array built from multiple antennas and an advanced digital
processing unit.
“This unit features the most advanced signals processing using the CRPA method, which
is the leading anti-jamming method. It’s a stand-alone product that can be integrated into
any airborne or maritime platforms,” said Alex Levite, ADA project manager.
Jacob Galifat, general manger of the MALAM Division, said capabilities provided by
his firm’s ADA system are imperative at a time when avionics systems are increasingly
vulnerable to proliferating jamming threats. “Facing today’s threats to GNSS, these
systems are a must, for any platform using GPS, or any other Global Satellite Navigation
Systems. Our operationally proven systems will ensure the availability of GPS- and
GNSS-based systems, even in the most contested, [electronic warfare]-saturated battlespace.
“Considering the operational challenges, we believe this system has considerable export
potential for many air forces and armies who experience GNSS jamming in combat
zones.”
OE Watch | March 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: US Presence in Bahrain in the Crosshairs?
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s 29 January 2017 ballistic missile test—its tenth since
signing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and UN Security Council passage of
Resolution 2231 but its first since the start of the new US administration—reinvigorated
international debate about whether Iran’s ballistic missile tests violated Iranian commitments
under both agreements. At issue is whether Iran’s ballistic missiles are designed and can
carry a nuclear warhead. Iranian officials argue that they are not designed to do so and
therefore are permissible, while others argue that a capacity to carry a nuclear warhead
makes any work on ballistic missiles illegal.
The 29 January test was met with augmented sanctions on individuals and firms
involved with Iran’s ballistic missile program. Iranian officials responded with outrage.
It is in this context that Hojjat al-Islam Mojtaba Zonour, a former advisor to the Supreme
Leader’s representative to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), is important.
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei is not only Iran’s political leader but constitutionally he
is also commander-in-chief, with the ability to hire and fire any military commander.
He communicates with the IRGC through a permanent representative stationed with the
IRGC’s top brass. Zonour’s statements, therefore, excerpted here from an Iranian website
and newspaper closely affiliated with the IRGC, are more than simple bloviating, but rather
likely reflect the hostility to the United States still present at senior levels of Iran’s religious
and military hierarchy. While Western press mention of Zonour’s comments focused on
his acknowledgement and implicit threat that Iranian missiles could reach Tel Aviv, Israel’s
largest city, in seven minutes, his threats to attack the US Fifth Fleet headquarters in Bahrain
should be of concern.
Previously, it was conventional wisdom in both war games and in the academic and policy
sphere that any military engagement with Iran—be it a limited skirmish with the United
States or a hypothetical Israeli airstrike—might lead Iran to retaliate by means of its proxies
in southern Lebanon and elsewhere. Zonour’s declaration suggests that in such a scenario, the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps could target directly not only the US presence in Bahrain
but also bases in Afghanistan and elsewhere with missiles rather than only indirectly or by
proxy as has often been assumed in the past. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“They will be flattened if the
Americans make a mistake.”
Source: “36 Payehgah-e Nizami Amrika
Tirras –e Samanehhaye Mushaki Iran (36
U.S. Bases within Iranian Missile Range),”
Resalat News, 5 February 2017. www.resalatnews.com/fa/?code=251219

36 American Bases are within Range
of Iranian Missiles
“A member of the Commission on Foreign
Affairs and National Security in the
Parliament said: 36 American military bases
are within range of the missile systems of
Iran. According to a Fars report, Hojjat alIslam Mojtaba Zonour at a commemoration
for Basij industrial engineers, said… the truth
is that it is not a slogan that Iranian missiles
can hit Tel Aviv in only seven minutes. He
stated that 36 American bases are within
range of Iranian missiles. The American Fifth
Fleet has occupied a part of Bahrain, and the
enemy’s farthest military base is in the Indian
Ocean but these points are all within the
range of Iran’s missile systems and they will
be flattened if the enemy makes a mistake.”

Harbor patrol and USS Harry S. Truman (CVN 75) at Naval Support Activity, Bahrain.
Source: Naval Support Activity, Bahrain http://www.navy.mil/local/nsabahrain/

OE Watch | March 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Who Are Our Enemies?
OE Watch Commentary: Almost every week since the 1979 Islamic
Revolution, Iran’s clerical leadership have presided over Friday prayer
sermons and rallies in which they encouraged chants of ‘Death to
America.’ After more than three decades of such behavior, many Western
diplomats and politicians have
become inured to it, and many
suggest it is just pro forma
and should not be taken as a
true expression of the Iranian
leadership’s attitudes toward
the United States or the West.
In an address excerpted here
to prominent officials and
citizens in Qom, Iran’s main
clerical center, Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei
addressed the notion of
enmity and argued that the
United States, alongside
Great Britain, Israel, and
the international elite should
be considered Iran’s true
enemies.
The notion of Britain as
an enemy has a long history
in Iran, dating back to the
nineteenth century when
Great Britain wielded great
influence over Iranian
politics and exploited Iran
economically. Khamenei’s castigation of international plutocrats fits
within the Islamic Republic’s rhetoric of social justice and defending Iran
against the exploitation by the Western-dominated international system.
His hatred of Israel is well-known, and perhaps forms the chief immutable
pillar of Islamic Republic ideology. That he includes the United States as
the enemy and warns that the weekly castigation of America should not
simply be seen as a slogan, however, is important because it puts a damper
on the ambitions of those who see the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action as a crack in the façade of Iranian government antipathy that could
somehow be widened by further outreach. Indeed, in his broader speech,
he argues that there is no substantive difference in the policies toward
Iran put forward by the Obama administration and Secretary of State John
Kerry and those of the current administration; at is core, he argues, the
problem with the United States is its ideology, behavior, and unwillingness
to recognize that what Washington condemns as Iran’s support for
terrorism, Khamenei believes is legitimate. Notable is his omission of
Russia as an enemy. After all, both Tsarist Russia and the Soviet Union
victimized Iran as much as British imperialists did.
Just as the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps exists to defend Iran
from enemies both foreign and domestic, Khamenei reaffirms that Iran
faces challenges not only from abroad, but from those inside Iran who are
enamored with outside cultures. His conclusion that Iranians must double
down on the Islamic Republic’s core ideology suggests that sustained
reform will remain at best in the realm of regime rhetoric rather than result
in substantive change. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The main enemies…are America, Britain, the
international plutocracy, and Zionists.”

Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei addresses an audience in Qom.
Source: Leader.ir, http://leader.ir/media/album/news/51400_999.jpg

Source: “Vazifeh-e Muhim Mas‘ulan va Mardam Taqvit-e
‘Avamil Eqtedar Melli va Shenakht-e Doshman Ast
(The Important Task of the Authorities and People is the
Strengthening of National Authority and Recognition of the
Enemy),” Leader.ir, 8 January 2017. leader.ir/fa/content/17195/
‫رادید‬-‫نارازه‬-‫رفن‬-‫زا‬-‫یاهرشق‬-‫فلتخم‬-‫مدرم‬-‫مق‬

Khamenei: Who Are Our Enemies?
“He then posed the question: “Who are our enemies?” and
he said, “The main enemies of an independent and progressive
Iran are America, Britain, the international plutocracy, and
Zionists.” The Supreme Leader of the Islamic Revolution noted,
certainly, in addition to foreign enemies, we also have internal
enemies—reluctance, disappointment, depression, laziness,
bad policies, bad behavior, various disputes, and narrowmindedness….” That the main enemy is foreign is not a slogan
but a reality based on knowing rational principles…The Leader
of the Islamic Revolution noted that under these conditions, the
most important duty for state officials, academics, seminary
scholars as well as cultural and political activists is “to
boost the power of the country and make it resistant through
strengthening the elements of national might.”

OE Watch | March 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Domestic Weapons Production up 69 Percent
OE Watch Commentary: The end of many
military sanctions on Iran in the wake of the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and Tehran’s ability to
purchase sophisticated, off-the-shelf weapons
systems (even if the timeline of sanctions
expiration may impact delivery dates) has not
led the Islamic Republic to abandon let alone
scale down its investment in its domestic
armament industry. In the excerpted article,
Defense Minister Hossein Dehqan brags at a
ribbon cutting for new production lines that
Iran’s domestic armament industry has increased
production by 69 percent over the past three
years. This suggests that Iran has used some
of the hard currency windfall in the form of
new investment and unfrozen assets since
negotiations began for the Joint Plan of Action
(the temporary agreement which predated the
JCPOA) to bolster its military industries.
While Dehqan bragged about 115 new
products, the five main achievements he noted
in other articles surrounding his appearance and
speech included the Fajr 5 guided rocket, the
Misaq 33 shoulder-launched rocket system, a 40mm grenade-launcher system, the Masaf 5.56 x
445mm -caliber gun and a new pistol.
Such products may not rise to the same level of
international concern as possible Iranian import
of S-400 missiles or new ballistic missiles, but
the proliferation possibilities to Iranian proxies in
Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and elsewhere will
complicate the operational environment in which
the United States and its allies operate. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“115 types of new defense systems and items have been designed.”

Fajr-5 Rocket.
Source: Tabnak.ir, http://www.tabnak.ir/files/ar/news/2014/7/12/27221_652.jpg

Source: “Iran Ti 3 Sal Akhir Bish az 115 Nua’ Taslihat-e Jadid Tarahi va Tawlid Kardeh
Ast (Over the Last 3 Years, Iran has Designed and Manufactured Over 115 New Types of
Weapons),” Fars News, 6 February 2017. http://www.farsnews.com/13951118000895

Over 115 New Types of Weapons
“Gen. Hossein Dehqan, minister of defense and armed force logistics, in an unveiling
ceremony for the opening of production lines for five military achievements…said, the
defense ministry, in order to effectively support the armed forces in the areas of ground
combat and air defense, [recognizes] that construction and production of these advanced
system are another big step in fulfilling the supply requirements of the armed forces and
strengthening the defense capabilities of the country…
The defense minister, with reference to the 69 percent growth in the past three years,
said, “In this period, over 115 types of new defense systems and items have been
designed, produced and launched.”

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity
By Matthew Stein

Since Central Asian states gained independence in 1991, new
regional military and security alliances have been created (some
of which are Russian-led), new military partnerships with
non-NATO countries have been established, a number of joint
military exercises have been conducted, over a dozen highprofile incidents of violence and civil unrest have taken place, and
military installations have been used by foreign militaries. While
this activity gained attention, it has not been collectively compiled.
A compilation of this activity can serve as a guide for current and
future military and security involvement in Central Asia.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20Com/Compendium%20of%20Central%20Asian%20Military%20and%20Security%20Activity%20v7%20-%20October%2028,%202016.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Chechen Military Police in East Aleppo
OE Watch Commentary: In early December, two
Chechen Battalions (Vostok and Zapad) were sent to guard
the Russian military base on the outskirts of Lattakia.
Shortly before Christmas, a contingent – presumably
from these forces – was deployed to East Aleppo. The
deployment of Chechnya-based Russian Military Police to
the anarchic and destroyed neighborhoods of East Aleppo
has led observers on both sides of the Syrian conflict to
reflect on how the “Chechen Model” is being applied in
Syria. The accompanying articles give some local insight
into the goals and challenges of the Chechen deployment in
Aleppo, particularly in terms of their relations with Iranianbacked loyalist militias.
Loyalist militias did not depart East Aleppo after rebels
were expelled in early December, as the Syrian government
had hoped. Instead, the pro-government fighters retreated
from central areas to the city’s eastern periphery. According
to the first excerpt, the al-Baqir Brigade has become the
dominant loyalist militia in East Aleppo. They are backed
by Iran and dominated by members of the Sunni al-Baggara
tribe from Aleppo’s south and southeast countryside. The
brigade’s name references the tribe’s common ancestor
(Muhammad al-Baqir), who is an important Shia historical
figure. Syrian opposition sources claim that many of the
militia members now identify as Shia.
Sectarian sensitivities prevent Iranian-backed forces
from holding the conservative, working-class Sunni
neighborhoods of East Aleppo. Absent a reliable loyalist
Sunni force to deploy in these areas, the Syrian government
turned to its Russian ally for support.
In mid-January a Chechen delegation that included the
Mufti of Chechnya traveled to Aleppo. During the visit they
met with Syrian religious authorities and prayed at the ruins
of the Great Mosque of Aleppo, which Chechen leader
Ramzan Kadyrov has vowed to restore. Pro-government
sources have emphasized that the Chechens deployed to
Aleppo are Sunni Muslims, and as the second excerpt
notes: “Perhaps the Kremlin wanted to show local and
global public opinion that it understood the religious nature
of Aleppo’s people by deploying the Chechen forces.”
Indeed the Kremlin has been eager to highlight these
religious sensitivities, as noted in the third accompanying
excerpt, which describes reactions to a video that went
viral, showing a Russian soldier in Aleppo converting to
Islam under the guidance of the Chechen Mufti.
Around the time of the Chechen delegation’s visit, Syrian
media outlets reported that three members of the Chechen
deployment had been killed in the Helwaniyah roundabout
of East Aleppo’s Tariq al-Bab neighborhood. The incident
was never confirmed, but opposition sources claimed
the perpetrators were from the al-Baqir Brigade, given
that some of their fighters had been killed in a firefight
with Russian forces the day before. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“…Perhaps the Kremlin

Russian Military Police in Aleppo (screenshots).
Source: ANNA News https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=0vxmYR6QQkI

wanted to show local and
global public opinion that
it understood the religious
nature of Aleppo’s people
by deploying the Chechen
forces…”

Source:
‫ وبعض النازحين يعودون‬..‫حلب تحت حكم المليشيات‬
“Aleppo Under Militia Rule as Some Refugees Return,” al-Modon, 5 February
2017. https://goo.gl/K7Iteh
The militias did not leave the city as the regime and Russian military
police had hoped, but rather they moved away from the city center and
neighborhoods frequented by Western and Arab media delegations where
reconstruction is programed, such as the Old City and areas surrounding the
citadel. Russian military police dares not venture to the city’s working-class
eastern neighborhoods due to the danger of pro-regime militias and armed
gangs. A Russian military police patrol was ambushed near the al-Halwaniyya
roundabout and all three soldiers were captured. Their bodies were found
tossed near the roundabout the next day, on 14 January 2017. The pro-regime
NDF, specifically the “al-Baqir Brigade,” which includes members of the
Baggara and other tribes, was blamed. This occurred days after a member of
the al-Baqir Brigade was killed by Russian Military Police near the same area
due to a traffic problem. The al-Baqir Brigade controls the neighborhoods
of al-Salihin, Karm Hamoud, al-Marjah, and parts of Fardous, al-Masir and
Jazmati. Its influence extends to villages south and southeast of Aleppo. It has
recruited new fighters after militias took over East Aleppo and became rich
through plundering and stealing.
Source:
‫الشرطة العسكرية الشيشانية في حلب‬
“Chechen Military Police in Aleppo,” Ayn al-Madina, 22 January 2017. https://
goo.gl/Y6p2vf (translation via: http://syrianobserver.com/EN/Features/32261/
Why_Are_Chechen_Military_Police_Patrolling_Aleppo)
This measure coincided with Assad’s announcement of his intention to bring
peacekeeping forces from friendly countries Egypt, China and Armenia.
However the surprise was not in the deployment of Russian police forces, but
that the majority were Chechen. It is unprecedented in Russia’s post-Soviet
history that forces from a non-Russian background who practice the Islamic
faith have been sent to a foreign country. Perhaps the Kremlin wanted to
show local and global public opinion that it understood the religious nature of
Aleppo’s people by deploying the Chechen forces.
Source:
‫ روسيا تستبدل مفتي الشيشان بالمحيسني‬:‫حلب‬
“Aleppo: Russia Exchanges the Chechen Mufti for Muhaisin,” All4Syria, 28
January 2017. http://www.all4syria.info/Archive/383382
The video caused controversy on social media. Some believe it is mere
propaganda aimed at improving the image of the Russian occupation of
Aleppo. Regime loyalists seek to highlight how the video shows the difference
between what they call “true Islam” and “extreme Islam,” describing Russia
as calling for moderate Islam.
OE Watch | March 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST

Top

ISIS Dummy Equipment: More Than Just Airstrike Decoys
OE Watch Commentary: Deception is a pillar
of the fighting doctrine of the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS), not merely a tactic it uses
to defend against airstrikes. The
employment of decoys and dummies
is an important manifestation
of this doctrine. According to
the accompanying excerpts,
ISIS’s dummies serve a variety
of purposes including deterring
attackers; misdirecting enemy fire;
intimidating local opponents; and
encouraging supporters.
As the first passage discusses,
Iraqi security forces recently found
an ISIS workshop to produce dummy
wooden vehicles on the east side
of Mosul. The passage notes that
the wooden vehicles are used “to
deceive UAVs and surveillance and
attack aircraft and other troops in
the al-Arabi neighborhood.” This
follows a March 2016 video posted
to YouTube showing anti-ISIS Iraqi militia fighters
examining a fake black wooden Humvee captured in
Anbar Province. No context was given for how ISIS
employed the dummy vehicle, but the models found
in Mosul are similar. Much of the analysis and media
reporting assumes them to be airstrike decoys, though
the lack of a heat signature makes wooden objects
largely ineffective as such.
The earliest reports of ISIS using “Quaker Guns”
date back to September 2014, only months after
they chased Iraqi troops out of Mosul and declared
themselves heads of the new caliphate. As the second
accompanying article explains, ISIS began defending
against expected attacks by setting up fake anti-aircraft
missiles and heavy machine gun nests on high points
throughout the city. ISIS employed these props to
“make itself appear stronger and scare the forces that
may attack its positions after American and Western
airstrikes” while also sending “a message to its
followers… that it possesses hundreds of air defense
missiles.”
Fake vehicles have featured prominently in ISIS’s
ongoing defense of Mosul. Wooden tanks placed along
main highways and junctions have drawn a great deal
of fire from Iraqi troops. Intelligence gathered from the
video feeds of commercial surveillance drones, used
extensively by combatant groups in Iraq and Syria,
may inaccurately identify them and other dummy
vehicles as real equipment. Wooden Humvees painted
to resemble those used by Iraqi Security Forces can
create confusion and allow ISIS to leverage the element
of surprise. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…showing they are serious about deception …”

Wooden dummy Humvees, East Mosul, January 2017. Inset: Tanks, rifles and vehicles in wooden
dummies workshop, East Mosul, 11 November 2016.
Sources: https://www.facebook.com/mod.mil.iq/photos/a.1474021859493981.1073741828.144787860
5441640/1935520600010769/?type=3&theater ; https://www.facebook.com/mod.mil.iq/photos/a.147
4021859493981.1073741828.1447878605441640/1890545891174907/?type=3

Source:
‫ ضبط عجالت وهمية لداعش في الموصل‬..‫بالصور‬
“In Pictures: ISIS Dummy Vehicles Captured in Mosul,” All Iraq News, 27 January
2017. http://www.alliraqnews.com/modules/news/article.php?storyid=57375
Iraqi security forces found an ISIS workshop to produce dummy wooden vehicles
on the east side of Mosul…. the wooden vehicles are used “to deceive UAVs and
surveillance and attack aircraft and other troops in the al-Arabi neighborhood.
They are placed on main roads and junctions to draw the greatest number of
rockets possible and force significant expenditures on rockets and ammunition.
The wheels are painted in military colors to like those of the Iraqi Army’s CounterTerrorism Units.”
Source:
‫داعش يلجأ للتمويه وينشر اسلحة وصواريخ خشبية‬
“ISIS resorts to concealment and deploys wooden weapons and missiles,” al-Sabah
al-Jadid, 14 September 2014. http://newsabah.com/newspaper/18812
ISIS resorts to traditional deception methods to magnify the size of its military
arsenal… they have deployed hundreds of wooden rockets with realistic-looking
fins and painted in metallic colors, showing they are serious about deception. In
most urban areas under its control ISIS has also scattered thousands of wooden
machine guns carved and painted to resemble Duskhas and PKs. The group’s
intention is that these weapons’ barrels be prominent in the openings and holes
made in rooftop walls of tall buildings. In this way it seeks to project greater
strength and scare the forces that may attack its positions after American and
Western airstrikes. If the group had this number of missiles, which are between
four and five meters long, they would have been used against our positions in the
various battles over the past three weeks in Nineveh Province. The group also aims
to send a message to its followers, who are nervously following news on the launch
of the airstrikes, that it possesses hundreds of air defense missiles…
OE Watch | March 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Jordan Braces for ISIS Retreat to the Syrian Desert
OE Watch Commentary: In early December,
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) regained
control of Palmyra from Syrian loyalist forces
despite being under attack in Mosul (Iraq) and alBab (Syria), while also preparing for an impending
attack on Raqqa (Syria). The accompanying articles
explore how expelling ISIS from these three urban
strongholds could force the group to disperse to the
Syrian Desert (Badia). Authorities in Jordan are
concerned by this scenario and have begun adjusting
their policies accordingly.
As the first accompanying excerpt notes, in
January ISIS opened several fronts in the Syrian
Desert, simultaneously attacking four Syrian airbases
“to prove they are still able to launch attacks” and to
“improve their military position with the impending
loss of the city of al-Bab.” Battles in Deir Ezzour,
described in the third excerpt, provide a preview
of what dispersed ISIS desert strike forces might
look like: “flexible and highly mobile” units of 40
fighters “divided into two groups and equipped with
Kalashnikovs, PKC machine guns, Dragunov sniper
rifles, and anti-tank missiles” attacking relatively soft
positions.
Jordanian political and military authorities
foresee ISIS having a foothold in the Syrian Desert
by the summer of 2017, and according to the
second accompanying excerpt, this is Jordan’s top
foreign policy concern. The Jordanian government
previously sought to roll back ISIS from the Syrian
Desert using a local proxy force called the “Tribal
Army.” The first (and only) engagement ended with
“catastrophic losses” for the Jordanian-backed forces,
forcing the kingdom to back away from using proxy
forces against the self-proclaimed caliphate. Jordan
has furthermore begun moving away from arming
rebel factions opposed to the Syrian government,
pushing them instead to the negotiating table.
Jordanian fears of mobile ISIS units roaming
the Syrian Desert are most acute in al-Rukban,
an informal encampment on the Syrian side of
the desert border that houses tens of thousands of
refugees from ISIS-controlled territory. Al-Rukban is
likely to be high on ISIS’s list of priority targets if the
group is indeed expelled from its urban strongholds
and forced to seek haven in the Syrian Desert.
According to the fourth excerpt, Jordanian security
believes that “thousands of ISIS members live in
the camp.” The camp’s despondent residents are
attractive targets for ISIS recruiters. Over the past
seven months, four different car bombs have gone off
in or near the camp, including one that crashed into a
border post and killed several Jordanian soldiers. The
Jordanian-backed “Tribal Army” is deeply enmeshed
in the camp’s political and security affairs. End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“[Jordan’s northeast] area is expected to become a main haven
for ISIS by this summer, after the group loses control over
Mosul and American pressure increases on the city of Raqqa.
The threat has become closer and clearer for Jordan, and postMosul ISIS increases rather than eliminates the danger.”
Source:
‫ مطارات عسكرية للنظام‬٤ ‫هجوم واسع لداعش على‬
“Broad ISIS Attacks on 4 Regime Military Airports,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 4 February
2017. https://goo.gl/0X99vN
ISIS is fighting on four broad military fronts in Syria, simultaneously targeting four
Syrian regime force airbases… “They are actually fighting on eight fronts, aiming to
prove they are still able to launch attacks”… the attacks on regime airbases in rural
Damascus, Homs, Aleppo and Deir Ezzour aim to “improve their military position
with the impending loss of the city of al-Bab” in eastern rural Aleppo…
ً ‫ التهديد أكثر اقترابا‬..‫داعش واألردن‬
Source:
“ISIS and Jordan: The Approaching Threat,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 24 January 2017.
https://goo.gl/1wkzTt
Jordan’s official though undeclared read on the situation is that the kingdom’s
northeast, bordering Deir Ezzour, the Syrian Badia and rural Homs, has become the
number one foreign threat. This area is expected to become a main haven for ISIS
by this summer, after the group loses control over Mosul and American pressure
increases on the city of Raqqa. The threat has become closer and clearer for Jordan,
and post-Mosul ISIS increases rather than eliminates the danger… Jordan and the
Americans armed and trained the “Tribal Army” to fight ISIS in Albu Kamal and
then Deir Ezzour, but the initial battles were total disappointments, as the new army
suffered catastrophic losses and lost a large chunk of its weapons. This confirms
the Jordanian view, which the Americans do not understand, that rushing to train
and prepare a force without confirming the outputs will have reverse results, which
is indeed what happened… [Jordan] has forced its allies to stop fighting the Syrian
regime and abide by the ceasefire…The regional map with the breakup of ISIS’s Iraqi
state is not ideal for Jordan; quite the opposite: the threat of ISIS on the Jordanian
border is clearer than before.
Source:
‫ تكتيكات عسكرية جديدة ل”داعش‬:‫”دير الزور‬
“Deir Ezzour: New ISIS Military Tactics,” al-Modon, 23 January 2017. https://goo.gl/
FhCX4c
ISIS relied on small groups, flexible and highly mobile, to fight the regime… there
were no more than 40 ISIS fighters in the battle to control the brick and cement block
factory. They were divided into two groups and equipped with Kalashnikovs, PKC
machine guns, Dragunov sniper rifles, and anti-tank missiles.
Source:
‫كيف قرأ األردن تفجير مخيم الركبان؟‬
“How Does Jordan Understand the al-Rukban Camp Explosion?” al-Dustour, 22
January 2017. https://goo.gl/7JvMQa
The frightening explosion in al-Rukban proves the Jordanian security view that
claims thousands of ISIS members live in the camp. This explains Jordan’s various
obstacles in dealing with the camp, and the great care taken even in humanitarian
cases… How will Jordan deal with the injured?… The situation is complicated given
the many considerations…
OE Watch | March 2017

11

AFRICA

Top

Why African Arms Embargoes Often Fail
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article provides significant insight into
several underreported reasons behind embargo failures in Africa. Despite painting a bleak
picture of the situation on the ground, the author provides several overlooked explanations
as to why arms flows continue despite the implementation of numerous impediments.
Perhaps most interesting of these explanations is the futile attempt to target the money of
those involved in the arms trade. Though there are certainly corrupt politicians and others
who have bank accounts, including foreign ones that can be seized, many of the violators
lack such economic assets. They may command vast areas with large mineral deposits
guarded by militias, but they operate outside the formal banking system. Additionally,
threats to limit the travels or confiscate the passports of arms smugglers are also often
futile as many of these individuals rarely travel outside the area they control…think local
warlords. Trade in arms is conducted through emissaries, with minerals serving as the
currency.
Another often overlooked factor is the development by several African countries of
their own domestic arms industries, which in some cases might eventually replace arms
lost to embargoes. Surprisingly though the article states that no link has been found so far
between arms embargoes and homegrown weapons production. This seems to go against
what was observed in South Africa when the 1963 arms embargo was enacted against
that country. Still, South Africa is probably the exception rather than the rule as it had the
technical capacity to develop a significant weapons manufacturing capability - indeed it
was already making arms, albeit on a relatively small scale - before the embargo. Countries
such as Somalia on the other hand presently lack the resources for arms manufacturing
beyond the artisanal level. Besides, the ease of accessibility of weapons probably negates
the need or desire to invest in production facilities by either the Somali government or its
armed opposition, notably al-Shabaab.
Political factors should also not be overlooked in the failure of embargoes. As the article
relates, African countries frequently view the imposition of an arms embargo as a punitive
measure rather than as a way to help the embargoed country. Furthermore, the country
ends up being perceived as a “failure,” a stigma they decry. There is thus sometimes little
incentive from a political standpoint to assist the UN in their well meaning endeavors.
Even when governments are on board, their actions, such as increasing border surveillance
in one area, are often woefully inadequate as traffickers just shift their routes.
Porous borders, corrupt officials who look the other way, difficulties in interrupting
payment transactions, politicians angry at the failed state label, and numerous other
reasons undermine African arms embargoes. Such a multidimensional problem will
require a multidimensional approach that takes all of these factors into account. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“In Somalia, armed violence
continues unabated despite the
country having been under an
arms embargo since 1992.”
Source: Nelson Alusala, “Towards effective
implementation of UN-imposed arms
embargoes in Africa,” Institute for Security
Studies (South Africa), November 2016.
https://issafrica.s3.amazonaws.com/site/
uploads/policybrief92.pdf
The effectiveness of these UN-imposed
embargoes is the subject of much debate in
Africa.
In Somalia, armed violence continues
unabated despite the country having been
under an arms embargo since 1992.
The success of an arms embargo depends a
great deal on the willingness of neighbouring
countries to walk with the embargoed
country
Countries do not consider sanctions as a
positive element in their transformation, but
as a sign of punishment.
… a senior of government ofﬁcial expressed
the helplessness of Côte d’Ivoire to singlehandedly deter marauding trafﬁckers,
without the support of neighbouring
countries.
This is made worse by the fact that these
law-enforcement agencies are ill-equipped
with the necessary skills and technical
capability to monitor and enforce targeted
sanctions. The situation is, however, also
undermined further by lack of adequate
funding.

The AK-47, a favorite of arms traffickers.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | March 2017

12

AFRICA

Top

A New Eye on Rebel Forces in Eastern DRC:
Joint Follow-up Mechanisms
OE Watch Commentary: The eastern portion of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC) is home to regionally destabilizing
rebel groups, including some with links to al-Shabaab and Boko
Haram. Against this backdrop, countries in the Africa Great Lakes
Region have decided to establish a military intelligence base in
Kasese, Uganda, close to the DRC border to monitor the situation.
The accompanying article discusses this base, which will be staffed
by 12 officers, known as the Joint Follow-up Mechanisms, or JFM.
Much of the JFM’s focus will be on the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), a Ugandan Islamic-leaning rebel group that has been
recruiting young men from mosques. As 2016 ended, the group
increased its attacks on civilians in eastern DRC. However, the
ADF is not the only dangerous group holed up in that region. Two
other groups based in the region are the Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda, which includes Hutus who carried out the
Rwandan genocide; and M23, a rebel group which had signed a
ceasefire with the DRC government in 2013. Adding to the volatile
mix are approximately 80,000 South Sudanese refugees, including
former fighters of Rick Machar, who oppose South Sudan’s president,
Salva Kiir.
Financial support for some of the rebel groups comes through
illegal exploitation of the DRC’s rich mineral resources. Political
support comes from certain governments who use some rebel groups
as proxies.
UN peacekeepers as well as troops from Tanzania, Malawi and
South Africa – known as the Intervention Force – tried and failed
to neutralize the rebel groups in the past. Now, with the JFM
monitoring and gathering intelligence on them—something that
was not done before—there might be hope that the governments
of the African Great Lakes Region can better formulate how to
effectively deal with these very dangerous menaces. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“…efforts to get
rid of negative
forces in eastern
DRC have suffered
because of lack
of permanent
intelligence and
monitoring...”

Kasese, not drawn to scale, will serve as the
home of the Joint Follow-up Mechanisms.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: Fred Oluoch, “Uganda to host military intelligence base to
monitor eastern DR Congo,” The East African, 10 Jan 2017. http://
www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Uganda-host-military-intelligencebase-monitor-eastern-DR-Congo/2558-3512834-pkx6m8z/index.html
Countries in the Great Lakes Region will at the end of January
set up a military intelligence base in Kasese, Uganda, to monitor
“negative forces” in eastern Congo.
The executive secretary of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) Zachary Muburi-Muita told The East
African that efforts to get rid of negative forces in eastern DRC have
suffered because of lack of permanent intelligence and monitoring.
… the Islamic-leaning ADF is regrouping by recruiting young men
from mosques with the promise of being taken to Saudi Arabia and
other Gulf countries.
“These negative forces are being sustained by illegal exploitation of
mineral resources through international links and are also enjoying
political support from some governments in the region, who use them
as proxies,” …

A Small Box That’s a Big Deal: How Latin
American Countries Are Using CubeSATs
and Why it Matters
by Kevin Freese
The Army is the Defense Department’s largest space user and
the space domain is an essential part of the current and future
operational environment. A relatively new satellite technology
– the CubeSAT – is now making it easier for countries such as
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay to launch their space
programs. By facilitating traditionally non-spacefaring nations
to develop space programs, CubeSATs will give such nations a
greater voice in international space policies and laws. For the
United States, this will mean increased necessity to take the
interests of other nations into consideration when operating in
space.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/SWJ_A%20Small%20Box%20That’s%20a%20Big%20Deal_%20How%20Latin%20American%20Countries%20Are%20Using%20CubeSATs%20and%20Why%20it%20Matters.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

13

AFRICA

Top

Zimbabweans Envious as Gambia’s President
Goes but Theirs Stays
“We need an ECOWAS in southern Africa.”
OE Watch Commentary: In late 2016, Adama Barrow was elected
president of Gambia, but his presidency was thwarted by Yahya Jammeh,
who had served as the country’s president since 1994. In mid-January, with
nearby countries flexing their military muscle, and in what could best be
described as a forced voluntary flight, Jammeh fled the country, allowing
Barrow to finally assume office. Much of Africa was jubilant as an
ironfisted ruler who remained in office for too long finally abdicated. The
accompanying article relates the envious mood in Zimbabwe, where Robert
Mugabe, the country’s President since 1987 (and Prime Minister for several
years before that) does not appear to be leaving any time soon.
There are several reasons for Jammeh being forced to leave while
Mugabe gets to stay, beginning with the respective regional bodies. The
Economic Community of West African States, ECOWAS, of which Gambia
is a member, took a firm stand against Jammeh after he refused to leave
office following his electoral defeat. The Southern African Development
Community, SADC, of which Zimbabwe is a member, does not appear
as anxious to take action against Mugabe. Perhaps this is because, as the
article describes, the SADC’s liberation-led leaders are unwilling to oust
one of their own.
A related factor is the unwillingness of South Africa “to appear as if they
are bullying their neighbor, Zimbabwe,” according to the article. Without
the will from South Africa, SADC’s most powerful member, to intervene in
Zimbabwe, the other SADC members are also averse to the idea. Contrast
this with Gambia’s neighbor, Senegal, who readily supplied troops for the
operation against Jammeh.
Unfortunately for Zimbabweans who yearn for change, the problem is
not just the surrounding countries. At home, Zimbabwe has a fractured
opposition. Whereas Gambians had Barrow to rally around, no single
opposition leader has emerged from Zimbabwe. With so many Zimbabwean
parties looking to take on the presidency – at last count there were more
than 48 – analysts predict that the 2018 election will see Mugabe elected
once again. Moreover, unlike the 2008 election, widely believed to be
doctored, the results this time could correctly show him with the winning
tally. Unless the opposition can unite, Zimbabwean envy described in the
article towards Gambia is likely to continue. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Unless a badly fractured opposition can unite, longtime Zimabwean
president Robert Mugabe, pictured here during a trip to Russia, is predicted
to prevail in elections next year.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: “So how did Mugabe get away with it? Zimbabweans
look to the Gambia with envy,” News24 (South Africa), 21 Jan
2017. http://www.news24.com/Africa/Zimbabwe/exclusive-sohow-did-mugabe-get-away-with-it-zimbabweans-look-to-thegambia-with-envy-20170121
“We need an ECOWAS in southern Africa.”
While Jammeh has been ostracized by regional body
ECOWAS, SADC did no such thing nine years ago.
South Africa didn’t want to be seen as bullying a neighbor.
Zimbabwe’s opposition was horribly fractured in 2008…The
splitting isn’t over yet.
Will ZANU-PF draw lessons from what’s happening in the
Gambia to make sure Jammeh’s humiliation can’t happen in
Zimbabwe? Or will Zimbabwe’s opposition and civic activists
finally unite?

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since
the state became independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security
cooperation with Russia, the United States and other partners, but there have also been internally
driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past several
years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which
is part of a plan to have contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end 2016.
While the result has yet to be announced, an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed
Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the impact this
could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20-%20Transition%20in%20the%20Armed%20Forces%20of%20Kazakhstan%20-%20From%20Conscripts%20to%20Contract%20Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

14

AFRICA

Top

Following Deadly al-Shabaab Attack, Some Kenyans
Rethink AMISOM Involvement
OE Watch Commentary: On 27 January,
al-Shabaab attacked the Kenyan base in
Kolbiyow, Somalia. The attack came only
a few days after the first anniversary of a
similar attack on a different Kenyan base, ElAdde, by the same terrorist group. The recent
attack claimed the lives of at least 50 Kenyan
soldiers, while last year’s attack had killed
over 100. The accompanying articles discuss
the attacks; along with some calls to rethink
Kenya’s involvement in the African Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM).

“When Kenya joined the African Union Mission in Somalia some
six years ago, the understanding was that it was to be a short
assignment and that terrorists would be vanquished and the soldiers
[would] return to carry on with their usual operations.”

The first passage discusses the similarities
between the two attacks. Both started before
daybreak, were initiated by suicide vehicle
borne IEDs, and led to casualties on both
sides. According to a preliminary report, the
first Kenyan casualties occurred when the
bomb laden vehicle exploded. The attack
continued with waves of suicide bombers,
fighters on foot and with pickup trucks with
mounted machine guns, who also joined the
fray.
The first passage also notes that there are
conflicting and unconfirmed accounts, as
is often the case with such attacks. These
include al-Shabaab using a military grade
personnel carrier, al-Shabaab seizing weapons
and vehicles from the base, and discrepancies
in the number of Kenyan soldiers killed, with
Kenya saying 50 and al-Shabaab claiming 57.
The Kolbiyow attack comes only three
days after al-Shabaab attacked a hotel in
Mogadishu, killing 28 people. It also follows a
string of attacks on AMISOM bases over the
past two years that resulted in high casualties
of Kenyan, Burundian and Ugandan soldiers.
With the latest attack, Kenyans are calling
for a rethink of Kenya’s strategy and role
in the war. As the second article relates, six
years ago when Kenya joined AMISOM, it
did so with the thought that the war would
be brief. Now there appears to be no end
in sight. However, having Kenya withdraw
troops from Somalia, as Ethiopia has just
done, would greatly weaken AMISOM and
Kenya remains concerned that a strong alShabaab would launch terrorist attacks, as
it has done before, on Kenyan soil. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Several hours after al Shabaab attack on their AMISOM base in Somalia, Kenyan soldiers, such as the ones
pictured here, launched a major operation against the terrorists.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: Fred Mukinda and Stella Cherono, “Kenyan soldiers fight back after raid by
Shabaab” Daily Nation (Kenya), 28 January 2017. http://www.nation.co.ke/news/10563789976-3qva6fz/index.html
The raid was similar to the El-Adde attack in that it occurred before daybreak, was
initiated with vehicle-borne bomb and there were casualties on both sides.
“The information being peddled by terrorists on social media is false and part of their
propaganda,” he said. Al-Shabaab had claimed that 57 soldiers had been killed in the raid.
Besides Kenya, Al-Shabaab has attacked camps belonging to Uganda, Burundi and
Ethiopia, with Uganda and Burundi suffering massive causalities.
Source: “It’s time for Kenya to rethink war against al Shabaab,” Daily Nation (Kenya),
27 January 2017. http://www.nation.co.ke/oped/Editorial/time-kenya-rethink-warshabaab/440804-3789988-bv5ob8z/index.html
When Kenya joined the African Union Mission in Somalia some six years ago, the
understanding was that it was to be a short assignment and that terrorists would be
vanquished and the soldiers [would] return to carry on with their usual operations.
After many years in the war-torn country and the rising cases of killings of our soldiers it
is time to step back and review our mission and strategy in Somalia.
The government must rethink the strategies for fighting al-Shabaab without putting our
soldiers in harm’s way.
OE Watch | March 2017

15

AFRICA

Top

An Unfinished Operation: Neutralizing the LRA
OE Watch Commentary: The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
once terrorized large portions of Uganda, but as the accompanying
article relates, the group founded and led by Joseph Kony is now only
a shadow of itself. Though estimates of its size were always sketchy,
its peak strength of somewhere between two and three thousand
soldiers has dwindled to just 150 to 200. These numbers mean that it
is no longer able to attack hard targets such as government troops on
the move; being limited instead to only soft targets such as unarmed
civilians. Having fled Uganda, it reportedly roamed the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC), South Sudan, and the Central African
Republic. LRA attacks in these three central African countries have
led to large scale displacements of civilians both internally and across
borders, including into Uganda, as they fear being killed or abducted.
As the article discusses, the lack of decisive action has led to
the war against the terrorist group being prolonged. During side
meetings of the 28th African Union Summit, Uganda’s President
Yoweri Museveni urged central African militaries to make strong
commitments to finally rid Africa of the LRA scourge. He stated a
joint plan would be required in order to flush out LRA remnants, and
urged the international community to support the effort by providing
force multipliers such as helicopters.
It is difficult to know the LRA’s exact location, though their main
source of income appears to be in the Garamba Forest of the DRC
where they steal gold from miners and hunt animals for ivory. They
avoid using satellite phones, radios and other devices that would give
away their position. This lack of credible intelligence is one of the
factors Museveni cited for why cross-border efforts are required,
noting that both human and technical resources must be brought
to bear on finding the group. However, until that critical piece of
intelligence becomes available, the operation to neutralize the LRA
remains unfinished. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Museveni called on all engaged in the fight
against the Lords Resistance Army (LRA)
insurgency in the Central African Republic
to commit themselves and allow military
commands to jointly work out a plan to flush
out remnants of the LRA and put an end to the
suffering of the civilian population.”
Source: “Museveni pushes for joint regional operation to flush out
Kony,” The Independent (Uganda), 30 January 2017. https://www.
independent.co.ug/museveni-pushes-joint-regional-operation-flushkony/
Museveni called on all engaged in the fight against the Lords
Resistance Army (LRA) insurgency in the Central African Republic
to commit themselves and allow military commands to jointly work
out a plan to flush out remnants of the LRA and put an end to the
suffering of the civilian population.
“What they do is attack soft targets. That is not a strength; it is a
weakness but it embarrasses governments because then they are not
protecting their people enough.
...
We must move in day and night and hunt them down. After, we
must have a zonal force which remains there. The force must be
disciplined…not killing, looting, raping women or talking badly to
the people. This will give confidence and security to the people,”
Museveni said.

Slaughtering elephants for ivory helps fund terrorist groups including the LRA.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | March 2017

16

AFRICA

Top

The Changing Face of African Conflict
OE Watch Commentary: Anyone who regularly follows Africa
knows that parts of the continent are embroiled in conflict. However,
they may be surprised to find out how that conflict has changed over
the years. The accompanying article discusses a report from the
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project (ACLED) out of
the University of Sussex, which claims that battles and large scale
wars are on the decline in Africa. Replacing these are multiple,
co-existing agents including local, pro-government, and political
militias; rebel groups; and foreign entities such as ISIS seeking local
partners, all frequently violently jockeying for power.
In 2016, 34% of incidents in Africa involved state agents, higher
than in previous years, reflecting government efforts to forcefully
stay in power. Other interesting findings of the report include the
fact that Libya, Nigeria, South Sudan and Somalia accounted for 33%
of all violent conflict on the continent last year. Somalia, where the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has spent ten years
and billions of dollars trying to implement peace, had 740 armed,
organized violent events in 2016. This was roughly equal to the
other three countries combined. Interestingly, the average number of
deaths per event differed among the four countries: Somalia lost an
average of two and a half lives per event; while that number was four
for Libya, four and a half for South Sudan and six for Nigeria, which
has a large number of civilian casualties.
Protests were also on the rise last year, with a 4.8% increase over
2015. Chad, Tunisia, and Ethiopia were all big contributors to this,
but by far the largest was South Africa. Police violence against
protesters there fueled more disorder. As the article notes, unless
political solutions are found, this low level of violence - the changing
face of African conflict - is likely to persist or even escalate. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Despite lesser media coverage, a number of
countries across the continent witnessed lower
yet sustained rates of armed conflict, as state
and non-state actors continue to use violence to
influence political dynamics or consolidate their
position vis-à-vis other competitors.”
Source: Simon Allison, “Africa: Conflict is not going away, but it is
evolving,” Daily Maverick (South Africa), 7 Feb 2017. https://www.
dailymaverick.co.za/article/2017-02-07-africa-conflict-is-not-goingaway-but-it-is-evolving/#.WJ3LA4WcGcw
Nigeria is also extreme in that fatalities “are overwhelmingly
against civilians compared to battles between armed agents, and
fatalities when the state retakes territory are also markedly higher
than in other crisis contexts”. On the other hand, actors in the
Libyan conflict appear to avoid directly targeting civilians.
Elsewhere, the absence of full-blown civil war or large-scale
insurgencies masks disturbing levels of violence.
When it comes to protests, there are some signs that Africans are
beginning to find their voices, with a 4.8% increase last year in the
number of events involving rioters and protesters.
Despite lesser media coverage, a number of countries across the
continent witnessed lower yet sustained rates of armed conflict,
as state and non-state actors continue to use violence to influence
political dynamics or consolidate their position vis-à-vis other
competitors.

Throughout Africa protests for a variety of causes increased last year.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | March 2017

17

AFRICA

Top

Keeping up the Operational Tempo Against Boko Haram
OE Watch Commentary: Since declaring a State of
Emergency and launching an offensive against Boko Haram in
2015, the Nigerian military has forced Boko Haram out of the
territories it held in its declared Islamic State in northeastern
Nigeria. Unlike other State of Emergencies before 2015, this
one has not been short term. Nearly two years later, the military
is still on the offensive. Despite setbacks,
including occasional large-scale Boko
Haram attacks, Boko Haram’s pledge of
allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria (ISIS), mistaken air strikes
that have had devastating consequences
for civilians, and significant numbers of
military casualties, the military’s counterinsurgency approach under this State of
Emergency is being renewed and improved.
According to the excerpted article from
a Nigerian source, Nigeria’s counterinsurgency focus will be on preventing
Boko Haram from regrouping, especially
by using the air force to bomb Boko Haram
camps. The military recognizes that killing
all Boko Haram fighters is not possible.
Its goal is to keep Boko Haram fighters on
the run so they cannot train new fighters
in their camps, store weapons, and have
time plan major attacks. Increasing reports
of Boko Haram defections as well as the
escape of a second Chibok schoolgirl, who
was taken captive by Boko Haram in April 2014, suggests that
Boko Haram morale may be decreasing and that the militants
are unable to maintain control of their most prized resources—
namely, the Chibok schoolgirls.
The Nigerian military also plans to improve its counterinsurgency operations in three other ways. First, it has elevated
its medical directorate to the status of a branch, showing a
greater focus on caring for wounded soldiers amid complaints
of the government ignoring them. Second, it has improved the
defenses around military barracks throughout the northeast in
hopes of protecting them from Boko Haram attacks: it was the
fall of barracks in 2013 that allowed Boko Haram to become the
de-facto power in Borno State by 2014. Finally, the government
has developed a new human rights-based curriculum in
recognition that alienating the population, including abusing
Boko Haram members and relatives, has become a factor
encouraging Boko Haram recruitment.
While the insurgency’s end is still not near, the Nigerian
military’s improvements to its counter-insurgency strategy
should allow it to continue making progress against Boko
Haram. Moreover, these lessons can be used in other parts of
the country, which are also witnessing various forms of lowgrade insurgency and insecurity. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“The Air Force has vowed to ensure that
remnants of Boko Haram terrorists are not allowed
to regroup again in any part of the country to pose
a threat to lives and properties.”

Areas of Boko Haram activity in Nigeria.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boko_Haram_insurgency_map.svg

Source: “We’ll Never Allow Boko Haram Regroup Again,” ThisDayLive,
7 January 2017. http://www.thisdaylive.com/index.php/2017/01/07/
airforce-chief-well-never-allow-boko-haram-regroup-again/
The Air Force has vowed to ensure that remnants of Boko Haram
terrorists are not allowed to regroup again in any part of the country to
pose a threat to lives and properties. Chief of Air Staff (CAS) Air Marshal
Sadique Baba Abubakar stated. He explained that the incessant cases
of insecurity in the country where armed groups in the North-east and
some part of the South have continued to hold the nation hostage will be
checkmated with the expansion. He said, “Apart from the field command,
we also have the medical branch now. It used to be a directorate, now it’s
a branch because we are expanding. We have also enhanced our bases.
It is not likely that anybody can threaten our bases now unlike in 2013
when we didn’t have the right structure. For the North-east, our focus
now generally is to ensure that Boko Haram does not regroup anywhere.
Our men are flying to ensure that these guys do not regroup to constitute
any threat to our troops or any community in the North-east.” He also
spoke in respect for human rights: “we have changed the curriculum for
training; we have included the aspect of respect for human rights and we
have given them the basic understanding of humanitarian law that was
not there before”.
OE Watch | March 2017

18

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Arson Emerging as Insurgent Fashion?
OE Watch Commentary: In 2017 so far, Chile has
suffered extensive, costly incendiary protests which have
taken the form of actual fires. Many of the record number
of forest fires are attributable to natural climatic conditions.
Others, however, were the product of arson, apparently
organized in support of an ethnic based insurgent
movement. The accompanying passages discuss the
organized use of arson as a destructive resistance tactic by
some Mapuche groups. Chile can hardly be described as a
‘third-world hell hole’ and its ethnic Mapuche challenge is
worthy of more of our attention as an irregular war case.
According to the current CIA World Factbook, the
Mapuche identity accounts for over nine percent of
the population. This is up from a reported ‘Indian’
population of 3% and a ‘White’ population of 95% in
1991. The question of ethnic grievance and activation of
that grievance has been heightened by external interests
and tied, expectedly, to land claims which are considered
ancestral, as the second passage notes. It should perhaps
be worrisome that the organized use of arson as a
destructive resistance tactic may be undergoing rehearsal
there. The Mapuche question has been a magnet for
provocation from the region’s leftist revolutionary groups,
perhaps even including the FARC. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Cuba’s State

Source: Multiple contributors, “Incendios forestales en Chile de 2017 (Chilean
forest fires of 2017),” Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre, 2017 varios dates.
https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incendios_forestales_en_Chile_de_2017
“The Chilean forest fires of 2017 are a series of forest fires generated in
multiple focal points in Chile’s central and southern zones, between the regions
of Coquimbo and Los Lagos, with greatest intensity in the regions of O’Higgins,
Maule y Biobio, as well as distant foci in the Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic
regions (the country’s austral zone), during January and February of 2017…
Authorities have admitted that the origin of the fires is human and to this point
there are 43 arrested, demonstrating that many of the points were started
intentionally.”
Source: EFE, “Dos muertos en incendio provocado en la zona del conflicto
mapuche en Chile (Two deaths in arson fire in Mapuche conflicto zone in
Chile),” Terra, 4 January 2013. https://noticias.terra.cl/chile/dos-muertos-enincendio-provocado-en-la-zona-del-conflicto-mapuche-en-chile,0307a838c16fb
310VgnCLD2000000ec6eb0aRCRD.html
“The loss happened around 0200 hours (0600 GMT) this Friday, when about
twenty masked gunmen set fire to a family home in Lumahue, situated near
the locality of Vilcun, in Araucania, about 700 kilometers south of Santiago.”
… For his part, the district attorney declined to give information regarding
the identity of the detainee and his possible connection with the demands of
Mapuche groups that in the region are confronting agriculture and forestry
businesses over the ownership of land that they consider ancestral.”

“…whoremongering represent[s] an extra salary for many policemen…”

OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying source reference
is noteworthy for the student of irregular war in that the Cuban police,
as an armed institution (and as part of a national government hierarchy),
is accused of the pro-forma role of big-pimp. As background, note that
until 2014, the US State Department rated Cuba as a Tier 3 country
on its Trafficking in Persons Report (Tier 3 lists ‘countries whose
governments do not fully comply with the minimum standards and
are not making significant efforts to do so’). In 2016, that rating was
improved to the Tier 2 Watch List, although the accompanying country
narrative stated that the ‘Government of Cuba does not fully comply
with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking and
is not making significant efforts to do so.’ Policemen getting caught
up supplementing their incomes in a prostitute protection scheme is
nothing new, but this article raises the question of whether pandering is
becoming customary in the national police force.
The second accompanying source reference, on a much less lurid
topic, gives part of the answer. The government allows small private
transportation entrepreneurship, but recently clamped down on price
controls, causing some publicly visible disruptions and discontent. The
wry analysis from the Cuban writer is that the crisis will end and the
bureaucracy will win — that every corner of Cuban life is eventually
regulated to the last detail. So, according to Cuban commentators,
Cuba’s sex trade will continue, and while the police might be playing a
central role, the bureaucrats will soon also have it under control, or at
least extract their rents. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Source: Gerónimo García, “La prostitución, un ‘salario extra’ para
muchos policías (Prostitution, extra pay for many policemen),”
Diario de Cuba, 8 February 2107. http://www.diariodecuba.com/
cuba/1486400787_28725.html
“‘I don’t know why it surprises you if here even a potato-head
knows that prostitution and whoremongering represent an extra
salary for many policemen’,…’The policemen are a necessary
evil in this business. They lend a certain security and whistle if a
operation is coming through the zone. They almost never make us
pay them “in kind;” they want money’, she added… ‘It is best not to
begin lying to them because they are into everything and they have,
like, a network’….”
Source: Jorge Olivera Castillo and Alen Lauzán, “Transporte: La
crisis interminable (Transportation: The interminable crisis),”
Diario de Cuba, 14 February 2017. http://www.diariodecuba.com/
cuba/1487050553_28930.html
“It is very possible that the current social tensions caused by the
control over non-state carrier prices has a more-or-less happy
ending — obviously for the bureaucracy, that knows the signals
of central power by heart. In the end, they will impose the rules of
coexistence between the bigwigs and their vassals, in this case the
majority of the people, which has become accustomed to survive in
the niches of illegality, …”
OE Watch | March 2017

19

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Manuel Santos’ Ten Rules for Peace
OE Watch Commentary: While
suffering very low levels of public
popularity, Colombian President Manuel
Santos appeared aglow in the unfolding
normalization of relations with the
FARC and his reception of the Nobel
Peace Prize. Early this February, he
took the podium in the iconic Colon
Theatre in Bogota to speak in front of
other Nobel laureates. He offered to the
world a list of ten rules for peace. To
some the list was inspirational and the
moment one of national pride. Other
Colombians, however, did not rate
their President’s composition with the
Decalogue from Mount Sinai. The
first accompanying reference offers the
President’s instruction unvarnished,
although only the headings are relayed
here. The second accompanying
reference is an extensive critique of it.
The excerpt is taken from a valuable
essay for those seeking an expression
of what the opposition finds wrong with
the political-philosophical current on
which the Santos administration carried
the deal with the FARC. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…WE MUST TALK.”
Source: Ariel Cabrera, “Santos propuso a la comunidad internacional la Carta de Colombia,
diez principios para la paz (To the International community Santos proposed the Charter of
Colombia, ten principles for peace),” Radio Santafé, 3 February 2017. http://www.radiosantafe.
com/2017/02/03/santos-propuso-a-la-comunidad-internacional-la-carta-de-colombia-diezprincipios-para-la-paz/
“1. PEACE IS A RIGHT; 2. WE ARE ONE; 3. WE ARE DIVERSE; 4. WE MUST FOLLOW
THE GOLDEN RULE; 5. WE MUST AVOID WAR; 6. WE MUST BE LAWFUL; 7. WE MUST
TALK; 8. WE MUST RESPECT EACH OTHER; 9. WE MUST EDUCATE; 10. WE MUST
UNDERSTAND. ”

“There are conflicts that can only be ended by force…”
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Los 10 mandamientos de Juan Manuel Santos (Juan Manuel
Santos’ 10 commandments),” Periodismo sin Fronteras, 5 February 2017. http://www.
periodismosinfronteras.org/los-10-mandamientos-de-juan-manuel-santos.html
“…‘7. WE MUST TALK: Whenever possible, conflicts should end by way of dialog. The
International community should support effective means of prevention and limitation of wars.’
Would that Santos had spoken with the Colombians and not only with the FARC in Cuba, in the
badly named ‘peace negotiations’. ‘Conflicts should end by way of dialog’. That variation of
pacifist ideology does not withstand analysis. It does not respect the facts. There are conflicts
that can only be ended by force, allied to the law, for the neutralization and destruction of the
aggressor; not by way of a ‘dialog’….”

OE Watch | March 2017

20

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Venezuelan Government Strategy
OE Watch Commentary: Sometimes foreign advice
and intervention regarding Venezuela’s internal woes is
what it seems. Luis Zapatero is an ex-president of Spain
and Ernesto Samper an ex-president of Colombia. As
related by the first accompanying opinion, they have come
together, lending their good offices, to give advice to the
heterogonous opposition to Venezuela’s regime. Their
advice to the opposition is that it give up trying to toss
out the bolivarians and instead become more loyal and
cooperative. The two former presidents’ advice apparently
reflects the current Venezuelan government’s policy.
Notably, Zapatero and Samper are both from left-leaning
parties with expressed sympathies for the bolivarian
movement, of which the current Venezuelan regime is a
part.
The second reference adds a more ominous angle
that begs a question. It is an explicit warning by the
Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro that Colombia
not meddle in the question of bolivarian control of the
Venezuelan state. The cautionary expression makes
us wonder if it is the product of growing paranoia or a
calculated effort to back Colombian President Santos
away from public enthusiasm for bolivarian concessions
toward its opposition. Nicolas Maduro also makes what
some might receive as self-deluding bluster — that
Venezuela is a bulwark for stability and peace in the
continent. Actually, that might not be far from the truth
if one’s definition of stability is the durability of control
by a leftist party, and one’s definition of peace is the
suppression of dissent and the submission of political
opponents. Nevertheless, the true colors of the Maduro
policy are made clear. The bolivarian ‘Revolution’ is not
taking any steps back. The party’s control mechanisms
also bespeak that resolve, and are elegant indeed. As the
third passage notes, in Venezuela, the bolivarian military
increasingly is in control of whether and what people will
eat. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the proposition is made openly to slacken what has been
the battle flag for 18 years….”
Source: Carlos Blanco, Venezuela: Acuerdo para la rendición incondicional
(Venezuela: Agreement for Unconditional Surrender),” El Nacional, 25 January
2017. http://www.el-nacional.com/autores/carlos-blanco
“The project for achieving an agreement proposed by ex-presidents [of Spain
and Colombia, respectively] Zapatero and Samper is not so much a fraud, but
rather a text in which the proposition is made openly to slacken what has been
the battle flag [of the opposition] for 18 years: the exit of the regime and its
replacement by a democratic government.”

“There will be no peace in Colombia if they destabilize the
bolivarian revolution…”
Source: Editors, Maduro: “No habra paz en Colombia si se mete con la
revolucion (Maduro: There will not be peace in Colombia if it meses with
the revolution),” Taringa, 12 February 2017. http://www.taringa.net/post/
info/19772758/Maduro-No-habra-paz-en-Colombia-si-se-mete-con-larevolucion.html
“…President Nicolas Maduro said that ‘there will be no peace in Colombia if
they destabilize the peace in Venezuela, I demand maximum respect for the peace
in our country’. He added that ‘those who conspire from outside [the country]
had better think and think again. Venezuela is a strong point and bulwark for
stability and peace in the continent. There will be no peace in Colombia if they
destabilize the bolivarian revolution’.
Source: Ibsen Martínez, “Venezuela: Hambruna y militares (Venezuela:
Starvation and the military),” Para Rescatar el Porvenir, 25 January 2017.
https://pararescatarelporvenir.wordpress.com/2017/01/25/ibsen-martinez/
“…President Nicolas Maduro said that ‘there will be no peace in Colombia if
they destabilize the peace in Venezuela, I demand maximum respect for the peace
in our country’. He added that ‘those who conspire from outside [the country]
had better think and think again. Venezuela is a strong point and bulwark for
stability and peace in the continent. There will be no peace in Colombia if they
destabilize the bolivarian revolution’.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is about
a broader set of conflicts than just ‘insurgency.’
In its 144 sections, Geoff Demarest raises new
and overlooked concepts related to modern
conflict in a provocative manner designed to
stir up debate and critical thinking. As Geoff
Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the ideas
in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Trade Deals Hail New Cooperation between
Argentina and Japan
“...from now on they will reinforce an economic and
OE Watch Commentary: While Japan and Argentina have
never been enemies, they have not been allies either. Instead,
their relationship has been characterized by insignificant
engagement and sporadic high level visits over the last six
decades. However, recent developments signal that this tide
may be turning. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s
recent visit to Argentina coupled with Argentinian President
Mauricio Macri’s plans to expand relations with Japan have
created an unprecedented moment in bilateral relations
between the two countries. The accompanying passages from
Latin American sources discuss this trend.
Argentinian President Mauricio Macri, who took
office in November 2015, is looking to re-engage foreign
partnerships ignored or pushed to the side during the Kircher
administrations (2003-2014) and he currently has his sights
set on Japan. As the first passage discusses, this “paradigm
shift” is supported by a visit from Japan’s Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe on 21 November 2016, during which both sides
agreed to deepen bilateral relations, increase trade and
establish a bilateral “strategic alliance.” As the passage notes,
Japanese companies see a lot of potential in Argentina and
the Japanese state will provide financial support to these
companies to invest in Argentina.
More specifically, Japan is interested in investing in
transport, energy, agriculture, and commercial electronics
while Argentina is interested in increasing exports and
reaping the benefits of foreign investment. These new
agreements signal a significant departure from Argentina’s
previously sluggish trade relationship with Japan. For
example, as the second excerpt points out, Argentina
currently ranks 55 in the list of countries that trade with
Japan while neighboring Brazil has reaped extensive
economic benefits from its relationship with Japan. According
to the third passage, the new agreements with Japan herald
economic and commercial bonds that were “previously
unthinkable”. In Argentina’s era of re-engagement, the hope
is to create lasting and significant economic impact within
the country, which now looks more feasible than ever. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

commercial bond that was previously unthinkable.”

Source: “Argentina y Japón elevan a nivel de “asociación estratégica” el
vínculo bilateral (Argentina and Japan Elevate Strategic Association via
Bilateral Agreements),” Telam, 17 November 2016. http://www.telam.com.
ar/notas/201611/171131-argentina-japon-asociacion-estrategica-vinculobilateral.html
“We have agreed to build a strategic partnership to further advance the
relations between our countries. We have also agreed to promote trade
between the two countries. In the economic field, Japanese companies have
a lot of interest in Argentina, which has enormous potential,” Abe said to a
euphoric Macri. The gesture is not minor. From now on, the Japanese state
will provide financial support to the companies in their country to invest in
Argentina. It will do so through the Foreign Trade Organization of Japan
(JETRO) and this turns out to be a paradigm shift. During the 12 years of the
Kirchner government and with a country in default, the Japanese state did
not endorse any investment project in Argentina.
Source: “Argentina y los desafíos del mercado japonés (Argentina and its
Challenges with the Japanese Market),” Infobae, 21 November 2016. http://
www.infobae.com/opinion/2016/11/21/argentina-puede-abrir-las-puertasgrandes-del-mercado-japones-al-mercosur/
Per data from the UN, Argentina ranks 55th in the list of countries that
trade with Japan. Last year there was a total of $1.22 billion in exports and
purchases from Tokyo for $572 million. Very small figures if one compares
the large volume of Japan’s trade with Brazil. Today, Japan’s investments in
Argentina are around $100 million per year. That is, 30 times less than the
capital invested in Brazil.
Source: “Shinzo Abe: “Japón apoya la apertura que lidera Macri” (Shinzo
Abe: Japan Supports Opening Offered by Macri),” La Nacion, 21 November
2016. http://www.lanacion.com.ar/1958032-shinzo-abe-japon-apoya-laapertura-que-lidera-macri
“Macri and Abe are greatly increasing trade and business opportunities
between the two countries. Diplomatic sources from Japan and Argentina
concurred during an interview with La Nacion that, “ from now on they
will reinforce an economic and commercial bond that was previously
unthinkable.”

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | March 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Argentina Purchases Israeli Military Equipment to Monitor
Drug Trafficking
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 January
2017, the Argentinian government agreed to
purchase four Israeli high-speed and fully
armed river patrol vessels, together with an
integrated vigilance system. The vigilance
system will be used to monitor the Parana
River where large-scale drug shipments
enter Argentina from Paraguay and Bolivia.
The new vessels are imperative to fulfill the
Macri administration’s goals of modernizing
its military force and counter-acting the
exacerbation of drug trafficking activity in
the country; particularly in littoral areas
where vigilance is not as robust as it could
be. The accompanying passages from Latin
American sources discuss the importance of
the new patrol vessels.
The first passage discusses the details of
the deal and notes that the vessels will be
operating along the Parana River, which
is one of Argentina’s main entries of
marihuana and cocaine from central South
America. The Argentinian government
has been proactive in monitoring drug
shipments, but has lacked the resources
necessary to monitor the Parana River given
that its area of responsibility covers over
3200 miles of coastal areas and rivers. As
the second passage discusses, traffickers
have taken advantage of this situation and
are currently using amphibious aircraft to
drop shipments along the Parana River.
In the third excerpted passage, Claudio
Izaguirre of the Argentinian Anti-Drug
Association points out in an interview with
Paraguayan news source La Nacion, that
traffickers prefer amphibious aircraft to
traditional fluvial transportation (boats/
cargo vessels) as they are able to land
directly in the Parana River and drop
shipments into fast-boats that quickly move
shipments to safe-houses. Amphibious
flights are also able to fly at low altitudes
which allows them to avoid aerial radar
systems. At present, Izaguirre indicated that
his organization detects up to 20 amphibious
flights a week, but the hope is that with
the new Israeli vessels, the Prefectura
Naval will be able to interdict shipments
and thwart trafficking in a more effective
manner. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“The Shaldag ISL class patrols will be operating along the Parana
river, which is one of Argentina’s main entries of marihuana and
cocaine from central South America.”
Map showing the Paraná River
and its tributaries.
Source: https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Riodelaplatabasinmap.png

Source: “Argentina se arma
con tecnología militar israelí
para combatir narcotráfico
(Argentina Purchases Military
Equipment from Israel to
Combat Drug Trafficking),”
PanamPost, 02 January 2017.
https://es.panampost.com/
raquel-garcia/2017/01/02/
argentina-militar-israelinarcotrafico/
On 02 January 2017, the Macri administration announced the purchase of four Israeli high
speed and fully armed river patrol vessels, together with an integrated vigilance system
for land border crossings, with a total bill of eighty million dollars. The Shaldag ISL class
patrols will be operating along the Parana river, which is one of Argentina’s main entries of
marihuana and cocaine from central South America. They can accelerate up to 40 knots in
seconds and carry two guns, a 25mm Typhoon in the bow and a 20mm Oerlikon in the stern
plus two machine guns. Highly versatile and with great mobility, given its small draft, the
vessels can also carry a 12-men landing group for special operations.
Source: “La fragil frontera norte (The Fragile Northern Border),” La Nacion, 17 November
2013. http://servicios.lanacion.com.ar/archivo/2013/11/17/024/DT
A spokesperson for the Prefectura Naval of Argentina stated the use of amphibious aircraft
along fluvial routes is not surprising because traffickers realize it is impossible for authorities
to monitor all coastal and river activity at all times, as the Prefectura is responsible for more
than 5,117 km of coastline and rivers. During an interview with La Nacion, the spokesperson
indicated that “there are large extensions of unmonitored river systems in the north, northeast
and eastern sectors of Argentina which drug traffickers have taken advantage of. From these
locations, they are able to drop their shipments for local distribution and foreign export.”
Source: “Los isleños del Delta del Paraná viven acosados por el narcotráfico (Islanders in the
Parana Delta Live in Fear of Drug Traffickers),” El Tiempo, 15 November 2016. http://tiempo.
infonews.com/nota/13388/los-islenos-del-delta-del-parana-viven-acosados-por-el-narcotrafico
According to El Tiempo, the amphibious shipments belong to Bolivian and Paraguayan
traffickers, who are well aware of terrestrial Federal Police checkpoints and radar systems that
actively scan Argentinian airspace for incoming narco flights. To avoid radar detection pilots
are told to fly at low altitudes. Regarding coordination and drop points, Izaguirre indicated
that pilots use GPS coordinates and drop shipments to awaiting fast-boats only if there is no
sign of police or military activity in and around the area.
OE Watch | March 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA

Top

MS-13 Gang Calls for Truce to End Violence
OE Watch Commentary: In December
2016, the MS-13, a major gang in El Salvador
voiced their desire to create a definitive pact to
end violence and reintegrate themselves into
society. This follows unprecedented murder
rates following the collapse of a previous
truce proposed in 2012. The accompanying
passages from Latin American sources discuss
the significance of this development, and how
it is different than the previous truce.
The first passage notes the MS-13’s
declaration that it “prefers to continue dialogue
options with the government instead of
resorting to violence”. This proposal appears
to be different than the 2012 truce, for two
reasons. First, the group is proposing that
the government create a process that would
allow active members to leave the gang if
they wish to do so and help re-integrate
them into society. The cost of this process
is estimated at $12,000 per gang member.
Second, as the second excerpt discusses, the
MS-13 spokesperson in charge of negotiations
proposed dismantling the gang; a significant
proposal which has never been discussed
or even considered before. However, as the
third passage discusses, as willing as the
gang may be to negotiate, the government is
hesitant and has to consider the willingness of
political parties, society, and even the financial
ramifications that would need to be considered.
The final passage provides some background
on the previous truce. On 9 March 2012,
El Salvador’s two largest gangs, Mara
Salvatrucha-13 (MS-13) and Barrio 18
announced a truce claiming that they were
tired of the violence and constant murders.
This truce also consisted of deals with the
government to transfer certain high ranking
gang members to different prisons and allowed
gang members other benefits. In the short
term, the truce was hailed as a success because
it cut violence rates in half and helped bring
homicide rates in the region to a 10-year low.
Unfortunately, this truce only lasted 15 months
and once it collapsed, murder rates surged by
nearly 70% in late 2013. La Nacion indicates
that the truce initially worked because the
Salvadoran government tacitly supported it,
but their rhetoric changed in mid-2014. Since
the end of the truce, violence and gang activity
has continued and even worsened, culminating
in the current situation and proposal for a new
truce. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Lo que se le olvida al gobierno es que al matarnos están matando a la gente
que los llevó al poder (What the Government is Forgetting is that by Killing Us, they are
Killing the People who Brought them to Power),” El Faro, 17 January 2017. https://elfaro.
net/es/201701/salanegra/19750/%E2%80%9CLo-que-se-le-olvida-al-gobierno-es-que-almatarnos-est%C3%A1n-matando-a-la-gente-que-los-llev%C3%B3-al-poder%E2%80%9D.
htm
The MS-13 assures that the government’s strategy to deal with the gang has failed to
corner or weaken them. Instead, group leaders claim that the strategy has encouraged
members to take revenge to the extent that they could be the impetus behind a war that
would only cause chaos within the country. However, the MS-13 states that it prefers to
continue dialogue options with the government instead of resorting to violence.
Source: “MS-13 pide diálogo al gobierno y pone sobre la mesa su propia desarticulación
(MS-13 Requests Dialogue with Government and Proposes Dismantling)”, El Faro, 17
January 2017. https://elfaro.net/es/201701/salanegra/19747/MS-13-pide-di%C3%A1logoal-gobierno-y-pone-sobre-la-mesa-su-propia-desarticulaci%C3%B3n.htm
The MS13’s spokesman insisted that the issue (referring to dismantling the group) can
be addressed if they are treated seriously in the negotiations. “The FARC have done it,”
a spokesman said, referring to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia). “We can not leave saying that we are going
to disarm. Everything depends on how the government receives the proposal and the
seriousness it gives.” He (MS-13 spokesperson) added that they had seen the process of
the demobilization of the FARC in Colombia as a model: “After killing people and being
terrorists, they are going to reinsert themselves as citizens,” he said.
Source: ”La Mara Salvatrucha pide dialogo al gobierno de El Salvador (Mara Salvatrucha
Requests Dialogue with Government)”, Univision, 19 January 2017. http://www.univision.
com/noticias/maras/la-mara-salvatrucha-pide-dialogo-al-gobierno-de-el-salvador
The President’s spokesperson Eugenio Chicas stated the following regarding the proposed
deal issued by the MS-13: “It sounds like a well thought and serious proposal, which
cannot be given a quick and improvised response. I am not the man indicated to deal with
an offer of this kind. This has to be taken care of by Interior Secretary Hato Hasbún, who
is responsible for all sorts of dialogues and agreements on behalf of the government.” He
further added that the possibility of exploring an agreement with the MS-13 depends on
several factors: first, the social acceptance of the negotiations; second, the convergence of
the political willingness of different parties; and third, the resources needed to finance such
a process and the legal discussions that must take place before it starts.
Source: “Asi funcionan las pandillas en El Salvador (How Gangs Function in El
Salvador)”, La Nacion, 08 August 2015. http://www.nacion.com/mundo/centroamerica/
como-funcionan-pandillas-El_Salvador_0_1504449607.html
Gangs in El Salvador are aware that their violence and criminal activity is associated with
negative political image and because of this, the El Salvadoran government wants to come
to some sort of agreement with gangs but not openly because it shows how much power
these gangs possess. For this reason, the Mauricio Funes administration distanced itself
from the truce in 2012 but did comply with some gang requests including prison transfers
and allowing cell phones in prisons amongst other things. This collaboration resulted in a
dramatic reduction in homicides, but when President Salvador Sánchez Cerén took office
in June 2014, he reneged on all agreements made by the previous administration which
resulted in unpreceded levels of gang violence and a cancellation of the truce.
OE Watch | March 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Unprecedented African Migration Reported in
Central America
“Official reports indicate that up to 11 November 2016,
OE Watch Commentary: Europe and the United
States have historically been popular destinations for
African migrants looking to escape poverty and civil wars.
However, with many European countries capping the
number of asylum seekers they are accepting, the US has
become the primary destination for many migrants from
Africa. In this journey, most Africans cross the Atlantic
Ocean and arrive at the Americas through Brazil. From
there, they use routes to Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Mexico
and Honduras to arrive in the US. The accompanying
passages discuss the trends in the routes that African
migrants are taking, and highlight unprecedented levels of
African migration in Central America.
Those that make it to Costa Rica receive help from
the Costa Rican government to move north through the
country. The only requirement issued by the Costa Rican
government is that migrants check in at a migration center
every 15 days. From Costa Rica, migrants must pass
through Nicaragua on their journey to the US. However,
as the first passage discusses, the Nicaraguan government
has made this task very difficult. This means that many
migrants end up stranded in Costa Rica for longer than
expected. The piece also notes that many of the migrants
seek out human smugglers to get them across the border.
Honduras and Mexico are also reporting abnormally
high numbers of African migrants passing through their
territories. The second passage reports that Honduras
received over 3,400 migrants this year; 1,205 of which
were from the Republic of Congo. Mexico has also seen
a dramatic increase of migrants from Africa since 2011.
In 2015, over 2,000 migrants, the majority coming from
Ghana and Somalia, were detained; up from 280 migrants
from Africa (mostly from Eritrea) detained in 2011. In
the first seven months of 2016, the number skyrocketed to
4,900, almost entirely from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Mexico would likely take steps to re-patriate some
of these individuals, but as the third passage discusses, does
not have the diplomatic ties with many African nations to
do so.
As the second passage discusses, many of these migrants
leave their countries due to poverty and violence (in the
form of terrorism, civil wars, and dictatorships). They also
lack basic living necessities such as safety and adequate
health services. Given the trends in Africa, this migration
trend is likely to be a growing challenge for many
developed nations. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

3,400 people crossed into Honduran territory; 1,205
of which were reported as being from the Republic of
Congo. To a lesser extent, authorities also noted an
increased influx of migrants from other African countries
such as Senegal, Ghana, Somalia, and Cameroon.”
Source: “Cientos de africanos se aglomeran en Peñas Blancas para cruzar
a Nicaragua (Hundreds of Africans Congregate at Peñas Blancas Border to
Cross into Nicaragua)”, La Prensa, 16 June 2016. http://www.laprensa.com.
ni/2016/06/01/nacionales/2044328-migrantes-africanos-intentan-cruzar-anicaragua
Nicaragua has maintained a hardline stance against letting migrants without
visas pass through the country. Many of the migrants have sought out human
smugglers to get them across the border, with varying degrees of success.
Source: “Honduras: Alarmante llegada de africanos en su paso a Estados
Unidos (Alarming Number of African Migrants Pass Through Honduras on
their Way to the United States)”, El Heraldo, 21 November 2016. http://www.
elheraldo.hn/pais/1019616-466/honduras-alarmante-llegada-de-africanos-ensu-paso-a-estados-unidos
Official reports indicate that up to 11 November 2016, 3,400 people crossed
into Honduran territory; 1,205 of which were reported as being from the
Republic of Congo. To a lesser extent, authorities also noted an increased
influx of migrants from other African countries such as Senegal, Ghana,
Somalia, and Cameroon.
In interviews conducted by the authorities to the migrants who use the
country as a step to reach the United States, they found out that many leave
their country because of poverty, violence (in the form of terrorism, civil
wars, and dictatorships) and the lack of basic living necessities. they seek to
improve their living conditions. They also found out that some claim they left
their country because they do not have adequate health services to treat a
disease.
Source: “Mexico enfrenta una oleada de africanos (Mexico Experiences Mass
Influx of African Nationals)”, El Universal, 30 December 2016. http://www.
eluniversal.com.mx/articulo/nacion/sociedad/2016/12/30/mexico-enfrentauna-oleada-de-africanos
In testimony before the Mexican Senate on Aug. 3, Mexico’s chief immigration
officer Ardelio Vargas Fosado said his agency was aware of the influx of
migrants from outside the Americas. But the lack of diplomatic relationships
between Mexico and many African countries has made it difficult to deport
those apprehended, he said.

Migrants at sea.
Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/dfmagazine/19863662131

OE Watch | March 2017

25

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Street Gangs and Forced Displacements in El Salvador
OE Watch Commentary: A new report from
El Salvador says that the country’s street gangs
accounted for 84 percent of forced displacements in
2016. While forced displacements have been an issue
in the Northern Triangle Region (which comprises
Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador) for at
least a decade, the problem has reached a critical,
unprecedented level, in not just El Salvador, but in
Guatemala and Honduras as well. The accompanying
passages discuss this trend.
The first discusses a report by ten NGO’s which
found that the two main gangs in El Salvador—
the Mara Salvatrucha (MS13) and their rivals, the
Barrio 18—accounted for two thirds of all forced
displacements in the country. The second passage
discusses that forced displacement by gangs is also
problematic in Honduras, and just as in El Salvador, is
much more prevalent now, compared to ten years ago.
Gangs are operational in 40 percent of Honduras, with
major strongholds in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.
Another factor that has changed over the last decade
is that gangs now control both impoverished and
middle class neighborhoods whereas before they only
targeted low-income neighborhoods. This is also true
in El Salvador. In fact, many families are forced to
pay extortion fees to live in their own homes. As the
second passage discusses, the extortion and violence
exerted by gangs leads to forced displacement of
entire neighborhoods as families have chosen to flee
for their own safety.
The third passage discusses the importance of
territory. The more a group controls, they more power
they exert and the more cash they generate. Unless
governments in these countries take steps to stop the
blatant abuse of normal citizens, gangs will continue
to cause forced displacement in a region where there
is no place else to go but north. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“The fundamental objective of criminal gangs in Central
America is territorial dominance and control of black market
operations (selling drugs and weapons). In short, more territory
equates to more control and more revenue.”
Source: “Pandillas de El Salvador responsables de 84% de desplazamiento
forzado (Gangs in El Salvador Responsible for 84% of Forced Displacement in
the Country)”, La Voz de Honduras, 17 January 2017. http://radiohrn.hn/l/noticias/
pandillas-de-el-salvador-responsables-de-84-de-desplazamiento-forzado
According to the report by the Civil Society Roundtable Against Forced
Displacement by Violence and Organized Crime in El Salvador (Observatorio
de la Mesa de Sociedad Civil contra el Desplazamiento Forzado por Violencia y
Crimen Organizado en El Salvador) — which is comprised of ten non-governmental
organizations — the Mara Salvatrucha (MS13) was responsible for about a third
of the forced displacements caused by the gangs, while their rivals in the Barrio 18
accounted for another third.
Source: “ACNUR: las maras son en El Salvador la principal causa de
“desplazamiento forzado” (ACNUR: Las Maras in El Salvador are the Principal
Cause of Forced Displacement)”, El Faro, 19 March 2016. http://www.elfaro.net/
es/201403/internacionales/15084
For the most part, citizens flee from the communities in the face of death threats,
to ensure that their children are not recruited at force by the gang, or to avoid
paying weekly or monthly extortion payments. In Honduras, Guatemala, and El
Salvador, thousands of citizens have also fled after having their homes seized by
gang members.
Source: “Así funcionan las pandillas en El Salvador (How Gangs Operate in
El Salvador)”, La Nacion, 17 August 2016. http://www.nacion.com/mundo/
centroamerica/como-funcionan-pandillas-El_Salvador_0_1504449607.html
The fundamental objective of criminal gangs in Central America is territorial
dominance and control of black market operations (selling drugs and weapons). In
short, more territory equates to more control and more revenue. It also aids in the
intelligence collection process as gangs can place more informants in areas they
control.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

26

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Brazilian Criminal Groups Seeking FARC Dissidents
OE Watch Commentary: La Semana is reporting that the
largest criminal organization in South America (The First
Capital Command or Primeiro Comando da Capital, or PCC)
is actively looking to recruit FARC dissidents who do not want
to take part in the demobilization process. The accompanying
passages discuss the risks involved in such a development.
As the first passage notes, there are multiple reasons why the
PCC would be interested in aligning with FARC dissidents.
These include the opportunity to receive weapons and training
needed to fight against Brazil’s armed forces, and control of
key trafficking routes in Colombia. With a presence in twothirds of Brazil, the PCC is currently considered Brazil’s largest
and most powerful criminal group. It also maintains powerful
ties with criminal groups in Bolivia and Paraguay. Given these
links, the proposed recruitment of FARC dissidents could undo
much of the work that was put into the reconciliation process
in Colombia and even increase trafficking operations in the
region.
The Colombian government currently estimates there are
anywhere between 150-300 FARC dissidents that the PCC
may try to recruit. According to the first passage from La
Semana, the PCC is particularly interested in two key leaders
known as Gentil Duarte and Francisco Javier Builes, aka
John 40; but especially in John 40 as he is a powerful leader
within the FARC and was previously in charge of financial
operations in the Bloque Oriental. As the second passage
discusses, Colombian and Brazilian leaders are working
together and recently met in Manaus, Brazil to discuss possible
strategies to thwart PCC recruitment of FARC dissidents.
Given the work that was put into stabilizing Colombia, it is of
utmost importance to the government to keep the PCC out of
Colombian territory. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The PCC, the largest criminal organization in South
America, is looking to recruit FARC dissidents in an
effort to obtain weapons and military training needed
to fight against Brazil’s armed forces.”
Source: “Las grandes pandillas brasileñas reclutan disidentes de las
FARC (Powerful Brazilian Gangs Look to Recruit FARC Dissidents)”, La
Semana, 02 February 2017. http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/pccde-brasil-recluta-a-disidentes-de-las-farc/514105
The PCC, the largest criminal organization in South America, is looking
to recruit FARC dissidents in an effort to obtain weapons and military
training needed to fight against Brazil’s armed forces. Simultaneously, the
PCC is also interested in expanding their operations into Colombia with
the intent of cutting out intermediaries to obtain cocaine. Key leaders they
are looking to recruit include Gentil Duarte and Francisco Javier Builes,
aka John 40.
Source: “Las pandillas brasileñas importan ex guerrilleros colombianos
(Brazilian Gangs Import Ex-Colombian Guerillas)”, El Periodico de
Mexico, 31 January 2017. http://www.newsjs.com/url.php?p=http://
elperiodicodemexico.com/nota.php?id=846352&sec=InternacionalSeguridad
Concerned with information regarding the possible PCC recruitment of
FARC dissidents, government leaders from Colombia and Brazil met in
Manaus in late January. During this meeting, they agreed to reinforce
border security, increase information sharing, and coordinate efforts to
dismantle these organizations and/or inhibit collaboration between them
as primary steps in dealing with this situation.

Suheil al-Hassan and the Syrian Army’s Tiger Forces
By Lucas Winter

This paper looks at the genesis, evolution and growth of the Syrian Army’s
“Tiger Forces” and their leader Suheil al-Hassan. The paper shows how Hassan
has played an important role since conflict began in 2011. It attributes his
transformation from special forces commander to leader of military campaigns to
an ability to harness the Syrian Army’s full infantry, artillery and airpower better
than any other loyalist field commander. Given the Syrian Army’s manpower
shortages, rampant corruption and rivalry-laden bureaucracy, this is no small feat.
Al-Hassan has become a key symbol in the Syrian loyalist camp, able to project
more combined arms power than anyone else in Syria. His success on the
battlefield comes less from tactical or strategic insights than from his ability
to thrive within the loyalist camp’s opaque and rivalry-laden bureaucracy. For
this he has become a symbol to regime supporters, proof that the war can
be won by working within the system.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Small%20Wars%20Journal%20-%20Suheil%20al-Hassan%20and%20the%20
Syrian%20Army%E2%80%99s%20Tiger%20Forces%20-%202016-07-22.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

27

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

DPRK Committed to Ballistic Missile Program
OE Watch Commentary: Despite extensive
sanctions and UN Security Council Resolutions
condemning the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (DPRK) for pursuing nuclear and
ballistic missile technology, Kim Jung Un
continues to conduct missile test launches.
The DPRK considers the advancement of their
missile program a matter of grave concern
regarding their own national defense.
The accompanying piece from the official
North Korean newspaper, Rodong Sinmun
refers to their nuclear missile capabilities as
an essential deterrent against the “US nuclear
war threat.” Annual nuclear war exercises
conducted by the US and the Republic of Korea
along with the launching of Minuteman-3 by
the US are perceived as direct threats against
the Kim Regime. The piece notes that the US
“is kicking up a fuss” over the DPRK’s ballistic
missile program while allowing other nations
around the world to pursue additional missile
capabilities. It claims that this double standard
reveals that the US is not acting out of a desire
for peace but a strategic aspiration for regional
hegemony.
The strong rhetoric indicates the DPRK’s
resolve to continue their nuclear and missile
programs despite consistent international
pressure to cease all missile and nuclear
testing. Becoming a formidable
nuclear power remains the
keystone to their strategy
for maintaining
regional autonomy.
End OE Watch
Commentary
(Galluzzi)

Estimated
maximum range of
some North Korean
missiles based on
data from http://www.
bbc.co.uk/news/worldasia-21710644.
Source: https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:North_
Korean_missile_range.svg

Source: Pae, H.-t. “Intercontinental Ballistic Rocket Test Launch Cannot Become a Bone of
Contention,” Rodong Sinmun, 20 January 2017. https://www.opensource.gov/portal/server.
pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_0_200_203_121123_43/content/Display/KPO2017012002432908
The United States is kicking up a fuss and is frightened to death by the fact that our
preparation for an intercontinental ballistic rocket test launch has reached the final stage.
…
Our intercontinental ballistic rocket test launch aimed at countering the United States’
nuclear war threat … is a part of the consolidation of our national defense capabilities…
Around the world, many countries have launched intercontinental ballistic rockets. If
intercontinental ballistic rocket launches are a provocation and a threat, as the United
States argues, all of these countries should have become issues.
…
It is a well-known fact in the world that the United States, while conducting the test launch
of “Minuteman-3,” an ICBM, last year, openly raved that this was “to signal the use of
nuclear weapons against North Korea.”
…
Mobilizing the South Korean puppets and enormous forces, it is staging nuclear war
exercises every year in order to carry out preemptive attacks on our Republic.
…
The reason that the United States takes issue with our intercontinental ballistic rocket test
launch is because the destiny of its strategy for hegemony over Asia and the Pacific is at
risk.
…
It is natural that, as long as the United States is making a last-ditch, desperate effort to
plunge the place of our nation’s existence into nuclear catastrophe and to place peace
in the Asia-Pacific region and in the rest of the world in jeopardy, we will even more
persistently hone the shield of justice and the precious nuclear sword of
defending peace in order to safeguard the destiny of the nation,
the supreme interests of the country, and global peace and
security.

“It is natural that, as long as the
United States is making a last-ditch,
desperate effort to plunge the
place of our nation’s existence
into nuclear catastrophe and to
place peace in the Asia-Pacific
region and in the rest of the
world in jeopardy, we will even
more persistently hone the shield
of justice and the precious nuclear
sword of defending peace in order
to safeguard the destiny of the nation,
the supreme interests of the country, and
global peace and security.”
OE Watch | March 2017

28

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

The Chinese Navy’s Growing Might
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past
year, the People’s Liberation Army Navy
(PLAN) has been making huge strides toward
modernization. The following two excerpted
articles from Chinese sources highlight some
of that progress.
According to the first article, China now
has six electronic-reconnaissance vessels,
the latest one (Kaiyangxing) of which was
commissioned in January. Kaiyangxing
is reportedly “so sophisticated that only a
few countries, such as the United States
and Russia, are capable of developing it.”
According to the second article, the PLAN has
also commissioned its fifth Type 052D guided
missile destroyer. Known as the Xining, it
“has a stealth design and can act as a flagship
for a strike group.” Because of its capability,
the destroyer has been dubbed by some as
a “carrier killer.” As the PLAN’s “mightiest
destroyer,” the Type 052D is the country’s
most “capable fleet escort.”
China is believed to be modernizing its navy
for a number of reasons including the desire to
dominate and defend its claim over the South
China Sea; to defend its commercial sea lines
of communication; to displace US influence
in the Western Pacific; and to assert its status
as a leading regional and major world power.
Furthermore, China appears to be increasing
the pace of its modernization efforts. In
addition to the growing number of destroyers
heavily armed with an array of cutting edge
technologies and weapons, we can also expect
to see more electronic intelligence platforms
and highly capable platforms. These include
China’s first domestically designed aircraft
carrier, which will deploy domestically
developed J-15 fighter jets. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“The Type 052D class is deemed by military experts to be the
mightiest destroyer and the most capable fleet escort deployed
by the PLA Navy. With a large load of anti-ship and land attack
cruise missiles, it has been described by some Western observers
as a ‘carrier killer’.”
Source: Zhao Lei, “New PLA Navy Ship Unveiled,” China Daily, 12 January 2017. http://
www.chinadailyasia.com/nation/2017-01/12/content_15556017.html

Vessel has top speed of 37 km/h and displacement of 6,000 metric tons
The Kaiyangxing is capable of conducting all-weather, round-the-clock reconnaissance on
multiple and different targets, the report said, adding that the ship is so sophisticated that
only a few countries, such as the United States and Russia, are capable of developing it.
“The fact that we are facing an increasing number of difficulties when we safeguard our
maritime interests means that we require more reconnaissance ships to support the PLA
Navy’s operations on the open sea,” he said. “In addition, our future carrier battle groups
also need such vessels that can provide various kinds of theater intelligence.”
In 2016, the PLA Navy commissioned a total of 18 ships, including a Type 052D guided
missile destroyer, three Type 054A guided missile frigates, and six Type 056 corvettes.
China is now building a domestically designed aircraft carrier in Dalian, Liaoning
province. According to Defense Ministry spokesman Yang Yujun, the new carrier will have
a displacement of 50,000 tons and will deploy domestically developed J-15 fighter jets.
Source: Zhau Lei, “New ‘Carrier Killer’ Delivered to Fleet,” China Daily, 24 January 2017.
http://www.chinadailyasia.com/nation/2017-01/24/content_15562973.html

New ‘Carrier Killer’ Delivered to Fleet
The Type 052D class is deemed by military experts to be the mightiest destroyer and the
most capable fleet escort deployed by the PLA Navy. With a large load of anti-ship and
land attack cruise missiles, it has been described by some Western observers as a “carrier
killer”.
According to military sources, a Type 052D destroyer has a full displacement of nearly
7,000 metric tons and a wide range of weapons, including a single-barrel 130-mm naval
gun and a close-in weapon system as well as a total of 64 HHQ-9 long-range anti-aircraft
missiles and YJ-18 or YJ-83 anti-ship cruise missiles. Adopting a host of cutting-edge
technologies, the vessel features a low radar signature, a high information level, and a
state-of-the-art phased array radar.
052D class destroyer.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:052d.jpg

OE Watch | March 2017

29

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Xi Jinping: The Center of China’s Universe
OE Watch Commentary: Since Xi Jinping took control of the
People’s Republic of China, the country’s military has been undergoing
a radical transformation. The accompanying passages from Chinese
sources discuss this transformation, Xi Jinping’s complete control over
it, and the elements that Chinese officials view as essential to creating “a
world-class military.”
The first article offers an overview of the country’s progress toward
reshaping the military thus far. The armed forces have been streamlined
and senior governing bodies have been reorganized. Each branch of
the armed forces has been formally established, while the top four
PLA departments –staff, politics, logistics, and armaments have been
disbanded and replaced by 15 new agencies under the CMC to boost
efficiency. The seven military regions were reshuffled into five theater
commands and training exercises have intensified. In addition, China
has made a number of other “less obvious” administrative changes
meant to streamline various military operations. The country has also
made progress in producing domestic military technology and weapons
and initiated a massive campaign to try to clean up corruption. The
latter has resulted in more than 50 senior officers being convicted or
placed under disciplinary probes.
The second article discusses Xi Jinping as the core of the Party
Central Committee and as the core of the entire Party and notes that
this “is the fundamental way of ensuring the realization of the strong
military goal and of constructing a world-class military.” Both articles
drive home the concept of Xi Jinping having complete control over the
entire transformation, which has been ongoing since he took power in
2012. Some outside observers have argued that granting Xi the power
of a core leader, which has the ingredients of a dictatorship, could
jeopardize China. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The reform has resulted in the biggest
overhaul of the People’s Liberation Army for
several decades. The PLA’s senior governing
bodies up to the level of the Central Military
Commission were reshuffled, the regional
command was reorganized, and new units
were established to prepare for wars in
cyberspace and even space itself.”
Source: Zhao Lei, “PLA Restructures to Meet New Challenges,”
China Daily, 10 January 2017. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/2017-01/11/content_27920160.htm

PLA Restructures to Meet New Challenges
In the past 12 months, China has carried out a number of
measures to streamline its armed forces and prepare them for the
challenges posed by modern warfare.
The reform has resulted in the biggest overhaul of the People’s
Liberation Army for several decades. The PLA’s senior governing
bodies up to the level of the Central Military Commission were
reshuffled, the regional command was reorganized, and new units
were established to prepare for wars in cyberspace and even
space itself.
Looking back at the timeline, it seems clear that President
Xi Jinping, who is also chairman of the commission, probably
decided to revolutionize the armed forces when he was elected
top leader in November 2012.
Source: “坚定维护核心 坚决听党指挥 (Firmly Safeguard
the Core of the Party and Resolutely Listen to the Party’s
Commands),” Jiefangjun Bao, 4 February 2017. http://
jz.chinamil.com.cn/n2014/tp/content_7475470.htm

Firmly Safeguard the Core of the Party and Resolutely
Listen to the Party’s Commands

General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, Xi Jinping.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Xi_Jinping_Sept._19,_2012.jpg

To firmly safeguard General Secretary Xi Jinping as the core
of the Party Central Committee and as the core of the entire
Party is the fundamental way of ensuring the realization of the
strong military goal and of constructing a world-class military.
Currently, our military is at the historical crossing point of
transitioning from being big to being strong. To advance on
this road we will encounter many [difficult situations such as
the historical battles at] “Loushan Pass” [or] “Lazikou Pass.”
When we encounter this kind or that kind of hidden shoals and
dangerous reefs or danger zones, we must always persist in
absolute leadership of the Party over the military and always
persist in having Chairman Xi as the core that navigates [and]
grasps the rudder.
OE Watch | March 2017

30

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Can ISIS Gain a Stronghold in the Philippines?
OE Watch Commentary: Philippine
President Rodrigo Duterte and his
administration expect more violence
as the country’s military continues
offensive operations against the Abu
Sayyaf Group and others affiliated
with the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS). Much of Duterte’s concern,
according to the first article, is centered
on Abu Sayyaf and its senior leader
Isnilon Hapilon. The president argues
that the impending crackdown by the
United States on ISIS militants could
cause ISIS to spill over to the Southern
Philippines. He claims that if the terror
group loses its land base in the Middle
East, “they will start to scatter around
the world.” He believes their favorite
target will be the southern part of the
Philippines and goes on to warn that the
situation will become bloody.
According to the second article, in
late December 2016, the ISIS leadership
reached out to Hapilon to instruct him
to locate an area in Mindanao, a large
island in southern Philippines, and
establish a caliphate. According to the
article, ISIS finds that Mindanao would
be more conducive to establishing a
caliphate as opposed to smaller islands
where they can be trapped in the area.
This idea of establishing a caliphate
in the southern Philippines reportedly
goes back to similar efforts beginning
in 2016. It is worth noting that Hapilon
was reportedly injured during an air
raid this year, which offers a degree of
uncertainty regarding the collaboration
between Abu Sayyaf Group and ISIS.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Duterte … warned of bloody consequences in case IS extremists are
able to fully penetrate the Abu Sayyaf and other groups in Southern
Philippines.”
Source: Christina Mendez, “Violence Seen to Persist in Mindanao Due to IS,” Philstar, 3 February
2017. http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2017/02/04/1668900/violence-seen-persist-mindanaodue

Violence Seen to Persist in Mindanao Due to IS
[Philippine President Rodrigo] Duterte also warned of bloody consequences in case IS extremists
are able to fully penetrate Abu Sayyaf and other groups in the Southern Philippines.
Duterte also noted that the impending crackdown by the United States on the IS militants might
spill over to the Southern Philippines.
“And if [US President Donald] Trump decides to invade the Middle East and if ISIS loses its land
base there, they will start to scatter around the world. Their favorite target would be the southern
part of the Philippines,” the President said.
“It’s gonna be bloody,” he warned.
Source: Carmela Fonbuena, “ISIS Makes Direct Contact with Abu Sayyaf, Wants Caliphate in PH
[the Philippines],” Rappler, 26 January 2017. http://www.rappler.com/nation/159568-isis-directcontact-isnilon-hapilon

ISIS Makes Direct Contact with Abu Sayyaf, Wants Caliphate in PH
Philippine defense chief Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said the leadership of the Islamic State (ISIS)
in Syria made direct contact with Abu Sayyaf senior leader Isnilon Hapilon back in December
2016 to instruct him to find a suitable area to establish a caliphate in Mindanao.
“They’ve made contact. One of the leaders in Basilan, Isnilon Hapilon, moved to Central
Mindanao allegedly on the behest of ISIS people in the Middle East to find out if Central
Mindanao is more conducive to the establishment of their wilayat [caliphate],” Lorenzana said on
Thursday, January 26, in a press briefing.
Citing intelligence reports, Lorenzana said ISIS finds the islands of Sulu and Basilan, where the
Abu Sayyaf Group traditionally operates, too small for a caliphate…They can be easily trapped in
the area…
Rappler executive editor Maria Ressa reported as early as January 2016 about an ISIS video
talking about plans to create a caliphate in Mindanao. Hapilon himself had long ago sworn
allegiance to ISIS although the military said there were no direct links until now.

River Flotillas in Support of Defensive Ground Operations: The Soviet Experience
Lester W. Grau
In the history of warfare, ground and naval forces frequently have to cooperate. There are usually problems putting
these two forces together since their missions, equipment, training, communications and mutual unfamiliarity get
in the way. These problems are common during transport of ground force equipment and personnel aboard naval
vessels, exacerbated during amphibious landings and assaults and very difficult when operating together along major
rivers. This article analyzes the Soviet history of defensive river flotilla combat during the first period of the Great
Patriotic War (World War II against Germany). It outlines missions, the operational environment, lessons learned,
the command and control problems experienced between naval and ground forces and the challenges of conducting
such operations.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/River%20Flotillas%20in%20Support%20of%20Defensive%20Ground%20Operations%20The%20Soviet%20Experience.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Territorial Dispute between Singapore and
Malaysia is Revived
OE Watch Commentary: After nearly a
decade-long resolution, a territorial dispute
between Malaysia and Singapore has been
revived. The 6.2 acre island, known as Pedra
Branca in Singapore and Pulau Batu Puteh
in Malaysia, is located 30 kilometers east of
Singapore and 15 kilometers off peninsular
Malaysia’s southern coast. According to the
website of Singapore’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, the island has long been of strategic
importance in commanding “the entire
eastern approach to the Straits of Singapore,
through which almost 900 ships pass daily.”
As the accompanying article in The Malay
Mail discusses, the dispute can be traced
back to 1980 when Malaysia published a
map that showed the island to be within its
territorial waters, triggering a territorial
dispute that would last for nearly three
decades. Finally, in 2008, the dispute was
resolved when the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) granted ownership to Singapore.
The ICJ had concluded that since Singapore
acted as an authority in granting or not
granting Malaysian officials’ permission to survey the waters
around the island, and Malaysia reacted to neither Singaporean
flag nor military equipment on the island, that it should belong
to Singapore. The case was closed…until recently.
Sometime between August 2016 and January 2017, the United
Kingdom released some documents to the public, reigniting the
dispute. The documents included “private letters of Singapore’s
colonial authorities from 1958, a British Navy incident report
from the same year, and an annotated map of naval operations
from the 1960s.” Since going through the documents, whose
contents have not yet been disclosed, Malaysia is claiming that
had the Court been aware of these documents at the time of
its decision, it would have reached a different conclusion over
who the rightful owner over the island is. As such, Malaysia
has made an application to review a 2008 judgment by the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) over the award of Pedra
Branca to Singapore. The case is ongoing. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“…the Court would have been bound
to reach a different conclusion on the
question of sovereignty over Pedra
Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh had it been
aware of this new evidence.”

Pedro Branca island location.
Source: Google Maps

Source: “International Court of Justice – Case concerning sovereignty over
Pedra Branca, Middle Rocks and South Ledge,” The Website of Singapore
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Undated, https://www.mfa.gov.sg/content/mfa/
media_centre/special_events/pedrabranca.html
Pedra Branca is an island that sits at the eastern entrance of the Straits of
Singapore. It lies about 24 nautical miles to the east of Singapore.
Its location has long been of strategic importance to us as it commands
the entire eastern approach to the Straits of Singapore, through which
almost 900 ships pass daily.
Source: “Malaysia Basing New Batu Puteh Challenge on Declassified
UK Papers,” The Malay Mail, 4 February 2017. http://www.
themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/malaysia-basing-new-batu-putehchallenge-on-declassified-uk-papers

Malaysia Basing New Batu Puteh Challenge on Declassified
UK Papers
“Malaysia claims that these documents establish the new fact that
‘officials at the highest levels in the British colonial and Singaporean
administration appreciated that Pedra Branca/Pulau Batu Puteh did not
form part of Singapore’s sovereign territory’ during the relevant period,”
the ICJ said in a statement.
“Malaysia argues that ‘the Court would have been bound to reach a
different conclusion on the question of sovereignty over Pedra Branca/
Pulau Batu Puteh had it been aware of this new evidence’.”
OE Watch | March 2017

32

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China’s National Cyberspace Security Strategy
OE Watch Commentary: In late
December 2016, China released its
Cyberspace Security Strategy. The
accompanying passages highlight
important parts of this document,
which was broken into four parts.
First, it listed opportunities and
challenges, which included new
platforms for social governance
and new territory for protecting
national sovereignty, among other
issues. Second, it discussed goals,
which included ensuring peace,
security, openness, cooperation,
and orderliness. Third, it listed
principles which covered cyberspace
sovereignty, the peaceful use of
cyberspace, Internet governance
in accordance with the law, and
planning cybersecurity and
development as a whole. Finally,
the document listed nine strategic
tasks. They were to safeguard
cyberspace sovereignty and national
security, protect information’s basic
infrastructure, enhance China’s
cyber culture, crack down on
cyber terrorism and illegal crimes,
improve the Internet governance
system, consolidate the basis for
cybersecurity, enhance cyberspace
protection capabilities, and enhance
international cooperation in
cyberspace. There was a strong
push in the document to support
the United Nation’s efforts to
formulate a universally accepted set
of international cyberspace rules
and anti-terrorism conventions and
to speed up the establishment of an
Internet governance system (legal
norms, supervision, self-regulation,
technical support, social education,
etc.). End OE Watch Commentary
(Thomas)

“...cyberspace is a new territory of national sovereignty. We must
build a cyberspace protection force that is commensurate with China’s
international status and fitting of a strong cyberspace nation, vigorously
develop the means of cybersecurity defense, detect and resist cyber
intrusion in a timely manner, and cast a strong posterior shield to
safeguard national cybersecurity.”
Source: Cyberspace Administration of China release, “National Cyberspace Security Strategy,”
December 2016, approved by the Office of the Central Leading Group for Cyberspace Affairs, no
further information provided.
We must build and improve the national cybersecurity technology support system; strengthen
research into the basic theory and major issues of cybersecurity; strengthen standardization,
certification, and accreditation of cybersecurity work, and make more use of standards to correct
cyberspace behavior; perform well in fundamental work such as grading protection, risk assessment,
and vulnerability discovery to improve cybersecurity monitoring and early warning, and the
emergency response handling system for major cybersecurity events.
We must implement the cybersecurity human resource project, strengthen development of
cybersecurity discipline and profession, build first-class cybersecurity colleges and innovation
parks, form an ecological environment that is conducive to personnel training, innovation, and
entrepreneurship; run cybersecurity publicity week activities, vigorously carry out national
cybersecurity publicity and education; promote bringing cybersecurity education into teaching
materials, into schools, and into classrooms to improve cyber media literacy; enhance social
awareness and protection technology in cybersecurity; improve the ability of majority of internet
users to identify and resist illegal criminal activities such as harmful cyber information and cyber
fraud.
The cyberspace is a new territory of national sovereignty. We must build a cyberspace protection
force that is commensurate with China’s international status and fitting of a strong cyberspace
nation, vigorously develop the means of cybersecurity defense, detect and resist cyber intrusion in a
timely manner, and cast a strong posterior shield to safeguard national cybersecurity.
“Cyberspace sovereignty is inviolable. We respect the right of all countries to choose their
own development path, cyberspace management mode, internet public policy, and have equal
participation in international internet governance. Cyberspace affairs falling within the sovereignty
of each country shall be decided by the people of the respective countries. Each country has the
right to formulate the relevant cyberspace laws and regulations in accordance with its own national
conditions, and draw lessons from international experience to take the necessary measures to
manage its domestic information system and cyberspace activities in its own territory; protect its
national information system and information resource from intrusion, interference, attack, and
sabotage; guarantee the legal rights and interests of its citizens in cyberspace; prevent, deter, and
punish the dissemination of harmful information that endanger national security and interests in its
own cyberspace.”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

33

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Hails Progress Toward Military Reforms,
Improved Jointness
by Peter Wood
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief, Vol. 16, Issue 18, 5 December 2016, Edited for
OE Watch. https://jamestown.org/program/china-hails-progress-toward-military-reforms-improved-jointness/

OE Watch Commentary: As the major reorganization of the Chinese military neared its oneyear anniversary in late December 2016, the Chinese press and propaganda organs reflected on the
progress made and steps yet to be taken in this core part of China’s military modernization project.
The accompanying passage provides one example of this. While the passage highlights improved
coordination, it should be noted that joint operations, the ability of the Army, Air Force, Navy and
Rocket Forces to work together in coordinated campaigns, still remains a key bottleneck for the
PLA. In addition, though the reforms have made major progress toward streamlining the command
structures, three are still calls for the PLA to “cast off” old concepts about the predominance of the
Ground Forces (PLAGF), indicating that the transition has not gone smoothly.
As the accompanying passage from China Military, the news website of the Chinese Armed Forces
discusses, PLA Air Force Spokesperson Senior Colonel Shen Jinke (申进科) noted that Chinese
aircraft recently overflew the Bashi and Miyako Channels and that this was “the first time for the
PLA Air Force aircrafts to fly over the Bashi Channel and Miyako Strait at the same time, which
is different from the previous six open sea trainings in the Western Pacific Ocean...” These two
channels are to the North and South of Taiwan, between the island and Okinawa and the Philippines,
respectively. Such flights are becoming routine, though they largely represent an aspirational combat
capability.
China is attempting to resolve a number of issues that remain in terms of military coordination
between disparate regions and between military services. The military reorganization reduced
the number of Military Regions from 7 to 5, and streamlined the command structure to prevent
bottlenecks in communication due to the Ground Forces’ primacy in key organizations. The
continuing attention given to “Big Ground Army, Big Military Region System Mindset” (大陆军、大
军区体制下的思维定势) is understandable given the virtual omnipresence of Ground Force’ officers
throughout the previous PLA structure.
The latest Defense White Paper, issued in May 2015, directly addressed the imbalance of influence
between the services, calling on the PLA to abandon “the traditional mentality that land outweighs
sea,” a sentiment that has been echoed in PLA Daily editorials. The relegation of the Ground Forces to
the role of “one among many” rather than the heart of the PLA is ruffling feathers and smashing “iron
rice bowls.”
The reorganization and downsizings are just one step in the modernization process. Jointness, in
particular is a goal in which there has been some more obvious progress. As the year progressed, a
number of exercises were carried out to test the new command structures as well as to practice more
basic capabilities such as trans-regional movement and joint operations. Realistic, Joint, and TransRegional (跨区) exercises are all focused on this goal. Earlier in 2016, the Navy participated in its
longest-distance-ever joint transregional counter-terror exercise in China’s Western province.
However, such exercises require an advanced level of coordination that the PLA is unused to.
Perhaps tellingly, most long-distance operations are conducted by a single service. The accompanying
passage is thus significant in demonstrating the progress made in this area.

Top

“It is the first time
for the PLA Air Force
aircrafts to fly over
the Bashi Channel
and Miyako Strait at
the same time, which
is different from the
previous six open
sea trainings in the
Western Pacific Ocean,
according to media
reports.”
Source: “Expert: Chinese air force
able to cope with two high sea
operations simultaneously,” PLA
Daily, December 29 2016. http://
english.chinamil.com.cn/view/201611/29/content_7383359.htm
Warplanes of the Chinese PLA Air
Force flew over the Bashi Channel
and Miyako Strait to the Western
Pacific Ocean for open-sea training
on Nov. 25, said Senior Colonel
Shen Jinke, spokesperson of the PLA
Air Force on Saturday. Shen added
that multiple types of warplanes
participating in the open-sea
training flew over the Bashi Channel
and Miyako Strait at the same
time, with the established training
objectives achieved. Shen said that
the PLA Air Force will continue
to organize such routine open-sea
training in a bid to further enhance
and explore the open-sea operational
capabilities of its aviation troops, so
as to safeguard national sovereignty,
security and peaceful development.
It is the first time for the PLA Air
Force aircrafts to fly over the Bashi
Channel and Miyako Strait at the
same time, which is different from
the previous six open sea trainings
in the Western Pacific Ocean,
according to media reports.

The PLA certainly faces a number of structural and technological hurdles to becoming a true peer
competitor to the United States. Despite a clear definition of its modernization goals, recognition of
continuing weakness, and great strides toward “basically accomplishing mechanization and making
major progress in Informationization” by 2020, the odds of making good the reforms and making
the PLA a truly joint military in the same time frame—or at least before Xi Jinping steps down, are
decreasing. Over the next year more high profile exercises can be expected to hone joint operations
and discover remaining bottlenecks in communication. For international analysts, additional attention
should be directed toward the theory and progress of PLA joint operations, as well as other keystone
concepts such as System of Systems. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)
OE Watch | March 2017

34

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Bitcoin, Paypal and the Financing of Terrorism in Indonesia
OE Watch Commentary: Indonesian’s most infamous
terrorist overseas is Bahrun Naim, who is a member of
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and believed
to be in Syria. Naim is suspected of coordinating, or
at least inspiring, Indonesians to carry out attacks for
ISIS in Indonesia. The
most prominent attack he
inspired was the January
2016 suicide attacks near
a Starbucks at a mall in
Jakarta, which killed two
civilians and five attackers.
Naim, who maintained a
blog at the time, indicated
that the attacks in Jakarta
were intended to duplicate
ISIS’s massive attack in
Paris in November 2015.
While Naim’s visible
online activities, such as
blogging, are known, the
excerpted article from
beritahuharian on 9
January discusses Naim’s
financing operations in
Indonesia using Bitcoin
and PayPal. Overall,
Indonesian’s anti-money laundering agency says there
were 25 cases in 2016 where digital currencies or online
mediums such as Bitcoin and PayPal were used to fund
terrorist activities. According to the article, the agency
believes the rise in the use of these online mediums for
funding terrorism can be attributed to the difficulties and
risks in using conventional banking systems. Eventually,
the anti-money laundering agency believes that it will
learn to track these new types of online money transfers,
but by that time—likely in two or three years—the
terrorists will have developed new means for transfers
that the agency will struggle to track.
The article also points out that the security issues
related to hard-to-trace online mediums is not limited
only to financial transactions. Telegram is an application
that operates on closed forums and is more difficult to
track than Twitter or Facebook. It has become popular
among ISIS members since 2016 when Twitter began
closing down hundreds of ISIS members’ accounts. Naim
reportedly used Telegram when speaking to a young lady
in Indonesia who he introduced to a militant that she
ended up marrying. Soon after, the militant convinced
her to become a suicide bomber, although the Indonesian
security forces broke up her cell before she could carry
out at attack near the intended target: the presidential
palace in Jakarta. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“[Bahrun Naim] is using online payment services such as
PayPal and the digital money Bitcoin to transfer money to
movements in Indonesia to finance terrorist activities.”

Bitcoin is hard for anti-money laundering agencies to trace and is being used for terror
financing by an Indonesian ISIS militant.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/mht-bitcoin-soars-in-2016/3661230.html

Source: “Militan Bahrun Naim guna PayPal, Bitcoin pindahkan dana bagi biayai
serangan di Indonesi (Militant Bahrun Naim Uses PayPal, Bitcoin, to Transfer
Money for Financing Attacks in Indonesian),” Beritaharian, 9 January 2017.
http://www.beritaharian.sg/dunia/militan-bahrun-naim-guna-paypal-bitcoinpindahkan-dana-bagi-biayai-serangan-di-indonesia
Bahrun Naim is among the most well-known militants in Indonesia, which is
struggling with the terrorism of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in the
Middle East. [Naim] is using online payment services such as PayPal and the
digital money Bitcoin to transfer money to movements in Indonesia to finance
terrorist activities.
The Indonesian Financial Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre [PPATK]
said that concealed fraudulent transactions associated with the terrorism ...
increased from 12 to 25 cases in 2016. It has been exposed that funds have been
transferred to domestic terrorism cells throughout Java, which were recently
destroyed by Indonesia’s anti-terrorism unit, Detachment 88 (Densus 88).
Mr Ivan Yustiavandana,of the PPATK said today we are talking about PayPal,
Bitcoin. Two to three years from now, we may be talking about other ways, new
ways. The more sophisticated we are in trying to catch them, the more they try to
find new ways.
Most of them, if not all, receive money and learn to make bombs and launch
attacks from Indonesian fighters in ISIS such as Bahrun Naim in Syria, who
deliver messages to Indonesia using Telegram. One of the cells intended to attack
the Presidential Palace in Jakarta by using a female suicide bomber, but the plan
was thwarted by Densus 88.
OE Watch | March 2017

35

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

An Updated Look at Kazakhstan’s Defense Acquisitions
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has
historically been Kazakhstan’s main supplier
for weapon systems. Several years ago
the government of Kazakhstan
started to diversify its inventory
of weapon systems and equipment
through acquisitions from nonRussian defense companies. The
accompanying excerpted article
from a Kazakh source reports on
the recent delivery of four Russian
Mi-35M attack helicopters to
Kazakhstan; and provides insight
into Russia’s current position as a
supplier of defense acquisitions for
Kazakhstan.
As the article reports, the Mi35M is an export variant of a more
advanced Mi-24. The Kazakh
government announced the purchase
of the Mi-35Ms last year, but the
article confirms that the variants of
the Mi-24 that had been in service
have already been withdrawn from
service. This suggests that the
process of putting the Mi-35Ms
into service moved very quickly.
This is likely because, as the article
mentions, the 405th Aircraft Factory
(see: http://www.arz405.kz/) finished
assembly and conducted trial flights.
This is a notable difference from
the purchase of helicopters from
Eurocopter (Airbus Group) a few
years ago, which involved setting
up a new factory to finish assembly
in addition to training personnel on
a new system. The 405th factory
already has the experience and
facilities to quickly put the new
helicopters into service and while
the crews had to undergo additional
training in Russia, it did not take
long to get everything ready and put
into service.
The author predicts that
Kazakhstan will acquire more
Mi-35Ms in the next few years to
replace the Mi-24s. Ultimately, the
article demonstrates that Russia
remains an important supplier of
defense acquisitions for Kazakhstan.
End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“The ‘Thirty-five’ is a major modernization of the Mi-24V/VP and
classified as the Mi-24VM...”

“The Mi-35 (Czech Air Force version pictured here) is an export variant of the Mi-24V and includes advanced avionics and
targeting systems in addition to being capable of operating at high altitudes and in extreme climates.”
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mi-35_8044.JPG

Source: Bedenko, Grigory, “‘Крокодилы’ в Казахстане: второе пришествие (‘Crocodiles’ in
Kazakhstan: the Second Coming),” Inform Buro, 19 January 2017. https://informburo.kz/stati/
krokodily-v-kazahstane-vtoroe-prishestvie.html

“Crocodiles” in Kazakhstan: the Second Coming
…The new helicopters were bought in Russia in the framework of refitting the Kazakh Air Force.
Equipment of this level came to our country after a long break, in connection with the withdrawal
from service of the Soviet-built Mi-24V…The “Thirty-five” is a major modernization of the Mi-24V/
VP and classified as the Mi-24VM. The export version is Mi-35M. The helicopters that arrived in
Kazakhstan are designed the same as those in the Russian Armed Forces…
The aircraft performance is designed to operate in different geographical conditions, including high
altitude and hot climates… Now it is possible to use precision-guided munitions. The helicopter is
equipped with modern avionics and sighting system OPS-24N with a gyro-stabilized optronic station
GOES-324…A group of Kazakh pilots and technical personnel were sent to Russia at the beginning of
2016 for training. At the moment there are 12 people trained – four crews…The helicopters arrived in
Kazakhstan from Rostov-on-Don in November 2016 in an uncompleted condition. Their assembly and
trials were carried out on the 405th aircraft factory, located at the Almaty International Airport…
It can be assumed that Kazakhstan’s generals have high hopes for the Mi-35M…In the next few years
their number will grow to a full squadron, which is known to have from 10 to 30 aircraft…
OE Watch | March 2017

36

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Armenia Looks for Alternative Partners in
Security Cooperation
Source: “Armenia Ombudsman: Azerbaijan deliberately fired at Chinari
OE Watch Commentary: When the dispute between
Armenia and Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh
periodically turns violent, Armenians turn their attention
to the country’s membership in the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) and how the organization
might respond based on its collective defense article. The
accompanying excerpted articles from Armenian, Azeri and
Russian sources report on a recent incident on the ArmenianAzerbaijani border and provide insight into how such
incidents are perceived in the region. The final passage from
an Armenian source suggests that the CSTO is not viewed as
an adequate mechanism to ensure Armenia’s security; and
that Armenia should diversity its partners.
The latest violent incident took place on 29 December
on the border, near the Armenia town of Chinari. As the
articles from Armenia’s News.am and Azerbaijan’s Haqqin
demonstrate, each side claimed the other initiated an
incursion. Russia’s Nezavisimaya Gazeta notes a report that
the body of an Azerbaijani soldier who was reported missing
following the incident, turned up on the Armenian side of
the border. The Russian source also claims that the incident
took place away from Nagorno-Karabakh. Regardless of the
circumstances, sources in Russia and in the region pointed
to Azerbaijan as the initiator of the incursion. Additionally,
the Armenian News.am article includes an embedded video
briefing by Armenian officials and this shows the effort
Armenia took to state its case that Azerbaijan initiated the
incident.
The article from Armenian Lragir reports on Armenian
Defense Minister Vigen Sargsyan’s visit to Iran and shows
the Armenian reaction to the incident. In the article, Defense
Minister Sargsyan states that Armenian acquisitions from
Russia and through the CSTO are insufficient for the
country’s security requirements. The CSTO responded
to the incident in December by condemning and blaming
Azerbaijan, but it did not invoke the collective defense
article. Armenian officials have criticized the CSTO and
fellow members of the organization for not supporting them
in the conflict against Azerbaijan, though the collective
defense article had not been seriously considered in
previous incidents. The Armenian government signed a
joint agreement with Russia on a united defense group in
November 2016 that might have allowed Russia to intervene
on behalf of Armenia, but there is no mention of this.
(For more information see, “The Reaction to the RussianArmenian Joint Force,” in OE Watch, January-February 2017)
The author of the Lragir article speculates that Armenia is
looking to form an alternative security system, but based
on Sargsyan’s comments, this might be more about finding
alternative partners for weapons and equipment rather than a
new defense agreement. How Russia responds to this remains
to be seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

village,” News.am, 18 January 2017. https://news.am/eng/news/368271.html

Armenia Ombudsman: Azerbaijan deliberately fired at Chinari
village
Human Rights Defender (Ombudsman) of Armenia, Arman Tatoyan,
on Wednesday held a press conference. He reflected on the incident that
occurred at the Armenia-Azerbaijan border as well as the Azerbaijani army’s
firing of shots toward Chinari village of Armenia’s Tavush Province, on
December 29…Tatoyan informed that his representative carried out a factfinding work at Chinari village, on December 29 and 30…“The incident,
from which it all started, was the killing of three Armenian soldiers [by
Azerbaijan]…”
Source: “А теперь Минобороны Азербайджана заявило о боях с
Арменией (The Ministry of Defense of Azerbaijan has now announced the
clashes with Armenia),” Haqqin.az, 29 December 2016. http://haqqin.az/
news/88655
…A reconnaissance group of the Armed Forces of Armenia was ambushed
while attempting to violate the border. The enemy was forced to retreat
during the clashes, suffering a number of losses. A soldier of the Armed
Forces of Azerbaijan went missing as a result…
Source: Yuri Roks, “В ОБСЕ вспомнили о карабахском конфликте (They
are reminded about the Karabakh conflict in the OSCE),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 12 January 2017. http://www.ng.ru/cis/2017-01-12/6_6900_karabah.
html
The village of Chinari is located away from Nagorno-Karabakh, on the
Armenian-Azerbaijani border area. Some people have long abandoned it due
to frequent shelling from the Azerbaijani side… The parties to the incident
blamed each other…(the OSCE Minsk Group report) also contains a detail
which eloquently indicates the initiator of the conflict: on the Armenian
side of the border, the dead body of Azerbaijani soldier, reflecting the
diversionary sortie.
Source: Naira Hayrumyan, “Հայաստանն այլընտրանքային
անվտանգությո՞ւն է կառուցում (Armenia is building an alternative
security system),” Lragir, 30 January 2017. http://www.lragir.am/index/
arm/0/politics/view/146939
The Armenian Defense Minister Vigen Sargsyan is visiting Iran today. At
the Army Day celebrations on January 28 he made a remarkable statement
about the visit. He said that weapons, purchased within the framework of the
Armenian-Russian cooperation and the CSTO (the Collective Security Treaty
Organization), are insufficient to ensure Armenia’s security requirements,
so we are holding talks with Russia and other partner countries to fill our
arsenal with weapons…The formation of an alternative, reserve security
system is not just a requirement for Armenia to diversify (weapons supply
sources), but a matter of national security. Especially in an environment
where formal blocs, of which Armenia is a member, repeatedly make it clear
that they will not ensure Armenia’s security in case of aggression...(Sargsyan)
noted that Georgia, for example, is important in terms of various aspects,
including strategic…
OE Watch | March 2017

37

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Gauging the Reaction to Pakistan’s Babur and
Ababeel Missile Tests
OE Watch Commentary: The wars and
periodic skirmishes between India and
Pakistan have had a significant impact on
weapons development on both sides. As the
accompanying excerpted articles report,
Pakistan recently took the latest step when it
carried out two important missile tests. The
passages from Pakistani and Indian sources
demonstrate how the development was
reported by each side, providing insight into
their threat perceptions.
The articles from Pakistan’s Dawn and
the Daily Times report on the successful
tests of the Ababeel medium-range ballistic
missile and the Babur-3 cruise missile
in January. Both articles provide some
specifications of the missiles, including the
Ababeel’s 2200 km range and its payload of
multiple independently targetable re-entry
vehicles (MIRV), which is the first missile
in Pakistan’s inventory with this capability.
The Babur-3 is notable for being launched
from a modified submarine, though neither
article mentions that its range is estimated
at 450 km, which is less than the range of
the ground-launched variants Babur 1 and 2,
which is 700 km.
Both Pakistani sources note that the new
missiles provide deterrence, but neither
believes that they give the country any edge
against India. Dawn points out how India’s
Agni-V missile has a longer range than the
Ababeel, while the Daily Times reports
that India already has a seaborne nuclear
launch capability with the INS Arihant.
The Agni-V is also reportedly going to have
multiple independently targetable re-entry
vehicles in a future variant of the missile.
The article from Indian Deccan Herald
serves as an example of how sources in
India reported it. The article discusses both
tests and notes that the Ababeel missile is
capable of carrying a nuclear warhead up
to 2,200 kms, “bringing many Indian cities
within its range.”
Pakistan’s successful missile tests may
have given it better deterrence capabilities,
but the reaction from India suggests that
they are viewed as potential threats. Any
development of additional systems to match
Indian capabilities could result in an upward
spiral of capabilities and tension on both
sides. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The first successful flight test of Ababeel, after the two

operational MRBMs Shaheen-I and Shaheen-II, would
enable Pakistan to launch multiple warheads using Multiple
Independent Re-entry Vehicle (MIRV) technology..”
Source: Ali Osman, “What you need to know about Pakistan’s Ababeel ballistic missile,”
Dawn, 25 January 2017. http://www.dawn.com/news/1310463/what-you-need-to-knowabout-pakistans-ababeel-ballistic-missile

What you need to know about Pakistan’s Ababeel ballistic missile
The strategic forces of Pakistan, with the testing of the 2,200 kilometre range Ababeel
ballistic missile, have achieved vital technological and deterrence capability with the
introduction of a missile with multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicle (MIRV)
compatibility…Pakistan has become the seventh country in the world to now possess the
technology, which was developed in the late ‘60s by the Americans and Russians. India first
tested a MIRV capable missile in 2012, with the successful launch of the Agni-V…
India’s quest for a ballistic missile defence (BMD) system also challenged the effectiveness
of Pakistan’s strategic deterrence…Although the Ababeel has shorter range when compared
with India’s Agni-V, it provides the needed deterrence…It is not yet clear how many MIRVs
will be carried by the Ababeel.
Source: Maimuna Ashraf, “Babur-III and Ababeel: contours and counters,” Daily Times, 31
January 2017. http://dailytimes.com.pk/opinion/31-Jan-17/babur-iii-and-ababeel-contoursand-counters
…Pakistan’s two first-ever recently tested nuclear-capable missiles, ‘Babur-3’ submarinelaunched cruise missile (SLCM) and ‘Ababeel’ surface-to-surface medium range ballistic
missile (SSBM), has further reinforced the debate on South Asian maritime security, secondstrike capability and missile defense technologies in the regional landscape…Reportedly,
Pakistan modified one of its three Agosta 90 B diesel-electric submarines to launch the
submarine missile…The first successful flight test of Ababeel, after the two operational
MRBMs Shaheen-I and Shaheen-II, would enable Pakistan to launch multiple warheads
using Multiple Independent Re-entry Vehicle (MIRV) technology…it is likely to provide
Pakistan a seaborne nuclear deterrent while India already possesses it after formally
commissioning its nuclear powered submarine — INS Arihant…
Source: “Pak conducts 1st flight test of N-capable ‘Ababeel’ missile,” Deccan Herald, 24
January 2017. http://www.deccanherald.com/content/593030/pak-conducts-1st-flight-test.
html
Pakistan today successfully conducted the first test flight of the radar-evading ‘Ababeel’
surface-to-surface ballistic missile (SSM) capable of carrying a nuclear warhead up to 2,200
kms, bringing many Indian cities within its range…”The development of the Ababeel weapon
system was aimed at ensuring survivability of Pakistan’s ballistic missiles in the growing
regional Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD) environment,” the (ISPR) release said, in an
obvious reference to India.
The Ababeel missile test came close on the heels of a successful test of submarine-launched
cruise missile Babur-III on January 9…The missile, launched from an undisclosed location
in the Indian Ocean from an underwater, mobile platform, had hit its target with precise
accuracy, the (Pakistani) Army had said. Babur-III is a sea-based variant of groundlaunched cruise missile Babur-II, which was successfully tested in December last year.
OE Watch | March 2017

38

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

India and China: Arms Sales and the
Delicate Balance of Power
OE Watch Commentary: China and India appear to be caught up
in an arms sale race, both aiming to encircle the other by selling arms
to the other’s neighbors. The excerpted
article in India Today from 11 January
discusses Indian arms sales to Vietnam
at a time when Vietnam is engaged in a
potentially volatile dispute with China
over islands in the South China Sea.
According to the article, India may sell
Akash surface-to-air missile defense
systems to Vietnam, which Vietnam
could use to intercept Chinese aircraft at
a range of 25 kilometers. In late 2016,
India was also reported to be close to
selling the joint Russia-India designed
BrahMos missile to Vietnam, which is
the world’s fastest cruise missile and
would give Vietnam a new asymmetric
capability to counter China if a battle
broke out in the South China Sea.
The article notes China’s harsh
condemnation of India for considering
such a sale to Vietnam. It suggests that
China’s concern is rooted in India reaching parity with China in terms
of nuclear capabilities and India’s use of its arms sales as a diplomatic
counter to China. India has recently tested intercontinental ballistic
missiles with a 4,000-kilometer range that could reach Beijing. Now
India is developing other advanced weapons systems and selling them
to China’s neighbors and countries in conflict with China, raising the
risk for China of being encircled by these weapons systems.
The article justifies India’s arms sales to Vietnam and other countries
surrounding China, such as Japan and Mongolia, as well as Taiwan, as
a reaction to China’s own encirclement of India. China has exported
its nuclear and missile technology to Pakistan and will soon provide
Pakistan a nuclear submarine. Moreover, as part of China’s foreign
infrastructure development plans and String of Pearls strategy, it
is building ports and infrastructure in Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Maldives and Bangladesh, all of which surround India. However,
the article claims that India’s sales to Vietnam are most specifically
in response to China’s arms sales to Pakistan, given that Pakistan
is the primary adversary to India and Vietnam is the most powerful
competitor for China of the South China Sea country claimants.
The article concludes that China has no right to condemn India’s
prospective sales to Vietnam because that is exactly what China is
doing to India in India’s own sub-region. Rather than stirring up
trouble, as China alleges, India may be maintaining a balance of power
between China and India in South Asia and Southeast Asia, leading to
stability in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
“Brahmos: Vietnam’s new killer Indo-Russian missile,” Russia Beyond the Headlines, 22 June 2016. http://rbth.com/blogs/continental_drift/2016/06/22/brahmos-vietnams-new-killer-indo-russian-missile_604759

1

“If China can sell weapons to Pakistan, why can’t
India do so to Vietnam?”

BrahMos missiles, which India may sell to Vietnam despite Chinese objections.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/india-to-sell-advanced-missiles/3399999.html

Source: “China says it will not sit idle if India sells missiles to
Vietnam,” Indiatoday, 11 January 2017. http://indiatoday.intoday.
in/story/china-india-missiles-vietnam/1/855048.html
Global Times, the mouthpiece of the Communist Party of China
(CPC), has threatened India once again. This time it is about
India’s proposal to sell Akash missiles to Vietnam. The system has
an interception range of 25 km to keep an effective check on any
incoming hostile aircraft for area defence and deliberations are
said to be in an advanced stage.
China has been trying to encircle India by making inroads in
its neighbourhood, by offering to develop or developing ports
and infrastructure in Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Maldives or by
reaching out to Nepal and Bangladesh or with its String of Pearls
geopolitical theory where it is said that China is developing a
network in the Indian Ocean region to encircle India. Now, of
late, India is realising the Chinese designs and is pursuing an
agenda to answer China in its own geopolitical language by
developing bilateral and strategic ties with countries in China’s
neighbourhood like Japan, Vietnam, Taiwan and even Mongolia. It
is a much needed course correction. If China can do so, why can’t
India? If China can sell weapons to Pakistan, why can’t India do so
with Vietnam?
If China can do so then it doesn’t have any right to preach us
that ‘India-Vietnam ties should be built for the sake of peace and
stability in the region, rather than stirring up troubles or anxiety
for others’.

OE Watch | March 2017

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Iskander Turns 10, Modernization Scheduled
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
TASS interview with Valeriy Kashin, general designer
of the Machine-Building Design Bureau Science
and Production Corporation, discusses Russian
plans to upgrade the Iskander missile system. The
modernization of this system is significant because
it is “unequalled worldwide in its performance” and
will be in service for at least another 25 years. The
Iskander missile system fills an important niche in
Russian force projection. Tactical and theater ballistic
missiles are far more important for Russia than for
the US/NATO. In general, Russia believes that the
US/NATO will maintain air superiority; and has thus
invested heavily in missile technologies to fill a niche
that air power fills for the US/NATO.
Iskander missile systems are found in missile
brigades operated by the Russian Ground Forces’
Missile and Artillery Troops. These brigades are
usually part of an Army Group (Combined Arms
Army or Tank Army) or Army Corps. In terms
of capabilities, the Iskander missile system is a
significant improvement over its predecessors and
has little in common with them (Tochka and Oka).
The system is capable of not only transporting and
launching two missiles, but also firing two different
types of missiles. The Iskander, which Russia
classifies as a tactical-operational
(continued)

Source: “Start of Iskander Upgrade Planned for Beginning of 2020s,” TASS
Online, 19 January 2017. http://tass.ru/opinions/interviews/3951316
The Russian Iskander-M
operational-tactical missile
system is unequalled
worldwide in its performance
and will be in service for at
least another 25 years. Valeriy
Kashin, general designer of
the Machine-Building Design
Bureau (KBM) Science and
Production Corporation,
which created these weapons,
spoke in a TASS interview
about the plans to upgrade
the Iskander…
[TASS] Is it planned
to further upgrade the
Iskander-M missile system?

Valeriy Kashin, general designer of the MachineBuilding Design Bureau Science and Production
Corporation.
Source: http://www.kbm.ru/local/images/kbm/_400_
kb_jpg_1395032816.jpg

[Kashin] We have already
prepared proposals for the
further development of this system and they are currently being reviewed in
the Defense Ministry. But the improvements need to be coordinated with some
events. The beginning of the 2020s will mark 10 years since the first brigade was
(continued)
equipped with the Iskander-M and the time will come when

Russian Ground Forces’ Missile Brigades with 500km launch range annotated.

OE Watch | March 2017

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Iskander Turns 10, Modernization Scheduled
missile system, can fire two SRBMs (SS-26 Stone) or
two ground-launched cruise missiles GLCMs, referred
to as the R-500 or Iskander-K in Russian, and possibly
could fire a combination of these missiles.
These missiles can carry a variety of payloads
weighing 480-700 kilograms, including cluster
warheads (antipersonnel/antimateriel), fragmentation
submunitions, area denial submunitions, HE,
thermobaric, high explosive earth penetrators for
bunker busting, electromagnetic pulse, decoy,
and nuclear warheads. The Iskander’s missiles are
reportedly compliant with the 1987 IntermediateRange Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, but there are
allegations that these missiles could be easily modified
to violate the 500-kilometer lower limit of the treaty.
As discussed in the interview, the Iskander missile
system has been in service for ten years and will
likely be modernized in the course of the previously
scheduled maintenance overhaul. If Russia does
proceed with this modernization, the Iskander will
follow a similar modernization pattern as other
Russian combat vehicles. This pattern is one of
frequent, incremental modernization, with no
requirement that the entire force is modernized to a
certain level, before the next modernization program
begins. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

the equipment will require repair. That is, the upgrade should coincide with
the need for repair and maintenance of the equipment in brigades armed with
the Iskanders in order not to reduce their combat readiness. But as regards
the service life of existing Iskander-Ms, we believe that this system will be
operational for a comparable time to its predecessors, 25-30 years, (the Tochka
has served for over 40 years and the Tochka-U for 30 years). Here it must not be
forgotten that the Iskander-M deliveries mean the creation of a full infrastructure
to place a brigade in its place of permanent deployment and the creation of
depots and a technical position. All these are serious costs, and the creation
of new systems every five to 10 years constitutes an irrational expenditure of
state funds. On the other hand, there other targets could emerge that have to be
destroyed, new political circumstances and threats at the borders could arise.
Naturally, it is necessary to respond to this by a system upgrade.
[TASS] By what year will all brigades be equipped with Iskanders?
[Kashin] Our contract is computed up to 2017, and next year we have to deliver
sets for a further two brigades. There might need to be some further number of
systems but this is already being decided the Russian Federation Armed Forces
General Staff. We will continue to produce missiles…
[TASS] Are there foreign analogues of the Iskander?
[Kashin] In the USA, for example, the tasks involved in destroying targets up to
500 kilometers in depth are planned by other means, primarily aviation…

Iskander missile system.
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin

OE Watch | March 2017

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Principles of Russian Armor: Modularity,
Standardization, and Survivability
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
article from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer
discusses Russian armor developments and states the
principles of armor development explicitly: modularity,
standardization, and the value of human life. These
principles will come as little surprise to those
following Russian military modernization.
Russia’s modernization and standardization efforts
have included the creation of not only the Armata
tracked heavy chassis, but also the Kurganets-25
tracked utility chassis and the Bumerang wheeled
chassis. These three chassis types, made by three
different manufactures, are all designed to accept the
same turret, the “universal combat module” known
at the “Epoch” or “Bumerang-BM,” made by a fourth
company. (The universal combat module consists of
a 30mm automatic cannon, four “Kornet” antitank
missiles, and a 7.62mm PKT machine gun.) This level
of interoperability is unheard of in Western defense
industries, where proprietary technology and financial
considerations would make the pursuit of such an effort
difficult. The imposition of such a standard must have
been implemented several years ago, as some reports
have implied the BTR-82A (armored personnel carrier)
and BMD-4 (infantry fighting vehicle for the Airborne)
have already entered service, and may also be capable
of mounting the “universal combat module.”
In terms of survivability, Russia has touted the
Armata’s design that puts the crew in an armored
capsule. This is made possible by an autoloader and
unmanned turret, that reportedly not only allows better
crew protection, but also provides significant weight
savings.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the article
is the mention of how the T-14 Armata could be
utilized. In the past, the T-14 was always discussed
as operating with other Armata-chassised vehicles,
but this article lays out a possible different type of
use. The author believes that the T-14 could be used
as a “reconnaissance tool” in conjunction with other
combat vehicles and tanks, such as the T-90. The
T-14 does have an impressive array of sensors for such
usage, and there is discussion of mounting a tethered
UAV on the Armata as an ISR platform. This is the
first time the T-14 has been described as a “networkcentric warfare” enabler for other combat vehicles.
This author’s description may be an anomaly, or the
result of changing Russian thinking about the number
of Armata-chassised vehicles that could realistically
be produced, as Russia had announced that 2,300
vehicles on Armata-chassised vehicles would be fielded
by 2025. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Sergey Cherkasov, “The Incalculable Armata,” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy
Kuryer Online, 17 January 2017. http://vpk-news.ru/articles/34625
…The basis for Russian military design rests on three principles: modularity,
standardization, and the value of human life. We should cherish not only combined
armor but also the soldier who sits behind it. The result is a phenomenon, the
breakthrough of the decade: the Armata combat platform. Unfortunately, in our
society there is still no understanding that this is not a tank but something much
bigger. The Armata is a tracked platform that makes it possible to create heavy
armor for many years. The Armata family will include 28 vehicles. Modern
technologies of computer data processing and the genius of Russian engineers
have given rise to a highly flexible and universal platform: the engine on it can be
moved from the nose to the rear, and weapons and components can be added and
removed…
All this provides substantial savings at several stages. First, a common platform
during development makes it possible to focus on designing “add-ons” and
weaponry. Second, during production, the mass issuance of parts on a single
production line reduces design costs as a whole. Third, during operation, identical
repair kits reduce maintenance costs. Fourth, modularity speeds up the return to
service of non-functional vehicles, which is especially important in field conditions.
As a result, we have a greater variety of combat vehicles for the same money.
…The T-14 is primarily a reconnaissance tool: its Doppler radar with active
phased antenna array coupled with infrared and ultraviolet cameras is capable of
detecting more than 50 targets at distances up to 100 kilometers. Due to its closed
communication channels the T-14 can carry out targeting and adjust the fire of its
own escort of T-90 tanks, as well as of the following Koalitsiya-SV self-propelled
guns and close- and medium-range antiaircraft missile systems. Thus, the T-14
design embodies the concept of network-centric warfare…
OE Watch | March 2017

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

The Growing Role of DOSAAF and Private
Military Companies
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s Volunteer Society for
Cooperation with the Army, Aviation, and Fleet (DOSAAF) is a
government-sponsored sports and outdoor enthusiast organization
that promotes and funds militarily useful skills, such as flying,
hiking, camping, shooting, skiing, parachuting, driving, and
athletics, for young people. The predecessors of the organization
were invaluable in the Great Patriotic War (Second World War)
by providing skilled servicemen to the Armed Forces. The
accompanying articles discuss recent DOSAAF developments.

“DOSAAF trained 32,600 citizens on 12 militaryregistration specialties in 2016.”
— DOSAAF Deputy Chairman,
Sergey Serikov

Russia appears to be growing the quantity of persons trained
and quality of skills provided. According to the accompanying
RIA Novosti article, in 2016, DOSAAF trained 32,600 personnel in
one of sixteen military occupational specialties (MOSs). In 2016,
DOSAAF trained 1,011 parachutists. In the future, additional
MOSs will be provided, and there may be special programs for
young men considering service in the naval infantry and spetsnaz.
The passage from Moskovsky Komsomolets discusses perhaps
the most interesting DOSAAF development. Apparently, there is
some consideration of using DOSAAF to train personnel serving
in Private Military Companies (PMCs), in particular for sapper
(military engineer) demining and explosive ordinance disposal.
(The Russian military’s conduct of these activities in Syria has been
widely reported on in the Russian press.) Russian PMCs have been
a hot topic in Russian security circles. They have reportedly been
found in Eastern Ukraine and Syria, and there has been discussion
of changing Russian law to more easily facilitate their operation.
The fact that Russia is considering using a state funded asset to
provide training for the (semi) private sector, indicates that at least
some elements of the Russian government see private military
companies as having a role in state security. Another reason for this
development may be finance related, as private military companies
may be a potential funding stream to supplement DOSAAF’s state
provided funds.
DOSAAF is particularly valuable for the conscription-based
manning system that the Russian Federation utilizes to fill its
rank and file, but would be an inefficient way of imparting skills
to a fully professional (non-conscript) army. Conscripts who have
participated in DOSAAF activities gain skills that would be difficult
to impart to troops who are only drafted for one year. The DOSAAF
system is so well ingrained into the Russian military system that a
DOSAAF representative sits on each draft board in order to advise
the state on the best way to utilize each conscript. For example,
a conscript who has participated in a DOSAAF parachuting club
would be more likely to be assigned to an airborne unit.
The DOSAAF program declined after the collapse of the Soviet
Union, but in the last few years experienced a resurgence. Today,
it exists in many states of the former Soviet Union in one form
or another. DOSAAF reportedly operates 81 regional branches,
over 3,000 local branches, and more than 1,300 educational and
sports organizations in the Russian Federation. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

DOSAAF Flag.
Source: el-dosaaf.ru

Source: “DOSAAF Has Announced That It Can Train up to 80,000
Young Men Annually for the Army,” RIA Novosti Online, 11 January
2017. https://ria.ru/defense_safety/20170111/1485527559.html
DOSAAF can train up to 80,000 young men for the Army annually,
at the time when more than 32,000 conscripts were trained in 2016,
Society Deputy Chairman Sergey Serikov said. “A state mission
has been assigned to Russian DOSAAF: the training of citizens on
military-registration specialties. In the aggregate, the available
facilities permit it to carry out the training of specialists on military
registration specialties in the amount of up to 80,000 men per year,”
Serikov said while summing the results of the fall draft.
In his words, in accordance with the Ministry of Defense task,
DOSAAF trained 32,600 citizens on 12 military-registration
specialties in 2016. “The training of specialists for the Airborne
Troops was the distinctive feature of training in 2016. In 2016, the
planned task for the training of citizens on military-registration
specializes in support of the VDV was established at 1,000 men and
the fulfillment totaled 1,011 men”, Serikov added.
He also pointed out that, while taking into account the acquired
experience, Russian DOSAAF is examining the training of conscripts
for service in the VDV and, in the future, for Naval Infantry and
Spetsnaz units. In the process, they plan to expand the list of
military-registration specialties in subsequent years. So, the training
of specialists for the Signals Troops began in 2016-2017. “At the
present time, we are conducting the “Seamen” experiment on two
specialties of training specialists for the Navy, based upon the results
of which a decision will be made on training these specialists for the
Armed Forces based upon the military-registration specialties”, the
DOSAAF deputy head concluded.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: The Growing Role of DOSAAF and
Private Military Companies
Source: Aleksandr Stepanov, “Private Military Companies May Appear in
Russia,” Moskovsky Komsomolets Online, 18 January 2017. http://www.mk.ru/
politics/2017/01/18/v-rossii-mogut-poyavitsya-chastnye-voennye-kompanii.html
DOSAAF celebrates its 90th anniversary in 2017. On the eve of the jubilee Alexander
Kolmakov, the society’s chairman, summed up the results for the year and talked about
what innovations lie in store for DOSAAF in the immediate future. In particular, there
are plans to create private sapper companies and even private military companies on
the basis of the society…
Kolmakov also talked about yet another interesting innovation — a private sapper
company is to be created on the basis of DOSAAF. “Together with the Russian Union
of Engineers we are completing the creation of the first engineering company to train
sappers from among reserve service personnel, including experts for underwater mine
clearance from bodies of water,” Kolmakov said, noting that the decision to create such
company was proposed by Sergey Shoygu, the head of the military department.
“During one of his meetings the minister of defense drew attention to the fact that
abroad tasks to clear areas of mines and shells in areas of military conflicts are
frequently carried out by private engineering companies. In this connection he
Alexander Kolmakov, DOSAAF Chairman.
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Колмаков,_Александр_
proposed that thought be given to whether the defense organization would be able to
Петрович#/media/File:Alexander_Kolmakov.JPG
assume responsibility for creating such a company to perform special tasks,” Kolmakov
said. He noted that the company would operate on a pilot-scheme basis for a while in
order to check the utilization of private sappers when clearing various kinds of munitions and mines. “We will of course clear mines in areas
of former military conflicts in accordance with a recommendation from the country’s military department,” Kolmakov stressed.
Viktor Vodolatskiy, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee for CIS Affairs, Eurasian Integration, and Links with Compatriots, who
also attended the news conference, suggested that private military companies might also be created on the basis of the society. In his view it
is necessary for a federal law governing DOSAAF’s activity to be adopted and for the creation of private military companies to be possibly
considered within the framework of such a law.

President meeting with DOSAAF Chairman, Alexander Kolmakov.
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Колмаков,_Александр_Петрович#/media/File:Vladimir_
Putin,_Sergey_Ivanov,_Georgy_Shpak,_Alexander_Kolmakov,_September_2003.jpg

OE Watch | March 2017

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Reporting Military Losses: Ukraine and Russia
OE Watch Commentary: The fighting between
Ukrainian forces and Russian-backed separatists
in Southeast Ukraine continues to simmer, and
occasionally boil over as it did in late January and
early February 2017. The accompanying excerpts from
Ukrainian and Russian sources demonstrate the contrast
in the way military losses are reported.
According to UN statistics, nearly 10,000 soldiers
and civilians have been killed in this conflict over the
last three years. In early January 2017, the Ukrainian
Ministry of Defense released figures regarding the
number of soldiers who died in 2016. The first excerpt
from a Ukrainian source parses this data, pointing
out that more soldiers died in noncombat losses than
“were killed at the front in combat clashes.” According
to the article, “in 2016 noncombat losses among the
Ukrainian military totaled 256, while 211 members of
the Armed Forces of Ukraine were killed at the front
in combat clashes.” It notes that suicide, illness and
weapon mishandling were the top three causes behind
the noncombat deaths. The article describes some
of the underlying causes behind these fatalities (e.g.
combat fatigue, stress, substance abuse) and some of
the prophylactic measures adopted by the Ukrainian
authorities to prevent future losses.
The Russian Ministry of Defense has not been as
forthcoming regarding military casualties incurred in
2016. Recall that in mid-2015, the Kremlin enacted
legislation which stated that information regarding
military deaths, whether in peacetime or war, would
be classified as state secrets. Some analysts suggested
that this legislation was partially predicated upon
the Kremlin’s insistence that it was not militarily
involved in Ukraine. Revealing this information could
be punishable by up to seven years in prison. Still, as
the second excerpt from a Russian regional source
indicates, some information can be gleaned regarding
recent Russian military losses. According to this article,
a soldier from Tatarstan, who was killed in Syria in the
summer of 2016, was awarded with the rank of Hero
of Russia. The article goes on to assert that “Russian
combat losses in Syria have reached at least 24 people.”
A key component of the current Kremlin strategy is
built around the notion of restoring Russia’s military
prowess, and in both equipment and manpower, the
Russian military far surpasses the strength of its
Ukrainian neighbor. There may be a danger, however,
in concealing the human costs behind these military
achievements. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“... more [Ukrainian] soldiers are dying in
the intervals between battles than from the
militants’ bullets and mines….”
Source: Artur Hor, “Небоевые потери: почему украинские солдаты
погибают, когда пушки молчат (Noncombat Losses: Why Ukrainian Soldiers
Are Dying When the Guns Are Silent),” Apostrof, 12 January 2017. http://
apostrophe.ua/article/society/2017-01-12/pochemu-na-fronte-pogibaet-bolshesoldat-kogda-pushki-molchat/9444
The Defense Ministry has published some disturbing statistics — in 2016
noncombat losses among the Ukrainian military totaled 256, while 211
members of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were killed at the front in combat
clashes. Apostrof investigated why more soldiers are dying in the intervals
between battles than from the militants’ bullets and mines….
The most horrifying thing of all is the cause that came in first place for
noncombat losses in the Armed Forces of Ukraine in 2016. It was suicide. In
the past year the Defense Ministry has recorded 63 such cases….
…If you ask the Defense Ministry what they are doing to prevent people
committing suicide, they will say that they have orders and directives
concerning the prevention of suicide and all the specialists are working
on it. …According to the military psychologist, some suicides at the front
could be anticipated back at the stage of selection of soldiers at the military
commissariats.
…In second place on the blacklist of noncombat losses in the Ukrainian Army
is soldiers’ deaths from illnesses. According to Defense Ministry figures 58
service members died from this cause in 2016….
…The third most widespread cause of noncombat losses in the ATO is death
as a result of careless handling of weapons — 39 deaths. However, the military
themselves assert that this is not the cause but the consequence of another
problem in the Army — drunkenness. Although according to official figures 10
people died of poisoning by alcohol or drugs in the Armed Forces of Ukraine
in 2016, according to the military it is alcohol that lies behind deaths resulting
from accidents (29), murders (30), and road traffic accidents (18)….
Source: “В военкомате подтвердили гибель в Сирии еще одного
российского военного (Military enlistment office confirms still another death
of a Russian soldier in Syria),” RosBiznesKonsalting (RBK), 10 January 2017.
www.rbc.ru/rbcfreenews/5874ea859a7947c879140d3a
Russian combat losses in Syria have reached at least 24 people as the death
of yet another serviceman, who was killed in the summer of 2016, has been
confirmed by sources in his native Republic of Tatarstan.
Two district military enlistment offices in the city of Kazan, reported that
Captain Marat Akhmetshin had been killed in Syria in June 2016. He was
awarded the title of a Hero of Russia posthumously….

OE Watch | March 2017

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Cossack Influence in Southeastern Ukraine
OE Watch Commentary: Three years ago, when conflict
began in the Donbass region between pro-Russian separatist
and pro-Ukrainian forces, units on both sides were manned
with volunteers and regular military forces. Units made up
of Cossacks— predominantly East Slavic-speaking, selfgoverning, semi-military communities located in Ukraine
and Russia—were among the better organized forces on the
pro-Russian separatist side, where they played a key role in
some of the early battles. Since then, these Cossack units
have become largely incorporated into the official force
structure of the Lugansk and Donetsk separatist militaries.
Cossacks, however, have also fought on the opposite side
to defend Ukraine’s territorial integrity. The accompanying
excerpt addresses some of the challenges Ukrainian
military authorities have experienced with incorporating an
independent Cossack military unit into its ranks.

Source: Artur Hor, “Козацький бунт: у Холодному Яру хочуть створити
нову Січ (Cossack Revolt: Plans To Establish New Sich in Kholodnyy Yar),”
Apostrof, 19 January 2017. http://apostrophe.ua/ua/article/society/2017-01-19/
kazachiy-bunt-v-holodnom-yaru-grozyatsya-sozdat-novuyu-sech/9556

The article begins by suggesting that the Ukrainian
“General Staff is deliberately inhibiting the formation of
such a military unit,” by placing all sorts of administrative
obstacles among those who want to form a Cossack
battalion. The article asserts that those who claim Cossack
descent and are already serving in the Ukrainian military
would not be allowed to transfer to this new unit. A
Cossack spokesperson alleges that the Ukrainian General
Staff “wanted to control the appointment of officers in the
battalion,” which contradicts “the Cossack tradition” of
electing its own officers. Cossack leaders also assert that
potential new recruits into the Cossack unit are encouraged
to join regular units since “it is not known when the
Cossack battalion will be created.”

“We encountered enormous resistance from the generals of the General Staff.
We were supposed to be formed on the basis of the 28th Brigade, but we were
openly told that the formation of a Cossack battalion would not be allowed
under any circumstances,” Oleksandr Shepilov explains to Apostrof. Lt Col
Shepilov notes that the General Staff has set a number of official conditions the
Cossacks simply cannot meet. “For example, one such condition was a ban on
accepting active soldiers into our battalion…. Oleksandr Shepilov notes that the
General Staff also wanted to control the appointment of officers in the battalion.
“But this is a profanation, because the Cossack tradition is to elect officers….

A representative from the General Staff rebuffed these
assertions, pointing out that the actual cause of delay in
forming this unit dealt with the Cossack’s inability to
provide “an initial list for acquisition,” which will spell
out the number of personnel and associated equipment.
Another source who “represent[s] the Cossacks’ interests
in the Defense Ministry,” suggests that “military officials’
prejudice against the Cossacks” stems from the fact that
“at the moment society does not take Cossacks seriously…
because they made an exhibition of themselves.” The article
ends on an alarming note, pointing out “that if compromise
with the General Staff is not achieved in the near future,
some Cossacks are ready for drastic measures,” which
might include joining with the radical group, Right Sector.
Cossacks, whether affiliated with Russia or Ukraine, have
a long tradition of protecting borders. Throughout history,
however, Cossacks have also demonstrated a willingness
to revolt when they didn’t agree with central authorities.
Whether fully subordinate to the official military or not,
Cossack units will continue to play an important role as the
governments in Moscow and Kiev attempt to resolve the
conflict in the Donbass region of Ukraine. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

The first Cossack battalion in Ukraine could be created within the Armed
Forces; however, the General Staff is deliberately inhibiting the formation of
such a military unit. This is the statement that the representatives of Cossack
organizations made to Apostrof. The Cossacks say that if the generals of the
General Staff do not meet their expectations, they are ready to act radically and
create a new Cossack sich [military settlement] in Kholodnyy Yar, Cherkas’ka
Oblast.
It is planned that the main task of the Cossack battalion will be protection of
the Ukrainian state border. The reason for creating such a unit is to combine
disparate Cossack organizations, of which there are around 600 all over
Ukraine….

The General Staff assures Apostrof that it is not creating any artificial
obstacles to the formation of the Cossack battalion. “The General Staff has
completed all administrative papers to create a separate unit with such a name
and so on. The command has made decisions about where to form it and how.
The unit has already been defined, but the problem is that in order to form the
unit there should be an initial list for acquisition, which they failed to give us,”
Colonel Andriy Polonskyy…
Lt Col Shepilov argues that the General Staff invented another way to disrupt
the work of forming the lists of volunteers for the Cossack battalion…. We
agreed to this, but when the soldiers began to undergo medical examination,
I started receiving calls with complaints: As soon as soldiers undergo medical
examination, representatives of the military commissariats offer them the
opportunity to join other battalions. The guys do not agree, because they want
to join the Cossack battalion. But they are told that it is not known when the
Cossack battalion will be created, they are advised to take the assignment card
and get a contract and money to support their families from now on….
However, Volodymyr Harbuz, head of a working group representing the
Cossacks’ interests in the Defense Ministry, adds that the military officials’
prejudice against the Cossacks can be easily explained. “At the moment society
does not take Cossacks seriously, and they can only blame themselves for that,
because they made an exhibition of themselves: They have epaulets and stripes,
but they achieve no result in the creation of statehood. Therefore there is a
biased attitude,” Harbuz explains to Apostrof.
Lt Col Shepilov notes that if compromise with the General Staff is not achieved
in the near future, some Cossacks are ready for drastic measures, because
they “have shed their blood” to obtain the right to form a separate unit of the
Armed Forces. “We will have to take the path of Right Sector. They created the
Ukrainian Volunteer Army. We have already held talks with them….
OE Watch | March 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Growing Russian Military Presence Abroad
OE Watch Commentary: While Russian military
involvement in Syria and Ukraine has captured many
recent headlines, the Kremlin is also making its military
presence felt in more distant countries. The accompanying
articles discuss Russia’s expanding ties with two such
countries: Libya and the Philippines.
Building upon ties developed over the past half-century,
Russia continues to expand its influence today within the
war-torn and divided country of Libya. The brief first
excerpt from the centrist Russian source, Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, describes the visit of “Libyan National Army
commander General Khalifah Haftar to the aircraft carrier
Admiral Kuznetsov” in mid-January 2017.
Having completed operations near Syria, the Russian
ship parked off the coast of Libya and “invited [General
Haftar] to the warship for a teleconference involving talks
with Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu.” As the article
points out, the Kremlin apparently regards “Haftar as an
ally in the fight against terrorism.” Besides “advocating the
country’s secular development, [Haftar] enjoys clout among
the military.” The article suggests that “speculations” of
Haftar allowing greater Kremlin influence/presence in
the region in exchange for Russian military assistance is
“provocation,” claiming that Libyans “will never sacrifice
their freedom, territory, and independence.” Nevertheless,
altruistic considerations have rarely been the chief drivers
of Russian military interests in Libya or elsewhere.
Libya is not the only country where Russia appears to
be gaining a foothold. The second excerpt, again from
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, describes the warm welcome
Russian naval personnel received upon docking in the
port of Manila. The Philippine President remarked “that
Russian sailors were the most welcome visitors, they
could moor at the berths here at any time convenient to
them, and they could even live under the warm Filipino
sun for as long as they liked.” The article also points out
that after Philippine Defense Minister Delfin’s visit to
Moscow in December 2016, “it was announced that Russia
and the Philippines planned to hold joint exercises in the
South China Sea.” The article concludes by asserting that
“Russia also feels its responsibility as a power playing an
increasingly significant role in world politics… and the
presence of the Pacific Fleet in the Philippines could only
contribute to accomplishing them.”
As Russia continues to strengthen and modernize its
military, the Kremlin leadership has been moving to reestablish a global military presence. A key component
of their strategy is to identify and support a local strong
leader upon whom it can provide aid in return for greater
control and concessions. This strategy has so far worked
in Chechnya and Syria and could soon be adopted within
Libya and the Philippines. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

Source: Ravil Mustafin, “Нужны ли России военные базы в Ливии? (Does
Russia Need Military Bases in Libya?),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 19 January
2017. http://www.ng.ru/world/2017-01-19/1_6906_2livia.html
The recent visit paid by Libyan National Army commander General Khalifah
Haftar to the aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov shed light on the question
of Russian preferences in Libya. …Far from every contender for the role of
a leader capable of uniting the country and extracting it from the chaos of
internecine feuding is invited to a warship for a teleconference involving talks
with Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu. This speaks not only of the importance
and perhaps also of the urgency of the issues discussed but also of Moscow’s
special attitude towered Haftar as an ally in the fight against terrorism.
And why, indeed, should Moscow not count on Haftar. Of all the more or less
important Libyan politicians, the general is the only one who, in possession of
an organized military force, is assessing the situation rationally and advocating
the country’s secular development. He enjoys clout among the military….
As for the speculation that has appeared over how, in return for potential aid
with weapons, Haftar is prepared almost to grant Moscow use of the naval
base and airbase in the Benghazi region and thus extend the zone of Russian
influence in the region, this all looks like provocation. Whatever trust Libyans
may have in Russia, they will never tolerate a foreign military presence on
their territory…. They can deal with foreigners — trade with them or even
make friends — but they will never sacrifice their freedom, territory, and
independence.
Source: Boris Vinogradov, “КАРТ-БЛАНШ. Получит ли Тихоокеанский
флот базу на Филиппинах (Carte Blanche. Will Pacific Fleet Get Base on
Philippines),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 24 January 2017. www.ng.ru/
world/2017-01-24/3_6910_kartblansh.html
It is rare for a statement by Rodrigo Duterte, the president of the Philippines,
not to be split into quotes and to be ignored by the world press…. But what
he said recently when climbing on board the Admiral Tributs, a large antisubmarine ship of the Pacific Fleet, in the port of Manila is unlikely to be
categorized as an outrageous political statement or a reflective impromptu.
In addition to the “Welcome!”, which is customary on such occasions, Duterte
said that Russian sailors were the most welcome visitors, they could moor
at the berths here at any time convenient to them, and they could even live
under the warm Filipino sun for as long as they liked. That is, on a permanent
basis. Manila views Russia as a friendly power, the defender of its interests, its
patron and ally, and for this reason it is willing to consider the issue of closer
cooperation in the military sphere….
…As for Lorenzana, when he was in Moscow he visited the Russian Federation
Federal Service for Military-Technical Cooperation, studying a selection of our
weapons. Here there is also some symbolism: after the talks, it was announced
that Russia and the Philippines planned to hold joint exercises in the South
China Sea.
…It must be understood that Russia also feels its responsibility as a power
playing an increasingly significant role in world politics. It has no fewer
interests here than America. It could be said that Moscow and Washington are
facing common tasks in this regard. And the presence of the Pacific Fleet in the
Philippines could only contribute to accomplishing them.
OE Watch | March 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Chechen MP Battalion in Aleppo: The Russian Perspective
OE Watch Commentary: Having secured the
strategically important city of Aleppo in early
January, Kremlin officials announced a reduction
in their military presence in the region. They
withdrew a portion of their heavy assets (to include
their sole aircraft carrier), but left behind enough
equipment and manpower to secure vital interests,
to include a Military Police (MP) battalion from
Chechnya. The accompanying excerpt from
the pro-Kremlin news source, Izvestiya Online,
describes how one Russian expert views the
mission and the rationale for deploying such a unit
to Aleppo.
The author begins by pointing out that “the
objective of this Russian operation is not simply
to defeat the terrorist groupings… but to restore
state order throughout Syrian territory.” Since
“the Syrian Army…cannot perform policing
functions… and the local [Syrian] police are
weak,” this Russian MP unit will help to provide
sufficient stability and security to Syria’s largest
city and allow the state to provide basic services.
According to the author, the Chechens assigned to
this Russian MP battalion have experience with
this type of operation, when in 2006, they “were
sent to Lebanon to protect military construction
workers taking part in the country’s restoration
following the clash between Israel and Hizballah.”
The author goes on to assert that since the
Chechens are Sunni Muslim, this unit will be
able to better relate to the complex circumstances
in Aleppo and will prove that Russia will not
favor one religious or ethnic group over another.
Since many of these soldiers lived through the
violence of the Chechen conflict, they “know
from their own experience what it is to go through
such a crisis and how they should act in these
circumstances.” Finally, the author points out that
having “Muslim servicemen from Chechnya”
helping to restore order in Aleppo will counter any
propaganda among Russian Muslims “that Russia
is allegedly opposing Islam in Syria.”
In 2000, the Kremlin was able to largely
stabilize the situation in Chechnya by identifying
a strong local leader, gaining his allegiance, and
then supporting this leader to consolidate power
over the region. They appear to be using the same
model today in Syria, and perhaps emblematic of
the Kremlin’s wider ambitions, they have entrusted
loyal Chechen forces to handle this most delicate
mission. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
For an interesting PR video on the role of this unit in Aleppo,
see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BtnjvnLffJk

“If there is in the world

Syria.
Source: cia.gov

an army subunit in which
the soldiers and officers
know from their own
experience what it is to
go through such a crisis
and how they should act
in these circumstances,
then it is the Russian
military police battalion
manned by men from
Chechnya.”

Source: Nikolay Silayev, “Экспорт государственного порядка (Export of State
Order),” Izvestiya Online, 31 January 2017. http://izvestia.ru/news/661160
By sending to Aleppo a military police battalion manned by ethnic Chechens, Moscow
has taken an important step toward settling the situation in Syria. The objective of this
Russian operation is not simply to defeat the terrorist groupings and to deprive them
of their influence but to restore state order throughout Syrian territory…. The presence
of a Russian military police battalion from Chechnya here is significant for several
reasons.
First, maintaining order in Aleppo, Syria’s biggest city, is critically important.
The civil war in the country has not yet been ended and the organs of state power
in the regions liberated from the terrorists are only just getting down to work. The
infrastructure in the city is destroyed and mine clearing and constant and extensive
humanitarian aid are required…. The Syrian Army…cannot perform policing functions.
The local police are weak…. It is the Russian military police, or to be more precise a
battalion of that police manned by Chechens who are Sunni Muslims, which can be the
most neutral force here. Especially as the Chechen servicemen already have similar
experience. In 2006 the “Vostok” and “Zapad” battalions were sent to Lebanon to
protect military construction workers taking part in the country’s restoration following
the clash between Israel and Hizballah….
Second, Russia needs to prove to its Near East opponents that there is no religious
component in the Syrian conflict, no support for the Shiites and Alawites… as people in
the East are trying to make out…. It is hard to imagine a more graphic refutation than
the presence in Syria of Russian Sunni servicemen. And their presence in a capacity, as
military police, which presupposes the closest contact with residents.
Third, Syria, and primarily Aleppo, is now experiencing what Chechnya experienced
in the last decade…. If there is in the world an army subunit in which the soldiers and
officers know from their own experience what it is to go through such a crisis and how
they should act in these circumstances, then it is the Russian military police battalion
manned by men from Chechnya.
Finally, there is the domestic political aspect. The community of Russian Muslims is
being subjected to propaganda pressure from outside — it is being told that in Syria
Russia is allegedly opposing Islam. The Muslim servicemen from Chechnya will see
with their own eyes what is happening in the Near East.
OE Watch | March 2017

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Testing Russian Weapons in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Alongside various
geopolitical objectives, the Kremlin’s involvement in
Syria has provided the Russian military with a valuable
testing ground for new weapons and equipment. The
accompanying excerpt from the Russian pro-business
website, Vzglyad Online, reviews some developments in
these fields and their possible implications for Russia’s
defense industry. The article points out that employing
these new systems in the Syrian battleground “is not
simply about testing under desert conditions, but also
during interactions with unfriendly technologies of the
‘Western partners.’”
The article begins by describing advances in Russian
aviation and missile technology, to include “the newest
Su-35S and Su-30SM fighters, the Su-34 fighterbombers, the multirole Su-30 heavy fighters” as well as
“the Kalibr Kh-101 precision missiles.” While Russia
has often been at the forefront in aviation and missile
technology, the same cannot be said for robotics. The
Syrian operation, however, has helped to change this
perception. Over the past 18 months, the Russian
military has employed new robotic technologies in
Syria, including the Uran-6 mine clearing robot as well
as unconfirmed reports “on the use of the Argo and
Platforma-M type Russian [robotic] assault systems.”
The article then describes advances made in Russian
UAV technology, and although it provides few specifics
on their use in Syria, it asserts that “the previous year
was rich in reported developments” to include advances
in integrating UAVs with tanks which will allow crews
to “rapidly engage targets.” The article also points out
Russian electronic warfare developments on the Syrian
battlefield, providing a brief description of two new
systems, the Leyer-3 and the Krasukha-4. The Leyer-3
can be “mounted on the Orlan-10 unmanned aerial
vehicle” and is able to “imitate GSM communications
base stations,” allowing it “to route all calls and
reports through completely secure military equipment,
becoming a valuable source of data for intelligence
officers.” It also highlights the Krasukha-4 EW system,
“designed to counteract a broad spectrum of on-board
radars of enemy strike and reconnaissance aviation” to
include “UAV control radio channels.”
The article concludes by pointing out that the
massive investments in the Russia’s “defense industrial
complex during the period following 2008” appear
to be paying off. However, the author notes that the
goal of transferring “military developments into the
civilian sector” has yet to be realized, and claims
that “one must hope that in the foreseeable future we
will see not only sapper robots, but also (for example)
original Russian household robots.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“That the war in Syria remains the main background
in this context is wholly understandable. Besides fighting
terrorist groups, it is essentially performing the role of a
gigantic range for testing military developments, which the
RF [Russian Federation] military leadership, in general, is
making no effort to conceal.”
Source: Nikita Volchenko, “Сирия стала полигоном для испытания новейших
разработок российского ВПК (Syria has Become a Test Range for Testing the
Latest Developments of Russia’s Defense Industrial Complex),” Vzglyad Online, 3
February 2017. https://vz.ru/society/2017/2/3/855888.html
The domestic VPK [defense industrial complex] has made a leap forward,
primarily by virtue of the Army’s large-scale rearmament program and the
expansion of consumer markets. But the war in Syria has also played its role, and
as part of this role several of the latest domestic developments have been tested....
…That the war in Syria remains the main background in this context is wholly
understandable. Besides fighting terrorist groups, it is essentially performing the
role of a gigantic range for testing military developments, which the RF [Russian
Federation] military leadership, in general, is making no effort to conceal. And this
is not simply about testing under desert conditions, but also during interactions
with unfriendly technologies of the “Western partners,” who are directly or
indirectly peering around behind the backs of the local “bearded ones”
…The list of new or extensively modernized Russian developments which
have appeared in Syria is long, especially as it pertains to aviation and missile
equipment (taking into consideration the predominately remote nature of the war).
First, there is combat aviation: the newest Su-35S and Su-30SM fighters, the Su-34
fighter-bombers, the multirole Su-30 heavy fighters. Secondly, there are the Kalibr
Kh-101 precision missiles with their famed voyage from the Caspian Sea….
However, although the creation of new aircraft and missiles has been a traditional
strong area in the USSR and Russia, Russian defense industries have not ignored
combat robots, for example, a relatively new worldwide trend…. Specifically, in
Syria (and before then in Chechnya and Ingushetia) the Uran-6 mine clearing
robots proved their worth. This remotely controlled vehicle with a system of trawls
is able to destroy buried munitions or to trigger their explosions. In the Syrian
Arab Republic they were extensively used by sappers at Palmyra, and judging from
videos of the explosions the robot was not idled by an absence of tasks…. Although
the sapper robot is an officially recognized operations support device, the picture
concerning the use of fire support robots in the RF Armed Forces is thus far based
primarily on rumors. In Russian and Western sources there are reports on the use
of the Argo and Platforma-M type Russian assault systems….
…An important component of the aforementioned high-technology military
operations assets is the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (BPLA). In this respect the
previous year was rich in reported developments…. Another promising example
of the use of unmanned aerial vehicles is the attempt to integrate them with tanks:
developers from MAI [Moscow Aviation Institute] and MGTU [Moscow State
Technical University] have created a device that flies 20-30 meters above a tank. It
obtains power from a cable connected to the tank which transmits information to
the vehicle. Thus, the crew receives a scan of the battlefield and can rapidly engage
targets.
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Testing Russian Weapons in Syria
In the best traditions of “shield and sword” warfare, the evolution of electronic warfare
(REB) systems are being continued in Russia. This is wholly reflective of the global
trend toward a shift of confrontation into the area of digital technologies and toward the
interception of weapons command and control systems. At a minimum two systems that
were in Syria are worth mentioning.
The first of them is the Leyer-3, a hybrid UAV and electronic warfare technology. The
mobile systems are mounted on the Orlan-10 unmanned aerial vehicle and on a vehicle
command and control center. They have been operational in the troops since 2015. They
are, in fact, able to imitate GSM communications base stations. Suppressing them and
substituting their own cellular communications towers for the GSM base stations, they
are then able to route all calls and reports through completely secure military equipment,
becoming a valuable source of data for intelligence officers…. The second electronic
warfare system which became known in Syria was the Krasukha-4. It was designed to
counteract a broad spectrum of on-board radars of enemy strike and reconnaissance
aviation. It is affirmed that the system is able to suppress not only radar stations [RLS],
but also UAV control radio channels, which makes the system especially crucial in modern
high-technology warfare….
…In essence at this time the demonstration of the results of the outlays of capital
investments made in the armed services and in the defense industrial complex during
the period following 2008 is continuing…. But inasmuch as the migration of military
developments into the civilian sector is not only a conscious necessity, but also a goal
formulated by the head of state, one must hope that in the foreseeable future we will see not
only sapper robots, but also (for example) original Russian household robots.

Tim Thomas’s
Recasting
the Red
Star
describes
Russia’s
culture of
military
thought
through
its
modernization effort.
Adding to his robust
library of work on
the subject, Tim
Thomas illuminates
Russia’s Defense
Ministry reform
efforts, the Russian
national security
strategy take on
the operational
environment, and a
relevant review of
the Russian military
doctrine.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Recasting%20the%20red%20Star.pdf

Krasukha-4 at MAKS Exhibition 2015.
Source: http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2015/i-W9x5PRr

OE Watch | March 2017

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Expanding Russia’s Naval Base at Tartus, Syria
OE Watch Commentary: In January 2017,
Syria and Russia signed an agreement that allows
Russia to extend and expand its use of a naval base
at Tartus in Syria. Tartus, the second largest port
in Syria after Latakia, situated 140 miles northwest
of Damascus, has been left relatively untouched by
the Syrian civil war. The accompanying articles
from the Russian press discuss the agreement
and the conditions under which the Russian navy
must operate while in or near Syrian waters. The
second piece notes Iran’s tacit influence over the
Syrian leadership on this issue.
According to the first excerpt from the Russian
government news source, Rossiyskaya Gazeta
Online, “the agreement was signed for 49
years, but the lease for the port territory can be
automatically renewed every quarter of a century,
until one of the parties opts out of the treaty
process.” The Soviet Union built the base in 1977
to support the Soviet navy as it operated in the
Mediterranean Sea. The port was used to resupply
Soviet ships with fuel, food and water but lacked
any major repair facilities. The new agreement
will allow Russia to expand the base’s abilities
by installing high-tech repair facilities and the
ability to accommodate nuclear powered vessels.
The article also describes how the base would be
defended: The Syrian army will defend the base
from the land, while the Russian military will
defend air and sea approaches to the base.
Russia, however, is not the only country
involved in Syria, and the second excerpt from
Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online suggests that
“Damascus’ tougher demands on the presence of
the Russian Navy and aviation in Syria appeared
as a result of Iran’s tacit influence over the
Syrian leadership.” The article describes several
restrictive conditions the Russian navy must
operate under when in or near waters under Syrian
control. For instance, “there can be no more than
11 combat units in the material and technical
support center” and “the Russian Command is
obliged to notify Syria’s authorized organ of this in
good time (no later than 12 hours before entering
and six hours before leaving).” There are also
provisions which allow the Syrian government to
annul the agreement after giving a one-year notice.
According to this excerpt, Iran “was displeased
with the information that…the Russian Federation
was preparing a draft treaty with Syria on the
creation of a full-blown naval base in Tartus”
primarily because Russia is willing to work with
Turkey and the US to resolve the Syrian conflict.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gartner)

“…Nezavisimaya Gazeta’s military-diplomatic sources point
out that Damascus’ tougher demands on the presence of the
Russian Navy and aviation in Syria appeared as a result of
Iran’s tacit influence over the Syrian leadership.”
Source: Mikhail Falaleyev, “Встанем у моря. В сирийском Тартусе будет
российская военная база (We Will Stand by Sea. There Will Be Russian Military
Base in Syria’s Tartus),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 22 January 2017. https://
rg.ru/2017/01/22/rossijskie-korabli-budut-bazirovatsia-v-sirijskom-tartuse.html
A Russian-Syrian agreement has been signed on the creation in Tartus of our naval
base, which will be able to receive 11 large warships, including those equipped with
nuclear power plants. In fact, this will not only be a transit facility for restocking food
and drinking water supplies but also a place for high-tech repairs.... The agreement
was signed for 49 years, but the lease for the port territory can be automatically
renewed every quarter of a century, until one of the parties opts out of the treaty
process. It was decided that the Syrian Army will protect our base from the direction of
the land border and that we will cover the port and the dock with the sea and the air.
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Тартус не станет военно-морской базой России;
Усилению влияния Москвы в Средиземноморье противится Тегеран (Tartus Will
Not Become Russia’s Naval Base; Tehran Counters Moscow’s Growing Influence in
Mediterranean),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 23 January 2017. http://www.ng.ru/
world/2017-01-23/2_6909_tartus.html
The Russian Federation and Syria have at last signed documents whereby the
stationing of Russian troops in that country acquires juridical status. However, certain
aspects of the agreement beg questions….
The document defines new regulations governing Russian Federation warships putting
into territorial and internal waters, as well as Syria’s ports. At the same time there can
be no more than 11 combat units in the material and technical support center, including
warships with nuclear propulsion (provided nuclear and ecological safety is observed).
The agreement does not state whether this includes nuclear submarines, for example.
Damascus will rigidly control the coming and going of Russian ships in its territorial
waters, since the Russian Command is obliged to notify Syria’s authorized organ of this
in good time (no later than 12 hours before entering and six hours before leaving)….
“This agreement operates for 49 years and is automatically extended for subsequent
25-year periods unless either side notifies the other side in writing through diplomatic
channels no less than one year before the latest period expires of its intention to
terminate it,” the document reads.
That is, from now on, if the Syrian leadership no longer wishes to have a modernized
naval material and technical support center in Tartus, just one year later there will be
no Russian naval presence there….
…Nezavisimaya Gazeta’s military-diplomatic sources point out that Damascus’
tougher demands on the presence of the Russian Navy and aviation in Syria appeared
as a result of Iran’s tacit influence over the Syrian leadership. Tehran is pained by the
Russian Federation’s increasing role in the Near East and dislikes the fact that Moscow
is involving Turkey in settling the conflict in Syria and is planning to cooperate actively
with the United States and other countries that are part of the coalition.
Tehran was displeased with the information that appeared in Russian media in
October 2016 to the effect that the Russian Federation was preparing a draft treaty with
Syria on the creation of a full-blown naval base in Tartus.
OE Watch | March 2017

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Operational Plans for Russia’s Naval Base on
the Mediterranean
OE Watch Commentary: Russian
sea traffic to Syria has been heavy and
stressed the limited facilities of the old
Soviet-built repair and docking facility
in the port of Tartus. Upgraded facilities
are clearly needed as the Russian facility
can only handle four medium sized ships
when its floating piers are fully operational.
The port cannot handle large Russian
warships currently in the area such as
the Admiral Kuznetsov Aircraft Cruiser
and the missile cruiser Petr Veliki [Peter
the Great]. The accompanying passages
discuss the operational details and plans
for the base, which will aid Russian efforts
to support Syria and could also support
a permanent Russian naval presence
in the Mediterranean. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“On January 20, Moscow
and Damascus signed a 49year agreement to modernize
the repair and docking
facility in the Syrian port of
Tartus. Upon the agreement’s
expiration, a 25-year
extension will be automatic
unless one side informs the
other a year in advance of
any desired changes.”

Source: Nickolai Litovkin, “Russia to build full-fledged naval base in Syria,” Russia Beyond
the Headlines, 23 January 2017. http://rbth.com/international/2017/01/23/russia-to-build-fullfledged-naval-base-in-syria_686651
The Tartus naval repair facility was built by the Soviet government in 1977, and is the only
Russian naval facility on the Mediterranean Sea. Until recently, the Tartus facility was nothing
but a floating pontoon for rudimentary ship repair. According to the new agreement, Russia
will build a full-fledged base at Tartus and have the right to deploy up to 11 ships in the area.
Retired Colonel Mikhail Khodorenok stated “We’re beginning major construction of military
infrastructure - a wharf, barracks, headquarters, ammunition storage, and so on. Tartus will
turn into a naval base headed by a fleet Vice Admiral.” Khodorenok added that it would take
two to three years to build the base. The number of servicemen stationed there will depend on
the number of ships deployed in Tartus, and it’s highly unlikely that 11 ships will be docked in
the region at the same time. Instead, most likely about five ships will be based in Tartus on a
regular basis, while visiting ships will appear from time to time.
According to Vadim Kozyulin, a professor at the Academy of Military Sciences “Ships that
are part of the Admiral Kuznetsov aircraft carrier group will be stationed at the base. Large
landing, patrol and anti-submarine ships, most likely from the Black Sea and Northern Fleets.”
Source: Mikhail Falaleyev, “Встанем у моря. В сирийском Тартусе будет российская
военная база (We Will Stand by Sea. There Will Be Russian Military Base in Syria’s Tartus),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 22 January 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/01/22/rossijskie-korabli-budutbazirovatsia-v-sirijskom-tartuse.html

We Will Stand by Sea. There Will Be Russian Military Base in Syria’s Tartus
Our naval base will be able to receive 11 large warships, including those equipped with
nuclear power plants. In fact, this will not only be a transit facility for restocking food and
drinking water but also a place for high-tech repairs. This means that Russia will build a
modern production facility, including complete docks capable of receiving nuclear vessels.
But this will not just be a giant “repair shop” or a transit point but a combat position: It
will be possible to deliver air and sea strikes against terrorists from this base. The base will
have control systems for anti-aircraft and antisubmarine warfare. A battery of S-300 missile
defense weapon systems is already stationed there. Up to 10 ships and auxiliary vessels are
serving as part of a naval force in the Mediterranean Sea, with one of its bases located in
Tartus. Small missile ships Zelenyy Dol, Serpukhov, and Mirazh have recently joined the force
on rotation.

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of the Lone
Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of low-level guerrilla
combat as told by the survivors. They cover fighting from the cities
of Grozny and Argun to the villages of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt,
and finally the hills, river valleys and mountains that make up
so much of Chechnya. Dodge Billingsley, the primary author was
embedded with Chechen guerrilla forces after the first war, so he
knows the country, the culture, the key actors and the conflict.
Yet, as a Western outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and
objectivity. Fangs of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into
what is becoming modern and future war.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf
OE Watch | March 2017

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Hypersonic Weaponry
OE Watch Commentary: Russia will be adding hypersonic
weaponry to its arsenal in the near future. As the accompanying
passage from a Russian source discusses, hypersonic ammunition is
a weaponry type that travels at a speed of “mach five” or above (five
times the speed of sound), which is around 3750 miles an hour. The
major selling point of such ammunition is its lack of vulnerability. Air
defense weapons systems are currently unable to stop a projectile that
is flying at such a speed, with the exception of the S-500 Prometheus
surface-to-air missile. The excerpt details the advantages of this
system for Russia, noting that “Russian developments in the sphere of
hypersonics will ensure military parity for at least the next 40 years.”
While the speed at which the round flies is a major selling point,
there are two major drawbacks to hypersonic ammunition. The first
is that the shell risks being destroyed due to the high speeds and
temperatures. The second is that a cloud of white hot plasma forms
around the shell that could burn the equipment necessary to control
of the missile. According to a recent statement by Russian military
officials, Russia has succeeded in overcoming both of these issues.
Due to this success, multiple Tsirkon anti-ship missiles will be
outfitted on some of Russia’s fleet such as the Admiral Nakhimov, the
Petr Velikiy and the Admiral Kuznetsov.
This weaponry would allow Russia to carry out precision air strikes
while disregarding missile defense systems. It would also allow
Russia to bypass nuclear options, as the kinetic energy of the warhead
arriving from space would be more than enough to destroy the
intended target. End OE Watch Commentary (McConnell)

“In the opinion of experts from the Foundation
for Advanced Research, Russian developments
in the sphere of hypersonics will ensure military
parity for at least the next 40 years.”
Source: Anton Valagin, “Какое гиперзвуковое оружие готовит
Россия (The Type of Hypersonic Weapons Russia is Preparing),”
Moscow Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 22 January 2017. https://
rg.ru/2017/01/22/kakoe-giperzvukovoe-oruzhie-gotovit-rossiia.html
“It is customary to consider a speed five or more times the speed
of sound hypersonic (Mach five and above) – roughly, above 6,000
kilometers an hour, or 1.6 kilometers a second. This is twice the
speed of a bullet fired from a sniper rifle. The key advantage
of hypersonic ammunition is its lack of vulnerability – none of
the existing air defense or missile defense systems are capable
of stopping a target flying at such a speed. The Russian S-500
Prometheus surface-to-air missile system, whose tasks include
intercepting hypersonic targets, has just started tests. Other
countries have such systems at the development stage, at best.”
“In the opinion of experts from the Foundation for Advanced
Research, Russian developments in the sphere of hypersonics will
ensure military parity for at least the next 40 years.”

New National Guard Equipment: Electric-Shock Batons
OE Watch Commentary: Reports
out of Moscow indicate that the
National Guard will be armed with a
ZEUS baton that possesses an LED
flashlight, a laser sight, and the ability
to fire electronic shocks up to five
meters and stun grenades from a builtin rail. The baton is tied to its owner
via a special chip code ensuring that
it can only be used by its owner. The
batons will be in use by patrols and
those responsible for maintaining public
order. End OE Watch Commentary
(Thomas)

“ZEUS has undergone
clinical trials—the
impact from the shocker
immobilizes the offender
without damaging his
internal organs, ears, or
eyes.”

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “National Guard Troops Will Be Armed with Electric-Shock Batons.
New Batons Contain Flashlights, Laser Pointers, and Can Throw Grenades,” Izvestiya Online,
23 January 2017.
On the outside ZEUS differs little from traditional devices used by security forces: a rubber
stick with two electrodes at its tip. The only visible difference is probably the Picatinny rail (a
rail interface system).
“We specialize in the development of non-lethal weapons and therefore understand very well
what functionality is required for the security forces, what tasks they perform and in what
conditions,” Igor Shushura told Izvestiya. “ZEUS is unique in that, unlike similar foreign
devices, it combines several functions. It performs its routine functions (as an electric-shock
baton) and, because of its powerful flashlight, it can be used by a serviceman to inspect a car or
the basement of a residential building at night.”
What makes the new shocker different is that, in addition to close-quarters combat, it can also
be used for shooting the offender within a range of five meters. Special cartridges with electric
needles which cause neuromuscular incapacitation are used for that. It is equipped with a laser
pointer for precise targeting.
If a serviceman just needs to stop somebody by temporarily blinding and deafening him he can
install on the device a cartridge with stun grenades instead of one with needles.
ZEUS has undergone clinical trials—the impact from the shocker immobilizes the offender
without damaging his internal organs, ears, or eyes. In addition, the shocker is also an
individual-use device, which can only be used by its owner. Each device is equipped with a
personal chip code containing the owner’s data. If the owner drops the device for any reason, it
immediately stops working.
OE Watch | March 2017

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russia’s UAV Virtual Cellular Communication Tower
OE Watch Commentary: The
modernization of Russia’s unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) continues to
impress foreign observers. A recent
report notes that the Leer-3 UAV
can effectively turn into a “virtual
cellular station” by sending messages
and totally controlling a subscriber’s
devices once it replaces a base station.
If it manages to take the place of a
cellular communications tower, it
can also send audio messages and
small video clips to subscribers. The
accompanying passages from the
report discuss some of the capabilities
of these UAVs.
The Leer-3 RB-341V Electronic
Warfare UAV was used to send
out instant messages to armed
formations in Syria “with application
forms for the Armistice,” according
to Lieutenant-General Sergey
Kuralenko, the Chief of the Center for
the Reconciliation of the Opposing
Sides in Syria. It thus appears to have
some psychological warfare mission
implications, if it can do all of these
tasks. The Leer-3 can reportedly
block enemy mobile telephones while
simultaneously not impeding the
operation of friendly mobiles phones.
The systems can collect telephone
numbers and call these numbers while
blocking other people’s signals. It
may also be able to remotely connect
user devices as well. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“The Leer-3 complex is composed of three Orlan-10 UAVs
and a command and control post on a KamAZ-5350 truck. The
unmanned aerial vehicles’ primary mission is to suppress cellular
communication towers. To do this, special ‘ jammers’ have been
installed onboard the Orlan-10 UAVs, and also disposable jammers,
which they drop onto the ground. Having jammed the base stations,
the old Orlan-10 UAVs were able to send instant messages to
subscribers under certain conditions…But the new flying drones can
easily handle those targets. They ‘ jam’ base stations and take their
place, while becoming virtual cellular stations.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Vladimir Zykov, “The Russian Army Has Obtained a Cellular
Weapon: The Modernized Leer-3 Complex Will Be Able to Send Instant Messages and Audio
and Video Messages,” TASS, 25 January 2017. http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/3969215
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), which are capable of taking the place of a cellular
communications tower and of sending instant messages, audio messages, and small video clips
to subscribers in the future, have been officially accepted into the Russian Army inventory. The
drones have already completed successful tests during the course of the Russian Operation in
Syria and will arrive at Ministry of Defense subunits in the near future.
The new UAVs have been developed based upon the Orlan-10 unmanned aerial vehicle. They
will become part of the modernized Leer-3 RB-341V electronic warfare complex. The first Leer
UAVS, the mission of which is the suppression of the Global System for Mobile Communications
(GSMC) networks, arrived in the troops already in 2015. But until recently, the complexes
were not always capable of working with the networks, where the 3G and 4G generations of
information transmission technologies are being used.
“The Leer-3 complex is composed of three Orlan-10 UAVs and a command and control post
on a KamAZ-5350 truck. The unmanned aerial vehicles’ primary mission is to suppress cellular
communication towers. To do this, special ‘ jammers’ have been installed onboard the Orlan-10
UAVs, and also disposable jammers, which they drop onto the ground. Having jammed the base
stations, the old Orlan-10 UAVs were able to send instant messages to subscribers under certain
conditions…But the new flying drones can easily handle those targets. They ‘ jam’ base stations
and take their place, while becoming virtual cellular stations.”

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further, he has
taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian territory that
was taken, from his perspective, illegally. This book describes
Putin and the military’s use of various strategic concepts,
the Defense Ministry’s new equipment and reform initiatives,
and Putin’s geopolitical quest for influence in the Arctic and
Ukraine. Included in the discussion are some of the unintended
consequences of his actions (negative world opinion, sanctions,
NATO responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | March 2017

54

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

Top

By John Costello

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief. This article is from China Brief, Volume 16, Issue 19 , dated 21 December 2016.
https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-support-force-update-overview/

SPECIAL
ESSAY

The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
It has been nearly a year since the first round of military reforms
responsible for the creation of the Strategic Support Force (战略支援
部队; SSF). Although media reports were initially forthcoming with
information, references to the SSF quickly dropped off, leaving far
more questions than answers. However, as the PLA has started a more
serious and concrete implementation of the hard work of reforms,
more details have gradually emerged. A year on, there is enough
information available to enable a basic understanding of the Force’s
structure, unit composition, and future direction. The SSF has become
a force optimized for combat in space, cyberspace, and the electromagnetic domain that will enhance the PLA’s capability to fight and
win future informatized wars.

Force Overview
It is important to note that, while the SSF is a unique product of
the reforms, it is built from the familiar. The reforms have thus far
employed a “bricks not clay” approach to reorganization, repurposing
whole, existing institutions and reforming them into new organizations to align with new paradigms, presumably with more minute
changes to follow. This is best seen in the reorganization of the former
four general departments into the new Central Military Commission
functional organs.[1] Following from this concept, the SSF appears
to be wholly constructed from the operational units and organizations from the former general departments, particularly the General
Staff Department (GSD), General Armament Department (GAD),
and General Political Department (GPD) units responsible for space,
cyber, and electronic warfare, the SSF’s main missions.
The force looks to be primarily designed around two operational
imperatives. One, is peacetime-wartime integration (平战结合 or 平
战一体). Previous operating concept would have required the PLA to
transition to a wartime posture just prior to or shortly after the outbreak of war. For strategic-level information operations, in real terms
this would require unprecedented coordination between GSD, GAD,
GPD, and Military Region units across different echelons. The SSF
simplifies this process dramatically, effectively organizing these units
into operational groups under new domain-centric verticals as standard practice, optimized, like the new Military Theater Commands (
战区), as a wartime structure.
Two, the SSF is intended to shift the PLA’s most strategic, informatized missions from a discipline-centric to domain-centric force
structure. Previously, space, cyber, and electronic warfare units were
organized according to their mission type—the disciplines of reconnaissance, attack, or defense—rather than their war-fighting domain.
This is best seen in the cyber mission, for which espionage was handled by the 3PLA, while the attack elements were handled by the
4PLA. The central concept here is the idea of “integrated reconnaissance, attack, and defense” (侦攻防一体化), which requires that the
intelligence, offensive, and defensive elements are integrated together
to enable full-spectrum war-fighting in a particular domain. This new
organizational construct is also intended to enable previously impossible levels of unified planning, force construction, and operations.[2]

Force Structure and Composition
Established on December 31, 2015, the Strategic Support Force is a
Military Theater-grade (正战区级) or Deputy Military Theater-grade
(副战区级) organization commanded by former Second Artillery
Force Major General Gao Jin (高津). The political commissar is Major

General Liu Fulian (刘福连)i. Li Shangfu (李尚福), former director of
the GAD Xichang Satellite Launch Center (西昌卫星发射中心; 27th
Base) has been identified as a deputy commander of the SSFii. Rao
Kaixun (饶开勋), former director of the 1PLA, is reportedly another
deputy commanderiii. The SSF is responsible for the PLA’s space, cyber,
and electronic warfare missions. Functionally and structurally, the
SSF operates like the former Second Artillery Force (第二炮兵部队;
PLASAF), which was similarly a budui that functioned like a service
and consolidated strategic capabilities under the CMCiv.
Under this leadership, the force appears to have a staff department,
equipment department, political department, and, presumably, a
logistics department. More operationally, the force appears to have
headquarters components for its space and cyber forces, embodied in
the Space Systems Department (航天系统部; SSF-SSD) and Network
Systems Department (网络系统部; SSF-NSD), respectively. The SSF
may create or already have an Electronic/Electromagnetic Systems
Department (电子/电磁系统部; ESD) for its electronic warfare force.
These departments may be subordinate to the staff department or,
more likely, to SSF leadership directly, which would make them Corps
Leader grade (正军级) or Deputy Corps Leader grade (副军级) organizations.

Space and Aerospace Mission
Of the known missions of the SSF, the space mission has been the
best defined in the year since its creation. Space units are organized
into the newly-established Space Systems Department. The former
General Armament Department’s space mission forms the basis for
the Space Systems Department, although the department also draws
units and missions from the former General Staff Department. The
SSD consolidates nearly every aspect of PLA space operations, including space launch, support, telemetry, tracking, and control (TT&C)
and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR). The current
head of the SSD is unknown, though would likely come from the
GAD’s space cadre.
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

55

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

Top

By John Costello

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief. This article is from China Brief, Volume 16, Issue 19 , dated 21 December 2016.
https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-support-force-update-overview/

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
Launch Facilities:
English Name and Cover Designation
1. Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center / 20th Testing and Training Base (63600部队)
2. Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center / 25th Testing and Training Base (63710部队)
3. Xichang Satellite Launch Center / 27th Testing and Training Base (63790部队)
4. Wenchang Aerospace Launch Site

Chinese Name
中国酒泉卫星发射中心 ／第20试验训练基地
中国太原卫星发射中心 ／第25试验训练基地
中国西昌卫星发射中心 ／第27试验训练基地
文昌航天发射场

Sources: (1) “航天员景海鹏陈冬入住太空“新”家” (Astronauts Jin Haipeng, Chen Dong, Move in to « New » Home in Space), PLA Daily, October
20, http://www.81.cn/jmywyl/2016-10/20/content_7312493.htm; 我国成功发射云海一号01星 (China Successfully Launches Yunhai 01 Star), PLA Daily, November 11, http://zz.81.cn/content/2016-11/12/content_7355138.htm; (2) Zhejiang University, September 27 (3) 中国西昌卫星发射中心：打造卫
星发射“新引擎 (China Xichang Satellite Launch Center: to Develop and Launch “New Engine” Satellite), Strategic Support, April 17, http://chuansong.
me/n/518219052766; 我国成功发射风云四号科研试验卫星 (China Successfully Launches FengYun 4 Scientific Research and Experiment Satellite), PLA
Daily, December 12 http://jz.chinamil.com.cn/n2014/tp/content_7401227.htm (4) 让青春在追逐强军梦想中绽放 (Allowing Youth to Blossom in the
Pursuit of the Dream of a Strong Military), PLA Daily, May 8, http://www.mod.gov.cn/power/2016-05/08/content_4654402.htm; “眼睛可以失明，但追梦
的脚步不能迷失方向”——记海南文昌航天发射场工程建设指挥部工程师周湘虎 (“The Eye May Go Blind, but the Pursuit of the Dream’s Pace Must
Not Flounder/Get Lost”—Hainan Province’s Wenchang Spaceflight Launching Site Headquarters Engineer Zhou Xianghu Wrote), PLA Daily, November 1,
http://news.xinhuanet.com/2016-11/01/c_1119830374.htm

Space Telemetry, Tracking, & Control:
English Name and Cover Designation
1. Beijing Aerospace Flight Control Center
2. Xi’an Satellite Control Center / 26th Testing and Training Base (63750部队)
3. Telemetry, Tracking, and Control Stations (e.g., Kashi station)
4. China Satellite Maritime Tracking and Control Department 23rd Testing and Training Base

Chinese Name
北京航天飞行控制中心
中国西安卫星测控中心 ／第26试验训练基地
[喀什] 航天测控站
中国卫星海上测控部／第23试验训练基地

Sources: (1) 北京航天飞行控制中心：实行型号团队机制迎战高密度航天任务 (Beijing Spaceflight Control Center: The Implementation of Model Team
Mechanism Takes on High-Density Spaceflight), Strategic Support, April 10, http://chuansong.me/n/518219552684; (2) Zhejiang University, September 27;
娄勤俭在战略支援部队驻陕某部走访慰问 (Lou Qinjian Visits PLA Strategic Support Force Stationed in Shaanxi and Salutes Them) Weinan Daily, July
30, http://www.weinan.gov.cn/news/zwyw/525891.htm; (3) 走进“中国航天测控第一站” (Enter “China’s First Spaceflight Monitoring and Control Station”),
PLA Daily, May 3 http://www.81.cn/jsjz/2016-05/03/content_7030079.htm; (4) 新型舰只装备战略支援部队 用于卫星海上测控 (New Ship Type to Equip
Strategic Support Force for Monitoring and Control of Spaceflight at Sea), Phoenix, June 30, http://news.ifeng.com/a/20160630/49269997_0.shtml; 战略支
援部队如何锻造新质利器:多搞原创出奇制胜, (PLA Strategic Support Force on How to Forge a New Weapon: Create More Unorthodox Surprises), PLA
Daily, March 3 2016, http://www.chinanews.com/mil/2016/03-11/7792939.shtml

The SSD has also incorporated certain units from the General Staff Department, though much fewer than from the GAD, which had comparatively greater number of units responsible for space mission. The Aerospace Reconnaissance Bureau (航天侦察局; ARB), responsible for
aerospace ISR, has shifted to the SSF, based on personnel transfers, including that of Zhou Zhixin (周志鑫), head of the ARBv. The Satellite Main
Station (卫星通信总站; SMS) from the former GSD Informatization Department (总参信息化部; INFOD) has also been incorporated into the
SSFvi. [3]

English Name and Cover Designation
Aerospace Reconnaissance Bureau (ARB) 61646部队
Satellite Main Station (SMS) 61096部队*

Chinese Name
航天侦察局
卫星总站

Sources: 军队15位“大咖”畅谈如何提升军事创新能力 (Fifteen Military “Big Shots” Discuss How to Improve Military Innovation), PLA Daily, April
9 2016, http://www.81.cn/jwgz/2016-04/09/content_6998103_2.htm; 战略支援部队某总站党委在转隶调整中发挥凝心聚力作用纪实 (Strategic Support Force, PLA Daily, February 29 2016, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/n1/2016/0229/c117092-28158656.html; 卫星点波束的移动目标指向优化研究
(Moving-Target Pointing Optimization of Satellite Spot-Beam), Paper Download Page, CNKI, http://cnki.sgst.cn/KCMS/detail/detail.aspx?filename=TXJS201505006&dbcode=CJFD&dbname=CJFD2015.
* Both the ARB and Satellite Main Station have been split off from their former parent units, which have become new bureaus under the General Staff Department’s successor, the CMC Joint Staff Department (联合参谋部; JSD). The GSD 2PLA has become the new JSD Intelligence Bureau (情报局; JSD-IB)
and the GSD INFOD has become the new JSD Information Communications Bureau (信息通信局; JSD-CIB).

Although a more comprehensive analysis of where the former General Armament Departments operational and R&D units have moved is beyond the scope of this report, it is worth noting that a number of these organizations that fall outside of the space mission have also moved to the
SSF. Some serve administrative or support functions, such as the GAD 306th Hospital, which was transferred from the GAD in July 2016, while
others are more germane to the SSF’s missionvii. Such R&D-focused institutes may be housed in the SSD or alternatively could have been transferred to the SSF’s Equipment Department, or some equivalent.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

56

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

Top

By John Costello

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief. This article is from China Brief, Volume 16, Issue 19 , dated 21 December 2016.
https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-support-force-update-overview/

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
English Name and Cover Designation
1. China Nuclear Test Base / 21st Experimental and Training Base 63650部队*
2. Aerospace Research and Development Center
3. Project Design Research Center

Chinese Name
中国核试验基地／第21试验训练基地
航天研发中心
工程设计研究所

Sources: (1) 中国核试验基地科学家干惊天动地事 做隐姓埋名人 (China’s Nuclear Test Base Scientists Move Heaven and Earth While Maintaining
Anonymity), PLA Daily, January 30, http://military.people.com.cn/n1/2016/0130/c1011-28097575.html; (2) 国家863计划“北斗地基导航信号网络关键
技术”课题通过科技部技术验收评审 (National 863 Program “Beidou Ground Navigation Signal Network Key Technology” Goes Through Ministry of
Science and Technology Technical Assessment and Appraisal Upon Delivery, China Transport Telecommunications and Information Center, October 17
http://www.cttic.cn/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=show&catid=10&id=1848; Zhejiang University, September 27; (3) 国家863计划“北斗地基导航信
号网络关键技术”课题通过科技部技术验收评审 (National 863 Program “Beidou Ground Navigation Signal Network Key Technology” Goes Through
Ministry of Science and Technology Technical Assessment and Appraisal Upon Delivery, China Transport Telecommunications and Information Center,
October 17 http://www.cttic.cn/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=show&catid=10&id=1848; Zhejiang University, September 27
*Military researchers affiliated with the GAD 21st Test Base have published journal articles discussing directed energy weapons (DEW), which suggests that
this base may have a mission to conduct research into operational uses of lasers or other directed-energy weapons. This aligns with the Strategic Support
Forces mission to be a “new-type” (新型) force responsible for “new-type” capabilities, which DEWs have traditionally been characterized as.

There are key remaining questions regarding the SSF’s space mission. For one, it remains unclear whether the Space Systems Department will incorporate kinetic anti-satellite capabilities, such as
direct-ascent weapons, or those will remain with the successor to
the form PLASAF, the PLA Rocket Force (解放军火箭军; PLARF).
It is also unclear whether the SSD will incorporate operational units
responsible for hydrology, meteorology, mapping, and navigation,
although there are initial indications that some of these units are now
part of the SSFviii. These units were previously under the GSD First
Department (总参一部; 1PLA; also known as the Operations Department), Survey and Mapping Bureau (总参测绘导航局; SMB).
The 1PLA is now reorganized as the JSD Operations Bureau (作战局;
JSD-OB) under the Joint Staff Department, with the new Battlefield
Environmental Support Bureau (战场环境保障局; JSD-BESB) taking
the place of the former Survey and Mapping Bureauix.
Cyber Mission
Although the SSF’s cyber mission has thus far been far less defined
than its space mission, the details and structure are becoming progressively clearer. The Strategic Support Force’s cyber forces appear to be
organized under the newly-established SSF Network Systems Department (网络系统部; SSF-NSD). The former General Staff Department
Third Department (总参三部; 3PLA) appears to be the central component around which the NSD is organized. The 3PLA is the Chinese
military’s premiere cyber espionage organization, and their preeminence in this domain makes them a natural fit as the primary “tentpole” for the SSF’s cyber force. Although the leadership of the NSD is
unknown, Zheng Junjie (郑俊杰), former head of the 3PLA, may have
moved over, but this cannot yet be independently confirmed. This
would put him in contention as a potential Commander of the NSD.
Multiple organizations subordinate to or affiliated with the former
3PLA have moved over to the Strategic Support Force. Most noteworthy, the GSD 56th and 58th Research Institutes, both formerly under
the 3PLA, have moved to the Network Systems Departmentx. The GSD
56th and 58th Research Institutes previously reported directly to 3PLA
headquarters, and were tasked with military research, development,
testing, and acquisition (RDT&A) in support of 3PLA’s mission. [4]
Additionally, a growing number of public records link former 3PLA
units and facilities—in particular, former Technical Reconnaissance
Bureau’s and the 3PLA headquarters itself—to the SSFxi. These moves
are reliable indicators not only that the core functions of 3PLA have

moved, including its administrative responsibilities but also that the
Network Systems Department itself may be synonymous with the
3PLA, essentially acting as a renamed, reorganized version of the former department. [5]
Other aspects of cyber warfare, including cyber-attack and cyber
defense, should be expected to shift into the NSD, yet there have been
no indicators of this so far. Computer network attack (CNA) has traditionally been handled by the GSD Fourth Department (4PLA) and
the computer network defense (CND) mission has been handled by
the GSD Informatization Department. While elements of both organizations have moved to the SSF, there is no indication that their cyber
missions have yet been tasked specifically to the NSD. [6] It is likely
that these missions will move to the NSD within the coming few years
to align with the principles around which the SSF is organized and to
fulfill the concept of “integrated cyber-attack, defense, and reconnaissance.” [7]
Although cyber constitutes one of its primary missions, the 3PLA
is also responsible for traditional signals and communications intelligence, which doesn’t fit squarely into the Network Systems Department. If the Network Systems Department is solely focused on cyber
warfare, as its name implies, then the traditional signals intelligence
mission of the nation-wide network of TRB’s would need to find a new
home. This a substantial portion of the 3PLA’s personnel, facilities,
and organizational mass. Currently, it is unclear if the Central Military
Commission will split this mission away from the 3PLA, but given the
trajectory of the reforms this seems likely.
Electronic Warfare Mission
At this point, the least amount of information is known or can be
confirmed about the status of the SSF’s electronic warfare (EW) mission. The General Staff Department Fourth Department (总参四部;
4PLA), also known as the Electronic Countermeasure and Radar Department (电子对抗与雷达部), has been responsible for strategic-level, or national level, electronic warfare for the PLA. [8] In contrast to
the space and cyber missions, which have been scattered across several
different in the general departments, the electronic warfare mission
had been solely under the remit of the 4PLA. Given these facts, it is
likely the 4PLA will have a strong, central role in the electronic warfare mission under the SSF—perhaps even forming a separate systems
department of its own—though so far the extent of the 4PLA’s move,
though assumed, is unclear.
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

57

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

By John Costello

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief. This article is from China Brief, Volume 16, Issue 19 , dated 21 December 2016.
https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-support-force-update-overview/

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
In recent months, there have been some preliminary indicators that
suggest portions of the 4PLA have been transferred. The 54th Research
Institute, formerly subordinate to the 4PLA, appears to have moved to
the SSF, though it is not clear under what administrative structurexii.
Previously, the GSD 54th RI reported directly to 4PLA headquarters,
and much like the 56th and 58th Research Institutes for the 3PLA, its
move is a strong indicator that core components of the 4PLA now report to the Strategic Support Force. The fate of the 4PLA’s operational
units, alternatively, have been assumed to move but their status is still
unconfirmed; however, their primacy in strategic electronic warfare
makes their move to the SSF a near-certainty.
Speculatively, the SSF may create an equivalent Electronic or Electromagnetic Systems Department, analogous to the Space Systems Department and Network Systems Department, to oversee a force to fight
in the electromagnetic domain. Presumably, the 4PLA would serve
as the central “tentpole” around which the rest of the force would be
formed. This would mean that each of the SSF’s confirmed missions of
space, cyber, and electronic warfare would have a main administrative
and operational headquarters under the SSF, responsible for warfighting in their respective domains.
This potential structure could answer the question as to the status
of the 3PLA’s traditional signals intelligence mission, if it is eventually
split off from the Network Systems Department. A notional Electromagnetic Systems Department would be a natural home for the 3PLA’s
technical reconnaissance mission, which would provide the both the
domain reconnaissance component supporting the 4PLA’s electronic
warfare mission as well as the critical intelligence component for the
PLA’s expanding strategic missions.
Informatization
The Informatization Department and its subordinate units do not
appear to have moved to the Strategic Support Force as initially predicted, but rather seem to have remained largely within the Central
Military Commission thus farxiii. The Informatization Department has
been reorganized into the Information Communications Bureau (信息
通信局; JSD-ICB) under the CMC’s Joint Staff Department. Its former research institute, the 61st Research Institute, has also remained
within the CMC but moved to the CMC Equipment Development
Departmentxiv. [9]
Operationally, the CMC has appeared to have retained units for
force-wide information support. The highest-echelon organization
responsible for command and control, the Information Support Base
(联合参谋信息保障基地; JSD-ISB) formerly under the Informatization Department, has remained under the CMC Joint Staff Department, presumable directly reporting to Information Communications
Bureauxv. Before the reforms, all national-level informatization units
and communications main stations reported directly to the ISB. It is
unclear how many will still remain subordinate to the ISB. An overly
cautious Central Military Commission, reluctant to give up too much
control of information, may choose to keep a number of these informatized units under its direct purview.
The structure and shape of this CMC informatization corps is currently unknown. Speculatively, it is possible that the Central Military
Commission may create a joint informatization force similar in structure and scope to the Joint Logistics Support Force (军委联合后勤保
障部队; JLSF), a fusion of former General Logistics Department units
and possibly logistics units from the other service branchesxvi. [10]
Such a “Joint Information Support Force” (军委联合信息保障部队)

would presumably be responsible for national-level, joint information
support, command and control, information security, and intelligence
dissemination.
At this point, it remains unclear whether and to what extent the
SSF will incorporate an informatization or information support mission. Some informatization units are confirmed to have moved to the
Strategic Support Force, but these could be the exception rather than
the rule. Units responsible for elements of space information support,
computer network defense, and spectrum sensing/management are
expected to move over to corresponding missions in the Strategic Support Force, but there has been no confirmation in open sources thus
far.

Conclusion
Thus far, the Central Military Commission has focused on making broad strokes and affecting change in larger, leading organizations first, in what the PLA is calling an “above the neck” (脖子以
上) reformxvii. Such an approach minimizes disruptiveness of reforms
and helps generate buy-in from leadership on deeper cuts that will
undoubtedly take place in the future. Ultimately, this serves as a slow,
incremental baseline on which future reforms can be built. For the
Strategic Support Force, this has meant that the old siloed nature of
space, cyber, and electronic warfare have been broken and reorganized
into new verticals.
This alone, however, will not be enough. Although the organizational structure now employed by the SSF is a better representation of
a domain-centric view of war fighting, some incongruences remains at
lower levels. Elements of the former GSD’s cyber, space, and electronic warfare capabilities remain integrated within units responsible for
other missions. To fully follow-through on the conceptual framework
employed for the Strategic Support Force, deeper, more painful cuts
will need to happen. The PLA is now embarking on “below the neck” (
脖子以下) reforms, likely to be implemented over the remaining three
year period the reforms are intended to take place. This process will
presumably entail undertaking deeper, more difficult changes than
previous changes have presaged. For the SSF, this will be the test to see
whether the PLA can fully implement the concepts and guiding paradigms that will enable better war-fighting or institutional barriers and
vested interests will win the day.
John Costello is a Senior Analyst for Cyber and East Asia at Flashpoint. He is also a Cybersecurity Fellow for New America.

Notes
1. In the reforms, the four general departments, the General Staff
Department (总参谋部; GSD), General Political Department (
总政治部; GPD), General Logistics Department (总后勤部;
GLD), and General Armament Department (总装备部; GAD)
have become slimmed-down, CMC functions organs called
the Joint Staff Department (军委联合参谋部; JSD), Political
Work Department (军委政治工作部; PWD), Logistics Support
Department (军委后勤保障部; LSD), and Equipment Development Department (军委装备发展部; EDD), respectively.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

58

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

By John Costello

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief. This article is from China Brief, Volume 16, Issue 19 , dated 21 December 2016.
https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-support-force-update-overview/

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
6. While the PLA has so far move whole organizations, it can’t be
ruled out that the CMC may move smaller pieces of organizations when necessary. For instance, the CMC moved the 2PLA
to the CMC, reorganizing it as the Intelligence Bureau (JSD-IB),
and moved the 2PLA Aerospace Reconnaissance Bureau (ARB)
to the SSF Space Systems Department; effectively separating
the components of the organization. Generally, however, it
appears that the CMC is building with whole organizations, but
lingering uncertainty as to how deeply the CMC is cutting into
traditional mission sets hinders the ability to make predictions
with greater confidence.
7. In the previous structure, each Service Branch, including the
PLASAF, and Military Regions maintained their own Technical
Reconnaissance Bureaus. The SSF does not seem to incorporate
these other Service or MR-specific TRB’s, and they appear to
continue to be entities independent of the SSF’s cyber mission
as inherited from the 3PLA. Interestingly, there are preliminary indicators to suggest that the former MR TRB’s are not
under the control of the new Military Theater Commands as
one would expect, but rather report directly to the new Army
Leading Organ, indicating that the Army is utilizing the former
network of MR TRB’s as a de facto reconnaissance branch in a
similar manner the former GSD used the 3PLA.
8. As previously discussed, the former 4PLA was also responsible for the PLA’s computer network attack mission. In general,
for information operations, the 4PLA appeared to act as the
“attack” element, with the 3PLA serving as the reconnaissance
element, while the Informatization Department acted as the
defense element.
9. The 61st Research Institutes name would therefore be the CMC
Equipment Development Department 61st Research Institute (
中央军委装备发展部第61研究所).
10. An excellent forthcoming paper from Erin Richter and Leigh
Ann Ragland-Luce examines the JLSF in greater detail. Thank
you to both for giving the author a basic introduction into the
JLSF.

2. Xiao Tianliang [肖天亮] (eds.), The Science of Military Strategy [战略学], National Defense University Press [国防大学
出版社], 2015, p. 388; Though the SSF does appear to have
incorporated a former General Political Department unit, the
311 Base (311基地; 61716部队) or the “Three Warfares Base,”
for now the status of this unit isn’t entirely clear. Traditionally,
the psychological dimension of warfare hasn’t been considered
a domain, per se, but rather a discipline under information
operations. It is not clear whether the PLA intends to create a
war-fighting force on par with those for space, cyber, and electronic warfare that would conduct psychological operations. See
http://www.cqvip.com/qk/81377x/201606/669378161.html and
http://www.cqvip.com/QK/97723X/201401/49213060.html for
personnel linkages between the 311 Base and the SSF.
3. Both the ARB and Satellite Main Station have been split off
from their former parent units, which have become new bureaus under the General Staff Department’s successor, the CMC
Joint Staff Department (联合参谋部; JSD). The GSD 2PLA has
become the new JSD Intelligence Bureau (情报局; JSD-IB) and
the GSD INFOD has become the new JSD Communications
and Information Bureau (通信信息局; JSD-IB).
4. According to Mark Stokes, Russell Hsiao, and Jenny Lin, the
56th Research Institute focuses on research and development of
advanced computing technologies, including supercomputers.
The GSD 58th RI focuses on cryptography and information
security. Both of these technologies have applicability to cyber
warfare. https://project2049.net/documents/pla_third_department_sigint_cyber_stokes_lin_hsiao.pdf
5. In this regard, it is noteworthy that so far the 3PLA’s sister organizations from the General Staff Department, the 2PLA and
INFOD, have remained under the GSD’s successor, the CMC
Joint Staff Department, along with their respective Research
Institutes. In this way, the various GSD Research Institutes may
be a useful bellwether for judging if a particular general department or organization has moved. Such an approach to renaming
is consistent with the PLA’s “bricks not clay” reform.

i

ii

iii

iv

v

陆军领导机构火箭军战略支援部队成立大会在京举行 习近平向中国人
民解放军陆军火箭军战略支援部队授予军旗并致训词 (Army Leadership
Convenes in Beijing to Form the Rocket Force and Strategic Support Force,
Xi Jinping Confers Colors and Delivers Speech to Army, Rocket Force, and
Strategic Support Force), Xinhua, January 1 2016, http://news.xinhuanet.com/
politics/2016-01/01/c_1117646667.htm
战略支援部队副司令员李尚福晋升中将军衔 (Strategic Support Force
Deputy Commander and Chief of Staff Li Shangfu Promoted to the Rank of
Lieutenant General), Sohu, August 30 2016, http://news.sohu.com/20160830/
n466791345.shtml
原总参作战部部长饶开勋任战略支援部队副司令员 (Former Chief
of Operations Department of the General Staff Department Rao Kaixun
to Serve as Deputy Commander of Strategic Support Force), The Paper,
November 3 2016, http://www.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_1417427;
代表信息 (Delegate Information), The National People’s Congress of the
People’s Republic of China, http://www.npc.gov.cn/delegate/viewDelegate.
action?dbid=122920.
John Costello, “The Strategic Support Force: China’s Information Warfare
Service.” The China Brief 16, no. 3 (February 8, 2016): 15-20. https://
jamestown.org/program/the-strategic-support-force-chinas-informationwarfare-service/
军队15位“大咖”畅谈如何提升军事创新能力 (Fifteen Military “Big Shots”
Discuss How to Improve Military Innovation), PLA Daily, April 9 2016, http://
www.81.cn/jwgz/2016-04/09/content_6998103_2.htm

vi

vii

viii

ix

x

战略支援部队某总站党委在转隶调整中发挥凝心聚力作用纪实 (Strategic
Support Force ‘Certain’ Station Party Committee Directs the Role of
Documentaries in Building Cohesiveness, PLA Daily, February 29 2016, http://
dangjian.people.com.cn/n1/2016/0229/c117092-28158656.html
解放军第306医院转隶成为战略支援部队总医院 (The PLA’s Number 306
Hospital Becomes Central Hospital for the Strategic Support Force), Sohu, July
31 2016, http://news.sohu.com/20160731/n461899452.shtml
嘿！气象兵，你每天都干些啥？(Hey! Meteorological Soldier, What Are
Some of Your Daily Routines ?) chuangsong, December 4 2016, http://
chuansong.me/n/1235731652757
原总参测绘导航局局长薛贵江少将任军委联合参谋部战保局局长 (Former
Director of Map Survey and Navigation Bureau of the Operations Department
of the General Staff Department, Major General Xue Guijiang to Head the Joint
Staff Department’s Station Projection Bureau), The Paper, February 19 2016,
http://www.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_1433620
中国人民解放军战略支援部队网络系统部第五十六研究所 (PLA Strategic
Support Force, Network Systems Department’s 56th Research Institute)
China Postgraduate Student News, http://yz.chsi.com.cn/sch/schoolInfo-schId-368175.dhtml; 中国人民解放军总参第五十八研究所 (PLA Strategic
Support Force, Network Systems Department’s 58th Research Institute)
China Postgraduate Student News, http://yz.chsi.com.cn/sch/schoolInfo-schId-367828.dhtml

OE Watch | March 2017

59

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

By John Costello

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.
Re-published in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief. This article is from China Brief, Volume 16, Issue 19 , dated 21 December 2016.
https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-support-force-update-overview/

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Continued: The Strategic Support Force: Update and Overview
xi

xii

战略支援部队某部双路服务器竞争性采购结果公示, (PLA Strategic Support
Force Two Way Server Procurement, Public Competitive Bid), Weapon
Procurement Information Network, December 6 2016, http://www.weain.mil.
cn/cggg/zbgg1/539568.html
网络空间战略论坛年度人物 (Participants in this Year’s Cyberspace
Strategy Forum), China Information Security Network, August 26 2016,
http://www.cnitsec.com.cn/index.php/index/articontent/menuid/52/
tabid/100/id/3001/type/news.html; 激光探测定位系统项目单一来源
采购公示公告 (Laser Detection Positioning System Project, Single Source
Procurement, Public Bulletin) Beijing Guotai Jianzhong Management &
Consultation Co., Ltd, October 31 2016, http://www.bjgtjz.com/newsview.
asp?nid=11478; 部分专家报告题目 (Part Experts’ Report Topics List),
IECAS & ORIA Chinese Radar Industry Association Journal, http://radars.
ie.ac.cn/UserFiles/File/2016%E9%95%BF%E6%98%A5%E9%9B%B7 %E8%
BE%BE%E4%B8%8E%E5%AF%B9%E6%8A%97%E7%A0%94%E8%AE%A8
%E4%BC%9A%E6%8A%A5%E5%91%8A-1025.pdf; 战略支援部队如何锻造新
质利器:多搞原创出奇制胜 (PLA Strategic Support Force on How to Forge a
New Weapon: Create More Unorthodox Surprises), PLA Daily, March 3 2016,
http://www.chinanews.com/mil/2016/03-11/7792939.shtml

xiii

xiv

xv

xvi

xvii

John Costello, The Strategic Support Force: China’s Information Warfare
Service, China Brief Volume 16 Issue 3, February 8 2016, https://jamestown.
org/program/the-strategic-support-force-chinas-information-warfare-service/
共青团中央文件 (Communist Youth League Central Documents), Communist
Youth League Website, April 27 2016, p.49, http://www.gqt.org.cn/
documents/zqf/201604/P020160429815623372920.pdf
2016年定向培养士官招生计划表及工作日程安排表 (2016 NonCommissioned Officer Vocational Development Schedule and Arranged Work
Schedule Table), Duxuan network, June 26 2016, http://www.duxuan.cn/
doc/5514893.html
习近平：军队改革是决定军队未来的关键一招,(Xi Jinping : Military Reform
is the Key Move to Decide Future Military), Sina, November 29 2016, http://
mil.news.sina.com.cn/china/2016-11-29/doc-ifxyawmm3819408.shtml
“脖子以下”改革展开，军代表关心三件事 (“Below the Neck”
Reform Spreads, PLA Representatives are Concerned with Three Things),
PLA Daily, December 19 2016, http://www.81.cn/jmywyl/2016-12/19/
content_7413070_2.htm

OE Watch | March 2017

60

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

By Michael Rubin

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
Iran’s approach to soft power is sophisticated and varied. While
the Islamic Republic’s religious rhetoric might dominate the Western
understanding of Iran, successive governments—both before and
after the 1979 Islamic Revolution—have sought to capitalize on Iran’s
culture, religion, and historical legacy to extend influence and achieve
aims far beyond its borders. To understand Iranian soft power therefore requires recognition of Persia’s imperial past, its religious evolution, Persian language and culture, and its history.

Capitalizing on an Imperial Legacy
Iran is not only a modern nation state, but it is also the inheritor of
an ancient civilization. While the Middle East and Asia are home to
many artificial states born in the twentieth century, Iran—or Persia,
as it was known until 1935—has had a near contiguous history and
sense of identity going back two millennia. Modern Iranian culture is
a mélange of the influences which dominated in various incarnations
of the Persian Empire and Iranian state.
The Persian Empire, at its greatest extent, stretched from the Mediterranean to India. Over just the last five hundred years, however, it
has lost half its territory: The Portuguese seized Bahrain in 1521; the
Ottoman Empire took Baghdad in 1638; and, in the nineteenth century, the Russian Empire wrested from Tehran’s control of what today is
Armenia, Azerbaijan, and part of Georgia. Iranian elementary school
texts teach about the Iranian roots not only of cities like Baku, but also
cities further north like Darbent, in southern Russia. The Shah lost
much of his claim to western Afghanistan after in the Anglo-Persian
War of 1856-1857. Between 1871 and 1872, Iran lost much of Baluchistan not to the British army, but rather to the Indo-European Telegraph Department, the nineteenth century equivalent of losing a battle
to the post office. While Iran today may be a shadow of the Persian
Empires of the past, a strong sense of history and pride pervades the
country. Many Iranians consider their former imperial boundaries to
be a natural sphere of influence, Iranzamin, just as Russian nationalists believe that Russia should have paramount influence within their
“near abroad.” Indeed, the notion of Iranzamin is a staple of rhetoric
and cultural conception which transcends the 1979 Islamic Revolution; it remains an important aspect of Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei’s rhetoric today.1 Indeed, this is why Ali Saidi, the Supreme Leaders representative to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
spoke about taking the fight “from Shalamcheh [on the Persian Gulf]
to the shores of the eastern Mediterranean” and, more recently, Gen.
Mohammad Jafar Assadi, a former ground forces commander, bragged
in January 2017 about Iranian influence again stretching from Iran to
the Mediterranean.2
If the history is one pillar of Iranian outreach and a commonality
upon which Iranian leaders shape soft power strategies, then religion
is another pillar. The Islamic Revolution may have inaugurated the
modern world’s first Shi’ite theocracy, but to assume Iran’s importance or attraction rests only upon Shi‘ite Islam is to misunderstand
the residual influence of Iran’s pre-Islamic past and its importance to
the development of Islam. Across the Iranian plateau, Zoroastrianism
grew from murky origins to become the official religion of the ancient
Achaemenid Empire. From their capital in Babylon and their dynastic
center at Persepolis, they ruled a vast empire stretching at its height
from the Balkans to the Indus River Valley. Zoroastrianism outlived
the Achaemenid Empire and dominated the Persian plateau for one
thousand years. Its embrace of duality came to permeate Iranian
culture, and not simply in terms of good versus evil. Even today under
the Islamic Republic, the most prominent holiday in Iran is not Islamic but rather cultural: Iran’s leading ayatollahs have long ago given

SPECIAL
ESSAY

up any effort to stamp out celebration of Nowruz, the pre-Islamic
Persian New Year which begins on the first day of the Spring Equinox and continues for almost two weeks. Rather than suppress this
pre-Islamic identity, they have embraced it as a mechanism by which
they can reach out to other “Persian” societies. In 2014, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, for example, spent his first Persian New Year as
president attending a Nowruz festival in Afghanistan rather than Iran.3
The annual festival, begun in Iran, is now hosted on a rotating basis in
other regional countries.
The magi, Zoroastrian priests, are all but forgotten to those in the
West except for their bit role in the New Testament as wise men bearing gifts. However, as a priestly class, they reigned supreme, at least up
until the rise of Islam. Islam arose in the seventh century against the
backdrop of a region exhausted by war. The Byzantine and Sassanid
Empires had fought each other to a standstill, exhausting both empires
and giving the new armies of Islam fertile ground to expand. By the
end of the Prophet Muhammad’s life in 632 AD, the Islamic Empire
stretched across the Arabian Peninsula. Over the next three decades, it
grew rapidly to encompass a region stretching from Libya to Afghanistan. The Arabs were predominantly a desert, nomadic people; managing a vast new empire required a different skill set. Enter both the
Zoroastrian magi and Persian bureaucrats who converted to Islam to
retain their privileged position. Herein lies Zoroastrianism’s relevance
to the present day: The magi, and by extension Iran, shaped Islam as
much as Islam shaped Iran. While outsiders might believe contemporary Iran’s reach to be limited to the ten or perhaps 15 percent of the
Islamic world that is Shi‘ite, the Iranian influence upon Islam is actually much greater. Iranian officials see themselves not simply as the
representative and protectors of international Shi‘ites, but rather as a
beacon for all Muslims.
Shi‘ism is, of course, part and parcel of the Islamic Republic, but for
Iran, it is actually a relatively new phenomenon. Iran was largely Sunni
until the beginning of the 16th century. In 1501, Shah Ismail Safavi,
the founder of the Safavid dynasty (1501-1736), decreed Shi‘ism to be
Iran’s official religion. He imported clergy from southern Lebanon (the
linkage between Lebanon and Iran thus extends back centuries before
the creation of Hezbollah in the wake of the 1982 Israeli invasion of
Lebanon) in order to replace and supplant a clerical class at the time
indistinguishable from the Ottoman Empire. While textbooks might
give 1501 as the date of Iran’s conversion, the process was slower. Just
as King Henry VIII’s break with the Catholic Church in England was
simply the start of a centuries-long religious upheaval rather than its
end, so too did Iran only became majority Shi‘ite around the time that
George Washington crossed the Delaware River.
Religion is one source of identity; ethnicity is another. While in
the West, a genetic definition of ethnicity predominates, in the Greater Middle East ethnicity has revolved around language since the late
1920s and early 1930s:4 An Arab is someone who speaks Arabic as
their mother tongue, a Turk is someone who speaks Turkish, and a
Persian is someone who speaks Persian (or its constituent dialects,
Farsi, Dari, or Tajik). Arabic may be the lingua franca of the Middle
East from the Mediterranean to the shores of the Persian Gulf, but
Persian fulfills that role from the mountains of Kurdistan through the
bazaars of Central Asia and down through the Indian subcontinent.
Indeed, the official language of India was Persian under the sixteenth
century Moghul Empire; only in 1832 did the British army force India’s
princes and rajas to conduct business in English. Even so, Persian
remains the language of culture and poetry throughout much of West,
South, and Central Asia. School children well beyond Iran’s borders
memorize the poetry of famous Persian poets like Rumi, Saadi, and
Hafez. When Iranian authorities reach out to Shi‘ite
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

61

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

By Michael Rubin

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
communities, like Afghanistan’s Hazaras, they might embrace sectarian identity as the commonality around which to shape soft-power
but, if their target is further afield—such as predominantly Sunni
Tajikistan, Iranian authorities would be more likely to draw on their
common ethnic heritage. That is not to say that other Persian speakers
always embrace Iran’s big brother attitudes; indeed, they often resent
it.5
Language and culture can be important for other reasons. Strategies
evolve within cultural contexts. Western academics may trace modern strategy and statecraft to Niccolò Machiavelli (1469-1527), and
China scholars may root Chinese strategy to Sun-Tzu (544-496 BC).
A genre of princely literature also developed during Sassanian times
in the centuries immediately before Persia’s Islamization. Mirrors for
Princes, books of protocol and other guides, elaborated on the relationships and duties of ruler and subject. The most famous examples
include the Qabusnama (“Book of [King] Qabus”) written by a 11th
century king ruling over what is now the southern coast of the Caspian Sea; Nasihat al-muluk (Counsel for Princes), written by the eleventh century philosopher and theologian Al-Ghazali (1058-1111); and
the Siyasatnama (“Book of Government”), a manual of government
written by the eleventh century Seljuq grand vizier Nizam al-Mulk
(1018-1092).6 The Siyasatnama included 50 chapters, ranging from
“On holding court for the redress of wrongs and practicing justice and
virtue,” to “On having troops of various races,” to “Exposing the facts
about heretics who are enemies of the state and of Islam.” There is
documentary evidence that rulers into the nineteenth century not only
kept such literature in their personal libraries, but that they also read
them.7 Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei may not see himself as a Persian king, but his strategy for ruling and for exporting his ideology has
far more in common with Iran’s imperial and intellectual past than it
does with other countries and regimes which have evolved out of other
cultural milieu. Beyond simply examining specific chapters of the Qabusname or Siyasatnama or any other example of “Mirrors for Princes”
literature, Notre Dame professor Deborah Tor’s “The Islamisation of
Iranian Kingly Ideals in the Persianate Furstenspiegel”8 provides some
useful context by showing the interplay between Islam and kingship
before the Islamic Revolution.
The Islamic Revolution transformed Iran from a country content
simply to be a regional power into one which sought to export its
ideology in order to remake other regional states into the Islamic
Republic’s image. For this, the concept of export of revolution became
paramount. The idea that this imperative to replicate Iran’s Islamic
revolution is simply within the realm of regime radicals and can be
dispensed by engaging regime moderates or reformers is naïve.
Both the constitution of the Islamic Republic and the founding
statutes of the IRGC make export of Iran’s Islamic Revolution part
of the raison d’être of the regime. Article 3 of the constitution, for
example, declares the goals of the regime to be both “the expansion
and strengthening of Islamic brotherhood and public cooperation
among all the people” and “unsparing support to the oppressed of the
world,” while Article 154 calls for support of the just struggles of the
oppressed against the arrogant in every corner of the globe.” The issue
came to a head in 2008 when former President Mohammad Khatami
suggested that the Iranian leadership formally understand revolutionary export in terms of soft power. “What did the Imam [Khomeini]
want, and what was his purpose of exporting the revolution? Did he
wish us to export revolution by means of gunpowder or groups sabotaging other countries?” Khatami asked, before suggesting Khomeini
“meant to establish a role model here, which means people should
see that in this society, the economy, science, and dignity of man are
respected….”9 While clergy closer to the Supreme Leader intervened

SPECIAL
ESSAY

to ensure a military understanding of revolutionary export predominated, the debate nonetheless highlighted the importance by which
Tehran holds soft power as an arrow in its quiver and illustrates the
fact that the difference between regime reformers and hardliners is one
of tactics rather than goals.
To illustrate these aspects, both the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and “the Last Will and Testament of Imam Khomeini” are useful because they illustrate the prerogative to export through
all means necessary, both hard and soft, the precepts and ideology of
the Islamic Republic. Indeed, Khomeini states in his Last Will and
Testament, “This politico-religious testament of mine is not made to
the noble people of Iran only. Rather, it is recommended for all Islamic
nations and the oppressed peoples of the world regardless of religious
or nationality.”10 Khomeini’s notion in particular is important because
it illustrates an Iranian objective to influence on a global scale, rather
than simply just among lands in which it has had historical influence.

The Iranian Way of Influence
Iranian soft power seeks both to exploit commonalities Iran shares
with the target it seeks to influence and to use a variety of tools to
achieve that influence. The first is the “Hezbollah model.” While the
United States government officially designated Hezbollah to be a terrorist group on October 8, 1997, many European governments argue
that such labeling lacks nuance.11 After all, Hezbollah is not simply
a “resistance” group, but rather a political party with an active a social service network. It runs charities and schools, and even a satellite
television station. The goal of the Hezbollah model is simply to create
a state within a state, thereby delegitimizing the official sate structure
until such a time that structure can be co-opted or overthrown.
Patronage is the basis of the Hezbollah model. Here, Iraq provides
a useful example in the contrast between strategies: After the fall of
Saddam Hussein, as various constituent groups bargained to form the
next government, each pursued distinct strategies:
• Kurds prioritized formal recognition after years of ethnic and
national denial and so sought the most prestigious offices and
ministries on the world stage. They pushed first Jalal Talabani
and then Fuad Masoum for Iraq’s largely symbolic presidency
while Hoshyar Zebari became first foreign and then finance
minister.
• Sunni Arab sectarian parties sought ostensibly powerful posts,
for example, the defense ministry and the speakership of parliament. They may not have achieved their broad goal of restoring
the influence they had before Saddam’s fall, but the defense
ministry post symbolized that goal.
• What Iraqi Shi’ite sectarian leaders and parties prioritized was
the ability to dispense patronage, a core component of a strategy
long employed by Lebanese Hezbollah and encouraged by their
Iranian advisors. Firebrand cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, who despite
his Iraqi nationalist rhetoric tended to act as pro-Iranian militia
leader, placed his followers in the health ministry. By controlling hospitals and clinics, Sadr could either use services to
expand his influence among ordinary people or simply employ
his followers in a personnel-rich bureaucracy. Khodair al-Khozaei, a member of the Da’wa Party, likewise sought to place
Da`wa members in schools across Iraq. After all, the foreign
ministry may be prestigious, but the health and education ministries employ more people. To control the health or education
ministries means awarding jobs as doctors, nurses, teachers and
administrators to political followers regardless of their qualifi(continued)
cations.
OE Watch | March 2017
62

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
It would be a false caricature to suggest all Iraqi Shi‘ites are under
Iran’s thumb, but the strategy to take control of personnel-rich ministries does segue with Iranian goals. In the West, governments might
prioritize competence, provision of services, and education. In Iran
and among its proxies, the calculation seems to be that if this leads to a
decline in the quality of service and even to brain drain, then that can
be a net gain because the educated middle class tends not to support
the theological goals of Iran or its proxies. More malevolently, Iranian
proxies cas also control who received assistance and who did not. In
Baghdad, Sadrists treated Shi‘ites but neglected Sunnis, many of whom
died as a result.

Charities absent Altruism
Charities form another pillar to the Hezbollah model. They enable
the Islamic Republic and its proxies to develop patronage networks
and infiltrate both cities and countryside. Of myriad Iranian charities,
the Imam Khomeini Relief Committee (IKRC) is perhaps the most
important. With assets supplied by the Supreme Leader, the Committee sponsors programs similar to those conducted by Western charities, helping orphans, the disabled, and the elderly in Iraq, Lebanon,
and Central Asia. To those deprived and vulnerable in these areas, it
provides food aid, blankets, and fuel; sponsors computer classes and
medical clinics; and offers interest-free loans.12
In Afghanistan, Iranian-backed charities also helped sponsor
weddings which would otherwise be unaffordable for young men, a
gift which engenders a lifetime of loyalty.13 They also sponsor competition to build further patronage. The Iranian embassy in Kabul,
for example, hosted an IKRC contest to test knowledge of Khomeini’s
Last Will and Testament among more than 1,000 aid recipients.14 This
parallels similar contests held inside Iran. Iranian authorities also use
the IKRC to organize rallies and propagate Tehran’s vision. Hence, on
the last Friday of Ramadan, the IKRC often organizes annual Qods
[Jerusalem] Day rallies in places like Afghanistan and the Gaza Strip
to parallel similar commemorations in Iran.15 The annual event often
descends into an orgy of incitement and radical rhetoric, most often
directed toward Israel and both Jews and the West more broadly.
In addition to the significant amounts of aid they do deliver, Iranian charities seek to augment their influence by claiming credit for
the activities of others. To drive into Basra from the north is to pass a
phalanx of signs for the Shahid al-Mihrab Foundation, the charitable
wing of the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI), claiming credit for
housing and infrastructure projects implemented by US forces.
Such charities also signpost a broader Iranian presence. In Basra,
Najaf, and Karbala, the three largest cities in southern Iraq, Iranian
operatives have driven IKRC donation boxes into sidewalks along
main thoroughfares. Local authorities deny issuing permits for such
activities, but say they fear the Iranian response if they remove illegal
boxes or signage.
The Iranian government has even sought to use charities in the
United States in order to further its influence. In 2013, after a nearly
five-year legal battle, the US Department of Justice seized the assets of
the Alavi Foundation, including a $500 million Manhattan skyscraper,
although litigation continues as to the propriety of the order. The FBI
complaint alleged that the Foundation ran a charity on behalf of the
Iranian government.16 Before the US action, the Foundation provided
grants and other funding to academics and individuals who would
often then turn around and promote the Iranian government’s line.17
The career of Ammar al-Hakim, the current ISCI leader, illustrates
the importance of charities to Iranian soft power. Iran’s IRGC helped
found ISCI—originally named the Supreme Council for Islamic

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Revolution in Iraq—as part of its strategy to organize and co-opt Iraqi
Shi’ites. ISCI presided over two corollary organizations: The Badr
Corps, an IRGC-trained militia, and the Shahid al-Mihrab Foundation, ISCI’s charitable wing. Ammar rose to the leadership of ISCI not
through the Badr Corps, but rather as head of the Foundation. This
suggests that while American forces in Iraq focused on checking the
advance of the Badr Corps, for the Iranian-backed leadership, the
Foundation was equally if not more important. That said, the Iranian
concept of charities often blurs the sharp line between aid and military
that exists with Western NGOs. Hence, in August 2010, the US Treasury Department designated the Imam Khomeini Relief Committee
branch in Lebanon as a terrorist entity for the assistance it provided
Hezbollah.18
Beyond charities, the Iranian regime controls a vast business empire which it can use in pursuit of regime interests. The IRGC rose to
prominence against the backdrop first of the Islamic Revolution and
then of the Iran-Iraq War. When the war ended in 1988, the Revolutionary Guardsmen were loath simply to go back into the barracks let
alone disband. As the Iranian government cut military expenditures,
Khatam al-Anbiya, literally, “the Seal of the Prophets,” the IRGC’s
engineering and contracting wing, moved into civilian enterprises.
Today, they control much of Iran’s construction sector, oil industry,
automobile manufacturing, and electronics. The IRGC uses Khatam
al-Anbiya in order to expand its foothold and influence beyond its
borders. For example, Iran is among the world’s most active dam-exporting nations.19 Because every company involved in such heavy
construction is affiliated with Khatam al-Anbiya, such activities enable
Iran not only to win favor within countries which they help develop,
but also to insert IRGC members into those same countries. As the
Syrian civil war continued into its fourth year, for example, and Iran
sought to retrench its forces not only in Syria but also in northern Lebanon, it struck a deal to build a dam in northern Lebanon.20
The same holds true with Iran’s automobile industry: By opening
Iran Khodro plants in Azerbaijan, Venezuela, Senegal, and Belarus,21
the IRGC is not only able to provide jobs and thus augment is patronage, but also to enable cover for IRGC officers.
In July 2012, IRGC Commander Mohammad Ali Jafari spoke to
Khatam al-Anbiya employees and spoke of the importance of the
Guards in development work.22 Career trajectories underline this. In
2013, for example, the Defense Minister appointed Rostam Ghasemi,
a former oil minister and Khatam al-Anbiya commander, to be his
senior advisor.23

Educating the Next Generation
Khomeini meant the Islamic revolution not only to transform
Iran but also the entire region. Nor did he see the revolution as only
changing the political order; he saw its goal as the fundamental transformation of society. Accordingly, he prioritized the transformation of
schools and universities and sought to change society through education. He formed a Cultural Revolution Committee which worked
to impose an ideological litmus test on teachers and purge those who
taught Western philosophy, history, literature, and subjects Khomeini
deemed in contradiction to his own Islamic vision.
In recent years, the Iranian government has simultaneously sought
to reinvigorate its cultural revolution and export it abroad. Hence, in
2008, Hossein Mozaffar, a member of Iran’s Expediency and Discernment Council, suggested creating mosque councils to counter Western
influence.24 Then, in 2015, Ayatollah Hosseini Bushehri, a member
of the Assembly of Experts, a clerical body which will choose the
successor to Khamenei, argued the need “to provide
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

63

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
academic and administrative solutions for the serious struggle against
manifestations of corruption and the enemy’s cultural NATO.”25
Education is also an important component of Iranian soft power
and spans all levels. To understand fully the importance of education,
it is useful to review Ayatollah Khomeini’s original “Program for the
Establishment of an Islamic Government.”26
Iran’s Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance encourages sponsors Quran competitions and supports the Islamic Propagation Organization which publishes political and religious tracts and prints posters and religious art.27 Iran opens its seminaries to foreign students
with a goal to propagate Shi‘ism and Iran’s political philosophy. Latent
Iranian racism, however, often undercuts the effectiveness of instruction in Iran, as Iranian landlords and others abuse foreign students.28
Outside Iran, however, efforts to leverage education have had some
success. In Afghanistan, Ayatollah Asif Mohseni, a figure beholden to
Tehran because his religious credentials are not recognized in Najaf,
founded Khatam al-Nabayin University. Its professors are trained in
Iran, Iranian officials set its curriculum, and regime-approved publishers supply its library. In 2010, the budget for that single Iranian-backed
university was greater than the Afghan government’s entire higher
education budget.
In recent years, Iran has also worked to expand its network of
Islam Azad Universities internationally. Originally founded as a chain
of community colleges immediately after the Islamic Revolution in
order to expand educational opportunities to the masses—and keep
late teens and twenty-something’s off the street at a time when revolution and war had decimated the Iranian economy—the network of
several hundred colleges has become an essential means to promote
regime ideology and train its cadres. Indeed, during the Ahmadinejad
administration, the Iranian government moved to consolidate regime
control over the campuses and centers which some regime ideologues
complained had grown too independent. Iranian officials now operate
a branch of Islamic Azad in Kabul, Afghanistan, and they have often
opened up other campuses in Armenia, Dubai, and Lebanon.
Iranian publishers—many supported or under the control of ministries—are active. The annual Tehran International Book Fair, now in
its 30th year, attracts hundreds of publishers from around the world.29
While many Iranian titles are innocuous, others propagate political
conspiracies or anti-Semitic and national hatred. It is many of these
which the Tehran International Book Fair promotes in exhibits around
the world, in cities like Beijing, Frankfurt, and Moscow.

Train and Assist Missions
In recent years, the Islamic Republic has taken its influence further
by expanding training programs abroad. Consider the Law Enforcement Forces (Niru-ye entezami-ye jomhuri-ye eslami-ye Iran) whose
role spans a spectrum from traditional police functions to a role overlapping the paramilitary Basij. According to General Hossein Ashtari,
the group’s commander, Iranian authorities are considering expanding
their overseas operations.30
If the Iranian Law Enforcement Forces begin training overseas
corollaries, they will essentially be remaking other countries in their
image. To conduct police training in Lebanon, for example, where the
pro-Hezbollah Michel Aoun’s rise to the presidency confirms growing
Iranian influence, will permanently alter the system and the ideological preparation of its police to enable the influence of Iran and its
trainers to persist long after Aoun is gone. The same thing could be
true Iraq, or Yemen would help Iran solidify control and influence in
its new ‘near abroad.’
The Islamic Republic also appears prepared to replicate a similar

SPECIAL
ESSAY

strategy with regard to the Basij (Sazman-e Basij-e Mostaz’afin, the
Organization for the Mobilization of the Oppressed). The Islamic
Republic created the Basij began against the backdrop of the Iran-Iraq
War as a volunteer force. They were the child-soldiers who iconically
ran across minefields barefoot with plastic keys to paradise around
their necks. In 1981, Iran’s parliament formally folded the Basij into
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.31 While Basij autonomy from
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps has wavered with time, Danish-Iranian scholar Ali Alfoneh put it correctly when he observed, “…
While the IRGC may have been the varsity team and the Basij junior
varsity, they played the same game.”32
Today in Iran, the Basij is ever-present. Youth chapters exist in
secondary schools, and the organization runs summer camps and
afterschool activities. University students and professors have chapters,
each of which is charged with keeping their imagined constituencies
in line ideologically, by physical force if need be. An all-female Basij
unit helps enforce women’s conformity to the Islamic Republic’s social
mores. Separate Basij units even exist in factories and among Iran’s
dwindling nomadic population. Simply put, the Islamic Republic has
found the Basij a useful way to control society.
Perhaps is no surprise, then, that as the Islamic Republic increasingly seeks to export the Basij model abroad, not as a means of direct
control but rather in an effort to reshape societies in the image of the
Islamic Republic. In December 2011, for example, Ali Saidi, Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei’s representative to the IRGC, gave religious justification to the push to expand the Basij beyond Iran’s borders. “There
is a need for 100 million Basijis in the region before the Imam of the
Era can emerge,” he said.33
In 2014, Gen. Hossein Hamadani, who oversaw Qods Force operations in Syria until his death in Aleppo the following year, announced
that “the Basij is presently being formed in Iraq after Lebanon and Syria.” “Iraqi officials are reaching the conclusion that they must get help
from local popular forces,” he added, suggesting that Iranian officials
saw the Popular Mobilization Forces in Iraq (Hashd al-Shaabi) to be
the basis for a new Iraqi Basij.34

The Fifth Estate
The press is just as important as education to furthering the Iranian
message. Iran-watchers in the United States and Europe are familiar
with Press TV, an Iran-funded and produced English-language satellite channel which also has ubiquitous presence on the internet, often
crudely promoting the Islamic Republic’s official position. Press TV,
however, is a relative late comer. As the 2003 Iraq war loomed, Iranian authorities quickly set up the Arabic-language Al-Alam television,
beating similar American efforts by months.35 The result was that
the Iranian government had a virtual media monopoly once the war
began, shaping the perception of American occupation in a way both
inaccurate and corrosive.
Iran’s success rests on a comprehensive media strategy. To populate
content for so many networks, the Islamic Republic pursues a media
strategy more de-centralized in some ways than its competitors. Prior
to the 2003 start of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Al-Alam distributed
phones and video cameras to Iraqi youth, promising to pay them for
footage that Al-Alam could use; seldom was there a bombing, protest,
or an incident embarrassing to American forces that Al-Alam did not
cover.
The Iranian government saturates the airwaves with a far larger
number of officials and semi-official outlets. This stands in sharp
contrasts to countries that have one or two official channels geared
to broadcasts abroad. Bahraini Shi‘ites, for example,
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

64

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
listen almost exclusively to Iranian radio such as Voice of the Islamic
Republic in Arabic or Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting in Arabic,
and watch Iranian satellite channels such as al-Sahar and al-Alam.
Whereas US media, whether public or private, is lucky to have one
or two crews in any specific country, the Iranian media strategy in
effect enables Iran to have hundreds of unofficial but highly effective
stringers. The Iranian-backed Ahlulbayt television and radio blankets
southern Iraq with religious programming. That Kabul-based Tamadon (“Civilization”) television broadcasts an Iranian perspective across
Afghanistan is no coincidence: Upon the Taliban’s fall, IRGC Qods
Force commander Hassan Kazemi-Qomi—subsequently Iran’s ambassador to Iraq—set out to systematically establish radio and television
stations and build the broadcast and relay network to support them.36
Message is also important. Not only does the Iranian media cover
the news, but it also provides a consistent message in pursuit of regime
goals. It does not subscribe to a philosophy used by other countries
that truth or self-criticism bolsters credibility; Iranian outlet suffer no
editorial confusion.
Iranian officials also seek to cultivate non-Iranian media without
embarrassment or self-consciousness all too common when Americans seek to do likewise. On August 3, 2012, for example, the Iranian
embassy in Kabul hosted an iftaar (Ramadan fast-breaking) dinner
for journalists from Afghanistan’s leading newspapers and television
stations to push an Iranian-sponsored and funded project to create a
“union of journalists.”37 The expense of such an endeavor would be a
drop in the bucket: Iran has spent $100 million annually on Afghan
media.38
While much of the detail with regard to Iranian strategy in Iraq,
Afghanistan, and Bahrain has occurred too recently to be included in
any extensive book study of Iranian media strategy, there have been
some useful overviews, such as Pierre Pahlavi’s “Understanding Iran’s
Media Diplomacy.”39

Framing the Past; Presenting the Future
Another area in which Iranian soft power is uncontested is in the
construction of museums to promote its world view. In the aftermath
of the Iran hostage crisis, Iranian authorities transformed the former
US embassy into a museum to illustrate both supposed Iranian victories over America as well as grievances against the United States.
Hence, the former embassy displays portions of the US helicopter
which crashed during the 1980 mission to rescue the hostages, as well
as supposed American espionage equipment seized in the embassy
take over as well as, of course, copies of the cables woven back together
by the hostage takers and contracted carpet weavers. Other displays
show dioramas depicting the downing of a civilian Iranian airbus by
a missile fired by the U.S.S. Vincennes. Co-located with the museum,
appropriately, are classrooms and offices belonging to the psychological operations center of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
The Iranian government and its proxies have taken museum construction outside Iran itself. On a mountaintop east of Sidon, Lebanon,
lies Mlitta, which is an expansive Hezbollah museum created and run
by the pro-Iranian militia. School children can come and examine captured Israeli military hardware or tour caves in which Hezbollah operatives slept and coordinated actions. Visitors can also handle crewserved weaponry in cement bunkers, or try to spot mannequins of
Hezbollah terrorists in the brush and forest surrounding the complex.
The entire Mlitta facility reinforces Hezbollah’s resistance narrative
and subtlety highlights Iranian links, with posters and photographs of
Ayatollahs Khomeini and Khamenei accompanying the displayed kit
of Hezbollah fighters.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

In Iraq, another target of Iranian influence, the Museum of Imam
Hussein picks up many themes common in post-revolutionary Iran.
Visitors in the museum pass donation boxes not for the museum itself,
but instead for Shi’ite militias and “volunteers.” And whereas in Iran,
visitors to building are forced to step on mosaic depictions of American flags in doorways, the Imam Hussein museum forces visitors to
step upon the names of all those contemporaries who opposed Hussein. Much of the museum content contains legitimate artifacts, but
the absence of discussion of the United States while displaying wallsize silk carpets depicting Shi’ite history and donated by Iran leaves
visitors with a clear sense that Iran is the protecting power while the
United States is disinterested at best in religious justice.
The same holds true at the Museum of Jihad in Herat, Afghanistan,
founded by Iranian-funded regional power broker Ismail Khan, which
depicts the victory of the (Iranian-backed) mujahideen over the Soviets. The assistance of the United States is downplayed at best, enabling
Iran to retroactively amplify its role. Education matters, and school
groups as well as locals only receive one narrative of history, one that
either is antagonistic to the United States or ignores the American role
in liberation struggles or preservation of religious freedom.

When All Else Fails, Bribe.
Money matters. Whereas the Hezbollah model and charity penetration imply a bottom-up approach, top-down application of money
matters when all else fails. Where charity targets the masses, bribery
can recruit politicians and leaders. Between 2001 and 2007, the Iranian
government gave more than $250 million in grants to the Afghanistan
government, effectively bribing whosever assistance Tehran needed
at any given time.40 Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai admitted in
2010 that Iran provided his offices with “bags of money” worth hundreds of thousands of dollars each year.41
Iranian banks can be an important tool in dispensing such money
or funding proxy groups. While the Shi‘ites in Bahrain face real discrimination and harbor legitimate grievances, there are some who
seek to overthrow the Bahraini monarchy and orient Bahraini society
closer to Iran.42 While Tehran has denied any role in the sectarian unrest which began following the Arab Spring, Bahraini officials privately suggest that interest from Iranian business accounts deposited in
Bahraini banks might fund and subsidize an increasingly radicalized
opposition.
Pocketbook diplomacy greases all other soft-power, as Iran utilizes its oil wealth to dispense aid to countries whose votes it needs on
bodies such as the United Nations Security Council and International
Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) Board of Governors. Here, Sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia, and South America provide fertile ground
given that region’s relative poverty. Iran, for example, plied South
Africa with aid when that state served on the UN Security Council
and IAEA Board of Governors, an investment that paid off after South
Africa used its position on the Security Council to oppose sanctions
against Iran despite an IAEA report which found the Islamic Republic
continued to enrich uranium in violation of its safeguards agreement
and two security council resolutions.43 Once South Africa’s term on
these bodies expired—and for that matter that of Nigeria, the Côte
d’Ivoire, Uganda, Tanzania and Togo—Iran largely lost interest and
shifted its aid elsewhere. Tehran uses the same mercantile policies
toward the members of the Non-Aligned Movement, when it wants to
leverage that group for statements or other support.44 (For an overview of this diplomatic vote buying in Africa see also “Africa: Iran’s
Final Frontier?” Operational Environment Watch, U.S. Army Foreign
Military Studies Office, April 2013,
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2017

65

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/OEWatch/201304/Special_Essay_01.html)
The last mechanism by which Iran might distribute aid is through
the disbursement of religious funds. In exchange for the religious
guidance of their preferred ayatollah, Shi‘ite Muslims theoretically pay
khums, a religious tithe amounting to one-fifth of their annual income
calculated after all other obligations have been paid. Khums often can
exposes Iran’s Achilles’ heel: Because it is an individual rather that state
decision to determine which ayatollah receives the donation, many
Iranians signal their preference for those religious figures who oppose
clerical rule. Iranians reportedly pay Ayatollah Ali Sistani, an Iranian cleric based in Najaf, more khums than they do Iranian Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei. Because Khamenei based his legitimacy on the
theological claim that he is the deputy of the Messiah on earth, this
is quite a blow. That said, the offices and agents of Khamenei and the
late Ayatollah Hassan Fadlallah, long a leading clerical supporter of
Hezbollah, do collect and disburse tens of millions of dollars in Iraq,
Bahrain, and other areas where they seek to help those they consider
oppressed and disposed. Bahraini oppositionists, for example, will
vehemently deny receiving any aid from Iran to support their protests
or rebellion but, when pressed, will acknowledge accepting funds from
the offices of pro-Iranian ayatollahs. In effect, ayatollahs’ offices can
effectively launder money to groups which promote an Iranian government line while still maintaining Tehran’s plausible deniability with
regard to non-interference.

1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

See, for example, “Etela’iyeh-e Daftar-e Maqam Ma’azem Rahbar-e dar Taqdir
az Mardam Sharif Ostan Kermanshah” (“A Release from the Office of the
Supreme Leader in Appreciation of the People of the Kermanshah Province,”)
Leader.ir, 21 October 2011; “Ba Talash Masyulan va ajraye barnameh-haye
musub, Fars beh fazel pervardgar as ayyandeh dar khashantari barkhordar
khahad shod” (With the Efforts of Officials and the implementation of
approved programs, by the grace of the Lord, Fars will have a brighter future,”
Leader.ir, 10 May 2008, http://www.leader.ir/fa/content/8795; www.leader.
ir/fa/content/3865/‫هیعالطا‬-‫رتفد‬-‫ماقم‬-‫مظعم‬-‫یربهر‬-‫رد‬-‫طابترا‬-‫اب‬-‫رفس‬-‫ربهر‬‫مظعم‬-‫بالقنا‬-‫هب‬-‫ناتسا‬-‫;سراف‬
“Hojjat al-Islam va al-Musalmin Saidi dar Hamayesh Pishkosutan Namayandegi
Vali Faqih dar Sepah” (“Hojjat al-Islam Saidi [Speaks] to a Conference of
Veterans on behalf of the Supreme Leader”), Sepah News, 20 February 2014,
goo.gl/q8S8NM; “Jebha-ye Defah az Islam beh an Suye Meditraneh Rasideh
Ast” (“The Front for the Defense of Islam has Reached the Mediterranean,”
Fars News Agency, 12 January 2017. http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.
php?nn=13951022000339
“Iran’s President Due in Afghanistan to Attend Nowruz Festival,” Tasnim News
Agency (Tehran), March 20, 2014, http://www.tasnimnews.com/English/
Home/Single/319027
Rashid Khalidi, “Arab Nationalism: Historical Problems in the Literature,” The
American Historical Review, Vol. 96, No. 5 (Dec., 1991), pp. 1364-1365.
“Aval Hamsaye-ha gharamit bipurdazand.” (“First the Neighbors Should Pay
Compensation” Hasht-e Sobh (Kabul), March 28, 2012.
Nizam al-Mulk (Hubert Drake, trans.). The Book of Government or Rules for
Kings: The Siyar al—Muluk or Siyasat-nama. (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1978). The definitive discussion of this princely literature and its impact
is Ann Lambton, Theory and Practice in Medieval Persian Government (London:
Variorum Reprints, 1980), especially the essay “Islamic Mirrors for Princes”
(reprinted from La Persia nel medioevo: Atti del Convegno internazionale,
Rome, 1970).
Abbas Amanat. Pivot of the Universe. (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1997), 70-73.
Iran 49 (2011), pp. 115-122, available at : http://www.academia.edu/1280808/
The_Islamisation_of_Iranian_Kingly_Ideals_in_the_Persianate_Furstenspiegel
“Khatami: Dar Zamineh-e tahrif andisheh-ha-ye hazirat-e Imam ‘alam khatar
mikonam” [Khatami: I Find Danger in the Distortion of His Excellence the

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Conclusion
The Iranian leadership has a multifaceted approach toward
soft-power. It has multiple strategies at its disposal, which it mixes and
matches in order to achieve the most effective outcome. In countries
like Bahrain and Iraq, for example, it is much more likely to appeal to
sectarian solidarity and promote through its media a narrative of “us
vs. them.” In weaker states, it will utilize the Hezbollah model either to
hollow out state effectiveness over those it wishes to be suzerain or to
at least paralyze the effectiveness of government so that no competitor
can make a move without the Iranian proxy—or Tehran—signing off
on it.
In areas without an Iranian cultural or Islamic background, Iranian
officials are likely to utilize money and media unabashedly in order to
achieve their aims. By combining infusion of cash to decision-makers,
on one hand, with a comprehensive media and charity strategy on the
other, the Islamic Republic effectively combines both top-down and
bottom-up strategies thereby making their reach often more comprehensive than their competitors, and that is before the Iranian willingness to use hard power and terrorism is factored into the equation.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is a serious and sophisticated player on
the world state. To underestimate Iran is to play into Tehran’s hands
and handicap oneself in a struggle for influence which the Islamic
Republic believes both a divine mandate and a zero-sum game. It is
not enough to counter Iranian hard power; the Islamic Republic’s soft
power strategies are sophisticated and deep and, unfortunately, often
met with no response.

Imam’s Thoughts], Emrooz (Tehran), 3 May 3 2008.
10. See, “Prologue,” Last Will and Testament of Imam Khomeini, available online
at: http://www.alseraj.net/maktaba/kotob/english/Miscellaneousbooks/
LastwillofImamKhomeini/occasion/ertehal/english/will/
11. See discussion, for example, in Magnus Norell, “Hezbollah: Calling a
Spade a Spade,” Commentator (London), 25 February 2013, http://
europeandemocracy.eu/2013/02/hezbollah-calling-a-spade-a-spade/
12. See, for example, Imam Khomeini Relief Foundation, “Draft of the Final
Declaration of the 1st Joint Conference of Poverty Elimination and Sustainable
Development,” 16-17 January 2007, www.emdad.ir/en/conf.asp. See also
Ali Alfoneh and Ahmad Majidyar, “Iranian Influence in Afghanistan: Imam
Khomeini Relief Committee,” AEI Middle East Outlook, July 2010, www.aei.
org/outlook/foreign-and-defense-policy/regional/india-pakistan-afghanistan/
iranian-influence-in-afghanistan-outlook-1/.
13. “Jashan-e Komiteh-e Emdad Baraye zawjha-ye Afghan” [Relief Committee
Celebration for Afghan Husbands], Fararu.com (Tehran), May 24, 2012.
14. Ali Dianati, “Dekhalatha-ye Rezhim-e Iran Dar Afghanestan” [Interventions of
the Iranian Regime in Afghanistan], Afghanmaugh (Kabul), 10 March 2009,
http://www.afghanmaug.net/index.php/-mainmenu-32/558------v15-558
15. “Children Express Solidarity with Palestinians,” Pajhwok Afghan News (Kabul),
25 September 2008, http://web.archive.org/web/20080929064234/http://
pajhwok.com/viewstory.asp?lng=eng&id=62720; “Rezhim-e Iran Ba Qods
Noshkhar Mikonad” [The Iranian Regime Devours the Qods], Kabulpress
(Kabul), 10 September 2009.
16. “Manhattan U.S. Attorney Files Civil Action Seeking Forfeiture of Alavi
Foundation’s Interest in Fifth Avenue Office Tower Controlled by Iran,” U.S.
Attorney’s Office, Southern District of New York, November 12, 2009, http://
www.fbi.gov/newyork/press-releases/2009/nyfo111209a.htm
17. Glenn Kessler, “Prosecutors Tie Iran, U.S. Assets,” The Washington Post, 13
November 2009.
18. “Fact Sheet: U.S. Treasury Department Targets Iran’s Support for Terrorism
Treasury Announces New Sanctions Against Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps-Qods Force Leadership,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, 3 August
2010, http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/tg810.aspx
19. “Fifteen New Dams to Come On Stream in Iran,” Tehran Times, 6 April 2013,
http://tehrantimes.com/economy-and-business/106552-fifteen-new-dams-tocome-on-stream-in-iran

(continued)

OE Watch | March 2017

66

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Michael Rubin

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Strategies Underlying Iranian Soft Power
20. “Iran offers assistance in building Lebanese dam,” Daily Star (Beirut), 22
February 2015, http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Lebanon-News/2015/Feb22/288306-iran-offers-assistance-in-building-lebanese-dam.ashx
21. “IKCO Plants,” Iran Khodro Industrial Group, http://www.ikco.com/en/Plants.
aspx
22. Sepah News, 18 July 2012. No longer available online.
23. “Rostam Ghasemi Moshavar-e ‘Ali Vazir-e Defah Shod” (“Rostam Ghasemi
Appointed Senior Advisor to Defense Minister”), Fars News, 21 August 2013,
http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13920530001253
24. Resalat, 16 August 2008. Article no longer available online.
25. Rasa News, 2 September 2015. Article no longer available online.
26. See, Imam Khomeini (Hamid Algar, trans.). Islam and Revolution. London:
Kegan Paul, 1981, or http://www.al-islam.org/islamic-government-governanceof-jurist-imam-khomeini/program-establishment-islamic-government
27. “Minister of Culture: Holding Quranic competition is a positive publicity for
Islamic Republic,” Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance, 22 December
2013, http://www.farhang.gov.ir/en/news/94680/Minister-of-Culture-HoldingQuranic-competition-is-a-positive-publicity-for-Islamic-Republic
28. “Mushkal-e Talab-e Kharaji dar Qom” (The Problem of Foreign Students in
Qom),” 598.ir, 27 September 2012.
29. Tehran International Book Fair, 3-13 May 2017, http://www.tibf.ir/fa
30. “Amadegi Iran Baraye Entighal-e Tejarbiyat-e Mamorit-haye Amniyati va Polisi
beh Sayar Kashvarha,” (“Iran ready to transfer experiences of police and
security missions to other countries.”), Tasnim News, 31 October 2016, www.
tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/08/10/1227217/‫یگدامآ‬-‫ناریا‬-‫یارب‬-‫لاقتنا‬‫تایبرجت‬-‫تیرومام‬-‫یاه‬-‫یتینما‬-‫و‬-‫یسیلپ‬-‫هب‬-‫ریاس‬-‫اهروشک‬
31. Ali Alfoneh, Iran Unveiled. (Washington: American Enterprise Institute Press,
2013), p. 49
32. Alfoneh, op cit., p. 50.
33. “Namayendeh-e Vali Faqih dar Sepah: Velayat-e Faqih, Nazdakterin Model beh
hukumat-e Imam Zaman” (“Representative of the Supreme Leader in the IRGC:
Guardianship of the Jurist is the closest model to the governance of the Imam

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

if the Era”), Islamic Republic News Agency, 2 December 2011, www8.irna.ir/fa/
News/2000030038/‫ناهفصا‬/‫__هیقف_تیالو__هاپس_رد_هیقف_یلو_هدنیامن‬
‫تسا_نامز_ماما_تموکح_هب_لدم_نیرتکیدزن‬
“Tazehtaren Sokhnan Sardar Hamadani dar Mavard-e Suriya,” (“General
Hamadani’s Most Recent Remarks about the Situation in Syria,”), Iranian
Students News Agency, 30 June 2014. http://goo.gl/GUeJsq
“Iran Launches Arabic-Language Satellite News Channel,” Agence FrancePresse, 24 February 2003.
“Iranian Envoy Lists Iranian Infrastructure Projects in Afghan Herat Province,”
IRNA, 27 October 2003.
“Dar pai efsha saazi 8 Sobh, modakhela rasaana-yi Iran barasee meshawad,”
Hasht-e Sobh (Kabul), August 14, 2012.
Ahmad Majidyar, “Iran’s Hard and Soft Power in Afghanistan,” Operational
Environment Watch, U.S. Army Foreign Military Studies Office, September
2012.
Israel Journal of Foreign Affairs (May 2012), pp. 21-34.
“Iran-Afghan defense cooperation inevitable, Afghan minister,” Islamic
Revolutionary News Agency (IRNA), July 17, 2007.
Jon Boone, “Hamid Karzai admits office gets ‘bags of money’ from Iran,” The
Guardian (London), 25 October 2010.
Hasan Tariq Alhasan, “The Role of Iran in the Failed Coup of 1981: The IFLB in
Bahrain” Middle East Journal, Autumn 2011, 603-617.
“SA Commends Iran’s Stance on Nuclear Program,” Islamic Republic News
Agency (Tehran), 14 September 2007; International Atomic Energy Agency
Board of Governors, Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and
Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747
(2007) in the Islamic Republic of Iran: Report by the Director General (February
25, 2008), www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Board /2011/gov2011-7.
pdf; and “Security Council Edges Towards Adoption of Iran Sanctions,” The
Citizen (Johannesburg), 29 February 2008.
“Pretoria’s Pro-Iran Stance Can Boost Progress in Global South,” Tehran Times,
7 February 2008.

OEWATCH
Check out back issues
of FMSO’s Operational
Environment Watch dating
back to 2011. They provide
translated selections and
analysis from a diverse
range of foreign articles
and other media that our
analysts believe give military
and security experts an
added dimension to their
critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/oewpastissues.html
OE Watch | March 2017

67

