community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #7
August 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

RUSSIAN
ANTI-ACCESS AND AREA DENIAL

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
3
4
5
7
9
11
12
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Counter UAV Tactics and the ‘Leer-3’ Electronic
Warfare System
The Mission, Structure, and Size of the Russian
Radiotechnical Troops
Nebo-M Radars as a Key Component of Russian
Aerospace Defense
Russian Anti-Satellite Capability Enhancements
Russian Far East Air Defense Training
Swedish Concerns over Russian Tactical Nukes
Russian Coastal Defense Infrastructure
Improvements
So Much for Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics
Improving Armored Mobility Transport
Russian Military Readiness Reporting
Crimean Love Story
Possible Change to Russian Military Retirement
Stalin and Tukhachevsky Revisited
Russian Retired Colonel on How to Oppose Hybrid
War

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA

21 Update on the Turkey-Russia S-400 Deal
22 Egypt Starts Receiving Russian Air Defense Missiles
23 Syrians in Raqqa and Deir Ezzor Shift Blame for
Mounting Civilian Casualties
25 Yemen: The Arab Coalition Teeters

26
27
28
29
30

The Resistance Axis and Shia Mobilization
Iran: Budget Increases for Missiles, Qods Force
Iran: Rouhani Commends Iranian Missile Developers
Iran Suspends Flights to Najaf, Iraq
Israel and India Build Strategic Partnership

AFRICA

31 How China is Shaping Africa’s Next Generation of
Leaders
32 China’s Growing Trade and Influence in Africa
33 Al-Shabaab Launches Deadly Attacks in Kenya
34 The Threat al-Shabaab Poses to Kenya’s Election
35 Five African Countries Launch Joint Force to Combat
Terrorism in Sahel
36 The Return of Somali Pirates
37 ‘Eco-Militaries’ for Wildlife Protection?

LATIN AMERICA
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

In Colombia, Another Terrorist Organization?
FARC Census
Cocaine Supply Secure
Venezuelans Celebrate Independence
ISIS’s Use of Social Media in Latin America
Gangs Expand Extortion Practices in El Salvador
Drug Transit and the Dominican Republic
Organized Crime and Illegal Gold Mining in Peru

ASIA-PACIFIC

46 Fighting over Japan’s Peace Constitution
47 Japanese-Indian Cooperative Response to Chinese
Expansion
48 China Developing Sea Launches to Boost Space
Commerce
49 Recent Developments in the Chinese Army’s Helicopter
Force
50 Xi Jinping’s New Military Strategic Guideline
51 China’s Interest in Becoming a Major Player in the Arctic
Continues
52 Chinese Perspectives on the Qatar Crisis
53 A Chinese View on Russian Operations in Syria
54 Thailand Views Cyber-Security as a Growing Concern
55 Thailand’s Controversial 20-Year National Strategy
56 Indonesia to Boost Island Defenses with the Philippines

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
57
58
59
60

Armenia’s Security Cooperation Dilemma
Central Asian Peacekeepers in Syria?
Pakistan Continues to Search for Missing Officer
Does ISIS Pose a Threat to India?

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.
ON THE COVER: Russian S-400 Triumf missile air defense system

Source: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12070720@
egNews, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 7

August | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Sunguta West

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Asia-Pacific

Dennis Blasko
Les Grau
David Hunter-Chester
Cindy Hurst
Tim Thomas
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Animesh Roul
Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Tim Thomas

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Counter UAV Tactics and the ‘Leer-3’ Electronic Warfare
System
OE Watch Commentary: The Leer-3 RB-341V electronic warfare (EW) system
consists of three Orlan-10 UAVs and a command and control post on a KamAZ-5350
chassis. The Leer-3’s primary mission is to suppress cellular communications.
It accomplishes this mission by using jammers onboard the UAVs to disrupt
communications. The UAVs also have disposable jammers, which can be dropped on
the ground. The Leer-3 is not found in the EW companies of maneuver brigades, but is
instead found in EW brigades and centers.
The Leer-3 is reportedly capable of not only disrupting 3G and 4G cellular networks,
but also of spoofing their cellular towers, allowing the Leer-3 operator to transmit
information (texts, audio, video, internet, etc.) to subscribers, including smartphones,
in the covered area. The Leer-3 has reportedly already been successfully employed
in Syria. Lieutenant General Sergey Kuralenko reported that the Ministry of Defense
of the Russian Federation sent out instant messages to the armed formations in Syria
with application forms for an armistice. The Russian military also used text messages
to inform Aleppo residents about humanitarian corridors and assistance distribution
locations, despite the fact that the cellular communications infrastructure of Aleppo
was largely destroyed. The capability to communicate with subscribers in conditions
where the cellular infrastructure is inoperable or nonexistent, could expand the usage
of the Leer-3 from the battlefield to domestic disaster response purposes.
The accompanying article posted by the Ministry of Defense of the Russian
Federation discusses another use of the Leer-3: as a counter-UAV weapon. The
Radiotechnical Troops and Leer-3 operators (Ground Forces personnel) work in
conjunction to first detect, and then “knock out” the UAV’s navigation system,
presumably causing the UAV to crash. Although not stated, it is likely that the Leer3 has some sort of GPS spoofing capability. If such a capability was present, this
counter-UAV tactic would likely involve the Radiotechnical Troops identifying and
then relaying the coordinates of a hostile UAV to the Leer-3 operators. After the Leer-3
operators have an approximate location, they then would attempt to position the Leer3 relatively near (possibly above) the hostile UAV in order to broadcast a false GPS
signal to the hostile UAV. Once false data begins to be fed to the hostile UAV, the
geographic location and altitude of the hostile UAV may be changed to land or crash
the hostile UAV at will.

Source: “В Общевойсковой Армии ЗВО
Проведена Тренировка Групп По Борьбе С
Беспилотниками (Groups to Combat UAVs
Trained in Western Military District CombinedArms Army),” Ministry of Defense of the Russian
Federation, 29 June 2017. http://function.mil.ru/
news_page/country/more.htm?id=12131418@
egNews
A training session for groups to counter notional
enemy radio-controlled UAVs has been held in
the Western Military District’s combined-arms
combined formation stationed in Leningrad Oblast.
The groups mainly include air defense specialists,
but provision was also made to involve electronic
warfare specialists and radiotechnical troops.
Questions of cooperation and of combining
various stations and systems of electronic
suppression and reconnaissance – both newgeneration and ones adopted earlier – were being
rehearsed…With the aid of the modern Leer-3
electronic warfare system the specialists knocked
out the navigation systems of notional enemy
UAVs, more than 100 kilometers from where the
electronic warfare subunit was deployed.
The servicemen of the radiotechnical troop
subunits in turn used actual targets to resolve tasks
of detecting reconnaissance and strike UAVs flying
at minimum and intermediate altitudes and of
transmitting data to automated jamming stations.

Regardless of the ability to conduct
counter-UAV operations, a GPS spoofer
or jammer mounted on the Leer-3 (or any
UAV) would be far more effective than
the same equipment on the earth’s surface.
This is due to Leer-3’s ability to position
itself between the satellite broadcasting the
GPS signal and the GPS receivers on the
ground in a given area. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“With the aid of the modern
Leer-3 electronic warfare
system the specialists knocked
out the navigation systems of
notional enemy UAVs.”

RB-341V Leer-3 ECM system with UAV

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Static-displays-Park-Patriot/ijFtgd8w/A , CC BY 4.0 [http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy]

OE Watch | August 2017

3

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Mission, Structure, and Size of the Russian
Radiotechnical Troops
OE Watch Commentary: The Radiotechnical Troops are
a subordinate unit to the Aerospace Defense Forces (VKS)
responsible for manning and maintaining many of the strategic
defense radars and other early warning infrastructure operated
by Russia. They work closely with strategic air defense units
(S-300s, S-400s, S-500s), space monitoring forces, and civil air
traffic control. The accompanying excerpts from an interview
with the Chief of Radiotechnical Troops, Major General
Andrey Koban, mention some interesting details about the
mission, structure, and size of the organization. According to
Major General Koban, the Radiotechnical Troops consist of
approximately 6000 personnel organized into regiments and
separate subunits, who work around the clock to conduct constant
airspace surveillance. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“As of today the Radiotechnical Troops have several
dozen radiotechnical regiments and several hundred
radiotechnical subunits stationed throughout RF
territory…the Radiotechnical Troops stand aroundthe-clock alert duty, i.e., they are conducting
airspace surveillance constantly. Around 6,000

persons go on alert duty each day, every 24 hours.”

Source: Anatoliy Yermolin and Aleksey Durnovo, “Задачи и техническая оснащенность радиотехнических войск воздушнокосмических сил РФ (Missions and Technical Outfitting of Russian Federation Aerospace Forces Radiotechnical Troops),” Ekho Moskvy
Online, 10 June 2017. http://echo.msk.ru/programs/voensovet/1997342-echo/
[Durnovo] …Our guest is Major General Andrey Koban, Chief of Aerospace Forces Radiotechnical Troops. Andrey Yakovlevich, good
afternoon…
[Koban] Yes, in fact the Radiotechnical Troops were 65 years old in December of last year. They took their origin from the Observation,
Warning, and Communications Troops. Back in those far-off times, including during the Great Patriotic War, the Observation, Warning,
and Communications Troops of that time listened to airspace and reported on an air enemy attack specifically from what they were hearing.
Subsequently radar became operational with the Radiotechnical Troops, and as of today this is a highly intelligent combat arm which
performs a number of very serious missions. They engage in securing the state border in airspace and monitor the procedure for airspace
use on Russian Federation territory.
[Yermolin] And what do you have to perform this mission? What do the troops represent? How do you see and hear now? Do you use
ordinary border guard personnel? As a graduate of a border guard school, I know border guard personnel are obligated to work with you.
[Koban] Indeed, airspace reconnaissance and aerospace surveillance are a very serious, comprehensive mission, and the Radiotechnical
Troops perform it in coordination of course with border guard personnel, with other military command and control entities, and with
electronic intelligence assets. In peacetime a very strong interworking has been organized with air traffic control entities. At the present
time the federal targeted program for upgrading the federal system of airspace reconnaissance and surveillance has concluded its
functioning, but this does not mean that self-improvement of reconnaissance has halted. Further measures have been planned as part of the
state program for improving the country’s defense capability. Nevertheless, answering the first part of the question, I will put it as follows:
people of course are the basis of the Radiotechnical Troops. As of today the Radiotechnical Troops have several dozen radiotechnical
regiments and several hundred radiotechnical subunits stationed throughout RF territory. In 2014 we began active work of airspace
surveillance in our state’s Arctic zone… The Radiotechnical Troops have radar and radar complexes in the inventory which are sources of
data and carry out direct airspace reconnaissance. All this information is put together, generalized, and analyzed in automation equipment
complexes. As of today the electronic intelligence collection system has an echeloned component, i.e., the grouping is echeloned. Air
information also is processed in stages…
[Koban] …Based on the missions, the Radiotechnical Troops stand around-the-clock alert duty, i.e., they are conducting airspace
surveillance constantly. Around 6,000 persons go on alert duty each day, every 24 hours…Specialists at command posts process this data. I
already said in answering the question “What is this that is flying armed with certain weapons?” Because no one needs unprocessed data,
because both flocks of birds and some kind of balloons can appear in airspace which generally carry no kind of threat. It is very important
to filter this data from those airborne objects which indeed are necessary not only to the Radiotechnical Troops, but also to military command
and control entities…Therefore this information is necessary specifically to move aircraft to a certain region of airspace so it can use this
radar to lock onto the airborne object and then act against it. In addition to aviation, aerospace situation information is output to the SAM
Troops…

OE Watch | August 2017

4

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Nebo-M Radars as a Key Component of Russian
Aerospace Defense
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation is very concerned
with protecting its state borders from aircraft that are equipped with stealth
technologies. Due to the electromagnetic properties of different types of radars,
the Russians use a combination of different, networked radars to find, fix,
target, track, and engage for air defense purposes. The Radiotechnical Troops
(the primary operators of strategic air defense radars) operate radars primarily
in the VHF (very high frequency) and UHF (ultra-high frequency) bandwidths
to find and fix targets. This information is then transferred to the strategic air
defense units (S-300s/S-400s) that then target, track, and if necessary, engage.
In order for this ‘kill chain’ to be successful, radars must not only be effective,
but they must also be networked to ‘hand off’ to one another as required.
The Radiotechnical Troops utilize several different series of radars to
accomplish their mission, but appear to be gravitating towards two primary
systems: the fixed site Voronezh series radar and the mobile Nebo series radar.
These radars primarily operate in the VHF band range. The electromagnetic
properties of the VHF bandwidth make VHF far more effective at detecting
stealth-enabled aircraft than other bandwidths. Unfortunately, VHF radars
have some significant disadvantages, namely large size, poor or no mobility,
low spatial resolution, susceptibility to clutter, and a slow scan rate. Since
the 1990s, the Russians have put a strong emphasis on defeating stealth
technologies, including developing and fielding more technologically advanced
VHF radar systems, and fielding ‘hybrid’ radar systems that use different bands
to find, fix, and track aircraft and missiles.
The accompanying article from Svobodnaya Pressa discusses the capabilities
of the 55Zh6M Nebo-M radar system. The Nebo-M is a relatively new system,
passing state trials in 2011, but as the article states, there are already plans to
upgrade its capabilities. The Nebo-M consists of three active electronically
scanned array (AESA) truck-mounted radar systems, operating in VHF
(RLM-M), UHF (RLM-D), and S-band (RLM-S). The Nebo-M works by using
its VHF radar to initially detect an aircraft or missile. This information is then
passed to the UHF, then S-band radar, and eventually (if required) to an air
defense weapon system. Not only is data passed between the Nebo-M radars
for tipping and cueing purposes, but the different radars’ data are also combined
to determine the aircraft or missile’s location.
If the Nebo-M is as effective at detecting stealth-enabled aircraft as Russian
reports suggest, and if Russia has fielded a reliable communications network
and air defense command and control system to effectively ‘hand off’ data
from sensor to sensor, overcoming Russian air defense capabilities with stealthenabled technologies may be a difficult prospect. Furthermore, targeting
Russian air defense capabilities may also become very difficult. If Russia’s
strategic air defense system operates as described, high value air defense assets,
such as S-300s, S-400s, (and eventually) S-500s will not need to continuously
scan (emit), instead they may wait to turn on their targeting radars shortly
before they fire, making them much more difficult to find. Although the
radars of the Radiotechnical Troops emit massive amounts of energy and are
easy to detect, they may be hundreds (Nebo series) or thousands (Voronezh
series) of kilometers away from the objects they are detecting. Not only are
there technical difficulties with destroying radars that are often well within the
borders of Russia, there are also political constraints, due to fears of escalation.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “«Воронеж» и «Небо-М»
против «Minuteman» и F-22 (‘Voronezh’ and ‘Nebo-M’
Versus the Minuteman ICBM and the F-22),” Svobodnaya
Pressa Online, 13 June 2017. https://svpressa.ru/war21/
article/174535/
The Aerospace Forces (VKS) Radiotechnical Troops
plan to conduct the modernization of the Nebo-M radar
complex, Radiotechnical Troops Chief Major-General
Andrey Koban reported…
The Nebo-M radar complex, which was developed by
Nizhniy Novgorod Scientific Research Institute of Radio
Equipment, is characterized by the Radiotechnical
Troops Chief as having no equivalents in the world. It
is multipurpose and is capable of detecting all classes of
airborne targets, while possessing a long operating range
and the highest resolution based upon the detection and
determination of the accurate coordinates of air border
violators. And the detection altitude is such that the
Nebo-M is capable of “seeing” objects – ballistic missiles
and low-orbital satellites…
The Nebo-M is capable of accomplishing three missions
at the same time: transmitting target designations to
air defense missile subunits (in particular, to operate
in support of S-300 and S-400 air defense missile
systems), playing the role of an early radar detection
system, and, finally, to be an echelon in the strategic
missile attack warning system (SPRN)…the Nebo-M
radar complex doesn’t have an equivalent in the world
based upon several characteristics. First of all – based
upon its multi-functionality, while accomplishing the
missions of the missile attack warning system, of the early
radar detection system, and of target designations for
air defense missile systems, which is supported by the
operation of a complex of three frequency ranges at the
same time – VHF, UHF, and S-Band.
In the VHF and UHF ranges in the surveillance mode,
the target detection range with a radar cross-section
(RCS) of one square meter reaches 600 kilometers, which
is a record-setting indicator among all contemporary
early radar detection system radars. In the sector mode,
the instrumental range is up to 1,800 kilometers. Targets
with an RCS of 0.1 square meters are detected at a range
of up to 650 kilometers, and with a RCS of 0.01 square
meters – up to 350 kilometers. This is also an absolute
record. And it totally negates the main properties of
foreign fifth-generation fighter aircraft, which possess a
low radar signature. In the process, a powerful computer
supports the tracking of targets, which have a speed of up
to 5,000 meters per second. The number of tracked routes
is 200. And this is also a record for mobile radars.

(continued)
OE Watch | August 2017

5

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Nebo-M Radars as a Key Component
of Russian Aerospace Defense
“The Nebo-M is capable of accomplishing three missions at the same time: transmitting target
designations to air defense missile subunits (in particular, to operate in support of S-300 and S-400 air
defense missile systems), playing the role of an early radar detection system, and, finally, to be an echelon
in the strategic missile attack warning system (SPRN).”

55Zh6M Nebo-M radar system - RLM-M radar

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2016-Static-part3/iJL6Jh9x/A, CC 4.0

KREMLIN KONTROL
by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
In 2016 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chief of the General
Staff Valery Gerasimov instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and reestablished the
nation’s military prowess. This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to
describe how control over the security services and the military
have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | August 2017

6

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Anti-Satellite Capability Enhancements
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying articles from Russian
sources discuss Russian anti-satellite capability enhancements. These
enhancements are critical to Russia’s anti-access and area denial efforts.
The first accompanying article from Gazeta.Ru discusses the testing of
a missile of Russia’s forthcoming A-235 ‘Nudol’ ballistic missile defense
system (BMDS) for the protection of Moscow and surrounding areas.
The A-235 (essentially the same as the A-135, but with modernized
components and mobile launchers) consists of a command center,
targeting radars, launch platforms, and has long and short-range
interceptor missiles.
The 51T6 long-range missile interceptor (retired in 2006) has two
stages (the first stage has, solid-propellant, the second stage liquid
propellant) and was capable of destroying targets at altitudes from
70-670 kilometers, at ranges of 350 to 850 kilometers. (Reports vary
about the range capability of the 51T6.) The 53T6 short range missile
interceptor has two solid-propellant stages. It reportedly can bear a 210
G longitudinal load factor, and a 90 G lateral load factor, and has the
highest power-to weight-ratio in the world. The 53T6 carries a 10-kiloton
nuclear warhead, and is capable of destroying targets at an altitude of up
to 100 kilometers, at a range of up to 30 kilometers. These performance
parameters allow the 53T6 to intercept ICBMs traveling at speeds of up
to seven meters-per-second.
The accompanying article from Svobodnaya Pressa discusses the
capability improvements of the Russian BMDS interceptor missiles.
Notably the missiles will be fired from mobile launchers instead of
silos; nuclear munitions will not be used in favor of high-explosive
or kinetic warheads; and both interceptor missiles will be capable of
hitting satellites in low-earth orbit. The successful deployment of
these new interceptor missiles will provide the Russian Federation
with significantly more anti-satellite capability, especially considering
the forthcoming (2019) deployment of the S-500 surface-to-air missile
system, which also reportedly has an anti-satellite capability. These
capabilities will be enhanced by Russia’s newly launched satellite, the
Kosmos-2519, an imagery satellite (of some sort) that reportedly can
image other spacecraft, as discussed in the accompanying article from
Interfax. This space imaging ability will significantly enhance Russian
space situational awareness, and more easily facilitate the targeting of
spacecraft. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Mikhail Khodarenok. «Амур» попал в цель (The ‘Amur’
Hit the Target),” Gazeta.Ru Online, 16 June 2017. https://www.
gazeta.ru/army/2017/06/16/10724561.shtml
The Russian Ministry of Defense has tested the missile interceptor
for the Moscow Missile Defense System at a range in Kazakhstan.
Experts told Gazeta.Ru that they were talking about the test of the
Amur-P Multichannel Missile Launch Complex (MKSK). Russia
has conducted the successful test of a missile interceptor, which is
called upon to improve the Missile Defense System, a Ministry of
Defense spokesman reported on 16 June.
“During the course of the conducted tests, the Missile Defense
System’s missile interceptor successfully accomplished the mission
and destroyed the simulated target,” Aerospace Forces 1st Special
Purpose Air Defense/Missile Defense Army Deputy Commander
Colonel Andrey Prikhodko stated. The launch was carried out
by a combat crew of the RVSN 10th Missile Defense Test Range
(permanent deployment location – Sary-Shagan, Kazakhstan)
of the VKS Air Defense and Missile Defense Troops 1st Special
Purpose PVO/PRO Army 9th Missile Defense Division. The
Amur-P Multichannel Missile Launch Complex (MKSK) was
deployed to Sary-Shagan Range to test the Moscow Missile
Defense System, former Missile-Space Defense Troops Chief
of Staff Lieutenant-General Anatoliy Skolotyanyy explained to
Gazeta.Ru.
In the Lieutenant-General’s words, the Amur-P is the abbreviated
version of the Moscow A-135 Missile Defense System and at the
present time is the base system of 10th Missile Defense Test Range
to refine current and advanced missile defense missions…
The short-range missile interceptors, which are manufactured
based upon a single-stage scheme with a separating guided
warhead stage are launched from the Amur MKSK. The shortrange missile interceptors are designated for the destruction of
the warheads on the atmospheric phase of the targets’ flight and
possess high flight-technical characteristics, which correspond
to contemporary requirements, and do not have equivalents in
domestic missile manufacturing. A short-range interception is
normally carried out at an altitude of from 10 to 50 kilometers…

“In other words, the missile will be able to handle not only ICBMs but also objects in near-Earth space.
As a result, they call it the ‘satellite killer’.”
The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
(continued)
OE Watch | August 2017

7

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Anti-Satellite Capability Enhancements
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “А-235 «Нудоль» — истребитель американских спутников (The
A-235 ‘Nudol’ is an American Satellite Killer),” Svobodnaya Pressa Online, 19 June 2017.
https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/174898/

Source: “Russian Defense Ministry’s
Kosmos-2519 Satellite to Photograph
Space Objects,” Interfax, 24 June 2017.

…At the present time, the A-135 “Amur” Missile Defense System defends Moscow and the
Central Industrial Rayon from a ballistic missile strike. However, a new modification, which
has been obtained as a result of the “Amur’s” thorough modernization – the A-235 “Nudol”,
will soon replace it…The missile interceptors, which have been at the test stage since 2014, will
replace the silo-based missiles at the combat post. The new missiles are much less vulnerable
since they are based on mobile launchers. It is assumed that the Moscow Missile Defense System
will acquire a new appearance in two-three years…

The Russian Defense Ministry’s new
Kosmos-2519 satellite, launched into the
orbit by a Soyuz-2.lv carrier rocket from
the Plesetsk Cosmodrome on June 23 will
photograph space objects, the ministry’s
press service said.

The 53T6 high-speed missile interceptors can carry out the destruction of ballistic targets at
2.5 times the range, and three times the altitude currently certified. The system can also destroy
low-orbital satellites and other combat missions.” A modification of the 53T6 missile, which one
can tentatively call the 53T6M, will be part of the A-235 System. Its parameters are classified, but
it is understood that they will be greater than the base variant. We know that the new missile’s
warhead will be kinetic – in other words, without explosives. Target destruction must be carried
out using a very-high energy mechanical shock. This will substantially differentiate it from the
53T6 that uses a nuclear warhead with a 10-kiloton yield…
It is also the same thing with regard to the modification of the 51T6M long range missile
interceptor. The characteristics must also increase for it. Some articles, which are based on
the statements of sources in the defense industry and the Ministry of Defense, talk about this
missile’s range of up to 1,500 kilometers and the highest point of the trajectory of 750 kilometers.
In other words, the missile will be able to handle not only ICBMs but also objects in near-Earth
space. As a result, they call it the “satellite killer.” The interception is also kinetic and not
nuclear.

“The satellite is a space platform on
which various kinds of payload could
be installed. Equipment for remote
probing of the Earth and devices for
photographing space objects were
mounted on the platform as payload,” the
Russian Defense Ministry said…
The Volga had delivered the satellite
to the targeted orbit on time, and the
Russian Aerospace Forces’ ground
systems took control of it at 10:27 p.m.
Moscow time. The sequence number
Kosmos-2519 was assigned to the
satellite.

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | August 2017

8

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Far East Air Defense Training
Source: Yuriy Rossolov, “Камчатка под панцирем (Kamchatka under a Shield),” Krasnaya Zvesda, 25 June 2017. http://www.redstar.ru/
index.php/zotov/item/33600-kamchatka-pod-pantsirem?tmpl=component&print=1
OE Watch Commentary: The Pantsir-S1
(SA-22 Greyhound) is a combined short-tomedium-range surface-to-air missile and antiaircraft artillery weapon using phased array
radar for target acquisition and tracking. It is
usually assigned to protect operational level
air defense systems, airbases and mobile and
fixed rocket launcher sites. The accompanying
excerpt from Krasnaya Zvesda discusses a
recent live-fire tactical exercise conducted by
an anti-aircraft missile regiment unit located
in the Russian Far East on the Kamchatka
Peninsula jutting out into the Pacific Ocean
north of Japan. According to the article,
the missile firing exercises were critical to
“mastering the ‘Pantsir-S1’ anti-aircraft missile
and gun systems.” After the collapse of the
Soviet Union, the Eastern Military District
was often the last to receive new equipment,
but those days are past. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“...The exercise was
conducted in four stages.
In the first stage, the
subunit was alerted and
readied for combat. In
the second stage, several
crews were deployed
with their equipment to
the Ashuluk state firing
range.”

“The ‘Pantsir-S1,’ is an effective system
for combating precision weapons -- cruise
and antiradar missiles, guided bombs, etc.
The system is fully incorporated and is,
at the present time, unmatched by foreign
systems in many aspects.”

LTC Afanasenko stated
“At that stage we gained much practical experience in deploying our own equipment
over great distances by military-transport aircraft, as well as conducting combat on the
march while traveling to the exercise-firing area. On the march, we provided protective
cover for an S-400 surface-to-air missile system convoy while on the move. Our
movement and cross-country capability is only one of the undeniable advantages of our
system.”
According to LTC Afanasenko, “the equipment is very advanced to the extent that it
can conduct firing in the automatic mode, without involving any personnel, and, when
necessary, use its entire arsenal against uninvited guests…. Still, it takes a person,
with the ability to think in an unconventional and nonstandard way, and not according
to an algorithm, to be able to fully discover the full potential of even this advanced
equipment.”

Experience showed that a Pantsir-S1 system under crew control destroyed a similar aerial target half a second faster than an antiaircraft
missile and gun system being controlled exclusively by its electronic brain. In short, the symbiosis of machine and man still produces a better,
albeit marginal, result.
...
In the exercise’s third stage-- the firing stage, Warrant Officer Igor Prostakishin led operator Junior Sergeant Aleksandr Nikolayev, and
driver-mechanic Private First Class Vladimir Odintsov in engaging an aerial target. The aerial target, which imitated a cruise missile in
terms of its characteristics -- low-flying and maneuvering -- was destroyed in under five seconds.
LTC Afanasenko stated that “The ‘Pantsir-S1,’ is an effective system for combating precision weapons -- cruise and antiradar missiles,
guided bombs, etc…. The system is fully incorporated and is, at the present time, unmatched by foreign systems in many aspects.”
The “Pantsir-S1” is the only system in its class that is capable of firing at targets while on the move. Moreover, it works with equal success
and accuracy on both aerial and ground targets (light armored enemy vehicles and personnel). What makes it formidable are its two linked
30-mm automatic antiaircraft guns and 12 guided surface-to-air missiles. The latter’s performance characteristics enable it to destroy the
entire gamut of precision weapons in the NATO armories over great distances.
The thermal imager system “sees” any objects that emit heat at a distance of several kilometers. As was verified on the Ashuluk range, even
the numerous small fauna of the steppes -- rabbits and jerboas -- did not escape detection by the temperature-distribution monitoring device
at a distance of up to one kilometer. So, the “Pantsir-S1” (given competent organization of defense) is a match for saboteurs.
“Our system is very ergonomic, with a high degree of automation,” Warrant Officer Igor Prostakishin stated. “Working with it is sheer
pleasure. And retraining for it was not difficult -- everything is clear and accessible. Thanks to the fact that the antiaircraft missile and gun
system is mounted on an all-wheel drive KamAZ platform with an 8x8 wheel arrangement, it is unimportant to the ‘Pantsir’, whether it travels
along highways or off road.”….
The modular design of the Pantsir was a real plus during the tactical exercise’s second and fourth stages -- deployment. The possibility of
partially dismantling the system swiftly gives it the advantage of rapid redeployment to a designated area, for example, by military-transport
aviation aircraft (as happened in this case). To separate the “Pantsir’s” combat modules from the chassis and to load and secure all the
elements inside an Il-76 transport aircraft takes little more than half an hour. The reverse process takes exactly the same amount of time,
following which the antiaircraft missile and gun system is ready for combat use….
“And what of the victors of Ashuluk? Upon their return home, Warrant Officer Igor Prostakishin’s crew was given the honor of showing off
their fighting vehicle in the 9 May Victory Day Parade held in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy….”

(continued)
OE Watch | August 2017

9

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Far East Air Defense Training
“The ‘Pantsir-S1’ is the only system in its class that is capable of firing at targets while on the move...
What makes it formidable are its two linked 30-mm automatic antiaircraft guns and 12 guided surfaceto-air missiles. The latter’s performance characteristics enable it to destroy the entire gamut of precision
weapons in the NATO armories over great distances.”

Pantsir-S1 air defence system on GM-chassis at Engineering Technologies 2012 in Russia

Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin (http://vitalykuzmin.net/?q=node/459) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3APantsir-S1_(tracked)_-_Engineering_Technologies_2012_-1.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an
incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying
solely on brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces
(SOF) who were the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea.
This book will attempt to split the difference between these radically different ideas by
shedding some light on what exactly the Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are
structured, how they fight, and how they are modernizing.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | August 2017

10

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Swedish Concerns over Russian Tactical Nukes
OE Watch Commentary: The brief accompanying excerpt from a Swedish source discusses a recent report by the Swedish Defense
Research Agency regarding Russia’s activities in modernizing its tactical nuclear weapons. It points out that “while Western Europe was
disarming and considered these weapons not to be an important issue, Russia has modernized and is producing new tactical nuclear weapons.”
The article recounts President Putin’s comment that “after the annexation of Crimea…a counterattack would have been met with nuclear
weapons.”
The article mentions that while Russia has reduced its strategic inventory of nuclear weapons, “since 2012 the number of tactical warheads in
active use also seem to have been increased by 30 percent.” Alongside the bellicose Russian rhetoric which suggests that they are prepared to
use nuclear weapons, the excerpt points out that the Russian Defense Ministry has continued to incorporate the use of these weapons into their
exercise scenarios.
The article concludes by examining how Swedish forces are currently deployed and how this concentration of men and material could easily
“be knocked out with nuclear weapons.” It also addresses the “lack of plans to protect the population against nuclear war,” and how these plans
were shelved “during the period of optimism in the 1990s.” While non-NATO member Sweden shares no direct border with Russia, this article
indicates that it has grown increasingly wary of Russia’s tactical nuclear delivery systems. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“In Russia they seem to be on the way to convincing themselves that a limited nuclear war can be won...”
Source: Mikael Holmstrom, “New Report Warns of Tactical Nuclear Weapons From Russia,” DN.se, 13 June 2017. http://www.dn.se/nyheter/
sverige/ny-rapport-varnar-for-taktiska-karnvapen-fran-ryssland/
Russia is modernizing its nuclear weapons and threatening to deploy them on the battlefield. This is a serious threat to Europe, because
Sweden and other Western nations have assumed that such tactical nuclear weapons would disappear.
“Nuclear weapons will acquire an increased security role in Europe in the future. The rumor about the imminent dwindling of nuclear
weapons has turned out to be exaggerated.” This is the conclusion of a new report from the Swedish Defense Research Agency, FOI, which
will be published on 13 June. “While Western Europe was disarming and considered these weapons not to be an important issue, Russia has
modernized and is producing new tactical nuclear weapons,” says one of the editors of the report, research director Niklas Granholm, at FOI.
The report “Nuclear Weapons for Battlefield Use and European Security” focuses on the nuclear weapons that are launched at shorter
distances on the battlefield. It involves, for example, torpedoes, bombs, missiles -- so-called tactical nuclear weapons or battlefield nuclear
weapons.
These weapons could lower the threshold for nuclear war, which would mean greater risks than during the Cold War. At that time there was
nuclear deterrent between the Soviet Union and the United States, in which both knew that if nuclear weapons were used it would lead to total
nuclear war. This was called mutual assured destruction with the fitting abbreviation MAD.
But Russian President Putin and other Russian representatives have made statements in which they threatened to use nuclear weapons. After
the annexation of Crimea in 2014 Putin said that a counterattack would have been met with nuclear weapons. Denmark as well has been
threatened with nuclear weapons. “In Russia they seem to be on the way to convincing themselves that a limited nuclear war can be won,”
says Granholm….
…Russia as well reduced its nuclear warheads after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. But in parallel with the Russian rearmament nuclear
weapons have received an increasingly prominent role. It is a question of weapon systems with short or intermediate range.
“In Europe it is Russia that drives the development by giving these weapons an increasingly prominent role,” concludes the report, which
states: “The Russian tactical nuclear arsenal has been undergoing modernization for a long time, and several older weapons platforms have
been replaced with new systems. Since 2012 the number of tactical warheads in active use also seem to have been increased by 30 percent.
The Russian nuclear arms rhetoric has also returned.”
During exercises in recent years Russia has concluded combat activities with conventional weapons by deploying simulated nuclear attacks.
This is called “de-escalation.” Paired with various statements, this shows “that tactical nuclear weapons are assigned a role on the battlefield
in the actual Russian nuclear arms doctrine,” FOI writes.
This rhetoric signals that the Putin administration may be willing not only to threaten the use of nuclear weapons but also to use them in a
conflict…. “The major difference is Russia’s politics: the more aggressive behavior, the clear upgrade in military capability, and the increased
importance given to nuclear weapons,” FOI writes.
On the part of Sweden, it is pointed out that the Armed Forces are concentrated at a few bases and that materiel is stored in central depots.
This was rational for peacetime, but it means that these facilities can be knocked out with nuclear weapons, which would make it almost
impossible to act….

OE Watch | August 2017

11

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Coastal Defense Infrastructure Improvements
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Coastal Defense
Troops consist of two separate organizations, the Coastal
Defense Artillery Troops and the Naval Infantry. In terms
of command and control, the Coastal Defense Troops
are part of the Russian Navy. The Navy’s command and
control of these forces is exercised through the four fleets
and one flotilla, where the commander of the Coastal
Defense Troops units in each of these commands serves on
the fleet (flotilla) staff.

Source: “Первый заместитель Министра обороны Руслан Цаликов
проверил обустройство 126-й отдельной бригады береговой обороны
Черноморского флота (First Deputy Minister of Defense Ruslan Tsalikov
Has Inspected the Outfitting of the Black Sea Fleet’s 126th Separate Coastal
Defense Brigade),” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 6 July 2017.
http://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12132341@egNews

One consequence of Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea
and subsequent incorporation (reflagging) of Ukrainian
military units was the addition of a Ukrainian ‘Coastal
Defense Brigade,’ that is now part of the Russian Coastal
Defense Troops, but is neither a Coastal Defense Artillery
Troops unit nor Naval Infantry unit. The 126th Coastal
Defense Brigade (formerly the 36th Separate Coastal
Defense Brigade of the Ukrainian Navy) has approximately
2,000 personnel and consists of seven battalions (including
a motorized rifle and mountain warfare battalion), and five
separate companies. The brigade is closely associated with
the 8th Artillery Regiment that has approximately 800
personnel, and is also part of the Coastal Defense Troops.

The Southern Military District commander, Colonel General Aleksandr
Dvornikov, reported to the first deputy head of the military department about
the readiness of new barracks, the outfitting of a garrison, and the completed
construction of a maintenance and repair center for military equipment…

In terms of command and control, the 126th Coastal
Defense Brigade is part of the 22nd Army Corps.
Although not explicitly stated, Army Groups function
as intermediate commands between military districts
(operational-strategic commands) and maneuver units;
just as Army Corps function as intermediate commands
between the naval fleets and their associated coastal
defense and motorized rifle units. Only three fleets
currently have Army Corps, the Baltic Sea Fleet (11th
Army Corps, Kaliningrad), the Northern Sea Fleet (14th
Army Corps, Severomorsk), and the Black Sea Fleet (22nd
Army Corps, Sevastopol). There was an announcement
that a new coastal defense division would be formed in
Chukotka region. If this unit is assigned to the Pacific
Fleet, Russia may form another Army Corps to facilitate
command and control. Since motorized rifle units
(battalions, regiments, brigades, and divisions) may be
assigned to the Coastal Defense Troops, and units appear
to be routinely reshuffled between the Coastal Defense
Troops and Ground Forces, it is clear that the Russians
utilize a very different system of command and control
relationships than used by the US military. (continued).

During a working visit to Crimea, the first deputy Russian Minister of
Defense, Ruslan Tsalikov, has inspected the outfitting of the Black Sea Fleet’s
126th Separate Coastal Defense Brigade.

In 2003, the 36th Separate Coastal Defense Brigade of the Ukrainian Navy
was formed. On 21 March 2014, it became part of the Russian Armed Forces as
the Black Sea Fleet’s separate coastal defense brigade.
On 1 December 2014, the 126th Separate Coastal Defense Brigade was formed
on the basis of that formation.
Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Бригада в новостройках (Brigade in New
Buildings),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 6 July 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/07/06/
reg-ufo/v-sevastopole-i-kerchi-otkroiut-parki-patriot.html
…We recall that two years ago Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu ordered the
provision from scratch of facilities of the base compound of the 126th Separate
Coastal Defense Brigade and the 8th Artillery Regiment of the Black Sea
Fleet. Meaning the garrison in the Perevalnoye community. Before becoming a
part of our Armed Forces, the 126th Brigade was part of the Ukrainian Navy.
The garrison presented a dismal picture at that time. Buildings had not been
renovated there for decades, there was a catastrophic shortage of militarysocial facilities in Perevalnoye.
The provision of the garrison with facilities began with the conclusion of
government contracts for the construction of five quarters-type facilities for
300 men each, a 1,200-seat mess, rations depots with a vegetable storehouse, a
guard training facility, and a parking and service area. The erection of a new
department kindergarten for 250 children was envisaged also.
Ruslan Tsalikov evaluated the results of the work thus far on the spot. His
first order of business was to open the kindergarten -- a two-story building
with a total area of more than 3,000 square meters. There are premises here
for the preparation of meals, a medical unit, rooms for sports and musical
pursuits, and specialists’ rooms. The children’s building is even equipped
with a garden and pool, the quality of the water in which is controlled in a
special laboratory…The Defense Ministry has six departmental therapeutic
centers and the Sevastopol’ recreation facility in Crimea. They can take in
approximately 5,500 persons at any one time…

“In line with previously approved plans, the shore infrastructure of the Black Sea Fleet’s
Krymskaya and Novorossiysk naval bases and naval aviation airfields, as well as the coastal
training ranges, continue to be upgraded to comply with the fleet’s current requirements. We
plan to carry out repair and reconstruction work on a number of facilities this year…”
(continued)
OE Watch | August 2017

12

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Coastal Defense Infrastructure
Improvements
In terms of combat power, the 11th and 14th Army Corps
have significantly less combat power than most other
Army Groups, but the 22nd Army Corps has significantly
more, as it controls all coastal defense units in Crimea
and the 150th and 42nd Motorized Rifle Divisions on the
mainland.
The accompanying articles from the Ministry of
Defense and Rossiyskaya Gazeta discuss infrastructure
improvements for the 126th Coastal Defense Brigade and
the 8th Artillery Regiment in the vicinity of Perevalnoye.
Not only is Russia improving infrastructure for military
activities, but also for recreation and leisure. (In Soviet
times, the Crimean Peninsula was a popular vacation and
retirement area. The Soviet military sponsored several
summer camps for children and vacation resorts in the
area, a practice that apparently will continue.) The article
from Krasnaya Zvezda gives a general overview of the
increasing capabilities of the Coastal Defense Troops in
Crimea. The establishment of shore defense oriented
Army Corps, the addition of the 126th Coastal Defense
Brigade, plans for the creation of a coastal defense
division in the Far East, and substantial coastal defense
infrastructure improvements indicate that Russia is very
concerned about protecting her borders in general, and
coastal defense issues in particular. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Pavel Zavolokin, “Полной Самоотдачей (Total Commitment),”
Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 12 May 2017. http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/
item/33126-s-polnoj-samootdachej
[Zavolokin] Comrade Commander, on 13 May the Black Sea Fleet marks the
234th anniversary of its creation, and a performance-evaluation inspection for
the winter training period ended just recently in the fleet’s units and formations.
Are the results conducive to a holiday mood?
[Vitko] To judge by the preliminary results obtained during the performanceevaluation exercises the servicemen of the Black Sea Fleet achieved a good
outcome in the execution of their assigned tasks. Around 80 percent of the Black
Sea Fleet’s forces and assets were assigned to training measures forming part
of the inspection procedure, and a broad range of combat drills was conducted
by the fleet’s naval, coastal defense, and air components...It can be stated that
for the fleet as a whole the outstanding and good indicators for general and
specialized training are up almost 10 percent from last training period…
In the past year units of the coastal defense forces’ missile troops and artillery
took part in more than 100 tactical exercises and training drills of differing
levels. Bastion and Bal coastal defense antiship missile systems successfully
employed cruise missiles against a naval target, and artillery firing against
targets at sea was also performed by the Bereg system. Subunits of a Black Sea
Fleet artillery regiment, separate naval infantry brigade, and separate coastal
defense brigade conducted more than 450 fire missions…In line with previously
approved plans, the shore infrastructure of the Black Sea Fleet’s Krymskaya
and Novorossiysk naval bases and naval aviation airfields, as well as the coastal
training ranges, continue to be upgraded to comply with the fleet’s current
requirements. We plan to carry out repair and reconstruction work on a number
of facilities this year…

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign articles and other media
that our analysts believe give
military and security experts an
added dimension to their critical
thinking about the Operational
Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | August 2017

13

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
So Much for Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics
OE Watch Commentary: The GAZ Tigr has been a popular
reconnaissance and all-purpose 4x4 ATV since it was introduced
to Russian ground forces in 2006. According to the excerpted
article from Izvestiya, now it may provide accurate “shoot
and scoot” fire support to airborne, air assault and spetsnaz
reconnaissance troops. A robot mortar mount provides accurate,
rapid 120mm mortar fire. The mortar stays in the vehicle
and is loaded automatically with conventional or laser-guided
munitions. This is not the first time a mortar has been mounted
in the back of a vehicle, but this seems to be a first in mortar
accuracy due to the electronic suite coupled with the robot
mortar mount. This has got to be a very rugged system to
survive air drop and on-board 120mm mortar firing. This old
“eleven charlie” [mortar man] wonders what kind of hearing
protection the crew will have. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

AMN 233114 Tigr-M with remote weapon station Arbalet-DM

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Victory-Day-Rehearsal-in-Moscow-3May2017/i-6wrFwBc, CC 4.0

“The Gorets [Highlander] mortar is mounted in a vehicle’s aft section, where a special robot mortar
mount has been installed. It can set the elevation or the direction of the shot with micron accuracy in a
matter of seconds. The robot takes into account the weather conditions, the state of the tube, and even the
temperature of the mortar round in its calculations.”
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin and Aleksey Ramm, “Мобильные войска получат робот-минометы. Система Горец отличается высокой
мобильностью и способна уничтожить любую цель в секундах (The Mobile Troops Will Receive Robot-Mortars. The Gorets System Is
Distinguished by Its High Mobility and Is Capable of Destroying Any Target in a Matter of Seconds),” Izvestiya, 30 May 2017. http://iz.ru/
news/719306
“The Russian Army’s special subunits and also the airborne and air assault battalions will receive the MZ-204 Gorets mobile, automatic
mortar systems. The system has been installed on the chassis of Tigr and Tayfun-K armored motor vehicles and Rakushka armored transport
vehicles. The mortar can fire conventional mortar rounds as well as laser-guided precision munitions. The unique combat robot will guide
the motor rounds to the target. This system will substantially expand the lethality of the subunits that are operating on the forward defense or
in the enemy rear.”
According to an Airborne Troops Headquarters spokesman, they plan to deploy the Gorets, mounted on the Tigr armored motor vehicle, in
reconnaissance and Spetsnaz subunits. The Gorets mounted on the BTR-MDM Rakushka armored transport vehicle will join the air assault
and airborne battalions’ mortar batteries. Both vehicles are air-transportable and may be parachuted into the enemy rear. The final decision
on the acceptance of the Gorets system into will be made only after extensive testing.”...
“The Gorets [Highlander] mortar is mounted in a vehicle’s aft section, where a special robot mortar mount has been installed. It can set the
elevation or the direction of the shot with micron accuracy in a matter of seconds. The robot takes into account the weather conditions, the
state of the tube, and even the temperature of the mortar round in its calculations. One can control the mortar in the manual mode from the
commander’s seat, which is located alongside the vehicle driver. Controls include a special unit with a liquid crystal display of an electronic
terrain map and two joysticks which control the precision mechanism.
The Gorets’ distinctive feature is that the troops remain inside the armored capsule during the conduct of firing. Automatic loading occurs
directly inside the vehicle through a special opening, into which the mortar tube automatically drops after each shot. There is a rack of 20
120-millimeter mortar rounds plus several Gran precision-guided laser munitions. Reloading takes just seconds. If the vehicle is destroyed by
return fire, the crew will be able to remove the mortar from the gun mount in three minutes and continue firing in the conventional mode.”
Arsenal of the Fatherland Magazine Editor Viktor Murakhovskiy stated that mortars remain one of the most effective weapons against
unprotected personnel shelters. “The mortar has a fast reaction time and a very large bursting area. Simplicity, ease of use, and low weight
distinguish mortars. If necessary, one can transport it in the cab of a motor vehicle or even using the manpower of the combat crew itself,
if you urgently need to change position or withdraw from under return fire. Since these weapons will be integrated into the artillery fire
automated control system, their properties for destruction and reaction time will increase even more. We need to also take into account the
new types of munitions, which are being developed for mortars. The mortar rounds with laser and optical-electronic guided systems are even
more powerful.”...
“Military Expert Sergey Suvorov reported that the airborne troops frequently fired the earlier Gorets MZ-204 mortars through an open hatch
of the Tigr armored motor vehicle during the combat in the Caucasus. The present Gorets MZ-204 was developed after taking into account
this combat experience, but using new technology.”
OE Watch | August 2017

14

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Improving Armored Mobility Transport
OE Watch Commentary: While the Russian military’s new armored systems (e.g. T-14 Armata tanks, MSTA and Koalitsiya self-propelled
artillery) may have gathered the most praise during the recent Victory Day parade, military logisticians understand that effective transport of
armored equipment is equally important. Given Russia’s relatively poor road system, military planners have usually relied upon rail to transport
armored weapons within the country. This reliance upon rail transport appears to be shifting toward the use of multi-axle heavy wheeled
tractors (MTKT), possibly due to Russia’s improving road network. The brief excerpt from the pro-government source, Izvestiya, describes the
creation of new MTKT transport units designed to move armor assets on wheeled trailers (which soldiers have nicknamed “heavy bicycles”).
The scale of this initiative is impressive. According to the excerpt, these new transport units “will be part of all of the military districts and
combined-arms and tank armies,” with “the first three tractor battalions already appearing at the beginning of this year in Central and Eastern
military districts.” Each transport company will be equipped with more than 30 trailers and “there will be more than 600 KamAZ-65225
tractors in the composition of a regiment.” To reduce deployment time, as the excerpt points out, “tank and motorized rifle formations are
also deployed not far from the newly formed MTKT units.” The weight limit for these trailers is 65 tons, easily capable of moving the Russian
military’s heaviest armored assets.
The article includes a quote from a military expert who points out that moving armor on public roads is not only tough on the equipment, but
such transport tends to tear up the roads. He also observes that rail movement of armor makes it “impossible to transport vehicles directly to
the location of their combat employment. State-of-the-art heavy transporters can do this.” As the excerpt points out, the development of these
trailer-transport units will have a significant impact on the mobility of Russia’s most lethal armored assets, since “a KamAZ-65225 with a relief
crew conducts a march of 1,000 kilometers per day.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Russian tanks, armored infantry vehicles, and self-propelled artillery mounts will travel to deployment
locations not under their own power but on special multi-axle heavy tractors.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Dmitriy Litovkin, “Танки повезут на ‘велосипедах’; Минобороны начало формирование уникальных воинских
частей — полков, батальонов и рот многоосных тяжелых колесных тягачей (They Will Transport Tanks on ‘Bicycles’. The Ministry
of Defense Has Begun the Formation of Unique Military Units – Regiments, Battalions, and Companies of Multi-Axle Heavy Wheeled
Tractors),” Izvestiya Online, 21 June 2017. http://iz.ru/608113/aleksei-ramm-dmitrii-litovkin/tankisty-peresiadut-na-tiazhelye-velosipedy
Russian tanks, armored infantry vehicles, and self-propelled artillery mounts will travel to deployment locations not under their own power
but on special multi-axle heavy tractors. The Ministry of Defense has begun the formation of unique military units – regiments, battalions,
and companies of multi-axle heavy wheeled tractors (MTKT). Their mission – is the prompt delivery of tank and motorized rifle divisions
to the locations of combat operations at a distance of thousands of kilometers. In so doing, the armored vehicles will be ready to enter an
engagement without preparation – “ from the wheels”. KamAZ-65225 tractors with semitrailers will enter the inventory of the new military
units. It is noteworthy that those vehicles have received the informal designation – “heavy bicycles” – in the troops.
A Russian military department spokesman told Izvestiya that the decision on the formation of the new military units was made at the end of
last year. They will be part of all of the military districts and combined-arms and tank armies. And, in the future, they will also augment the
ranks of the army corps. They plan that an MTKT regiment will be formed in the military district and a “heavy bicycle” battalion or separate
company in an army.
The first three tractor battalions already appeared at the beginning of this year in Central and Eastern military districts. They are based at
Chita, Khabarovsk, and Chebarkul. And these military units will appear in Southern and Western military districts by the beginning of 2018….
It is noteworthy that tank and motorized rifle formations are also deployed not far from the newly formed MTKT units. By way of illustration,
the recently formed 90th Guards Tank Vitebsk-Novgorod Twice Red Banner Division is deployed at Chebarkul. There are more than one
thousand tanks, armored infantry vehicles, armored transport vehicles, and self-propelled artillery mounts in its inventory.
…The MTKT battalions are equipped with KamAZ-65225 three-axle, 11-tonne tractors. They can transport a cargo weighing up to 65 tons on
a special semitrailer. And, therefore, the “heavy bicycle” will easily handle the transportation of T-72 (a weight of 41 tons) and T-14 Armata
(48 tons) tanks, MSTA and Koalitsiya self-propelled artillery mounts (42-49 tons), and also BMPs [armored infantry vehicles] and BTRs
[armored transport vehicles] of all series. In the process, a KamAZ-65225 with a relief crew conducts a march of 1,000 kilometers per day.
There will be more than 30 tractors in each “heavy bicycle” company when there will be more than 600 KamAZ-65225 tractors in the
composition of a regiment….
…Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy, the editor of “Arsenal of the Fatherland” Magazine, told Izvestiya that the appearance of the heavy
tractor subunits – is an urgent need. “Heavy vehicles have serious limitations based upon the service life of the drive train and engines,” the
expert pointed out. “While taking into account the cost of this equipment, it is irrational to expend its service life on the conduct of lengthy
marches. All the more so to do this on public roads – tanks will simply break them up. Therefore, they have always deployed the vehicles either
via rail or motor vehicle transport. The railroad has its own shortcomings – it is impossible to transport vehicles directly to the location of
their combat employment. State-of-the-art heavy transporters can do this….
OE Watch | August 2017

15

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Military Readiness Reporting
OE Watch Commentary: Russian military reform continues apace and gauging from the frequent glowing reports in their media, the country
is well on its way toward creating a modern, combat-ready military. Occasionally, however, evidence appears which suggests that the optimistic
rhetoric may not always match the mundane reality. The recent article from the centrist-weekly Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer [Military
Industrial Courier] which warns of the dangers of fraudulent military reporting, is a good example.
The article begins by pointing out that “in Russia, reporting itself has become the main form of official activity,” and that the Russian military
has a penchant for delivering a positive assessment when reporting to higher headquarters. To illustrate this point, the excerpt describes how a
“regimental commander may report that all the available equipment is fully operational, supplied and combat-ready.” Therefore, based on this
report, “the senior commander decides that it is not necessary to allocate funds for repairs or resupply.” While the regimental report may look
good, if it is not accurate, “combat readiness will be compromised.”
The article claims that while career considerations sometimes prompt false reporting, it is usually “fear of punishment” which induces officials
to bend the truth. Aggravating this desire to please the boss, is the concept of “socialist competition” which the Russian military inherited from
the USSR. One cannot belong to the “best platoon, company, battalion, regiment, brigade” and still report deficiencies. Moreover, this desire to
produce a flawless report tends to infect the entire military unit with a willingness to overlook faults.
The author concludes the article with a handful of suggestions on how to combat the plague of false reporting. Honest reporting must begin
at the top, reports should be verifiable and those who report false data ought to “be punished publicly.” Commanders at all levels must do away
with a zero-defects mentality and accept that certain problems will exist in any unit. Finally, overall combat readiness should be the main
criteria for reporting and not how well the “grass is trimmed,” or as the excerpt suggests, how “well their soldiers can level snowdrifts.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…The criteria for evaluation of military members, and especially commanders, must be determined on
the basis of their official duties, and not as often practiced: on their ability to march in unison or how well
their soldiers can level snowdrifts.”
Source: Evgeniy Glukhov, “Служу квадратному сугробу (I serve the square snowdrift),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 5 July
2017. http://vpk-news.ru/articles/37608
The existing system of informing the authorities is dangerous, even in peacetime….
…The idea of reporting is to inform chiefs of actual performance. However, in Russia reporting itself has become the main form of official
activities, in comparison with which all else pales. In the military, fraudulent reporting is even more dangerous than in civilian life, since it
directly threatens the lives of soldiers and security of the state….
…For example, a regimental commander may report that all the available equipment is fully operational, supplied and combat-ready. His
senior commander decides that it is not necessary to allocate funds for repairs or resupply. However, if the equipment is actually faulty or
missing, combat readiness is compromised… Decisions made on the basis of false information, will lead to worse situations….
…There are many reasons for fraudulent reporting: a desire to curry favor and make a career, to match the behavior of a peer group, but
the main reason is fear of punishment, which will follow the truthful report. And the author of the report is not necessarily to blame for faulty
equipment, non-renovated buildings, poor academic performance. Often, there are objective reasons. But these will hardly release one from
punishment. Therefore, officials lie. And the author of the report is not the only one at fault, but also his superiors and the already established
practice of false reporting. When joining a team, a person adopts the rules of conduct, which have already been adopted, even if he had
earlier promised to abide by his conscience. Life within a bureaucratic system sets a certain standard of behavior….
…But that’s only half the problem. The system of socialist competition to determine the best platoon, company, battalion, regiment, brigade
which developed in the Armed Forces of the USSR remains operative today. After each period of training, superiors determine the place
among the subordinate units based on military discipline, training of troops, injuries and other reportable items….
…To summarize, I consider it necessary to offer my vision to eliminate fraud in the reports of military leaders.
…As the military is firmly built upon the principle of unity of command, to change this situation is only possible from above. This will
demand the political will of the senior leadership of the country and the security agencies.…we must build a system whereby reports can be
verified, and those who submit false reports should be punished publicly.
…The criteria for evaluation of military members, and especially commanders, must be determined on the basis of their official duties, and
not as often practiced: on their ability to march in unison or how well their soldiers can level snowdrifts.

OE Watch | August 2017

16

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Crimean Love Story
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s annexation of Crimea will likely be
regarded by Russians as one of President Putin’s most significant achievements
during his current term (2012-2018). Despite Western sanctions and aggravated
tensions with its neighbors, Russian media has consistently portrayed the
annexation as not only a fully legitimate action, but one which also helped
to preserve peace and stability on the Crimean Peninsula. Top Russian
media managers are also doing their part to ensure that this positive Kremlin
message reaches the largest possible audience.
The brief excerpt from a Saratov news source announces that a new film by
Alexei Pimanov, titled “Crimea” which “recreates with historical accuracy the
events that took place in Crimea in the spring of 2014,” will appear on Russian
screens on 28 September. According to earlier reports and the film trailer
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDVVzsEzpR0), this movie will combine
both fact and fiction, tracing the love story of two young people who get
caught up in the dramatic events in Ukraine, Russia, and Crimea in early 2014.
Pimanov is a well-known Russian TV and movie producer, director, and
journalist, who also hosts the popular television program “Человек и закон”
[Man and Law] on Russia’s most popular TV channel-ORT. As the excerpt
points out, Pimanov claimed that Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu was
responsible for suggesting that the film be made and that the Defense Ministry
also helped with funding for the film and providing personnel and equipment
for the movie’s production.
Winning over hearts and minds via cinema is not a new idea. Half a year
after seizing and occupying two large regions of Georgia, Russian movie fans
were treated to the action, docu-drama “Olympus Inferno” which took the
events of the Georgian-Russian conflict of August 2008 and spun them to align
with the pro-Kremlin narrative. While the production of the movie “Crimea”
has taken considerably longer, there is no doubt that it will reinforce the
Kremlin’s narrative as to what occurred in Ukraine and Crimea in early 2014,
“in an extremely honest way.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Саратовцы увидят уникальный
художественный фильм о Крыме (Saratov residents
see a unique film about Crimea),” Saratov Novosti.ru,
28 June 2017. https://sarnovosti.ru/news.php?ID=71422
On 28 September, Russian cinemas will release a fulllength feature film “Crimea,” created by “Pimanov and
Partners” in conjunction with the media holding “Red
Star.” The film recreates with historical accuracy the
events that took place in Crimea in the spring of 2014.
…“The mission of the film is to examine how the
Crimean Spring was understood by both the people of
Russian and Ukraine in an extremely honest way, by
looking at how two close people ended up separated,”
explained the authors.
The initiator of the project was Russian Defense
Minister Sergei Shoigu. The idea was approved by
the President of Russia Vladimir Putin. The final
version of the script was approved in the presidential
administration. This ambitious project enjoyed the
full cooperation and assistance in organizing from
the Office of the Plenipotentiary Representative of the
Russian President in the Crimean Federal District,
and the Government of the Republic of Crimea and
Sevastopol.
…The film involved modern military equipment:
helicopters, military transport aircraft, ships, artillery
systems, reconnaissance vehicle and a large number
of personnel. The movie is designed to be a socially
significant and cultural event, whose purpose strengthening patriotism among different generations of
Russian citizens.

“The initiator of the project was Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu.”

Map of Crimea

Source: Wikipedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_the_Crimea.
png CC BY-SA 2.0

OE Watch | August 2017

17

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Possible Change to Russian Military Retirement
OE Watch Commentary: Lower budget revenues and improved demographics continue to force the Kremlin to wrestle with its pension
system. To reduce pension expenditures, in January 2017 the government raised the retirement age for state workers from the current age (55.5
years-women; 60.5 years-men) to the future (63 years-women; 65 years-men). The change will take place over the next 15 years, whereby the
retirement age will be increased 6 months annually until 2032. In what could be a similar move, the excerpt from the weekly journal Versiya
indicates that the government is considering increasing the minimum length of service for receiving a military pension from 20 to 25 years.
Those involved in state security would have to serve 25 years before receiving a pension. As the excerpt points out, such a modification “will be
solved gradually and with great caution,” as this proposal would “affect the pensions of military, Interior Ministry, the Emergencies Ministry,
the Federal Penitentiary Service and the National Guard.”
The article stresses that this proposed change is merely being discussed, and that no decisions will be made until “after the presidential
election in 2018,” given the outcomes of previous proposals, and fears that any drastic change would lead to protest. The rationale for increasing
the term to receive pension benefits is predicated both on improved demographics and on the staggering number of military retirees (over 10
million) who currently receive pensions. Moreover, as the excerpt points out, the average military pension is almost twice that of the average
civil pension (21,300 rubles versus 12,890 rubles or $350 versus $210).
Russian military pensioners are already somewhat aggrieved that they have not been receiving their full pensions. As the excerpt points out,
back in 2012, when military salaries were increased to make them more competitive, pensions were only increased by some 50%. The promise
to gradually index these pensions by 2% annually has not been kept, and “despite inflation and a significant depreciation of the ruble, military
pensions have not changed for three years.”
The article concludes on a problematic note, pointing out that although pursuing a military career has become more popular over the past few
years, this trend could be reversed if the government continues to chip away at retiree benefits (e.g. travel subsidies, medical support). Moreover,
according to the expert quoted in the article, should retirement benefits continue to be reduced, there is a possibility that disgruntled military
retirees “could increase the protest potential of opposition groups.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“There is a tendency to gradually take away all the significant benefits from military retirees.”
Source: Alexander Stepanov, “Дали отставку; На военных пенсионерах хотят сэкономит (They gave retirement; they want to save money
on military pensions),” Versiya, 26 June 2017. https://versia.ru/na-voennyx-pensionerax-xotyat-syekonomit
Last week it became known that the security agencies are developing a bill to raise the lower threshold length of service, which would entitle
one to receive a military pension. It is reported that this will save the annual budget hundreds of billions of rubles. The document, on which
work started in March this year, will affect the pensions of military, Interior Ministry, the Emergencies Ministry, the Federal Penitentiary
Service and the National Guard. …the amendments proposed to increase the lower limit of the length of service from 20 to 25 years.
…Perhaps the amendments to the law to toughen the terms of military pensions will be made after the presidential election in 2018; a
number of sources reported that the presidential administration believe that “the issue is very delicate”… Most likely this issue will be solved
gradually and with great caution.
…According to rough estimates, in Russia today about 10 million military retirees. …The average size of pensions in the Russian military
after the increase rose to 21.3 thousand…. which is much higher than the average civil pensions, which in March 2017 was 12.89 thousand
rubles….
…In 2012, a federal law was passed which increased the money allowances of servicemen several times, to include those receiving a military
pension… However, the military financiers had a trick up their sleeves and introduced a reduction factor in the calculation of pensions. As a
result, a military retiree in 2012 began to get a little more than half of the pension owed, and then there were promises that the payment each
year will increase by 2%....
…Accordingly, despite inflation and a significant depreciation of the ruble, military pensions have not changed for three years. Moreover,
the increase in the lower threshold length of service to 25 years is becoming more tangible. Obviously, the reduction of social security of the
military will not add to the attractiveness of military service, but it will save the budget money, even at the expense of the most vulnerable
group of servicemen.
Anatoly Tsyganok, head of the Center for Military Forecasting, points out, “Today, young people once again aspire to serve in the army as
military pay is higher than the national average. The Defense Ministry understands that and so provides enough benefits to officers so that
it becomes not economically feasible to leave for early retirement… There is a tendency to gradually take away all the significant benefits
from military retirees. Previously, for example, a pensioner had the right to land, and now there is no such benefit; they are also deprived
of their benefits for free travel once a year on long-distance trains. Now the government is looking at reducing medical support for military
pensioners…. From all appearances, there is no risk of a social explosion, and that’s no small thing: today, the number of military pensioners
from all the power structures is somewhere around 10-12 million. This is not only the possible loss of tens of millions of votes, but such a move
could increase the protest potential of opposition groups.”
OE Watch | August 2017

18

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Stalin and Tukhachevsky Revisited
OE Watch Commentary: This past June marked the 80th Anniversary of
the arrest and execution of Marshall Mikhail Tukhachevsky and a number
of other high-level Soviet military officers. In 1937, these officers were
charged with being involved in a plot to remove Stalin and collaborating
with foreign enemies. Not long after Stalin’s death, however, these generals
were rehabilitated and their murders characterized as yet another facet of
Stalin’s determination to remove any and all opposition. Their untimely
deaths also helped to explain the USSR’s initial poor performance during
the ‘Great Patriotic War’ (World War II).
The first excerpt from the liberal radio station, Echo Moscow, includes
commentary from political analyst Stanislav Belkovskiy, who supports
the belief that there had indeed been a plot among the military leadership
“and that Mikhail Tukhachevsky wanted to remove Stalin.” Over the
past several years, there have been a
number of Russian documentaries/TV
series which support this allegation.
(See for instance, “Заговор против
Сталина,” [The Conspiracy against
Stalin] http://www.ntv.ru/peredacha/
Delo_temnoe/m33240/o309092/video/).
Belkovsky goes on to claim that while
Stalin’s removal of Tukhachevsky
and other military officers may have
“undermined the fighting capacity of
the Soviet armed forces,” it convinced
later Russian military leaders to remain
outside of politics.
Mikhail Tukhachevsky
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File%3AMikhail_Tukhachevsky.jpg, Public Domain

The second excerpt comes from
an interview with a Russian historian (Dr. Yuliya Kantor) given to the
popular daily Komsomolskaya Pravda. This historian categorically “claims
that there was no conspiracy, and the case [against Tukachevsky and the
other generals] was fabricated.” While Tukhachevsky had cooperated with
German military officers in the 1920s and 30s, this was part of a wider
scope of military cooperation between the USSR and Germany. Dr. Kantor
points out that Stalin was determined to destroy any domestic oppositioneven imaginary enemies, particularly those senior party and military
leaders who had played a significant role in the revolution and subsequent
civil war.
Despite assessments such as Dr. Kantor’s, over the past decade, Russia’s
historical pendulum appears to be drifting back toward a more positive
assessment of Josef Stalin and the role he played in Soviet/Russian history.
As the third excerpt from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer points out, in a
recent poll Stalin has once again been recognized by the Russians as “the
most outstanding person in Russian history.” The poll lists possible reasons
for this positive assessment, and Stalin’s role as the “author of the WW
II victory” as the most popular response (44%). Since the Soviet Union’s
victory in WW II remains at the center of the current Kremlin ideology, it
is not all that surprising that Stalin’s role would also be elevated. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Vladimir Kara-Murza, Grani Nedeliy, Echo
Moscow (radio), 10 June 2017. http://echo.msk.ru/
programs/graniweek/1997396-echo/
Stanislav Belkovskiy “…On the other hand, I believe that
the plot was real, and that Mikhail Tukhachevsky wanted
to remove Stalin. It was not known, whether this would be
good or bad for the country, but there was a conspiracy.
Stalin had to take the lead…. even if it undermined the
fighting capacity of the Soviet armed forces… And the
third most important effect of this incident is that from that
moment, the military finally lost any political initiative….
Stalin impressed upon the military, that they had no role in
politics…”
Source: David Genkina, “Маршал Тухачевский активно
сотрудничал с немецкими офицерами (Tukhachevsky
actively cooperated with German officers),”
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 13 June 2017. https://www.spb.
kp.ru/daily/26690.7/3714597/
Stanislav Belkovskiy “…On the other hand, I believe that
the plot was real, and that Mikhail Tukhachevsky wanted
to remove Stalin. It was not known, whether this would be
good or bad for the country, but there was a conspiracy.
Stalin had to take the lead…. even if it undermined the
fighting capacity of the Soviet armed forces… And the
third most important effect of this incident is that from that
moment, the military finally lost any political initiative….
Stalin impressed upon the military, that they had no role in
politics…”
Source: “Чем объяснить непреходящую любовь к
Сталину? (How to explain the undying love for Stalin?),”
Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, No. 24 (688), 28 June4 July 2017. http://vpk-news.ru/sites/default/files/pdf/
VPK_24_2017_688.pdf
Stalin remains the most outstanding person in Russian
history, according to a recent poll by the Levada Center.
Putin and Pushkin came in 2nd and 3rd. How can one
explain the unchanging love for Stalin?
44% -He was the author of the WW II victory
43% -People long for a strong ruler
6% -The cult of personality enjoys effective PR
5% -This is a syndrome of a deified past
2% -Too hard to answer

OE Watch | August 2017

19

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Retired Colonel on How to Oppose Hybrid War
OE Watch Commentary: The July issue of
Armeyskiy Sbornik, a Russian specialized monthly
analytical periodical covering a wide range of
military-related issues and problems, featured an
interesting article by Retired Colonel A. Kalistratov on
various ways to think about classifying war. However,
his focus was clearly on defining and discussing
hybrid war. The accompanying excerpts highlight
some of the ways Kalistratov envisions thwarting
hybrid wars.
As the passage notes, in order to thwart hybrid wars,
it is necessary to “maintain the stability of state and
social institutions” against attempts by internal or
external forces to “cripple and transform the country’s
sociopolitical system.” In addition, Kalistratov claims
it is important to disseminate “truthful information
about the state of affairs in the country.” Some of the
other noteworthy measures include taking “timely and
decisive measures to isolate leaders of the destructive
opposition” and to “shut down mass media organs
supporting it.”
Hybrid war is described as a mixed type of war,
combining strategies of indirect actions and crushing
opponents. Kalistratov writes that 70-80 percent of
these type wars use indirect strategies and 20-30
percent use armed violence. The principal method of
using them is forcing a crisis using a “fifth column”
to create divisions within a state system and thereby
deepen the crisis. An armed opposition will then use
direct or indirect means to bring a political force to
power. He states that the term comes from the United
States.
Hybrid wars became especially effective with
the powerful development of the mass media and
communication technologies. They enable the
opposition to influence human consciousness and
the subconscious of masses of people to carry out
disobedience and sabotage. Of special interest is that
in his article, Kalistratov used the new-type warfare
methodology of Russian Western Military District
Commander Colonel-General Andrey Karapolov to
describe hybrid war, thereby equating the two. He
also used General Staff Chief Valeriy Gerasimov’s
definition of “war” from his speech at the Academy of
Military Science in March, in which Gerasimov noted
that it was too early to classify war as hybrid. End OE
Watch Commentary (Thomas)

“Just how is the strategy of such hybrid wars to be
opposed? The following is necessary for this: maintain
the stability of state and social institutions and of public
awareness toward any attempts on the part of external
and internal forces to cripple and transform the country’s
sociopolitical system; counter any attempts to destroy
statehood by use of various information technologies. It is
important to disseminate truthful information about the state
of affairs in the country promptly and in real time; learn to
impose one’s own rules of the game and defend one’s own
interpretation of events in the global information field...”
Source: A. Kalistratov, “War and Modern Times: Modern Wars: Let’s Explore the
Classification,” Armeyskiy Sbornik, No. 7, July 2017, pp. 5-16.
Countering Hybrid Wars
Just how is the strategy of such hybrid wars to be opposed? The following is
necessary for this:
maintain the stability of state and social institutions and of public awareness
toward any attempts on the part of external and internal forces to cripple and
transform the country’s sociopolitical system;
counter any attempts to destroy statehood by use of various information
technologies. It is important to disseminate truthful information about the state of
affairs in the country promptly and in real time;
learn to impose one’s own rules of the game and defend one’s own interpretation
of events in the global information field;
maintain the necessary level of the index of social optimism in the population
and of the stability of personnel of state staff and power structures based on
formation of a national idea, national ideology, and successes in defending
statehood and the country’s national interests;
organize the effective activity of external and internal reconnaissance agencies;
take timely and decisive measures to isolate leaders of the destructive
opposition, shut down mass media organs supporting it, and block financial flows
from abroad;
promptly introduce martial law and strictly carry out wartime laws;
decisively suppress mass disorders, instances of a manifestation of anarchy,
sabotage, and insubordination; and
maintain combat effectiveness and combat readiness of the armed forces at a
level ensuring that substantial damage is inflicted on any potential enemy in case
of aggression.

OE Watch | August 2017

20

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Update on the Turkey-Russia S-400 Deal
OE Watch Commentary: In February 2017, Turkey’s
Defense Minister had announced that Turkey was
searching for systems to protect itself against missile
and air attacks and that Russian S-400s were a leading
contender, adding that significant progress had been made
in talks with Russia. As the first accompanying passage
notes, in early July, he said that technical discussions
with Russia were complete and that the sides were now
discussing financing options. The accompanying passages
from Turkish sources discuss this development. In contrast
to much of the international reporting on the issue, the
Turkish press does not report the deal as final.
The second accompanying passage includes statements
by the Turkish Defense Minister who points out that
Turkey is aware that the system will not be compatible
with NATO systems. However, he highlights that Turkey’s
“first choice was to buy systems produced by NATO
member countries,” but notes that the “offers they made
were far from competitive, and did not include technologysharing.” He says that this approach was not acceptable to
Turkey. The sharing of know-how is an important factor
for Turkey, as it works to develop indigenous air defense
systems and become self-sufficient in the defense industry.
The Minister’s comments that Turkey’s first choice was to
buy systems produced by NATO countries is significant.
This is likely in response to much of the international
reporting on the issue, which claim that the deal represents
Turkey “choosing Russia over NATO.”
The third accompanying passage also highlights that the
deal is not final, saying that it will come into force once
the two countries’ defense ministers sign it. It discusses
that the $2.5 billion system, which will have 24 batteries
and 96 missiles, will be deployed in two phases. The first
phase will be delivered to Turkey in 2019; after which
Turkey and Russia will co-produce the next phase. The
passage also discusses that Russia places no restrictions on
the regions where the system will be used.
Turkey’s search for a long-range air and missile defense
system is not new. Previously, in late 2013, Turkey had
announced its decision to start talks with a Chinese
firm to co-produce such a defense system. The contract
was awarded to the China Precision Machinery ExportImport Corporation (CPMEIC), a company that was under
sanctions for violating the Iran, North Korea and Syria
Nonproliferation Act. Furthermore, NATO members had
expressed concern and warned of compatibility issues
between the Chinese-made system and NATO systems. In
November 2015, Turkey cancelled the deal with China and
declared its goal to develop its own air defense systems
with its own resources. As the first passage notes, the
Defense Minister recently said that Turkey is still working
on this, and cooperating with France, Italy and possibly
the US. (See: “Trends in the Turkish Military Industry,”
Special Essay in OE Watch, June 2017). End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

Source: “Işık: S400’de finansman aşamasına geçildi ([Minister of Defense]
Işık: We have moved to the financing stage in the S-400 [process]),” Dunya.
com, 4 July 2017. https://www.dunya.com/gundem/isik-s400de-finansmanasamasina-gecildi-haberi-370871
“Regarding the process of Turkey buying S400 air defense missiles from
Russia, Minister of Defense Fikri Işık said that [they have] moved into the
[discussion of] sources of financing...
... Işık said that “The technical work is complete, we have come to the final
stage, we are working on ways to finance it....”
“Işık, who also noted that Turkey is working on developing an indigenous air
and missile defense system said, “We have decided to cooperate with France
and Italy on this project. We are now also discussing the issue of cooperating
with the United States.”
Source: “Işık: S-400’e acil ihtiyacımız var (Işık: We urgently need S-400s),”
Savunma ve Teknoloji.com, 5 July 2017. http://savunmaveteknoloji.com/isik-s400e-acil-ihtiyacimiz-var/
“The National Defense Minister, who expressed that the acquisition of S-400s
are due to an urgent need said, “it is not possible for us to integrate this into
NATO. We know this from the onset. As a country, our first choice was to buy
the systems produced by NATO member countries. In other words, buying the
systems produced by NATO countries and integrating them into NATO. But
the USA and European countries were not understanding towards Turkey. The
offers they made were far from competitive, and did not include technologysharing. So basically, I will sell you this system as is and you will buy it and set
it up [but] I will not let you touch a pin. It is not possible for us to accept such
an approach. The S-400 discussions arose due to a necessity for Turkey.”
Source: Türkiye, ABD ile Rusya arasında kaldı: S-400 gerginliği sürüyor
(Turkey stuck between the US and Russia: The S-400 tension continues),”
Birgun.net, 16 July 2017. http://www.birgun.net/haber-detay/turkiye-abd-ilerusya-arasinda-kaldi-s-400-gerginligi-suruyor-170015.html
...According to the agreement that will come into force after the defense
ministers of the two countries ratify it, the reportedly $2.5 billion system will
be deployed in two phases. According to the agreement, the first two systems
will be delivered to Turkey in 2019. Once those are deployed, then Turkey and
Russia will jointly produce the next two systems.
No restrictions
...the S-400 system will protect Turkish air space against ballistic missiles,
planes and UAVs. Since Russia places no restrictions on what areas the system
will protect, the S-400s will protect areas that pose the highest risk to Turkey’s
security, including the Northeast (Armenia), East (Iran), South (Syria), and the
Southeast (Iraq) regions.
24 batteries, 96 missiles
While it is not yet known when the agreement between Turkey and Russia for
the delivery of S-400 air defense missile systems will be signed, the number
of missiles has become clear. According to the deal, $2.5 billion will be paid
not for the two batteries, but for the two part missile system. According to
the information given by Russian defense industry officials, one missile part
includes 12 batteries. So the S-400 missiles to be purchased will include 24
batteries and a total of 96 long range missiles. Each part has its own radar and
command center vehicle.
OE Watch | August 2017

21

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt Starts Receiving Russian Air Defense Missiles
OE Watch Commentary: Russia continues to
expand its influence in the Middle East and North
Africa. The accompanying excerpts from Middle
Eastern sources report on the recent delivery of a
Russian air defense missile system to Egypt.
The first passage notes that the Egyptian Armed
Forces have received the first batch of missiles for
the S-300VM Antey 2500 missile defense system
(NATO code name: ‘SA-23 Gladiator\Giant’), and
that this will significantly alter the power balance
in the region. In terms of capabilities, it highlights
that the system can “engage ballistic missiles at
a range of 250 km and aircraft at a range of 200
km. It can reach targets at an altitude of up to 30
km.” Furthermore, it points out that the system
9A83ME launcher from the S-300VM Antey-2500 missile system
“can engage up to 24 aircraft or up to 16 ballistic
Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin (http://vitalykuzmin.net/?q=node/384) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File%3A9A83ME_TEL_-_Antey-2500_SAM_02.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
missiles simultaneously.” The S-300VM
“Antey-2500” missiles are known as the export
Source: Egypt Receives First S-300VM Air Defense Missile System from Russia,”
version of the S-300V4, used by the Russian
IsraelDefense.co.il, 8 June 2017. http://www.israeldefense.co.il/en/node/29920
Ground Forces. The missiles are produced by
“The Egyptian Armed Forces have received the first batch of missiles for the S-300VM
Russian company, Almaz Antey. The second
Antey-2500 missile defense system...
passage notes that the delivery is a culmination
of a 2015 deal signed between Russia and Egypt;
... this advanced system that can intercept and destroy aircraft and missiles (including
also reporting that the first batch of missiles have
ballistic ones) in large radius area. Three regiments of S-300VM have been ordered by
reached the port of Alexandria.
the Egyptian army, which will significantly modify the power balance in the region.”...
Russia has an interest in assisting Egypt and
bolstering its regime (where President Abdel
Fattah al-Sisi’s ideological affinity, which
opposes the Muslim Brotherhood, makes it
attractive to Moscow). Russia’s cooperation
with Egypt has been expanding, particularly
since Sisi was elected president in June 2014. In
March 2015, Russia and Egypt held their firstever joint naval exercises in the Mediterranean,
which included the Black Sea fleet’s flagship
Moskva missile cruiser. In October 2016, the
two countries held joint military drills involving
airborne troops on Egyptian territory for the first
time. As the final passage notes, there have also
been reports that Egypt may allow Russia use
of military bases across the country, including
an air base on the Mediterranean coast, close
to the border with Libya. In addition, Russia’s
natural gas company purchased 30% of one of
Egypt’s richest natural gas fields for $1.5 billion
last year. (Also see: “Syria, Egypt, Libya: A
New Russia-Dominated Axis?” OE Watch, May
2017; and “Perspectives on Russian Motives in
Libya,” OE Watch, April 2017.) End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“This system can engage ballistic missiles at a range of 250 km and aircraft at a range
of 200 km. It can reach targets at an altitude of up to 30 km. This air defense system can
engage up to 24 aircraft or up to 16 ballistic missiles simultaneously.”
Source: Mısır hava sahasına Rus kalkanı (Russian shield for Egyptian air space),”
Savunmaveteknoloji.com, 11 June 2017. http://savunmaveteknoloji.com/misir-havasahasina-rus-kalkani/
Egypt has started receiving the Almaz-Antey S-300VM air defense systems from
Russia
The S-300 air defense systems that Egypt had ordered following a 2015 deal with Russia,
have reached the Port of Alexandria on ships....
It can strike a target at a height of 30 km
The S-300VM “Antey-2500” (NATO code name SA-23 Gladiator\Giant) air defense
system was designed by Almaz-Antey company, to protect civilian and military facilities
against attacks from mid-range ballistic missiles, cruise missiles and tactical war planes.
The S-300VM system has the capability to strike targets at a distance of 250 km and a
height of 30 km
Source: Egypt ‘ready to agree’ to new Russian air base on coast,” Middleeasteye.net, 10
October 2016, http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/egypt-ready-agree-new-russian-airbase-coast-reports-1845388280
“Egypt is in talks to allow Russia use of military bases across the country, including an
air base on the Mediterranean coast close to the border with Libya...”

“The Egyptian Armed Forces have received the first batch of missiles for the S-300VM Antey-2500

missile defense system... Three regiments of S-300VM have been ordered by the Egyptian army, which
will significantly modify the power balance in the region.”
OE Watch | August 2017

22

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syrians in Raqqa and Deir Ezzor Shift Blame
for Mounting Civilian Casualties
OE Watch Commentary: There are few issues on
which the Syrian loyalist and opposition camps agree.
One of these is opposition to the mounting civilian
casualties in the campaign against the Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in the Syrian provinces of Raqqa
and Deir Ezzor. The four accompanying passages are
an illustrative sample of Syrian reactions to recent
casualty figures. The passages indicate that residents of
these provinces seem to be shifting the blame for civilian
casualties away from the Syrian government and ISIS and
toward the United States.
The first passage, from the opposition news website Ain
al-Medina, claims that “the American acknowledgements
of errors after the massacres carried out by coalition
warplanes,” are meaningless, citing that they “will not
return the dead their lives and will not hold the killer
to account.” The article argues that ISIS benefits from
civilian casualties, noting that the group may well have
double agents in place “to misinform the coalition
warplanes.” According to the second article, from the
website of the anti-ISIS activist network Raqqa is Being
Slaughtered Silently, “the brutal bombings and unjust
killings of civilians are not accidents” but rather part of “a
sinister plan America has prepared for the city.”
The third article is an opinion piece written by
prominent Syrian opposition intellectual Yassin Haj
Saleh and published in the pan-Arab daily al-Hayat.
Saleh, whose family hails from Raqqa, decries how
“those fighting terrorism show no interest in the victims
of terror.” The war against ISIS, Saleh argues, is
dehumanizing Syrians, “[making] their struggle invisible,
the blood of victims worthless.”
Not surprisingly, the shift in blame is being reinforced
by loyalist media. As an example, the final excerpt cites
a statement from the Syrian Sports Federation eulogizing
a badminton coach and his family who were killed in
Raqqa by “the hateful and aggressive bombing launched
by the aircraft of the international coalition led by the
United States.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫في دير الزور حيث يحارب التحالف داعش بقتل األبرياء‬
Fawzi Abdul, “Deir Ezzor: Where the Coalition Fights ISIS by Killing
Innocents,” Ain al-Medina, 6 July 2017. http://www.ayn-almadina.com/content_
images/users/1/contents/4118/2724.pdf (translation via: http://syrianobserver.
com/EN/Features/32982/Coalition_Bombing_Innocents_Strengthens_ISIS_
Propaganda_Syria/
The American acknowledgements of errors after the massacres carried out by
coalition warplanes from time to time against civilians do not mean anything to
anyone, because they will not return the dead their lives and will not hold the
killer to account, and they will not prevent these errors from occurring again…
ISIS of course knows who its prisoners are, but it neglected to let the families
of the dead learn anything about the fate of their children, but rather used them
as propaganda against the coalition, which does not distinguish “between
them and us, as we are all Muslims,” as the ISIS members put it in an effort to
encourage people to favor them… ISIS commanders have suddenly left their
homes before the raids that strike them. “A double agent working for both sides
— ISIS and the coalition at the same time,” [an activist in Deir Ezzor] suggests.
He notes that ISIS is using these agents to misinform the coalitions warplanes.
Source:
‫ تدمير وتهجير‬،‫معركة الرقة‬
“The Battle for Raqqa: Destruction and Forced Displacement,” Raqqa is Being
Slaughtered Silently, 5 July 2017. http://www.raqqa-sl.com/?attachment_
id=4731 (translation via: http://www.raqqa-sl.com/en/2017/07/06/the-battle-forraqqa-is-one-of-destruction-and-displacement/)
As the battle against ISIS in Raqqa intensifies, the strategy being used by the
International Coalition and their local allies, the Syrian Democratic Forces
(SDF), is becoming clearer. Their methods rely mainly upon intensive daily
aerial bombardment and artillery shelling. These practices cause dozens of
civilians deaths every day, as well as contribute to a massive destruction
of infrastructure, properties, residential buildings, and places of worship…
Activists from Raqqa believe that the brutal bombings and unjust killings
of civilians are not accidents. Rather, satellite images reveal an extent of
destruction in the city that seems to fall in line with a sinister plan America has
prepared for the city. The US administration may be taking this destructive
approach to facilitate SDF’s wishes of establishing a Kurdish State in the city
after ISIS’s defeat. This Kurdish establishment would then allow the US to
obtain their own control in Raqqa and establish military bases in it.
Source:
‫الحرب ضد اإلرهاب اإلباحة واإلبادة‬
Yassin Haj Saleh, “The War on Terror: Legitimization and Extermination,”
al-Hayat, 7 July 2017. https://goo.gl/RjHuF8
…those fighting terrorism show no interest in the victims of terror, with those
kidnapped or killed by ISIS having no political or legal value to the agenda
of those fighting terrorism… What is frightening is not the imposition of an
external agenda on Syrians, but that the “war on terror” makes their struggle
invisible, the blood of victims worthless…

(continued)
OE Watch | August 2017

23

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Syrians in Raqqa and Deir Ezzor Shift Blame
for Mounting Civilian Casualties
Source:

‫طيران التحالف األمريكي يقتل مدرب كرة الريشة الطائرة اسماعيل الخليف وعائلته في قصف على منزله بالرقة‬
“‘American Coalition’ Aircraft Bomb the Raqqa Home of Badminton Coach Ismail Khalif and his Family, Killing Him and his Family,”
SANA, 16 June 2017. http://www.sana.sy/?p=573844
The General Sports Federation, on its website, eulogized “Coach Ismail Mohammed al-Khalif,” the “spiritual father of badminton in Raqqa
Province,” along with his family following the hateful and aggressive bombing launched by the aircraft of the international coalition led by
the United States against various neighborhoods of Raqqa.”

A U.S. Air Force F-15E Strike Eagle flies over northern Iraq early in the morning of Sept. 23, 2014, after conducting airstrikes in
Syria. This F-15 was a part of a large coalition strike package that was the first to strike ISIL targets in Syria
Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Senior Airman Matthew Bruch, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Airstrikes_in_Syria_140923-F-UL677-674.jpg, Public Domain

Image: “Ukraine vs. Pro-Russian”
Image Source: Andrew Butko, https://www.flickr.com/
photos/121483302@N02/14690671827, Licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported | Wikimedia Commons

UKRAINE’S HIDDEN BATTLEFIELD
by Robert Kurz
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195079

This paper was previously published as a book chapter:
Kurz, Robert. “Ukraine’s Hidden Battlefield.” In Cultural Perspectives, Geopolitics & Energy Security of Eurasia: Is the Next Global Conflict Imminent?
edited by Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov, Mr. Gustav Otto, and Colonel Lee G. Gentile, Jr., 93-99. Fort Leavenworth: Army University Press, 2017.

OE Watch | August 2017

24

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Yemen: The Arab Coalition Teeters
OE Watch Commentary: The Saudi-led Arab Coalition
fighting in Yemen is finding it hard to contain rising
tensions between its key local partners. Although these
tensions have been overshadowed by Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates’ (UAE) unified stance against
Qatar, they are increasing by the day.
The author of the first accompanying passage, from
the Lebanese daily al-Akhbar, raises the possibility of
“the political conflict between Riyadh and Abu Dhabi’s
proxies becoming violent and widespread.” The conflict
in question, which has thus far played out mostly in Aden,
pits the UAE-backed “Security Belt” forces and southern
secessionists on the one hand, and the Saudi-backed
government of Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi on the other.
Recent statements by the leader of the “Security Belt”
forces, excerpted in the second accompanying passage, are
illustrative of how the UAE-backed groups have largely
dropped the language of compromise when referring to
the Hadi government. Efforts to avert a fight over Aden
include a reported deal to transfer some “Security Belt”
forces and the majority of Hadi loyalist units away from
Aden. According to the third accompanying excerpt,
these forces would be moved to areas in and around Taiz
Province.
The effects of Qatar’s expulsion from the Arab Coalition
continue to reverberate in Yemen. Saudi/UAE moves
to isolate Qatar have produced a change in the editorial
line of Qatari media, most notably al-Jazeera. As the
first accompanying passage notes, Qatari media has
gone from unequivocal support for the Arab Coalition’s
Yemen campaign to “shedding light on the victims of
Saudi bombing and inviting guests who condemn these
bombings or doubt the goals of the war and the utility of
its continuation.” Al-Jazeera has also reported extensively
on human rights violations at the hands of “Security Belt”
forces. While Saudi Arabia and the UAE pin the blame
for their faltering Yemeni campaign on Qatar, their local
partners appear more inclined to blame one another. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Developments in southern Yemen warn of the political
conflict between Riyadh and Abu Dhabi’s proxies
becoming violent and widespread.”
Source:
‫صراعات سعودية ــ إماراتية مستمرة أزمة الخليج ال تُه ّدئ الجنوب‬
Luqman Abdullah, “Saudi-Emirati Struggle Ongoing: The Gulf Crisis will not
Calm the South,” al-Akhbar, 5 June 2017. http://al-akhbar.com/node/279688
Developments in southern Yemen warn of the political conflict between
Riyadh and Abu Dhabi’s proxies becoming violent and widespread. After
weeks of silence regarding the Gulf crisis it has come out in the open. One new
development is that Yemeni Prime Minister Ahmed bin Dagher warned about
intra-Southern conflict in Aden, in an article published yesterday… Qatari
media, particularly al-Jazeera, has recently begun shining light on violations
by the UAE, particularly forced imprisonment in secret prisons run by Abu
Dhabi in southern Yemen… Qatari media has also changed its editorial policy
regarding the war in Yemen, from backing the aggressor viewpoint fully to
shedding light on the victims of Saudi bombing and inviting guests who condemn
these bombings or doubt the goals of the war and the utility of its continuation.
Source:
‫مجلس انفصال الجنوب يلوح بحسم معركته مع الحكومة الشرعية عسكريا‬
“Southern Secession Council Hints at Resolving its Battle with the Legitimate
Government Militarily,” Yemen Press, 2 July 2017. https://yemen-press.com/
news98613.html
Hani Ben Brik, the so-called deputy head of the Southern Transitional
Council who was dismissed from his position as state minister and put under
investigation by President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi, hinted at militarily
resolving the conflict with the legitimate government… Ben Brik said they are
ready to resort to weapons in defense of what he termed protecting their honor.
Source:
‫مصادر حكومية تكشف لعدن الغد تفاصيل خطة إخراج عدد من املعسكرات الى خارج عدن‬
“Government Sources Provide Aden al-Ghad with Details on the Plan to
Relocate Several Bases outside of Aden,” Aden al-Ghad, 26 June 2017. http://
adengd.net/news/264801/
The plan involves transferring the “Transport Brigade” located in the Dar
Saad district… to a mountainous area near Hayfan District in Taiz Province on
the border between al-Subahiya Balhaj and Taiz. A number of brigades from the
Security Belt would also be transferred to the city of Mokha in Taiz Province,
where their new headquarters would be located, while other Security Belt forces
would remain in Aden.

The Adaptive Transformation of Yemen’s Republican Guard
by Lucas Winter

This paper presents an analytical summary of the Yemeni Republican Guard’s adaptation to changing conditions in Yemen
following the 2011 resignation of Ali Abdullah Saleh. The Yemeni Republican Guard has effectively amalgamated with Huthi
forces into a hybrid that pairs young, ideologically motivated foot soldiers with trained operators of heavy weaponry and advanced equipment. This is similar in structure to successful fighting groups emerging from the battlefields of Syria and Iraq,
and may provide a template for the type of forces that will define the region’s operational environment for years to come.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194879

OE Watch | August 2017

25

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Resistance Axis and Shia Mobilization
OE Watch Commentary: The “Resistance Axis,” the
…the entire Shia world is mobilized…
coalition of forces supported by or allied with Iran, continues
to expand its projection of power in the Levant. The four
Source:
‫املقاومة في حرب البادية كنز من الخبرة العسكرية‬
accompanying passages, taken from a variety of ArabicHussein
al-Amin.
“The
Resistance
in
the
‘Badia
War’: A Trove of Military
language media sources, show various facets of this
Experience,” al-Akhbar, 24 June 2017. http://al-akhbar.com/node/279248
expansion.
If we were to briefly present the most important skills gained by the resistance
The first excerpted passage, from the pro-Hezbollah
fighters and commanders in the Syrian Badia (Desert) operation, the most
Lebanese newspaper al-Akhbar, points to the expansion
prominent would be how to deal with large open spaces and establishing
of Hezbollah’s military capabilities through its cadres’
the tactics needed to deal in open spaces, as well as how to use engineering
participation in the Syrian-Russian-Iranian campaign to
equipment, which is important for digging and removing fortifications
secure the Syrian Desert. The desert environment differs
and berms, as well as the ability to direct a large number of vehicles and
fundamentally from Hezbollah’s mountainous and semiequipment… it is clear that [Hizbullah’s] military doctrine was built to fight in
urban home environment. Thus its desert operations are
the mountains and partially in cities. Fighting in the desert is not part of the
described as something that was forced on the group’s
fighters’ training and preparation. However, current events have forced them
fighters by current events and “from which they have
to partake in this type of fighting, from which they have gained practice and
gained practice and experience.”
experience.

“

The second accompanying excerpt, from the Lebanese
newspaper al-Modon, cites Russian-language media
sources in noting how “the entire Shia world is
mobilized.” In a recent speech given for “International
Quds (Jerusalem) Day,” a holiday created by Iran’s
government in 1979 and which has grown in popularity
over time, Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah hinted
that Israeli aggression in Lebanon or Syria may prompt
hundreds of thousands of fighters from the global Shia
community to join the fray. Citing Nasrallah’s speech, the
third accompanying passage notes how the fighters would
come “from Iraq, Yemen, Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan
and throughout the Arab and Muslim nations.”
Further strengthening the Resistance Axis are recent
moves to bring Hamas back into the fold. Hamas fell
out of favor after supporting the Syrian revolt, but as
the fourth accompanying excerpt notes, “Hezbollah has
recently showed signs of its willingness to answer Hamas’
needs, in terms of ... military and security experience
among other things.” As the passage’s author notes,
Hamas provides the Resistance Axis with a valuable asset
that could “help dispel Hezbollah’s sectarian image.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

”

Source:
‫تقاسم النفوذ في سوريا روسيا ترفض حلف ًا مع إيران‬
Bassam Muqdad, “Partition of Influence in Syria: Russia Rejects Alliance with
Iran,” al-Modon, 22 June 2017. https://goo.gl/m1gKoG
… the entire Shia world is mobilized. The Iraqi Army, alongside the
international coalition, is mobilized to end the battle of Mosul. The Iraqi
Popular Mobilization Forces have met up with Syrian regime forces at the SyriaIraq border. Iran’s “al-Alam” was the only channel to show the first images of
this meeting, which once again points to loyalty toward Iran in the Shia groups
fighting in Iraq and Syria…
Source:
‫خطاب السيد نصر اهلل في يوم القدس العاملي كشف عن استراتيجية قتالية جديدة‬
Abd al-Bari Atwan, “Sayid Nasrallahs’s Speech on ‘International Quds Day’
Unveils a New Combat Strategy,” Rai al-Youm, 24 June 2017. http://www.
raialyoum.com/?p=698410
Nasrallah’s speech on International Jerusalem Day… warned that if Israel
launched a war against Lebanon, Gaza, or Syria, “It is unknown whether the
fighting would remain between Lebanon and Israel or Syria and Israel. Tens
or even hundreds of thousands of mujahideen and fighters from throughout
the Arab and Muslim Worlds may join in this battle. From Iraq, Yemen, Iran,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and throughout the Arab and Muslim nations”

Source:
‫أزمة الخليج تس ّرع تطبيع عالقات حماس وحزب اهلل‬
Adnan Abu Amer, “Regional developments accelerate Hamas-Hezbollah reconciliation,” Al-Monitor, 2 July 2017. http://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/ar/originals/2017/06/palestine-hamas-lebanon-hezbollah-rapprochement.html
After a five-year estrangement over their dispute on the Syrian crisis, Hamas and Hezbollah have held meetings in Beirut over the past
few months to discuss the region’s latest developments… It is no secret that Hamas, despite having different positions regarding the Syrian
crisis, needs Hezbollah when it comes to funding, training, securing supply lines for weapons and providing residence for Hamas cadres
in Lebanon. For its part, Hezbollah needs a Palestinian movement, such as Hamas, to restore its popularity among Arab public opinion…
Hamas, as a Sunni Islamic movement getting closer to the Shiite Hezbollah, may help dispel Hezbollah’s sectarian image…“Hezbollah has
recently showed signs of its willingness to answer Hamas’ needs, in terms of the military and security experience among other things. Hamas
and Hezbollah are in the same boat.”
OE Watch | August 2017

26

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Budget Increases for Missiles, Qods Force
OE Watch Commentary: Many Western diplomats hoped that the lifting
of sanctions and new investments that accompanied the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) would bolster the hands
of more reform-minded elements within the Iranian political spectrum. If
money talks, however, it seems that more hardline elements have the upper
hand in where and how to allocate funding. The accompanying remarks by
Kazem Jalali, who runs the major research arm for Iran’s parliament, suggest
budget increases are looming for Iran’s ballistic missile program and the
Qods Force—the elite unit of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
charged with export of the revolution.
The March 2017 to March 2018 Iranian budget allocated $7.4 billion to
the IRGC. That figure funds not only the IRGC Ground Forces and Navy,
but also IRGC universities and a large bureaucracy including the medical
department, telecommunications, a personal department, and internal
intelligence service. While the proportion of that which the Qods Force
receives is not known, the $307 million increase discussed by Jalali certainly
represents a huge budgetary increase, by percentage most likely in the middouble digits.
Jalali justifies the budgetary increase by discussing the need “to counter
US terrorism.” The Iranian definition of terrorism is more subjective than
objective and tends to be colored by an ideological antipathy to the United
States. Iranian leaders and the IRGC justify much objectionable behavior
by ‘resistance’ or ‘justice.’ When Iranian officials say they seek to counter
US-backed terrorism, they may signal an intent to be more aggressive toward
states allied with the United States in the region, such as Saudi Arabia, Israel,
the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait.
The increase in ballistic missile work signaled by a similar boost of $307
million in the budget indicates a growing reliance by Iran on its ballistic
missile forces (alongside its drone capabilities) as one of its fields of emphasis
is asymmetric military strategy. This budget increase comes against the
backdrop of the 19 June 2017 launch of ballistic missiles from Iran to targets
in Syria; suggesting that the capability is no longer symbolic or limited to the
testing stage. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“[The Majlis] would allocate
$307 million for expanding missile
activities and $307 million for the
Qods force….”

Source: “Takhsis 2,000 milyard toman baraye Gosteresh-e
fa’aliyatha-ye moshaki va sepah Qods” (Allocation of two
trillion toman [$615 million] to expand the activities of the
missile [program] and Qods Force),” Islamic Student News
Agency, 28 June 2017. https://goo.gl/kgamry
The head of the research center at the Majlis said that in
the plan to counter the terrorism of America, it is forecasted
that Iran would allocate one trillion tomans [$307 million] for
expanding missile activities and another trillion tomans [$307
million] for the Qods force to fight terrorism. Kazem Jalali, in
an interview with the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting,
with reference to 17 draft articles before the Majlis to counter
U.S. terrorism, said part of the plan is to support the armed
forces with one trillion tomans for missile activities and one
trillion tomans for the Qods Force to fight terrorism. In this
regard, the Ministry of Defense is also obligated within a
month to come up with an operational plan for submission to
the Supreme National Security Council for increased defense
capability and the deterrence of the country in the missile
field…According to Jalali, the 10 sections of the plan include
an introduction, definitions, strategy formulation, [discussion
of] U.S. support for terrorism, [discussion of] U.S. human
rights abuses, support for the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
armed forces, countering U.S. economic sanctions, protecting
Iranian citizens, and coordination.

The U.S. military, and therefore, the U.S. Army, finds itself at a historical inflection
point, where disparate, yet related elements of the Operational Environment
(OE) are converging, creating a situation where fast moving trends across the
Diplomatic, Information, Military, and Economic (DIME) spheres are rapidly
transforming the nature of all aspects of society and human life - including the
character of warfare.
In The Operational Environment and the Changing Character of Future
Warfare, the first part of this paper describes how technology will impact how
we live, create, think and prosper. The authors then use this description to make
an assessment on the OE and its implication on the future of warfare through
2050.
This paper can be found under Deep Futures Assessment on the TRADOC Mad
Scientist web page at http://www.tradoc.army.mil/watch/

OE Watch | August 2017

27

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Rouhani Commends Iranian Missile Developers
OE Watch Commentary:
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani
is often described by Western
press, academics, and even some
diplomats as a ‘reformer’ or
‘moderate.’ However, there is
nothing in his record to justify such
labels. First, for the late Supreme
Leader Ruhollah Khomeini
and now for his successor Ali
Khamenei, Rouhani has often
acted as the regime’s “Mr. Fix-it,”
appointed or maneuvered into key
positions in order to solve major
problems potentially impacting
regime stability. Hence, in 1988,
Khomeini appointed him to a
deputy position in Iran’s Joint
Chiefs of Staff in order to oversee
decommissioning after the IranIraq War, and subsequently
elevated him to chairman of
the Supreme National Security
Council.

President Rouhani commends Iranian missile developers before an audience of diplomats from Islamic countries
on the occasion of Eid al-Fitr, 26 June 2017
Source Tasnim News, goo.gl/YHfTjS, CC BY 4.0

Rouhani also oversaw nuclear
negotiations both between 2003-2005; and
2013-2015. His stewardship during the first
period came against the backdrop of the
exposure of Iran’s covert nuclear enrichment
facility and in the latter part came as Iran’s
economy suffered under international
sanctions. While Rouhani succeeded in his
mission in both cases to alleviate international
and economic pressure on Iran, the idea that
he sought to end Iran’s aggressiveness or even
all aspects of its military nuclear program is
not supported by any evidence.

Source: “Doktor Rouhani dar Didar Musulan-e Nizam va Safrayi Kashvarhayi Islami
bah Moqam Ma’azem Rahbari (Doctor Rouhani in a Meeting with the Authorities and
Ambassadors of Islamic Countries with the Supreme Leader),” President.ir, 26 June 2017.
http://president.ir/fa/99586
“The administration and other pillars of the Islamic Republic will display their power, unity
and integrity to the world anytime we feel it is necessary… Terrorists and the enemies of the
Iranian nation must know that they cannot interrupt our empathy and national unity and that
this nation, including Sunnis and Shi’a, are bravely standing against the enemies and will
keep [our] national unity… Today, we must all work together to build Iran, heeding what the
Supreme Leaders said in the beginning of the year… I also thank those who create strategic
weapons for the country and those who use these strategic weapons well.”

Indeed, Rouhani appears as committed to Iran’s indigenous military programs and its ballistic missile work as are the socalled hardline factions in Iran’s political spectrum. His address, excerpted here, to a gathering of senior Iranian officials and
ambassadors resident in Tehran from Islamic countries specifically signaled Iran’s gratitude and blessings to all of those involved
in Iran’s missile programs and his endorsement of the 19 June 2017 launching of missiles from Iran to targets in Syria.
Furthermore, Rouhani delivered his remarks on the podium alongside the Supreme Leader, underscoring the unity of position of
senior Iranian officials. Even if Rouhani privately dissents from Khamenei’s viewpoint—and there is no evidence to suggest that
is true—his remarks are geared to end any speculation about ideological divergence at the top of the Islamic Republic’s hierarchy.
The entirety of Rouhani’s speech—both in terms of substance and symbolism—is geared to show that the Supreme Leader,
President, and Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps all speak from the same page. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“I... thank those who create strategic weapons for the country and those who use these strategic weapons
well.”
OE Watch | August 2017

28

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Suspends Flights to Najaf, Iraq
OE Watch Commentary: Iran and Iraq are, respectively, the two
largest Shi’ite-led, Shi’ite majority countries. Their mutual border
is the longest for both countries and Iraq remains a major export
market for Iranian manufacturing. Many Iraqi political groups
and militias receive overt or covert Iranian support. However,
the friendship and cooperation between the two neighbors is often
exaggerated.

“…Flights [from Iran to Najaf] are generally
stopped.”

Iraqi politicians and civil society leaders resent the tendency of
outside analysts to depict Iraq as an Iranian puppet. Beyond the
ethnic differences between the two republics, there are also religious
differences. The concept of clerical rule inaugurated by the late
Iranian revolutionary leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini is widely
dismissed by the clerical leadership based in the Iraqi shrine cities
of Najaf and Karbala, where senior ayatollahs advocate a greater
separation between mosque and state. Economic interests also
distinguish the two countries. Iraqi businessmen resent the Iranian
dominance in some markets and accuse Iranian leaders of purposely
dumping manufactured goods into the Iraqi market in order to
undercut Iraqi factories.

The Secretary of Iran’s Aviation Companies Association said: As
previously stated, Iranian airlines stopped their flights to Najaf as of
today [1 July 2017]. Maqsud Asadi-Samani, in a conversation with the
Islamic Students’ News Agency, said, “The Iranian airline companies,
a few weeks ago had officially announced that if the Najaf airport
did not change its position on the imposed conditions, they would
stop their flights to that airport from today [1 July].” He continued,
“Though it’s likely that a limited number of flights continued to carry
passengers from Najaf, but these flights are generally stopped.”

It is against this backdrop that the excerpted report in the Islamic
Students’ News Agency is interesting: It suggests that Iranian
authorities have suspended flights into Najaf International Airport,
Iraq’s main gateway for Shi’ite pilgrims. The bulk of the airport’s
traffic originates with Iran and so the cessation of Iranian flights
is a major deal. That it impacts Shi’ite religious pilgrimage also
highlights that religious homogeny does not always correlate to
political unity. Iran’s decision to play hardball with Iraq over airport
fees, highlights a long-simmering dispute over customs duties and
fees imposed by Iraq.
The episode may also reflect
Iraqi corruption. Maqsud AsadiSamani, the secretary of the
umbrella group representing
multiple Iranian airlines,
complained elsewhere in his
interview that Najaf airport
authorities want to charge
Iranian airlines retrospectively
for customs duties and
seats—regardless of whether
occupied—going back to 2010.
Such a revenue grab seems to
indicate that either Najaf airport
authorities see an opportunity to
raise a considerable amount of
money or that they had hitherto
lacked the capacity to collect
what was owed. Whatever the
ultimate resolution of the dispute,
it may very well leave lasting
resentments between the two
neighbors. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Pervazha-ye Iran beh Najaf Mostawqaf Shod (Iranian
Flights to Najaf have been Stopped),” Islamic Students’ News Agency,
1 July 2017. https://goo.gl/CKP1gs

The Secretary of Iran’s Aviation Companies Association also
explained how to follow up and resolve it [the impasse]. Meetings
have been scheduled today at the Najaf Airport with representatives
of the civil aviation organization of the country and Iran’s Aviation
Companies Association, and they will have a dialogue, and we hope
that the problems will be solved at this session…
A few weeks ago, Najaf Airport took an extraordinary step toward
increasing the rates and fees of Iranian airlines, and Iranian
companies said they would not be able to continue flights to Najaf at
the current expense.

An airport depature board at Najaf International Airport showing the predominance of Iranian flights, 20 November 2015
Source: photograph by author

OE Watch | August 2017

29

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Israel and India Build Strategic Partnership
OE Watch Commentary: Israel has had close defense
ties with India for many years. However, Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Israel on 5 July -- the
first by a sitting Indian prime minister-- elevated the
relationship to the status of “strategic partnership.” The
accompanying passages from Indian and Israeli sources
discuss the outcome of this visit and the agreements signed
between the two countries, which include defense and space
cooperation.
As the first accompanying passage from The Hindu
points out, in addition to announcing a “strategic
partnership,” the two sides agreed to collaborate in the
fields of water, agriculture, space, and establish a joint
fund for research and innovation. Furthermore, the sides
signed three Memorandums of Understanding on space
cooperation, including “one for Electric Propulsion for
Small Satellites, and for the development of an optical link
as well as cooperation on atomic clocks.” The development
and research fund will be called the “I4F” which stands
for “India Israel Industrial Innovation.” Both governments
will contribute $20 million over the next five years to help
scholars manufacture their inventions. The passage also
notes that Mr. Modi had earlier coined the term “I4I” or
“India for Israel,” while Mr. Netanyahu had used the term
“Indian talent and Israeli technology equals India-Israel ties
for tomorrow.”
The second accompanying passage from the Israeli daily
Haaretz notes that Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) will
broaden its cooperation with India, and that it has signed
cooperation agreements with a number of Indian defense
contractor companies. This includes a maintenance plant
for the Barak 8 aerial defense system. The piece notes that
this plant will also produce “precision munitions systems
in cooperation with India’s Kalyani Strategic Systems.” It
also points out that “IAI will transfer know-how regarding
materials used in aviation for a new plant to be built in
India,” in conjunction with an Indian firm.
As the passage from The Hindu points out, the two sides
also agreed on counter-terrorism cooperation, noting that
strong measures should be taken against terrorists and
terror organizations, particularly highlighting the need to
“ensure that terrorist organizations do not get access to
any weapons of mass destruction or technologies.” The
two sides are also discussing ways to expand economic
ties, boost the number of flights between India and Israel,
and ease visa requirements for workers. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

Source: Suhasini Haidar, “India, Israel to set up $40 mn research fund,” The
Hindu, 6 July 2017. http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/india-israel-to-setup-40-mn-research-fund/article19217107.ece
“India and Israel announced a strategic partnership between the two
countries after a meeting between [Indian] Prime Minister Narendra Modi and
his Israeli counterpart Benjamin Netanyahu, and signed seven agreements in
the fields of water, agriculture, space, including a $40 million joint fund for
research and development in innovation...
“Without mentioning specifics of the counter-terrorism cooperation envisaged,
they agreed that “strong measures should be taken against terrorists, terror
organisations, their networks and all those who encourage, support and
finance terrorism, or provide sanctuary to terrorists and terror groups.” They
also underscored the need to “ensure that terrorist organisations do not get
access to any WMD [weapon of mass destruction] or technologies”...
“...officials... discussed the possibility of “ joint development of defense
products, including the transfer of technology from Israel”...
“This historical first-ever visit by an Indian Prime Minister to Israel solidified
the enduring friendship between their peoples and raised the bilateral
relationship to that of a strategic partnership,” the joint statement issued by the
Ministry of External Affairs said.
“Three MOUs on space cooperation included one for Electric Propulsion
for Small Satellites, and for the development of an optical link as well as
cooperation on atomic clocks. The fund of development and research,
called the “I4F” or India Israel Industrial Innovation Fund, will see both
governments contribute $20 million to help research scholars manufacture
their inventions easily”...
“At a meeting earlier with Israeli President Reuven Rivlin, Mr. Modi had also
coined the term, “I4I” or “India for Israel” as a response to Mr. Netanyahu’s
formula of “Indian talent and Israeli technology equals India-Israel ties for
tomorrow.”
Source: Gili Cohen, Hagai Amit, Ora Coren and Eliran Rubin, “India and
Israel’s Largest Aerospace Company to Broaden Cooperation,” Haaretz.com, 6
July 2017. http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/business/1.799788
“Israel Aerospace Industries will broaden its cooperation with India, making
the announcement Wednesday during Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s
visit to Israel”...
“... IAI did announce Wednesday that it has signed cooperation agreements
with a number of Indian defense contractor companies.
These include a maintenance plant for the Barak 8 aerial defense system,
which was developed jointly in India and Israel and which has generated more
than $2.5 billion in sales to India.
The plant itself will also produce precision munitions systems in cooperation
with India’s Kalyani Strategic Systems. In addition, IAI will transfer knowhow regarding materials used in aviation for a new plant to be built in India in
conjunction with Indian firm Wipro.”

“This historical first-ever visit by an Indian Prime Minister to Israel solidified the enduring friendship
between their peoples and raised the bilateral relationship to that of a strategic partnership...”
OE Watch | August 2017

30

AFRICA
How China is Shaping Africa’s Next Generation of Leaders
OE Watch Commentary: One might think that African Anglophone students
would gravitate towards two of the world’s biggest English speaking countries,
the US and UK, when choosing to study abroad. However, as the accompanying
article relates, these students are instead choosing to go to China to further their
education. The numbers doing so are quite impressive, jumping from just under
2,000 in 2003 to nearly 50,000 in 2015, a 25 fold increase. Especially notable
is the year 2014, which is when African student enrollment in Chinese schools
exceeded the approximately 40,000 who enroll in US and UK schools. China is
now the second most
popular choice for
African students who
study abroad; with
France, which draws
heavily from African
Francophone countries,
first at 95,000.

“This dramatic increase in students from
Africa can be explained in part by the
Chinese government’s targeted focus on
African human resource and education
development.”

Source: “China tops US and UK as destination for
anglophone African students,” The Conversation
(South Africa), 27 June 2017.
https://theconversation.com/china-tops-us-and-uk-asdestination-for-anglophone-african-students-78967
This dramatic increase in students from Africa can
be explained in part by the Chinese government’s
targeted focus on African human resource and
education development. Starting in 2000, China’s
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation summits have
promised financial and political support for African
education at home and abroad in China.

Why is China
attracting so many
African students? A
major reason is financial
Since 2006, China has set scholarship targets to aid
aid, and as the article
African students coming to China for study.
describes, “the Chinese
It’s difficult to know exactly which African countries
government’s targeted
are sending the most students to China. These details
focus on African human
are not kept by the Chinese Ministry of Education.
resource and education
But the statistics from Tsinghua University provide an
development.” For
insight. In the 2015-2016 academic year, the majority
example, at a 2015
of the university’s 111 African students came from
summit, the country
Zimbabwe, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Morocco, Eritrea, and
pledged to provide
Cameroon – slightly favoring East Africa.
30,000 scholarships to
Some simply go to pursue an education that is
African students by
affordable, even without a scholarship, while others
2018. As a result, the
go for the chance to develop business connections
proportion of African
or learn the language of a country presumed to be a
Increasingly African high school students, such as these, are
international students in
choosing to attend college in China
rising power.
Source: Mahyar Sheykhi, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:African_high_school_students_1.jpg,
Chinese schools has risen
CCA-SA 4.0.
from 2% in 2013 to 13% in
2015, with further increases expected in future years. Most African students enroll in engineering schools, which the article surmises might be
because these have English as their language of instruction. Interestingly, because Chinese schools are so inexpensive, many African students
are choosing to attend them even if they do not receive considerable financial aid.
Having African students go to Chinese universities is beneficial for both the students and China. For the students it is an affordable education
and a large pool of contacts. In addition, they are likely to learn Chinese, “the language of a country presumed to be a rising power.” For China,
providing these scholarships is part of its soft power approach towards Africa. As the article points out, these students will likely be more
willing to work with China and view its policies favorably.
Nearly all African students who study in China return to Africa after they complete their schooling, as China requires them to do so. Besides
helping to ensure the aforementioned African goodwill towards China, it also benefits Africa as these individuals bring the new skills they
learned back to their home continent. This contrasts markedly with the US, UK, and France where many African students remain after their
studies, contributing mightily to a problem described as the “African brain drain.” Thus, China is making significant progress in shaping
Africa’s next generation of leaders, even English speaking ones, at the expense of western nations. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | August 2017

31

AFRICA
China’s Growing Trade and Influence in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: A recent report from global consulting firm
McKinsey and Company demonstrates the astonishing growth in economic
ties between China and Africa. As the accompanying article relates, since
2000, trade between the two has increased by about 20% per year. Chinese
foreign direct investment into Africa has grown even faster, averaging a
breakneck speed of 40% per year over the past decade. Chinese trade with
sub-Saharan Africa
alone was $170 billion
in 2013, an amount
that almost surely has
increased since then.

“China is now Africa’s most important

partner in trade, investment, infrastructure
financing and aid.”

With growing
trade comes growing
influence, and China’s
influence is certainly
growing in Africa,
especially East Africa.
Among the eight
countries surveyed
in the report, three
countries – Ethiopia,
Kenya, and Tanzania
– stood out as having
the most advanced
and growing trade and
economic relationships
with China. In fact,
China provided partial
or full funding for three
of East Africa’s largest
infrastructure projects:
The Mombasa-Nairobi standard gauge railway is just one of several African megaprojects receiving Chinese financing
Source: Mwangi Kirubi, https://www.flickr.com/photos/mwangee/34181402040/ , CC BY-NC 2.0.
Ethiopia’s 6,000MW Grand
Renaissance Dam which
Source: “China most important African trade partner,” The
will cost $4.1 billion, Kenya’s $3.8 billion Mombasa-Nairobi standard gauge
East African, 4 July 2017. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/
railway, and Uganda’s $2.2 billion 600MW Karuma Hydropower Plant. The
business/China-most-important-African-trade-partner-report also notes extensive railroad projects financed by China.
/2560-3998956-a07dq1z/index.html
Ethiopian government statistics reveal that Chinese investments have
resulted in 1,300 miles of paved road in that country since 2010 and a 15%
increase in power supply between 2010 and 2014. The $3.4 billion, 480 mile
Ethiopia-Djibouti railroad that opened in 2016 was built by Chinese firms
and is now co-managed by them.

China is now Africa’s most important partner in trade,
investment, infrastructure financing and aid.

Since nearly a quarter of the 1,000 firms surveyed in the McKinsey and
Company study said they recovered their initial investments in a year or less,
and a third said they recorded profits of more than 20%, it is not surprising
that the report forecasts increased growth and dominance of China in Africa.
It is estimated that by 2025, Chinese firms could see annual revenues of $400
billion generated from China’s African investments.

“China is absolutely key to Africa. It is an investor, it
is the contractor of choice, and China injected much
needed competition in African companies’ negotiations
with other trading partners,” said Aly Khan Satchu, the
chief executive officer of investment advisory firm Rich
Management.

As high as these numbers are, it is worth noting that according to the
World Bank, some Chinese investments in sub-Saharan Africa may be
underestimated. As an example, foreign direct investment by the Chinese,
using alternative estimates, was placed at $61 billion in 2013, more than
double the official figure. In other words, the already large estimate for
Chinese investment in Africa could be substantially larger, as could Chinese
influence. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

The report also forecasts more growth and dominance of
China in Africa, boosted by high returns on investment and
the large potential for growth and expansion.

According to the World Bank, official data on Chinese
financial flows may be underestimating the extent of
China’s investment in sub-Saharan Africa.

“We are on the cusp of a big ticket transfer of low-cost
manufacturing jobs from China to Africa and we cannot
afford to miss this opportunity,” Mr. Satchu said.
OE Watch | August 2017

32

AFRICA
Al-Shabaab Launches Deadly Attacks in Kenya
OE Watch Commentary: AlShabaab, a terrorist group with ties
to al-Qaeda, continues to launch
deadly attacks beyond Somalia, where
it originated. As the accompanying
articles note, Kenya was the recent
recipient of al-Shabaab’s attention,
with two separate attacks killing
12 people. By launching attacks on
Kenyan territory, al-Shabaab puts
pressure on Kenya to reconsider the
costs of supporting the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM).
The first attack was in the town
of Lamu where, following a fierce
gun battle, the toll on the police
was initially two reported killed
but later revised to three, several
seriously wounded, and seven
missing. Three days later an attack
in the same region, which is near
the Somali border, resulted in nine
Al-Shabaab is launching deadly attacks in Kenya to force that country to withdraw its soldiers, such as the ones shown
fatalities, including several who were
here serving in AMISOM, from Somalia
Source: AMISOM Public Information, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AMISOM_and_allied_forces_enter_Kismayo_18_(8049935771).jpg, Public Domain.
reportedly hacked to death. These
attacks occurred barely two weeks
after eight people died – four police officers and four students – when
‘Nine people were killed, some were shot
their vehicle ran over a landmine reportedly planted by the terrorist
dead and others hacked,’ a police officer
organization.

“

The border between Somalia and Kenya is quite long, making
Kenyan efforts to prevent al-Shabaab from launching cross border
attacks extremely difficult. Additionally, it is believed that some attacks,
including possibly the ones discussed in the articles, originate from alShabaab terrorists already living on the Kenyan side of the border in the
Boni National Reserve, a large forested area affording them an excellent
hideout.
Though al-Shabaab has suffered a string of setbacks in Somalia,
most noticeably being forced out of the capital, Mogadishu, the
jihadist fundamentalist group has still been able to launch devastating
terrorist attacks within that country. Still the territory it controls has
been shrinking, in large part due to efforts by the Somali military and
AMISOM, of which Kenyan troops are one of the contingents.
About a year ago, articles on attacks by al-Shabaab would include
the assumed reason why they occurred, usually given as reprisals for
Kenya sending troops into Somalia to battle the terrorist organization.
Interestingly these two accompanying articles as well as several
other recent ones in the Kenyan press noticeably did not include any
explanation for the attacks. The absence of this information is likely due
to al-Shabaab attacks in Kenya becoming so common that the media
feels it is no longer necessary to explain why they are happening. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

from the region told Capital FM News.”

Source: Kalume Kazungu and Mohamed Ahmed, “Kenya: 2 Police
Dead, 7 Missing After ‘Shabaab’ Attack in Lamu,” Daily Nation/
AllAfrica, 5 July 2017. http://allafrica.com/stories/201707050744.
html
“Two police officers have been killed and seven others are missing in
their battle against suspected Al-Shabaab fighters in Lamu.
Two of the suspected militants, who attempted to raze the Pandanguo
Police Post, were also felled in the gun fight on Wednesday morning.”
“...[A senior administrator] said the over 200 fighters struck at the
crack of dawn after holding prayers in a mosque.”
Source: Bernard Momanyi, “Nine People Killed in Lamu ‘AlShabaab’ Attack,” CapitalFM (Kenya), 8 July 2017. http://www.
capitalfm.co.ke/news/2017/07/nine-people-killed-lamu-al-shabaabattack/
“Nine people were killed, some were shot dead and others hacked,”
a police officer from the region told Capital FM News.
Police sources said the attack occurred at Jima and Pandaguo
villages near the border with Somalia which has been prone to
attacks in recent weeks, mainly targeting security forces.

OE Watch | August 2017

33

AFRICA
The Threat al-Shabaab Poses to Kenya’s Election
by Sunguta West
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Terrorism Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 12, dated 16 June 2017,
Edited for OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/threat-al-shabaab-poses-kenyas-election/

OE Watch Commentary: With Kenyans heading to the polls on 8 August, voting once again against
the backdrop of the security threat posed by al-Shabaab, the recent supposed theft by militants of an
electronic voting kit has raised fears that the group could seek to directly target the election process.
Kenya goes into its 2017 election using a biometric voter registration system, candidate registration
system and electronic voter identification. These could all be targeted, according to some government
officials. The group could also seek to disrupt the polls in a more traditional manner.
In February 2017, suspected al-Shabaab fighters reportedly stole biometric voter registration kits
belonging to Kenya’s elections manager, the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission. The
militants attacked a local police station in Mandera, over-powering the 21 police officers manning the
station before making off with the kits, three guns, ammunition, a police vehicle and a motorcycle.
Analysts say that by targeting the electronic process, the militants would be attempting to turn
public opinion against the government by showing its inability to secure the election process. The
second accompanying passage, written by the chief executive of the Africa Policy Institute and a
former Kenya government advisor from 2008-2013 specifically says that “violent extremism and
cyber-terrorism have immense potential to undermine public confidence and trust in the electoral
process.”
However, the chances of a cyber-attack are slim. There is no direct evidence to suggest that the
group has acquired the technology to deploy a cyber or electronic attack. They are not known to
have executed one in the past, although they have targeted telecommunication installations, as the
first passage indicates. More likely, the threat that al-Shabaab poses to the polls on 8 August is of a
more traditional nature, coming from grenades, guns and explosives than in the form of an electronic
attack. The group recently stepped up attacks in the border areas of Garissa, Mandera and Wajir,
carrying out attacks in regions that are poorly policed.
Queuing voters at polling stations are a potential soft target for the militants. In the past, they have
used grenades and Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) to attack public places, the police, churches
and other institutions. Polling centers, which are usually poorly policed or set up without considering
the possibility of a strike by militants, could be relatively easy targets.
Furthermore, the kidnapping of election officials cannot be ruled out. The militant group is
known to kidnap aid workers, tourists and other officials for ransom. Five years ago such abductions
prompted Kenya to send its troops into Somalia.
In a country that has seen significant electoral violence in the past, that could ignite tempers and
even drive calls for the withdrawal of Kenyan Defense Forces in Somalia in order to bolster security
at home. An effective attack of this nature could disrupt and destabilize the country. End OE Watch
Commentary (West)

“The twin challenges

of violent extremism and
cyber-terrorism have
immense potential to
undermine public confidence
and trust in the electoral
process...”
Source: Al shabaab can interefere with
electronic voting system, CS [Cabinet
Secretary] Mucheru says,” The Star
(Kenya), 29 December 2016. http://
www.the-star.co.ke/news/2016/12/29/
al-shabaab-can-interefere-withelectronic-voting-system-cs-mucheru_
c1479566
“We are at war with al-Shabaab
who are known to interfere with
communication systems,” he
[Joe Mucheru, the Information
Communication and Technology (ICT)
Cabinet Secretary] said.
Source: Peter Kagwanja, “Insulating
the 2017 election against violent
extremism,” Daily Nation (Kenya),
10 June 2017. http://www.nation.
co.ke/oped/Opinion/Insulatingthe-2017-election-against-violentextremism/440808-3965154-m7ajse/
index.html
“The twin challenges of violent
extremism and cyber-terrorism have
immense potential to undermine public
confidence and trust in the electoral
process...”

Voters queue to vote at the General elections that were held on March 4th 2013

Source: By User:Stephenwanjau (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/45/Queue_at_a_voting_centre_in_Kenya.jpeg, [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons.

OE Watch | August 2017

34

AFRICA
Five African Countries Launch Joint Force to Combat
Terrorism in Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: With the African Union’s long awaited
African Standby Force (ASF) - a force intended to be capable of functioning
continent wide – still not functional, Chad, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, Mali,
and Niger launched the “Force conjointe du G5 Sahel” (G5 Sahel Joint
Force, or the FC-G5S) to combat terrorism
in their sub-region. According to the
accompanying article, this joint force will be
comprised of 5,000 troops deployed along
the Mali–Mauritania border; the Niger–
Chad border; and the cross-border region
between Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger
known as the Liptako Gourma.

“…the G5 Sahel heads of state announced that

a new force would be set up to fight terrorism in
the sub-region.”

The African Union’s Peace and Security
Council (PSC), roughly the equivalent
of the UN’s Security Council (UNSC),
has endorsed the FC-G5S’s concept of
operations. However, when the PSC asked
the UNSC to approve the force’s deployment
and essentially identify means to support
it – which would have meant passing a
resolution under Chapter VII of the UN
Charter - the UN declined to do so,
Soldiers from Niger, such as the ones pictured here during combat training, along with soldiers from Mali, Burkina
opting to welcome its deployment without
Faso, Mauritania, and Chad will combat terrorism as part of the newly established Force conjointe du G5 Sahel
Source: U.S. Navy Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Michael Larson, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Niger_Army_322nd_Parachute_Regiment.jpg, Public Domain.iRUuDK-dpbuGBexplicitly approving it. The article relates
7eqiiq-7eqi6u-9JiNqL-iQ6Gn-7empw8-abg18E-ab3riB-fsZX3c-7emoLZ-8AWiRd-rkpCMw-8tDFuv-ab6gV7-7empND-ab3rne-7emoGX-7zRUNx-8tGFFb-7eqio7-7eqisN-oJSTr8-7eqieE-5SRKBk-7eqiTm7eqiXm-ddYz6d-8tGGvW-oJwgrh-7eqjd9-7eqiP9-8tGHMy-5t65o-8tGEL7-cEwaPj-7eqiwj-Kxy38g-7ZRh3p-5sZG1-5t6c4, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.
that this might have been because the FCG5S would include troops intervening in
Source: “Challenges and opportunities for the G5 Sahel force,”
their own territories, an activity that does not fit the UN’s legal framework
Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 7 July 2017. https://
of peacekeeping operations. Thus, the UNSC stated it is the five countries issafrica.org/pscreport/situation-analysis/challenges-andof the Sahel which created the FC-G5S that need to provide the force with opportunities-for-the-g5-sahel-force
adequate resources. Though the European Union has pledged 50 million
On 2 July 2017 leaders of the G5 Sahel, which consists of Chad,
euros to the force, with a projected first year budget of 423 million euros,
Burkina Faso, Mauritania, Mali and Niger, officially launched
funding is falling far short of what is deemed necessary.
the new G5 Sahel force, in the presence of French President
Besides a significant lack of funding, the other major concern is what
Emmanuel Macron. This followed a meeting in February 2017
in which the G5 Sahel heads of state announced that a new force
structure the FC-G5S will take. Though its name includes the word
would be set up to fight terrorism in the sub-region.
“joint,” it is uncertain whether it will truly be an integrated force or
one that is just a coalition of battalions with national commands. The
Moreover, the [UN Security] council also recalled that it was the
latter model has caused recurrent problems with command and control
responsibility of the G5 Sahel states ‘to provide [the force with]
where it is used by the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM).
the adequate resources’, while encouraging ‘ further support from
Additionally, a poorly designed force structure could create issues
bilateral and multilateral partners’.
regarding the FC-G5S’s right of pursuit across borders.
The FC-G5S illustrates the collective ambition of its members
to address the growing insecurity in the Sahel despite the
The creation of the FC-G5S is an ambitious undertaking by the five
presence of the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
nations to combat the extremist groups operating in the area. These
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and France’s Operation Barkhane,
include Ansar Dine and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara along the
which is deployed across the G5 states. These forces have been
Niger-Mali border; and Katiba Macina and Ansaru Islam along the Malihampered by an inadequate mandate to fight terrorism and
Burkina Faso border. There are other factors that contribute to instability
limited capabilities in an extensive area with little state control,
in the region, such as the often violent confrontations between pastoralists
respectively. The new force, by focusing on terrorism and
and farmers; the void created by corrupt and inefficient governance; and
transnational crime in the border regions, is supposed to fill these
blunders by security forces. The article points out that this instability
gaps.
cannot be addressed solely by a military approach, such as sending in
Apart from the financial challenges, the main endogenous
the FC-G5S unaccompanied by development and institution building
challenge is the structure of the force. Will it be just a coalition of
resources. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
battalions with national commands, or an integrated one?
OE Watch | August 2017

35

AFRICA
The Return of Somali Pirates
OE Watch Commentary: It was 2008 when
piracy in the Gulf of Aden started to escalate.
Somalia’s Transitional Federal Government paid
little attention to the activity as it was busy fighting
the Islamic extremist group al-Shabaab and others
for control of the country. As the piracy worsened,
merchant ships began to carry armed guards
which, combined with a multinational naval task
force patrolling the waters, eventually resulted
in a significant decrease in vessels being seized.
However, piracy has recently returned, even with
these measures still in place. The accompanying
excerpt suggests a possible explanation for the
return of Somali pirates.
To understand this new burst of piracy, it is
necessary to review the roots of its cause. Before
the outbreak of piracy in 2008, many of the soon-tobe pirates were actually fishermen from Puntland.
However, illegal fishing by foreign vessels in their
territorial waters led them to take up arms. When
foreign ship owners started paying large ransoms
for the release of their vessels, Somalia’s organized
crime network took note and soon became heavily
involved. Though international naval intervention
and armed guards on ships helped, they were not
enough to completely eradicate piracy, as young
men from Puntland still needing income were
willing to take the risk.
To reduce piracy, the United Nations helped open
a prison in Garowe, Puntland’s “capital” in 2014,
which provided training for pirates so that they
could have alternatives for making a living. With
these actions, piracy in the region seemed to be
eliminated or at least greatly curtailed. However,
all this began to change recently when al-Shabaab
launched several attacks in Puntland, and Puntland
forces also became embroiled with Somaliland
over a border dispute. According to the article,
pirates took advantage of these distractions to the
armed forces and government to once again seize or
attempt to seize vessels.
March saw the first successful hijacking by the
pirates in five years. The ship was released two days
later. In May a South Korean vessel fell prey and is
still missing. Fortunately an attempt on a Greek oil
tanker in the Gulf of Oman was foiled by onboard
security. However, as the article relates, Puntland
and greater Somalia need to become stronger in
order to finally end this scourge of piracy, a scourge
that abated but returned when Puntland’s already
overstretched government and armed forces were
stretched even further and distracted from their
antipiracy efforts. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

“In this kind of volatile climate, it is clear that despite renewed
support from the international community... the government in
Puntland is nowhere near strong enough to exert control over
its inhabitants to override the desire for profit through piracy.”

Military efforts, such as the US Navy and Coast Guard capturing suspected pirates, have greatly
helped to reduce piracy, but addressing the problem’s root causes such as poverty have proven
difficult

Source: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Eric L. Beauregard, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pirates_capture-May_2009.jpg, Public
Domain.

Source: “Somali pirates are back. Only a strong state can put an end to their activities,”
The Conversation (South Africa), 3 July 2017. https://theconversation.com/somalipirates-are-back-only-a-strong-state-can-put-an-end-to-their-activities-80157
And in its last push to defeat the extremist group before the mission’s planned total
withdrawal from Somalia by 2020, AMISOM continues to seek financial and logistical
support.
The mission is unique in that it is entirely dependent on unreliable funding from
partners and donors; its main troop contributors are Somalia’s neighbors – Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda – who all have security interests in the country; and it is
engaged in an all-out war with al-Shabaab.
Based on these challenges, AMISOM has seen both major success and outright failure
over the past decade, compounded by severe losses in manpower.
While the mission has been praised, it has also received criticism for not having done
enough in terms of building the capacity of Somalia’s institutions, especially regarding
governance, security and justice. The challenge to secure areas recovered from alShabaab and hand over primary responsibilities to Somali security actors continues to
vex the mission because of the gap in institution-building.
In this sense, it could be argued that AMISOM doesn’t have the proper mandate or
capacity to support the establishment and enhancement of Somalia’s institutions, which
are vital for state rebuilding.
Given the failed state of Somalia, AMISOM should have been given a comprehensive
mandate that goes beyond just providing security. It should include helping to build
state institutions, strengthening rule of law and justice, supporting peacebuilding,
facilitating reconciliation of conflicts among the divided clans and sub-clans,
monitoring human rights, and coordinating humanitarian support.
OE Watch | May 2017

36

AFRICA
‘Eco-Militaries’ for Wildlife Protection?
OE Watch Commentary: Foreign armies, private
military contractors and UN peacekeepers are moving
into wildlife protection, often by assisting and/or training
local park rangers; and in some instances, taking up arms
against the poachers themselves. This is driven by concerns
about ties between terrorists and poachers who sport
increasingly heavy armament. The double benefit of these
operations - for example protecting elephants and fighting
Boko Haram at the same time – certainly sounds like a good
idea. However, the accompanying article argues that such
militarization of conservation may not address the problem,
and may even have potential counterproductive effects.

“Not everyone is happy to see them: the Game Rangers
Association of Africa recently issued a statement raising
concerns about the growth of military personnel from
beyond Africa involved in ranger training and antipoaching operations across the continent.”

Perhaps the biggest criticism is that these seemingly
benign “eco-militaries” distract attention from important
issues, such as the underlying causes of poaching, the role
poverty plays in it, and whether or not the local populace
welcomes these conservation armies. Further complicating
matters is that the indigenous population itself might be
involved in poaching for subsistence reasons. Additionally, it
can be easy to forget that a great deal of poaching is driven
by wealthier countries, and that these eco-militaries are
not punishing those who are driving the demand for ivory,
exotic animals, and such but instead punishing sometimes
marginalized people who might just be trying to survive.
As a result, at least two international organizations have
campaigned against abuses of African forest-dependent
communities by militarized conservation forces.
There are also questions regarding how much poaching is
actually done by terrorists. As the article discusses, because
of misinformation, miscommunications, and sometimes
just poor journalism, some poaching is falsely attributed
to terrorists. Unfortunately these stories gain traction and
are difficult to stop even after they have been debunked,
especially when private security forces, governments
worried about terrorism, and others see an opportunity to
expand their operations. This is not to say that no terrorist
organizations are involved in poaching, but rather the extent
is unknown and may have been exaggerated.
The Game Rangers Association of Africa, an organization
whose people have often benefited from training and
equipment by foreign militaries, provides some of the
most cogent reasons to rethink the way militarization of
conservation is being handled. These include a lack of
coordination among role-players, foreign forces lacking
an understanding of the operating environment such as
the bush, and a failure to appreciate the political, cultural
and social environment, with that last one warning that
heavy-handed approaches with the indigenous people
can be counterproductive. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

While many agree that poaching must be stopped in order to prevent the loss
of wildlife, such as this mother rhinoceros and her child killed for their horns, the
increasing militarization of conservation efforts is being called into question
Source: Hein Waschefort, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rhino_poaching.jpg, CCA-SA 3.0.

Source: “Foreign ‘conservation armies’ in Africa may be doing more harm than
good,” The Conversation (South Africa), 12 July 2017. https://theconversation.
com/foreign-conservation-armies-in-africa-may-be-doing-more-harm-thangood-80719
Not everyone is happy to see them: the Game Rangers Association of Africa
recently issued a statement raising concerns about the growth of military
personnel from beyond Africa involved in ranger training and anti-poaching
operations across the continent.
Often, terrorism is used to justify a military presence in national parks and
game reserves. But, though linking ivory with terrorism makes for attention
grabbing headlines, there is no credible evidence to support such claims.
In one well-documented case, Baka people in Cameroon were allegedly abused
by eco-guards who had been trained by a private company and funded by the
WWF. Though such stories document the use of violence against some of the
most marginalized peoples in the world, they don’t grab headlines as easily as a
friendly “eco-army.”
In the longer-term, “conservation armies” can’t fix any of the above. At worst,
they will be counterproductive and alienate the very communities needed to
make conservation work.

OE Watch | August 2017

37

LATIN AMERICA
In Colombia, Another Terrorist Organization?
OE Watch Commentary: A new terrorist group
might have made a clumsy, violent error in Colombia.
According to regional reports, it appears that militants
of the Revolutionary Peoples Movement (Movimiento
Revolucionario del Pueblo, MRP), were responsible
for the 17 June bombing attack at a prominent up-scale
shopping mall in Bogotá that killed three and injured
nine. The reports describe the organization as Marxist,
leftist, and FARC-friendly.
The explosion seems to have been premature, as
one of the fatalities was perhaps one of the intending
perpetrators, but this latter idea is yet to be resolved.
From eight to a dozen MRP militants have already
been apprehended and charged in connection with the
attack, so it may result that this particular attempt at
revolutionary expression did not further their cause.
According to reports, the group has been responsible
for some past actions that caused property damage
due to the detonation of pamphlet bombs. The goal of
this recent action may have been more extreme, but
the fatalities might also have been a mistake caused by
carelessness with the explosives. Regardless, the future
of the organization appears at risk if the prosecutions
proceed successfully. The event has caused a
widespread intercontinental media drama, due in part to
the French nationality of one of the fatalities, and in part
because the crime, according to local sources, was at
first curiously and incompetently investigated.
Highly regarded Colombian analyst and commentator,
Eduardo Mackenzie (working out of Paris) reports that
the German journal Die Linke (The Left) quickly came
to the defense of the MRP personnel who were arrested,
as did a far left German legislator, Heike Hänsel. One
of the sources’ inferences is that the poor government
effort at investigation is somehow related to the FARC
connection, that the government of Manuel Santos has
followed a policy of doing and saying little that might
further taint its unfolding power-sharing agreement with
the FARC. In any case, we might ask if the firmament
of radical leftist organizations in Colombia now has
more space available as the FARC retires units from the
field; if movement leaders are diversifying and orienting
FARC remnants and novitiates; or if a new generation is
just experimenting in revolutionary behavior. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Specified in these documents are surrounding addresses,
possible escape routes…”
Source: Editors, “En Andino hallaron restos de panfletos, Jueza señaló las
evidencias respaldan las sospechas contra el MRP (Remains of Pamphlets Found
in Andino, Judge indicates that the evidence supports the suspicions against the
MRP),” El Espectador, 30 June 2017. http://www.elespectador.com/noticias/
bogota/en-andino-hallaron-restos-de-panfletos-articulo-700927
Considerable evidence …“For the judge, the evidence presented by the
accusing entity are sufficient to infer that they would be the ones responsible for
the attack…
There was one detail that proved noteworthy: the Judge mentioned that in the
Andino it seems they found the remains of pamphlets that were similar to those
left by that organization in other attacks….
Detectives [also] found a calendar notebook in the residence of who they
indicate is the leader of the organization, in which, apparently, activities prior
to the execution of the attack are referenced in red ink. ‘Specified in these
documents are surrounding addresses, possible escape routes (“this way and
not that, because there is a CTV”), the radio frequencies of security patrols, the
number of patrols and ways to move without calling attention to themselves’…”

“…those detained in the framework of the investigation
for Andino Center killing are not ordinary people…”
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “¿Por qué Die Linke gesticula contra el Fiscal por
investigar el atentado en el centro Andino? (Why is The Left gesturing against
the DA for investigating the attack at the Andino Mall?),” Periódico Debate,
3 July 2017. http://www.periodicodebate.com/index.php/opinion/columnistasnacionales/item/15741-por-que-die-linke-gesticula-contra-el-fiscal-porinvestigar-el-atentado-en-el-centro-andino
German leftists interested “…Four days ago [30 June] an extreme left
German legislator, Heike Hänsel, sent a furious letter to the Colombian Attorney
General, Néstor Humberto Martínez. In it she criticized the efforts the Office of
the Attorney General is making to capture and prosecute those responsible for
the bloody attack at the Andino Center shopping mall in Bogotá, this past June
17th, where three young women died (including the Frenchwoman Julie Huynh)
and another nine were gravely wounded….
Heike Hänsel’s coarse intervention confirms that those detained in the
framework of the investigation for Andino Center killing are not ordinary
people, as they claim, but that they have, at least, international support and
sophisticated juridical support that is coming from afar. Die Linke is the
continuation, under new clothing, of the communist party of the DRG,…Die
Linke is an ardent partisan of the dictator Nicolás Maduro… Heike Hänsel’s web
page embraces and publishes FARC’s Twitter pages.”

OE Watch | August 2017

38

LATIN AMERICA
FARC Census
OE Watch Commentary: An interesting set of data
recently came out of the Colombian FARC-government
power sharing agreement in Colombia. A census was
recently taken of the demobilizing FARC force. The
sources reveal little about its category definitions or
methodology other than that the survey was taken
electronically using tablets to interview FARC members
in the 26 demobilization localities, plus several prisons
and welcoming points. The survey was designed
at the National University, and the results presented
in the company of the director of the Agency for
Reincorporation and Normalization; a university rector,
and a member of the FARC Secretariat.
This is quite a gem for those analysts who have
suffered within the obscure art of counting insurgents
and gangsters. The takeaways are, of course, subject to
a wide range of interpretation and contextualizing, as
the titles of the two source articles attest. The reports
state that 10,015 FARC members were surveyed. The
sources did not indicate what percentage of total
strength that is, but it may be close to the total FARC
membership. The data given show 77% were men
and 33% women. Only 55% of the respondents were
categorized as guerrillas, however. About 29% were
categorized as militia and another 16% as prisoners.
The data show a mostly rural force with a more-orless representative proportion of black foot soldiers and
a percentage of members identifying as indigenous that
is much higher than in the country as a whole. Such
numbers might be expected given the geographic range
of the FARC over time. “Pastor” Alape [Felix Muñoz],
a member of the FARC secretariat, suggested that the
survey reflects the reality of Colombia. That may very
well be. Of the fewer than one hundred foreigners
revealed as such in the survey, 54 responded that they
were Venezuelan and 16 as Ecuadoran. If nothing else,
this would reflect the spatial reality of rural smuggling
and escape routes to those countries. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…The census reflects the reality of Colombia…”

Flag of the FARC-EP

Source: By Boris Arenas (Own work) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bandera_escudo_-_Flag_of_the_FARC-EP.JPG, CC BY SA 4.0

Source: Censo socio-economico a las farc revela que más de 100 son extranjeros
(Socio-economic census of the FARC reveals that more than 100 are foreigners),”
RCN Radio, 6 July 2017. http://www.rcnradio.com/nacional/censo-socioeconomico-a-las-farc-revela-que-mas-de-100-son-extranjeros/
Few surprises …“Of the total of 10,015 members of the FARC who were surveyed
for the socio-economic census, it was found that 99% are Colombian and the rest
foreigners. On presenting the report, the National University and DANE [national
statistics agency] explained that of the total 66% were of rural origin and 19%
urban…. Of the foreigners in the FARC, 54 are Venezuelans, 16 Ecuadorans, 8
Brazilians, and the rest, between 1 and 2, from France, Holland, Chile, Argentina,
Panama, and the Dominican Republic. …Fifty-four percent of the ex-combatants
have children…At the time the data was gathered 168 women were pregnant,
7.2% of the female membership of the FARC…The surveys were made with tablets
that had an IT model developed by engineers [who] graduated from the National
University and with an average of 32 minutes per person.”

“…Of the foreigners in the FARC, 54 are Venezuelans, 16 Ecuadorans…”
Source: Paola Fernández, “Censo socio-económico de las FARC-EP revela esfuerzo educativo hecho por la guerrilla (Socio-economic census
of the FARC-EP reveals educational effort made by the guerrilla),” Pazífico Noticias and YouTube, 7 July 2017. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=PDxWj4mVXtw
Data as messaging? “…looking to obtain data for the strategy for reincorporation into civilian life. ‘... these results [will] define ... the
direction for a public policy that is responsible to this community, to the communities that receive them and that can truly transform the
dynamic of this country, broadening and deepening democracy.….
[from background slides] 66% rural, 19 % urban, 15% urban-rural, 77% men, 23% women…18% indigenous, 12% black…
2,267 women, 168 pregnant…
One of the facts that we can take away from the study is the good academic level of the insurgents. Ninety percent know how to read and
write…
‘The census reflects the reality of Colombia’.”
OE Watch | August 2017

39

LATIN AMERICA
Cocaine Supply Secure
OE Watch Commentary: Analysts and editorialists
in the region are reporting and lamenting a new reality
-- that the amount of coca being grown in Colombia is
rising dramatically. The accompanying source blames
it on the policies of the Colombian government and
its power-sharing agreement with the FARC. The
two regions noted in the editorial are homes to major
smuggling corridors and are places where leadership
structures of the now legalized FARC will enjoy
impunity. While the panorama does not look good to
the author, cocaine dealers should see a plentiful and
less expensive supply. Cocaine being a central column
of FARC’s fiscal health, the organization should benefit,
whether or not it decides to continue its revolutionary
initiatives by violent means. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Colombian Mambe Coca

Source: By Crista Castellanos (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Mambe_coca_colombia_crista_castellanos.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0

“It is not that we are inundated in coca, we are already drowning in it!” Source: José Manuel Acevedo, “Gasolina

para el incendio (Gasoline for the fire),”
Semana, 9 July 2017. http://webcache.
googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:_
jO-B23_FUEJ:www.semana.com/
opinion/articulo/juan-manuel-santos-esreponsable-del-aumento-de-coca-en-colo
mbia/531819&num=1&safe=active&hl=e
n&gl=us&strip=1&vwsrc=0
Bogota. “The Santos Administration is
responsible for the increase in coca: it
received the Cataumbo [a region along
the Venezuelan border] with 2 thousand
hectares and it will hand it over with more
than 25 thousand….
The numbers revealed by RCN News
and that will surely be made official next
week are alarming. Colombia went from
having 96 thousand hectares of coca in
2015 to 146,000 in 2016, which implies a
growth of 52% in the last year. In Tumaco
county alone there are as many illicit
cultivations as in all of Bolivia and the
situation in Nariño in general terms is
calamitous.….
The Catatumbo is another of the places
in the country where the State appears to
have lost the war against coca.…
[Furthermore] the official numbers
don’t take productivity per hectare into
consideration, and in that sense there may
be hundreds of tons of coca more than
registered….
As for voluntary crop substitution,
derivative of the peace accords, things
aren’t going much better…

The Catatumbo

Source: Demarest (using GIS data from Sistema de Información Geográfica para la Planeación y Ordenamiento Territorial, IGAC, (Geographic Information
System for Land-use Planning), Instituto Geográfico Agustín Codazzi, http://sigotn.igac.gov.co/sigotn/ (2013)

It is not that we are inundated in coca,
we are already drowning in it!”
OE Watch | August 2017

40

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuelans Celebrate Independence
OE Watch Commentary: July 5th is Venezuela’s Independence Day. This year, President Nicolás Maduro celebrated with an impressive
civil-military parade. Meanwhile, supporters of his regime broke into the national legislative chambers to hold opposition legislators hostage and
to beat some of them up. The accompanying references are a pair of Youtube videos from enlighteningly diametric perspectives on the events.
The first is a report from TeleSur, a pro-Bolivarian news agency established by the Hugo Chavez regime. The footage is mostly of a Sovietstyle military parade of marching units and a variety of military vehicles including many of those used to repress recent riots. There is also
a rousing harangue from a tank commander. The other video is from a news agency out of Panama and includes coverage of the events in
Venezuela from 5 July (starting at about the 2:15 minute mark). The Panamanian anchor re-reports a Spanish El Pais article that in turn cites
Reuters, asserting that 123 Venezuelan military personnel had been arrested since the beginning of the recent wave of protests (about four
months), including 30 desertions and 40 arrests for rebellion. The anchor then talks about the contrast between the military parade in downtown
Caracas and the assault on opposition legislators inside the legislative chambers.
The two reports have something in common. It seems everyone is convinced that as goes the military so go the fortunes of Nicolás Maduro
and his entourage. Beyond Maduro, Bolivarian party power is at stake. If command integrity of the armed institutions falters, those leaders
invested in Castro-Chavista (Bolivarian) power might lose control of the country. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Ejército venezolano ratifica su compromiso con el gobierno de Maduro (Venezuelan Army ratifies its commitment to the Maduro
government),” TeleSur and YouTube, July 2017. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zFHi2L1ivvQ
The Republic? …“In the civil-military parade, General Bernal Martínez asserted that ‘if the Armed Forces are lost, the Republic is lost.’”
Source: Variedades Del Mundo, “Urgente Profunda Crisis Militar en Venezuela, Noticias Hoy Última Hora (Urgent Deep Military Crisis in
Venezuela, Today’s News Last Minute),” Variedades Del Mundo and YouTube, 7 July 2017. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnr7zxB5iYs
Odd messaging. “What was happening just a short distance from this place [the parade viewing stand] was something that goes against
whatever democratic principle, was the taking of the Venezuelan Congress by Chavista hordes. In the middle of this ... spectacle by what
is still called the Bolivarian Armed Forces of Venezuela, President Nicolás Maduro said that he was in complete disagreement with what
happened [at the Congress] and that he was going to conduct an investigation. What I ask myself is how is that going to be carried out if the
personnel of the same military who were at the Congress did absolutely nothing to protect those representatives and reporters…
It is more than that, what finally happened here is that many who participated in this farcical event that you are watching, where they were
supposedly celebrating the independence of Venezuela, what they made, certainly, is a country that has no independence now because it
depends completely on the orders of Castro-Chavism….”

A Military Parade in Caracas in 2014 to Commemorate the Death of Hugo
Chávez

Source: By Cancillería del Ecuador via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Venezuelan_armed_forces.jpg,
CC BY SA 2.0

OE Watch | August 2017

41

LATIN AMERICA
ISIS’s Use of Social Media in Latin America
OE Watch Commentary: Cyberspace is a
principal source of recruitment for the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and, as the first
accompanying excerpt notes, Latin America and
the Caribbean are not exempt from this activity.
When looking at the region as a whole, cyberspace
recruitment appears particularly prevalent in
Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay, where the triborder area has been the focus of domestic and
international attention for many years. More
specifically, Foz do Iguaçu and its surroundings
in Brazil is a hot-spot for cyber recruitment as
it has the largest concentration of Muslims in
the country. This area is currently a concern for
Brazilian authorities.
Portuguese is a strategic language, as it is the
fifth most spoken language in the world, and one of
the few with the potential to expand, together with
English, Spanish, Mandarin and Arabic. In fact, as
the second passage discusses, just months before
the Rio 2016 Olympic Games, ISIS created a
Portuguese language account in the Telegram app
named Nashir Português. This same app is used
to promote ISIS discussions in French, English and
German and is supported by Android, iOS, and
Windows Phone mobile technology, as well as by
computer and web-based versions which allow the
exchange of messages either privately or in groups.
Another concern with the use of social media
networks for recruitment purposes is that they
have become a lot more effective due to the
growth of mobile communications in Brazil and
other countries in the region. As the third passage
indicates, enhanced mobile communication also
allows militants to spread their propaganda more
easily, and send messages all over the world, in
different languages. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

Source: “Estado Islâmico desenvolve própria rede social (Islamic State Develops its
Own Social Network),” Correio do Brasil, 22 May 2017.
http://www.correiodobrasil.com.br/estado-islamico-desenvolve-propria-rede-social/
Jihadists depend more and more frequently on conventional social media outlets for
recruitment purposes in Central and South America and the Caribbean. Some of these
social media outlets include Telegram, Whatsapp, Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook.
Specifically, these outlets are used to exchange messages online and spread the group’s
propaganda.

Flag of the Islamic State (IS), also known as “Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria” (ISIS) or “Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant” (ISIL)

Source: By Yo (Own work) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAQMI_
Flag.svg, Public Domain

Source: “Estado Islâmico usa de WhatsApp a Twitter para promover ‘terrorismo viral’
(Islamic State uses WhatsApp and Twitter to Promote ‘Viral Terrorism’),” Globo, 26
November 2015. http://g1.globo.com/tecnologia/noticia/2015/11/estado-islamico-usa-dewhatsapp-twitter-para-promover-terrorismo-viral.html
Exchange of messages encrypted by WhatsApp and Telegram. Hashtags scattered on
Twitter. Selfies on Instagram . Videos on YouTube. Virtual currency exchange bitcoin.
They seem to be innocent actions of those who are tech-savvy, but they are the way
ISIS uses the Internet in a way that some are referring to as “viral terrorism.” In fact,
the group has even created its own app known as Telegram which is supported on
Android, iOS, and Windows Phone mobile technology, as well as by computer and Webbased versions which allow the exchange of messages either privately or in groups. In
Portuguese, it can be found within the app under Nashir Português.

“Jihadists depend more and more
frequently on conventional social
media outlets for recruitment
purposes in Central and South
America and the Caribbean.”

Flag of Brazil

Source: By Governo do Brasil [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File%3AFlag_of_Brazil.svg, Public Domain

Source: “Por dentro da estratégia do Estado Islâmico em redes sociais no Brasil (The Islamic State’s Social Media Strategy in Brazil),” BBC
Brasil, 26 May 2017. http://www.bbc.com/portuguese/brasil-36839598
Social media aims to spread ISIS propaganda and messages all around the world, in different languages, including Portuguese. Social
media outlets are also used to co-opt individuals vulnerable to radicalization. Because of the clever way jihadists utilize the Internet, it is
extremely difficult to identify concrete proof of recruitment through ... social media and cell phone apps such as Twitter and WhatsApp.
OE Watch | August 2017

42

LATIN AMERICA
Gangs Expand Extortion Practices in El Salvador
OE Watch Commentary: For years, El Salvador has been struggling to contain
ferocious gang violence imposed by the MS-13 and Barrio 18 gangs. One of the
biggest issues is extortion rackets that are pushing more and more citizens to flee
the country, forcing their businesses to close. These gangs prey on both rich and
poor, with extortion demands backed by death threats to those who do not pay. As
the first excerpt indicates, many business owners, from hawkers to tycoons, must
hand over a slice of their revenues to gangs, pushing them to the brink.
The second excerpt details how these powerful gangs utilize their proceeds. It
indicates that extortion money is used to pay for everything from the purchase
of ammunition to dialysis of sick gang members. It is also used by jailed gang
members who use the cash from behind bars to run their organizations. This
information became available to the public after authorities seized documents from
a female MS-13 gang member in April.
There are an estimated 70,000 gang members in El Salvador and extortion
alone is a powerful income generator for gangs. It is said to bring in hundreds
of millions of dollars a year and affects virtually everyone in the country; even
children. As the third excerpt discusses, children working for gangs within
schools collect a daily “rent” (the term used by gangs in El Salvador to describe
extortion fees) of 10 to 25 cents from each of their classmates. The end effects
of widespread extortion in El Salvador are mass emigration, and in some cases,
outright defiance by those fed-up with the impunity granted to gangs which nearly
always ends in more violence and death. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“In El Salvador alone, the MS-13 and Barrio 18 gangs
collect an estimated $380 million a year in extortion fees
from small and large businesses alike.”

Source: “Imperios de la extorsión” están en Honduras
y El Salvador (Extortion Empires in Honduras and El
Salvador),” La Prensa, 15 March 2017. http://www.
laprensa.hn/honduras/854572-410/imperios-de-laextorsi%C3%B3n-est%C3%A1n-en-honduras-y-elsalvador
In El Salvador alone, the MS-13 and Barrio 18 gangs
collect an estimated $380 million a year in extortion fees
from small and large businesses alike. In fact, extortion
has become so rampant that many businesses; especially
small ones, have chosen to close as they are not able to
turn a profit. Others have chosen to close as they have
tired of the death threats associated with possible nonpayment.
Source: “Así maneja la contabilidad la Mara Salvatrucha
con el dinero de las extorsiones (How the Mara
Salvatrucha Gangs Utilize their Extortion Proceeds),” El
Salvador.com, 31 May 2017. http://www.elsalvador.com/
noticias/nacional/356580/asi-maneja-la-contabilidad-lamara-salvatrucha-con-el-dinero-de-las-extorsiones/
Several letters seized from a female member of the MS13 gang that operates in the municipality of San Rafael
Cedros, and its surroundings in the state of Cuscatlán,
reveal how the organization makes use of extortion money
collected from citizens, transportation companies, and
small and large businesses. These letters claim that the
money is used to pay for everything from ammunition to
dialysis of sick gang members.
Source: “Maras amenazan a niños
de escuelas capitalinas (Maras
Threaten Children at Schools
Located in the Capital),” La
Tribuna, 17 February 2017. http://
www.latribuna.hn/2017/02/18/
maras-amenazan-ninos-escuelascapitalinas/

San Rafael Cedros, Cuscatlan, El Salvador

Source: By Ll1324 (Own work) [CC0], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASan_Rafael_
Cedros_2011.jpg, CC0.

Extortion is forcing children to
leave school because gangs run
extortion rackets inside them,
charging both teachers and
pupils a protection tax, known
locally as the rent, “la renta”.
Gang members, using children
associated with the gangs as their
collection agents, are known to
charge children inside schools a
daily ‘renta’ of 10 to 25 cents. In
some cases, parents have taken
their children out of school or
simply left neighborhoods where
gangs were extorting because they
couldn’t pay the daily charge.

OE Watch | August 2017

43

LATIN AMERICA
Drug Transit and the Dominican Republic
OE Watch Commentary: In the world
of drug trafficking, there are producer,
transit, and consumer nations. Producer and
consumer nations are relatively static pieces
in this puzzle; and rarely change
with the exception of occasional
spikes and dips depending on
production constraints and
consumer demand. Transit
nations however, are a variable
trend in the drug trafficking
world. As the first excerpt
indicates, they vary based
on factors such as political
instability and corruption. The
accompanying excerpts focus
on the Dominican Republic as
a drug transit nation due to its
geographic location and rampant
corruption.

“In addition to corruption, the Dominican Republic’s strategic
geographic location is a major attraction to traffickers.”

A U.S. Coast Guard small boat crew, left, attached to the seagoing buoy tender USCGC Oak (WLB 211), acts as drug
smugglers on the run as the Dominican Republic patrol boat GC 109 Orion pursues them May 23, 2013

Trafficking through the
Source: By SSgt Earnest J. Barnes [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/38/A_U.S._Coast_Guard_small_boat_crew%2C_
left%2C_attached_to_the_seagoing_buoy_tender_USCGC_Oak_%28WLB_211%29%2C_acts_as_drug_smugglers_on_the_run_as_the_Dominican_Republic_patrol_boat_GC_109_Orion_pursues_them_
Dominican Republic is generally
May_23%2C_2013_130523-M-RE261-216.jpg, Public Domain
cyclical, but recent years have
seen sharp increases in both seizures and
Source: “Geopolítica del crimen: RD en ruta de la cocaine (Geopolitics of Crime:
suspected transit activity. As the first passage
Dominican Republic as a Cocaine Route),” Acento, 18 December 2016. http://acento.com.
discusses, one factor may be the political
do/2016/opinion/editorial/8394860-geopolitica-del-crimen-rd-ruta-la-cocaina/
instability and corruption in nearby Venezuela,
causing many shipments from Venezuela to
Recently released figures on the Dominican Republic’s annual cocaine seizures show the
traverse through the Dominican Republic.
country’s importance as a transit country continues to grow, worrying news for the island
According to the second passage, this increase
nation on the back of a huge corruption scandal involving the disappearance of police-held
in activity may also be related to the fact that
cocaine. As for corruption, it plays a role in aiding Dominican groups in the international
military and police are supposedly involved
drug trade and provides huge pay-backs to officers (who make approximately $153 per
in an estimated 90 percent of organized crime
month) willing to work with drug trafficking organizations. In addition to corruption, the
Dominican Republic’s strategic geographic location is a major attraction to traffickers.
cases according to a top-level prosecutor in the
Political instability and corruption in nearby Venezuela is another factor that has likely
island nation. This involvement alone plays a
contributed to increasing cocaine flows through the Dominican Republic in recent years as
significant role in aiding Dominican groups in
many shipments from Venezuela traverse through the island nation
international drug trade while simultaneously
providing huge pay-backs to officers who earn
as little as $153/month.
To mitigate widespread corruption, the
Dominican government purged the police force
in both 2013 and 2014 during which time more
than 3,000 officers were dismissed from duty.
But corruption continues to plague the island.
This is likely because no matter how much is
done to decrease corruption, there will always
be sufficient money to buy off underpaid
officers; particularly in areas that serve as key
routes to drug trafficking organizations such
as the Dominican Republic. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Yeni Bernice dice policias y militares estan involucrados en 90% casos crimen
organizado (Yeni Bernice Claims that Police and Military are Involved in 90% of
Organized Crime Cases),” Hoy.com, 15 May 2017. http://hoy.com.do/yeni-berenice-dicepolicias-y-militares-estan-involucrados-en-90-casos-crimen-organizado/
A top-level prosecutor in the Dominican Republic reported that the military and police
are involved in 90 percent of organized crime cases, putting a hard number to official
involvement in criminal activity after years of high-level corruption scandals. Yeni
Berenice Reynoso, the chief prosecutor for the district where capital city Santo Domingo is
located, claims the military and police are usually involved in high-level drug trafficking,
contract killings, and organized crime although it is uncertain as to how she calculated this
number...
According to Yeni Bernice, more than 3,000 police officers were released from duty for
their alleged involvement in criminal activity from February 2013 to March 2014.
OE Watch | August 2017

44

LATIN AMERICA
Organized Crime and Illegal Gold Mining in Peru
OE Watch Commentary: As one of the accompanying
passages points out, “Illegal gold is the new cocaine.” Not only
does this new business feed drug trafficking organizations, it
is also a major cause of deforestation in Peru’s Amazon. This
is not surprising given that Peru is Latin America’s biggest
gold producer. Gold mining activity is controlled by organized
crime groups and has historically been the most prevalent
in the Madre de Dios and Puno regions. The accompanying
passages from Peruvian sources discuss some trends in this
activity.
As the first accompanying excerpt notes, gold-mining
activity appears to be moving north to the Santiago Basin,
which represents a new trend. Generally, illegal mining in the
north has been less significant than in the Madre de Dios and
Puno regions where open source channels are reporting the
deforestation of 460 hectares of rainforest since September
2016, due to miners’ attempts to uncover gold reserves. As
the second passage indicates, illegal gold mining is prevalent
because pure monetary gain from this activity far exceeds the
gain generated by cocaine trade, as “a kilogram of cocaine
originating in Peru sells for $2,000 while a kilogram of gold
sells for $35,000.” And while that may be a great incentive for
criminal organizations, it is detrimental to the environment in
Peru.
The most appalling effects of illegal gold mining are the
destruction of forests and river-banks, contamination of rivers
by mercury and cyanide in addition to human and animal
poisoning by the chemicals used in the mining process. In
addition to these problems, the first excerpt also highlights
the impacts that this activity has on indigenous people and
children, including “forced labor, 10,000s of child workers,
prostitution, sexual exploitation of minors, human trafficking,
appalling health and safety factors, ... violence and alcoholism.”
As the third passage discusses, the Peruvian government has
been unsuccessful in thwarting this illegal activity. Criminal
organizations are apt at bribing authorities and re-directing
their shipments to neighboring countries to facilitate movement
to international markets. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“...illegal gold is the new cocaine.

This new business
feeds drug trafficking organizations as well as external
demand.”

Minería

Source: By Amazonía Puno -Madre de Dios, https://www.flickr.com/photos/amazoniapunomdd/6299888926/in/album-72157627896378823/, CC BY 2.0

Source: “Oro ilegal ahoga la selva de Madre de Dios (Illegal Mining
Inundates Rainforests in Madre de Dios),” El Comercio, 24 May 2017.
http://elcomercio.pe/peru/oro-ilegal-ahoga-selva-madre-dios-425574
In the Amazon, gold extraction is only known about in the Madre de Dios
and Puno regions in the south of the country. The shift to the north in the
Santiago basin is believed to have started more recently...
Numerous reports by NGOs, academics and open-source news media
over the last few years have highlighted the environmental and human
impacts of illegal gold mining in Peru. These include the destruction of
forests and river-banks, contamination of rivers by mercury and cyanide,
contamination of people, fish and other foods by mercury, indications of
forced labor, 10,000s of child workers, prostitution, sexual exploitation of
minors, human trafficking, appalling health and safety factors, numerous
fatalities, money laundering, the razing of indigenous peoples’ land,
violence and alcoholism.

Source: “Sudamérica: un corredor del tráfico de oro ilegal (South America: A Corridor for Illegal Gold Trafficking),” El Comercio, 13 May
2017. http://elcomercio.pe/mundo/latinoamerica/sudamerica-corredor-trafico-oro-ilegal-420189
Experts are concluding that illegal gold is the new cocaine. This new business feeds drug trafficking organizations as well as external
demand. When comparing the two, illegal gold is much more profitable as a kilogram of cocaine originating in Peru sells for $2,000 while a
kilogram of gold sells for $35,000.
Source: “El circuito del oro ilegal que se abre paso en el Perú (The Illegal Gold Circuit Evolving in Peru),” El Comercio, 01 June 2017. http://
elcomercio.pe/peru/circuito-oro-ilegal-abre-paso-peru-157497
Efforts by the Peruvian government to prevent illegal mining to include restricting the importation of chemicals used to extract it has done
little to stop this activity. Instead, criminal organizations have resorted to bribing port authorities to obtain chemicals. They then traffic the
illegally mined gold to Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Ecuador. From these countries, gold is sent to international markets with high demand for
the product.
OE Watch | August 2017

45

ASIA-PACIFIC
Fighting over Japan’s Peace Constitution
OE Watch Commentary: On 3 May, the 70th anniversary of Japan’s so-called
Peace Constitution going into effect, Japanese Prime Minister Abe Shinzō announced
that he wanted to amend the constitution, adding a third clause to Article 9, War
Renunciation, that would explicitly acknowledge the constitutionality of Japan’s SelfDefense Force (SDF). The accompanying passages from Japanese sources discuss
reactions to this announcement.
The timing of the announcement – in the middle of Japan’s Golden Week, a sevenday period with four national holidays on non-consecutive days, which has resulted in
a tradition of many businesses and individuals in Japan taking the whole week off – is
typical for a topic that the politician knows will be controversial. The choice of venue
was also significant for Abe, who has long wanted to amend Article 9: He made the
announcement via video at a meeting of a group that is strongly in favor of revising
the constitution, a document that has not been amended since its inception.
The announcement has been greeted as controversial within Abe’s own Liberal
Democratic Party (LDP). The LDP has had amending Article 9 as a plank in its party
platform since it was formed in 1955. The controversy has to do with the fact that
Abe’s suggestion, to simply add a third clause specifying the SDF is constitutional,
while leaving the current two clauses untouched, is counter to the draft of a revised
Article 9 the LDP itself put forward in 2012, which envisioned changing the SDF into
the National Defense Force (Kokubō Guntai. Both Kokubō, or national defense, and
Guntai, military force, are controversial terms among many Japanese as well). Though
the Prime Minister’s suggestion sidesteps the loaded terms in the LDP’s proposal, his
relatively simpler suggested change has still been divisive not only within the LDP, but
among members of the SDF and the general population as well.
As the accompanying passages demonstrate, media coverage of the announcement
tended to follow the ideological leanings of the source in question. Left-leaning
organizations, like the Asahi Shimbun newspaper (Japan’s second-largest-circulation
overall, left-of-center newspaper) urged caution and extolled Article 9 in its present
form; while right-leaning organizations, like the Sankei Shimbun newspaper applauded
the initiative, at least as a first step.
The suggestion has also met with mixed reactions from SDF personnel and their
family members. Admiral Kawano, the highest-ranking SDF member, is quoted in
the accompanying Okinawa Times article as favoring Abe’s idea, in order to finally
settle the question of the SDF’s constitutionality. However, in the same article a senior
Maritime Self-Defense Force officer is quoted as saying that since this suggestion
leaves in place the second clause of Article 9, which forbids Japan from maintaining
“land, sea and air forces, as well as other war potential,” the additional third clause
does not solve the underlying problem. The final quote in the same article is from the
father of an SDF member who says that the SDF “is not a military force.” The quote
demonstrates the widespread narrative, cherished by many, that the SDF is not, in fact,
an armed force, despite the fact that by any objective measure Japan’s Self-Defense
Force is equipped as the most modern armed force in the region.
In the same Okinawa Times article, the author notes Admiral Kawano also
expressed gratitude to Prime Minister Abe for raising the topic. Japan’s Communist
Party feels that this expression of gratitude goes beyond Kawano’s oath to support the
constitution and has demanded the admiral resign. The fact that this demand is not
more widespread demonstrates how far the debate over Article 9 has progressed. In
the past, even suggesting that Article 9 should be amended has resulted in government
officials resigning. On the other hand, the still-wide-apart convictions dividing
Japanese society, either that Article 9 is sacrosanct and should never be changed, or
that Article 9 should, at least, be adjusted to reflect reality, demonstrate that the debate
over Japan’s War Renunciation article is far from over. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hunter-Chester)

“Article 9 is ‘an asset of Japan...
revising it is not necessary’.”
Source: “(社説）憲法７０年 ９条の理想を使
いこなす (Editorial: 70 Years of the Constitution
– [Let Us] Acquire the Ideals of Article 9),” Asahi
Shimbun, 4 May 2017. www.asahi.com/articles/
DA3S12922579.html?ref=editorial_backnumber
Article 9 is “an asset of Japan . . . revising it is not
necessary.”
Source: “主張首相の９条発言 最大の政治課
題に邁進を (The Prime Minister’s Statement on
Article 9 – Pushing a Top Political Issue Forward),”
Sankei Shimbun, 3 May 2017. http://www.sankei.
com/column/news/170504/clm1705040002-n1.html
The Self-Defense Force must possess “the
personality of an army that protects the nation and
the people . . . [while] adhering to pacifism.”
Source: “9条明記 戸惑う 隊員 (Article 9
Specification [That the SDF is Constitutional]
– Servicemembers Perplexed),” Okinawa Times, 3
June 2017. http://webun.jp/item/7372998
[Admiral Kawano Katsutoshi, Chief of the Joint
Staff:]“Many scholars . . . and political parties
have found the SDF unconstitutional. During
our generation’s lifetime the margin for saying
[the SDF] is perhaps unconstitutional, should be
closed”...
[Maritime Self-Defense Force officer:] “Since
this suggestion leaves in place the second clause
of Article 9, which forbids Japan from maintaining
land, sea and air forces, as well as other war
potential, the additional third clause does not solve
the underlying problem”...
[The 66-year-old father of a son in the
SDF:]“Since the Self-Defense Force is not a military
force, whether or not [its status] is made clear in the
constitution has no meaning.”

“The Self-Defense Force must
possess ‘the personality of an
army that protects the nation and
the people . . . [while] adhering to
pacifism’.”

OE Watch | August 2017

46

ASIA-PACIFIC
Japanese-Indian Cooperative Response to Chinese
Expansion
OE Watch Commentary: Japan and India are eyeing ways
to counter China’s military and political assertiveness in East
Asia. The accompanying passage from one of India’s most
popular daily newspapers discusses the two countries’ joint
response to China’s One Belt One Road (OBOR) initiative.
Japanese-Indian cooperation involves
infrastructure projects across Africa, Iran,
Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, while staying
away from participating in China’s OBOR
initiatives.

“There are security-related reasons for New Delhi to
pursue closer cooperation with Tokyo in response to
Beijing’s expansionary moves.”

As the article discusses, Japan and India
each have security-related reasons to be
concerned about China’s OBOR initiative. It
points out that “the continental and maritime
routes of OBOR are of strategic concern for
India...” while Japan is concerned because
of “China’s increasing military and political
assertiveness in Japan’s immediate security
environment...”
The most important infrastructure project
where Japan is expected to join India is
building Iran’s Chabahar port and the
adjoining special economic zone. Japan may
also join India in infrastructure projects
at Sri Lanka’s Trincomalee port and the
Dawei port along the Thai-Myanmar border.
Nonetheless, the article makes clear that
Africa is the most important geopolitical
target for Japanese and Indian infrastructure
initiatives because it is going to be a key new
area of Africa-Asia connectivity, with India’s
ports in Kochi and Mumbai playing key roles due to their
relative proximity to Africa.
The article points out that the Japanese and Indian
infrastructure projects will be formally known as the
Freedom Corridor, as announced by Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe during his meeting with Indian
counterpart Narendra Modi in Tokyo in November 2016.
The article refers to the infrastructure projects instead
as a strategic Great Wall, a play of words on China’s
own Great Wall. It notes that Japan’s economic strength
combined with India’s geopolitical strength can have
greater reach throughout the broader Indian-Pacific Ocean
region. Although the article does not specify what India’s
geopolitical strength entails, it appears to be based on
India’s military and diplomatic power and geopolitical
position relatively close to East Africa, the Middle East and
Southeast Asia. The article also contrasts the approaches
of Japan and India with that of China, which it considers
mercantilist and therefore lacking the depth that can be
forged by countries with close ties to Japan and India. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Prime minister Modi [of India] with Prime minister Abe of Japan

Source: By Narendra Modi’s official Flickr stream [CC BY-SA 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, via
Wikimedia Commons, hhttps://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a1/Narendra_Modi_and_Shinzo_Abe%2C_2014.jpg, CC BY 2.0.

Source: “Pushing back against China’s One Belt One Road, India, Japan build
strategic ‘Great Wall’,” Economic Times, 16 May 2017. http://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/news/economy/infrastructure/pushing-back-against-chinas-onebelt-one-road-india-japan-build-strategic-great-wall/articleshow/58689033.cms
India and Japan are together embarking upon multiple infrastructure projects
across Africa, Iran, Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia in what could be viewed as
pushback against China’s massive, unilateral infrastructure initiatives under
the One Belt One Road (OBOR) project connecting it with Europe and Africa.
While in East Africa, Delhi and Tokyo are planning to fund infrastructure and
capacity-building projects, Japan is expected to join the Indian foray in the
expansion of Iran’s Chabahar port and the adjoining special economic zone.
The India-Japanese initiatives are part of the Freedom Corridor that stretches
from the Asia-Pacific to Africa. The continental and maritime routes of OBOR
are of strategic concern for India and therefore there are security-related
reasons for New Delhi to pursue closer cooperation with Tokyo in response
to Beijing’s expansionary moves. China’s increasing military and political
assertiveness in Japan’s immediate security environment is a key driver of this
change.

OE Watch | August 2017

47

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Developing Sea Launches to Boost Space Commerce
OE Watch Commentary: China has announced that
it is developing sea launch capability to boost space
commerce. The accompanying passages from Chinese
sources discuss the announcement, which comes amid
two recent developments-- one or both of which likely
led to the decision to pursue this capability.
First, China might be seeking to compete with Sea
Launch, a multinational spacecraft launch service that
used a massive mobile sea-based platform to launch
commercial payloads. Sea Launch, established in
1995, was a consortium of four companies from the
United States, Russia, Norway, and Ukraine. The group
often launched payloads near the equator, which, due
to the earth’s increased rotation speed at the equator,
allowed them to gain an additional 200 kilometer
per hour boost over launches made from within the
United States. Following a series of financial and legal
hardships and the 2014 Russian military intervention in
Ukraine, however, Sea Launch stopped its operations
and mothballed its ships. Currently, Russian company
Energia owns 95 percent of Sea Launch, but has been
seeking to sell it. In September 2016, Russia’s S7 Group
announced it was planning to buy Sea Launch. The
purchase, according to several reports published in
various news sources, space and aviation journals in June
2017, is reportedly expected to be completed by the end
of the year.
Second, since 1970, China has reportedly launched
over 225 Long March carrier rockets. Throughout nearly
the past five decades of the program, the country has
enjoyed many successes and a handful of defeats. Most
recently, however, the program was dealt a major blow
with two failed launches within a two-week timeframe in
June and July. During the first week of July this year, the
Long March 5 Y2 (CZ-5), which is the newest and largest
member of China’s rocket fleet, experienced its second
launch failure. The rocket had been launched from
Wenchang Space Launch Center in southern China’s
Hainan province.
The two accompanying articles come within days
of the second failed launch and announcements that
Russia’s S7 Group would likely finalize its purchase
of Sea Launch by the end of the year. Whether there
is a correlation between the two failed launches and
the announcement to develop sea launches is not
clear. However, it is worth noting. Indeed, it could be
that China sees an opportunity to compete for space
commerce, or it could be that the country intends to try
to increase its own success rate while lowering costs and
increasing payloads. Or perhaps it is a combination of
both. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Sea Launch at Sea. All three stages fired successfully, putting a nuke-hardened
Italian SIRCAL satellite into geostationary orbit

Source: By jurvetson (Flickr.com - image description page) [CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASea_Launch_01.jpg, CC BY 2.0.

“...the technology is comparatively simple and a sea launch
platform can be built by modifying freighters.”
Source: “China Develops Sea Launches to Boost Space Commerce,” Xinhua, 7
July 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-07/07/c_136425261.htm
Tang Yagang, vice head of the aerospace division of the No.1 institute of the
China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASTC), said that
the technology is not difficult and a sea launch platform can be built based on
modifying 10,000-tonne freighters.
China will use solid carrier rockets which rely less on launch facilities and
feature mature technology, Tang said, adding that key technology for the carrier
rockets will be tested at sea this year and the service is expected to be available
for international users in 2018.
Currently, Long March carrier rockets have provided 60 commercial launches
for domestic and international users, Fu said.
Source: China Plans Sea Launches to Give Boost to Space Commerce,”
China Global Television Network, 10 July 2017. https://news.cgtn.com/
news/3d45544e3059444e/share.html
Tang Yagang, vice head of the aerospace division of the No.1 institute of the
China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASTC), said that the
technology is comparatively simple and a sea launch platform can be built by
modifying freighters.
Countries in the equator region have growing needs for launching nearequatorial and low-inclination satellites, said Fu Zhiheng, deputy general
manager of China Great Wall Industry Corporation, affiliated to CASTC.

OE Watch | August 2017

48

ASIA-PACIFIC
Recent Developments in the Chinese Army’s Helicopter
Force
by Dennis J. Blasko
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 8, dated 9 June 2017, Edited for
OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/recent-developments-chinese-armys-helicopter-force/

OE Watch Commentary: In November 2016, Chinese
internet sources showed photos of a ceremony in the (former)
13th Group Army of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
Army accepting the 1,000th helicopter into the force. This nice
round number demonstrates the growth of the Army Aviation
Corps over the past decade. Along with Special Operations
Forces (SOF), Army Aviation is one of the “new-type combat
forces” given priority for development. The increase in the
number of Army helicopters accompanies the expansion of
the force in the latest round of reforms. In roughly a month’s
time, half of all Army Aviation units have experienced some
sort of organizational change. However, even as the numbers
of helicopters rise, the size of the Army Aviation force is still
small for a ground force that will probably number around a
million personnel by 2020. The recent changes are an attempt
to improve and expand a force that underpins a number of
important capabilities from tactical mobility and special
operations to logistics support.

The Harbin Z9 is the Chinese built version of the Eurocopter AS.565 Panther.
The helicopter was on the frigate Yuncheng during a visit to Rotterdam.

Source: By Rob Schleiffert from Holland (Z9C Chinese Navy), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AZ9C_Chinese_Navy_
(16391212735).jpg, [CC BY-SA 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

In the month since the April 2017 announcement of changes to the PLA’s “84 corps-level
units,” Army Aviation units have undergone some of the most visible observed changes. Of the
18 former group armies that were reduced to 13, none of the five disbanded group armies were
assigned either an Army Aviation or SOF unit. In the few weeks since the reduction of group
armies was announced, multiple changes in Army Aviation units have been publicized.
All four of the former Army Aviation regiments in group armies have been reported as
expanded to brigades and it appears that the former General Staff Department (GSD) Army
Aviation brigade and the brigade assigned to the Xinjiang Military District have been transferred
to group armies. Specifically, as the first passage notes, in mid-May 2017, the former regiment
in the 26th Group Army was described as an “army aviation brigade under the PLA 80th Group
Army” and a week later the former regiment in the 54th Group Army was described as an “army
aviation brigade under the PLA 83rd Group Army.” As the second passage notes, the former
GSD Army Aviation brigade now appears to be “an army aviation brigade of the PLA 81st Group
Army in Beijing.” At the same time, the Army Aviation regiment in the former 31st Group Army/
current 73rd Group Army was reported to be an “army aviation brigade under the PLA Eastern
Theater Command.”
Additionally, Chinese television reported the former regiment in the old 42nd Group Army
(the regiment most recently created) is now a brigade in the 74th Group Army. The same news
broadcast reported on an Army Aviation brigade of the 76th Group Army in the Western
Theater Command. The 76th is the former 21st Group Army, which previously did not have an
Army Aviation unit. This change could be the result of either the transfer of the complete Army
Aviation brigade in the Xinjiang Military District to 76th Group Army command or elements of
that brigade have been transferred to the 76th to become a seed organization eventually to grow
into a full brigade.

Source: “Z-9 helicopters receive phase
maintenance,” Chinamil.com, 18 May
2017. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2017-05/18/content_7607783.htm
Soldiers assigned to an army aviation
brigade under the PLA 80th Group Army
perform[ed] phase maintenance on Z-9
multi-purpose helicopters at a military
training base on May 15, 2017.
Source: “China’s first helicopter
peacekeeping detachment prepares to
leave for Sudan,” Chinamil.com, 19 May
2017. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2017-05/19/content_7609950.htm
China’s first helicopter peacekeeping
detachment held a departure ceremony at
an army aviation brigade of the PLA 81st
Group Army in Beijing on May 19, 2017.
The detachment, consisting of 140 troops
and 4 Mi-171 medium multi-purpose
helicopters, will soon be sent to and
deployed in the Darfur region of Sudan
for carrying out such UN peacekeeping
missions as air patrol, transportation of
personnel and materials and so forth.

The PLA’s Army Aviation Corps was established in 1986 by inheriting helicopters from the Air
Force. It began with a single regiment and by the middle of the following decade had expanded
to seven operational regiments (and a few training units), composed of about 135 helicopters and some Y-5 biplanes. By early 2017 (prior to
changes in the structure of PLA operational units), operational helicopter units had grown to 12 operational units, including five regiments and
seven brigades, and a few training units. Despite the growth in the number and size of units and in the total number of helicopters, the lack of
sufficient aircraft to perform all the tasks necessary to conduct modern campaigns is a known shortcoming. As a result, continued growth in
the Army Aviation Corps is necessary and expected. End OE Watch Commentary (Blasko)
OE Watch | August 2017

49

ASIA-PACIFIC
Xi Jinping’s New Military Strategic Guideline
OE Watch Commentary: Senior Colonel Luo Derong, an associate professor at the Nanjing Political Science
Academy, discussed the military strategic guidelines of President Xi Jinping in the People’s Liberation Army’s
(PLA) new period of development in a recent issue of China Military Science.
He notes that the new strategic guidelines expand on strategic thought, strategic objectives, and strategic
tasks of the past for the PLA. The guidelines direct the building, reform, and preparations of the Armed Forces.
While many tasks are similar, such as the focus on active defense, some have changed slightly, such as from
“winning local wars under informatized conditions” to “fighting to win informatized local wars.” As the excerpt
below notes, joint operations and system sabotage operations are stressed, among other actions. Information
dominance is another area where emphasis is placed, as the author claims that “seizing information dominance
has become the core of seizing comprehensive battlefield control.” End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)

“Seizing information
dominance has
become the
core of seizing
comprehensive
battlefield control.”

“The New Guideline consistently takes integrated joint operations as a basic form of our military’s

military operations in an informatized local war, with system-of-systems operations based on information
systems being a basic combat method, with systems sabotage warfare being the core combat method for
achieving the objective of battle. In terms of operational effects, systems sabotage warfare is a kind of
structural destruction warfare or strategic paralyzing warfare.”
Source: Luo Derong, “Guidelines for the Armed Forces Building and Preparation for Military Struggle—Understanding of the Military
Strategic Guideline in the New Situation,” China Military Science, No. 1 2017, pp.88-96.
Active Defense, Strategic Advantage, Marxist Thought
“Chairman Xi’s important expositions on national defense and armed forces building, adheres to the Marxist war outlook and methodology,
applies materialist dialectics, comprehensively coordinates and scientifically handles the dialectical relationships between war preparedness
and war checking…thus becoming the core of our party’s military strategic guidance under the new situation. Defense refers to holding a
defensive status strategically…Activeness refers to attaching importance to military struggle preparations and taking offensive actions at the
campaign and tactical levels, so as to achieve the purpose of strategic defense through military strengthening-based deterrence and through
attacks and counterattacks at the campaign and tactical levels in local wars.” ...
…strive to change an unfavorable situation into a favorable situation; set store by controlling the intensity of struggle to an appropriate
degree and employing appropriate stratagems, effectively bring the situation under control while holding fast to the bottom line, win over the
most majority while concentrating strikes on the main adversary, prevent a situation of being faced with multiple enemies and using force in
multiple directions at the same time...
Seizing information dominance has become the core of seizing comprehensive battlefield control. Integrated joint operations have become
the basic form of military operations. Platforms-based operations, system-of-systems support, tactical actions, strategic support have become
the prominent features of contemporary warfare…greater importance must be attached to the creation of a favorable strategic posture....
“The New Guideline consistently takes integrated joint operations as a basic form of our military’s military operations in an informatized
local war, with system-of-systems operations based on information systems being a basic combat method, with systems sabotage warfare
being the core combat method for achieving the objective of battle. In terms of operation effects, systems sabotage warfare is a kind of
structural destruction warfare or strategic paralyzing warfare.”

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | August 2017

50

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Interest in Becoming a Major Player in the Arctic
Continues
OE Watch Commentary: China has long been
trying to increase its influence in the Arctic. It
has sought membership in the Arctic Council and
is now an observer member in the Council whose
full members have territory in the Arctic (Canada,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden,
and United States). It has further stated that the
Arctic belongs to the whole world, and that China has
the largest portion of the world’s population. Chinese
tourism to the Arctic has risen. China has an
icebreaker stationed in the Arctic and is constructing
a second larger icebreaker. It has purchased coal
mines with a seaport on Norwegian islands and built
the Arctic “Yellow River Station” on the Norwegian/
Russian island of Svalbard. Now China is interested
in buying seaports and mineral rights in Greenland.
Denmark has been carefully tracking China’s
Drift ice camp in the middle of the Arctic Ocean as seen from the deck of icebreaker Xue Long
Source: By Timo Palo (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
activities in the region because Greenland is an
commons/8/8d/Teadlased_j%C3%A4%C3%A4l.jpg, CC BY 3.0
Arctic autonomous constituent country within the
Kingdom of Denmark. The accompanying article, derived from a Danish source, discusses how China’s bid to buy Greenland’s Gronnedal
Naval Base was thwarted. It also discusses China’s ongoing interest in obtaining mineral rights to Greenland’s Kvanefjeld project.
Kvanefjeld is the site of a major mineral deposit, thought to be the world’s second-largest deposit of rare earth oxides, and the sixth-largest
deposit of uranium. China now owns 12.5% of Greenland Minerals and Energy Limited (GME) and appears to be trying for a controlling
interest over GME which owns 100% of these mineral rights. This appears to be part of China’s active campaign to control rare earth
deposits. (For a discussion on rare earth elements, see Cindy Hurst, “China’s Rare Earth Elements Industry: What Can the West Learn?”
http://www.iags.org/rareearth0310hurst.pdf) End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“China’s primary interests in the region are commercial in character and are associated mainly with the
possibilities of shorter shipping routes and access to natural resources. FE [Danish Defense Intelligence
Service] is closely following this development and is focusing on the way China is trying to position itself
as an influential player in the Arctic...”

Source: Kenneth Elkjaer, “Efterretningstjeneste: Vi holder øje med kinesiske interesser i Grønland (Intelligence Agency: We are Watching
Chinese Interests in Greenland),” Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa Greenlandic Broadcasting Corporation, 10 July 2017. http://knr.gl/da/nyheder/viholder-%C3%B8je-med-kinesiske-interesser-i-gr%C3%B8nland
Chinese companies have already attracted attention several times due to investments or attempts to buy up property in this country.
Last December the Danish website Defencewatch reported that the Danish Government had intervened against the Chinese company General
Nice Group’s attempt to buy the Gronnedal naval station. A short time later, the Reuters news agency reported that fears that both the United
States and China wanted to be represented in this country led the Danish Government to intervene against a potential sale of Gronnedal. The
Danish Government has said it rejected the Chinese interest in buying the facility because it needs Gronnedal, since it has decided to reopen
the base.
Last year, another Chinese company also made headlines. In the autumn, Shenghe bought a 12.5 percent share in the Australian company
Greenland Minerals and Energy Limited (GME), which is behind the Kvanefjeld project. The share purchase created major confusion about
whether the Chinese company had also been given an option to buy up to 60 percent of GME. GME has denied that on several occasions.
In its report, the Danish Defense Intelligence Service wrote that it was highly unlikely that Chinese investment of this kind in Greenland was
part of a larger, state-directed plan. But the agency nevertheless intends to remain vigilant: “Due to the close connections between Chinese
undertakings and the political system in China, there are however particular risks involved in extensive Chinese investment in Greenland.”
[The report notes:] “China’s primary interests in the region are commercial in character and are associated mainly with the possibilities of
shorter shipping routes and access to natural resources. FE [Danish Defense Intelligence Service] is closely following this development and is
focusing on the way China is trying to position itself as an influential player in the Arctic.”
OE Watch | August 2017

51

ASIA-PACIFIC
Chinese Perspectives on the Qatar Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: On 26 June
2017, the Chinese-language website sohu.com
featured a series of analyses by Chinese scholars
discussing the Qatar crisis and its implications
for China. The accompanying passages provide
insight into Chinese perspectives on the crisis.
China’s main concern centers around energy
security and potential delays in its construction
projects in Qatar.
One scholar claimed that the crisis was caused
by Qatar’s oversized media influence with its
al-Jazeera programming and the emir’s proIranian statements in the media. This angered
the Saudis because of their rivalry with Iran
and, in turn, forced Saudi Arabia’s allies to also
follow its lead. The scholar noted that Turkey’s
support of Qatar in this crisis also contradicted
ties between Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

Al Khor Beach [Qatar]

Source: Martin Belam, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Al_Khor_Beach.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0

Another scholar noted that even though
Turkey and Egypt have similar style regimes, Egypt’s alignment with Saudi Arabia against the Muslim
Brotherhood led it to side with Saudi Arabia. Finally, the scholar suggested that Russia suffers least
from the crisis because it can play the role of a mediator and maintain good relations with both the
Saudi and Qatar sides.
According to the scholars, the concern for China is not the potential outbreak of fighting but the lack
of unity among Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states, as this will make it more difficult for China to
engage in free trade negotiations with the GCC. There is also concern that in a time of crisis, China’s
energy security could be threatened considering Saudi Arabia is a major source of Chinese oil imports.
Moreover, China has projects for the construction of a new port, medical facilities and a subway line
in Qatar but these may be delayed as a result of the crisis, especially because Saudi Arabia has closed
the land border to Qatar, which slows down the transfer of, and raises the prices of important materials
such as cement, which are needed for construction.
None of the scholars expects fighting to take place. The consensus is that the crisis can be solved
through mediation. One scholar, however, notes that China is not a primary stakeholder in this conflict,
while another says that China should take a proactive role in mediation to show that it is indispensable
and can protect its interests. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“... we [should] develop
our strategy in the Middle
East as soon as possible
and take the initiative to
participate in mediation,
showing China’s existence
and indispensable
influence.”

Source: “卡塔尔变局、中东走势与中国的对策(Qatar’s Turning Point, Middle East Trends and China’s Countermeasures),” Sohu.com, 26
June 2017. http://www.sohu.com/a/152180209_729263
The recent outbreak of eight countries against Qatar is the focus of global attention. It is necessary to explore the impact of this on the
Middle East, China-Middle East relations, and how China should respond. I invited the representatives of the domestic Middle East research
institutions and personnel to discuss the issue. Zhou Rong (Senior Research Fellow, Renmin University of China) [said], “The relationship
between the countries in the Middle East has not reached the level of imminent crisis… Luo Lin (Dean and Professor, Beijing Language
and Culture University) [said] the Qatari emir’s pro-Iranian remarks touched on Saudi Arabia’s core security interests, so this hastened the
intensity of issue beyond the past forms of diplomacy in the Middle East… Wang Cheng (Head of Business Affairs, West Asia and Africa,
Ministry of Commerce) [said] the impact of this storm for China and the establishment of free trade between the GCC is that the GCC will
face great resistance in coordinating a common position for the GCC… Wu Yihong (Xinhua News Agency World Research Center researcher,
Middle East branch) [said] China’s energy imports will face a huge threat and challenge. [The conflict] will affect China’s energy strategic
reserves. Saudi Arabia is China’s major source of oil imports [and] projects under construction that are contracted by China will be affected.
It is recommended that as soon as possible we develop our strategy in the Middle East and take the initiative to participate in mediation,
showing China’s existence and indispensable influence.
OE Watch | August 2017

52

ASIA-PACIFIC
A Chinese View on Russian Operations in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Wang Jichang is a Colonel and research fellow with the Chinese Academy of Military Science’s European Military
Studies Division of the Foreign Military Studies Department. His excerpted article from China Military Science analyzes Russia’s operation
in Syria from three perspectives: political planning; situational planning and control; and tactical application. He describes Russian military
activities as a modernized information warfare operation. The accompanying excerpts offer Chinese observations regarding Russia’s planning
for its Syrian operation, the first large-scale military operation by Russia since the Soviet Union disintegrated.
As the passages claim, the Russian military developed a strategic approach of “limited use of forces” in order to solve the Syrian crisis
politically in a way that would be favorable to Russia. To achieve this, the Russian military crafted the war through careful planning and
“precision control” of the situation. The author discusses four stages of Russia’s operation. The first was to “mobilize 10 reconnaissance
satellites to conduct regular radio reconnaissance and imagery reconnaissance of Syria.” The second was to “dispatch two IL-20M electronic
reconnaissance aircraft, and UAVs to Syria in order to conduct a large swath of airborne reconnaissance over the Syrian battlefield.” Third,
he notes that Russia formed a “Middle East-specific strong technical reconnaissance network using its technical reconnaissance forces
stationed in Armenian and Tajikistan military bases.” Fourth, Russia actively used measures such as cyber reconnaissance and spy intelligence
reconnaissance.
Finally, the author notes that Russia consistently controlled Bashar al-Assad via “carrot and stick means” while “spurring the United States to
cooperate via the combinational means of discussing while fighting.” The author claims that as a result of these calculated actions, the situation
on the ground kept unfolding in accordance with Russia’s own rhythm and headed in the direction that had been pre-established by Russia from
the start. End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)

“For the operation, the Russian Army always adhered to the policy of limited use of forces, and

controlled Bashar via carrot and stick means while spurring the United States to cooperate via the
combinational means of discussing while fighting. As a result, the situation on the battlefield consistently
unfolded in accordance with its own rhythm, and headed in its pre-established direction.”
Source: Wang Jichang, “Main Experience of Russia’s Military Operations in Syria,” China Military Science, No. 3 2016, pp. 119-126.
Conducting Strategic and Tactical Planning in Advance
“The Russian military has developed a military strategic approach of “limited use of forces” in accordance with its strategic guidance “to
solve the Syrian crisis politically in a situation favorable to Russia.” On the basis of this, the Russian military has then carefully crafted the
course of war through “careful strategic and tactics planning in advance,” “deft opening,” “precision control of the situation,” and “perfect
closing.” ...
Before the war, Russia had long been in careful preparation, disposition, and ensuring that “everything had been made ready.” The first was
to carefully implement prewar dispositions. Russia conducted in-depth cooperation with Syria. Before the war, Russia had communicated
with multiple parties of Iran, including Iran’s foreign affairs, military, intelligence departments, etc., in an attempt to initiate the formation
of an alliance prototype via the excuse of mediating the Iranian nuclear crisis. The second was to ensure goods and material readiness. The
port of Tartus was to be expanded. In less than a month of time, Russian engineering units had completed a comprehensive renovation of the
Latakia Airport, and built several dozen battlefield infrastructural facilities... The third was to actively carry out intelligence preparedness.
Russia’s Military had mobilized 10 reconnaissance satellites to conduct regular radio reconnaissance and imagery reconnaissance of Syria. It
dispatched two IL-20M electronic reconnaissance aircraft, UAVs including 11 “Bee-1,” Seahawk-10,” etc., to Syria in order to conduct a large
swath of airborne reconnaissance over the Syrian battlefield. Russia had also formed a Middle East-specific strong technical reconnaissance
network using its technical reconnaissance forces stationed in Armenian and Tajikistan military bases. Russia had actively used measures
such as cyber reconnaissance, spy intelligence reconnaissance, and so forth. ...
Russia had also formed a Middle East-specific strong technical reconnaissance network using its technical reconnaissance forces
stationing in the Armenian and Tajikistan Military bases. Russia had actively used measures such as cyber reconnaissance, spy intelligence
reconnaissance, and so forth. As a result, it had acquired a great deal of terrorist target information, thus providing intelligence information
[to] support to its subsequent attacks. During its “Central 2015” strategic exercise in September 2015, Russia’s military had conducted
sufficient pre-war training for the Syrian operation....
The Russian Army accurately determined the situation, grasped the timing, decisively made decisions and then implemented the operation.
Russia unfolded its actions covertly. First, Russia transported a great deal of main combat equipment and a large number of combatants with
the excuse of providing normal military assistance. Second, Russia also sent an ocean fleet led by the “Moscow” guided missile cruiser to the
sea area near Syria with the excuse of training. Third, it completed airport transition for its fighter aircraft under cover of training. For the
operation, the Russian Army always adhered to the policy of limited use of forces, and controlled Bashar via carrot and stick means while
spurring the United States to cooperate via the combinational means of discussing while fighting. As a result, the situation on the battlefield
consistently unfolded in accordance with its own rhythm, and headed in its pre-established direction.
OE Watch | August 2017

53

ASIA-PACIFIC
Thailand Views Cyber-Security as a Growing Concern
OE Watch Commentary: The Thai Armed Forces
are carefully re-evaluating the country’s cyber-security
procedures after reports that North Korea used Thailand as
a base to carry out a cyber-attack against the United States.
The two highlighted articles discuss some of the issues
surrounding cyber-security and Thailand’s concerns. Both
articles point to an increased concern over, and emphasis on
cyber-security by the Thai Armed Forces. Colonel Amorn
Chomchoey, a cyber expert of the Royal Thai Air Force, is
quoted as urging the Thai Armed Forces to be “prepared for
all kinds of attacks.” He goes on to explain that “In a ground
battle, we can identify the attacks, but in cyber warfare, we
don’t know who is attacking us.”
According to the Global Security Index 2017, published
by the United Nations International Telecommunication
Union, Thailand ranks 20th in a group of 77 countries that
were classified in the “maturing” stage, which means they
“have developed complex commitments and engaged in
cyber-security programs and initiatives.” The ranking is
based on legal, technical, and organizational institutions and
their cooperation in information-sharing networks within
each country. The “leading” stage, classified as having
demonstrated a high commitment to cyber-security included
21 countries. The top 11 were: Singapore, United States,
Malaysia, Oman, Estonia, Mauritius, Australia, Georgia,
France, Canada, and Russia. China was 34th (which puts it in
the maturing stage). End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“We need to be prepared for all kinds of
attacks.”

Source: Wassana Nanuam, “Defence Girds for Cyber War,” Bangkok Post,
5 July 2017. http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1281163/defencegirds-for-cyber-war
Defence Girds for Cyber War
The Thai Armed Forces have discussed ways to prepare for a cyber war
after learning that North Korea allegedly once used Thailand as a base to
carry out a cyber attack against the US, according to Thai military officers.
[Col Amorn Chomchoey, a cyber expert of the Royal Thai Air Force] said
cyber war could be more challenging than traditional warfare. “In a ground
battle, we can identify the attackers. But in cyber warfare, we don’t know
who is attacking us.”
An unnamed source said North Korea has and is using robot networks to
take control of a computer network of a local organisation and using it to
attack other countries.
Source: Thailand Ranks 20th in Global Cybersecurity Ranking,” Bangkok
Post,” 5 July 2017. http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/asean/1281590/
thailand-ranks-20th-in-global-cybersecurity-ranking
Thailand Ranks 20th in Global Cybersecurity Ranking
Thailand was grouped in the “maturing” stage in the Global Security Index
2017 report by the UN International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The
group refers to 77 countries that have developed complex commitments and
engage in cybersecurity programs and initiatives.
The ranking was based on countries’ legal, technical and organizational
institutions, their educational and research capabilities, and their
cooperation in information-sharing networks.

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
CELEBRATING 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | August 2017

54

ASIA-PACIFIC
Thailand’s Controversial 20-Year National Strategy
OE Watch Commentary: In late June,
Thailand’s junta-appointed parliament passed
a controversial bill that some critics fear will
extend military rule over the country for the
next 20 years. The bill requires the heads
of Thailand’s government departments to
annually report their operations to Parliament,
the Cabinet, and a new Special Committee.
If a department is found not to comply with
the country’s reform strategy, which was put
out by the National Council for Peace and
Orders, the department head could face an
investigation by the National Anti-Corruption
Commission and ultimately face impeachment
and imprisonment.
A number of media reports have described
some of the concerns about the new bill. For
example, the first article explains that the
committee “will be stacked with members
who are sympathetic to the military.” The
second and third articles describe concerns
that the new bill could go against Thailand’s
new constitution, which was implemented
earlier this year, because it had been open to
limited participation, which was not in line
with the intent of the Constitution.
The third article also explains that the new
national strategy “will be legally binding,
effectively giving the military oversight of
elected governments for the next 20 years.”
According to the second article, however,
while this “legally binding, long-term plan”
shows the military installed regime’s intention
to cling to power, political critic Sukhum
Nualsakul argued that he was confident the
strategy would collapse when the public was
strong enough to reject them. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“This 20-year plan is designed
to embed the military’s role and
supervision over Thai politics and
economy for the long term.”

Source: Junta installs Committee to ‘Take Care of’ Elected Governments for 20 Years,”
Prachatai, 27 June 2017. http://www.prachatai.org/english/node/7239
Under the new bill, heads of government departments will be required to report annually on
their operations to the new special committee, the cabinet and parliament. If either the lower
house or senate finds that a department is not following the NCPO’s [National Council for
Peace and Orders] reform strategy, the department head may be reported for investigation by
the National Anti-Corruption Commission.
Unsurprisingly, the bill ensures that the committee will be stacked with members sympathetic
to the military. The committee’s chair will be the Prime Minister, with one vice-chair being
the speaker of the lower house, and the other [being] the speaker of the appointed senate.
Positions in the committee are also reserved for the Permanent Secretary of the Defence
Ministry, the Chief of the Defence forces, the Army Commander in Chief, the Air Force
Commander in Chief, the Navy Commander in Chief and the Police Commander in Chief.
Other positions have been reserved for leaders of previous junta-appointed bodies such
as the Secretary of the National Security Council. A final 17 positions will be appointed to
various individuals with relevant expertise.
Source: Kasamakorn Chanwanpen, “Skepticism Over National Strategy,” The Nation Online,
22 June 2017. https://www.thaivisa.com/forum/topic/989117-skepticism-over-nationalstrategy/
Plan shows regime intends to cling to power, says critic of 20-year strategy.
Political critic Sukhum Nualsakul said the legally binding, long-term plan clearly showed the
political ambitions of the military-installed regime to cling to power but he did not express
concerns because he said he believed society would find a way around it.
Former prime minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said he was disappointed over limited public
participation and concerned the strategy would become a burden for future governments.
The critic said he was confident that the strategy would collapse when the public will was
strong enough to reject them. “In two years, five years or whatever, if people say no, they [the
bills] cannot persist,” Sukhum said.
The process was not in line with the intent of the Constitution, which intended that people
participate more in legislation, he said. The writing and passing of the draft bill relied mainly
on the NLA, he said.
Source: China Plans Sea Launches to Give Boost to Space Commerce,” China Global
Television Network, 10 July 2017. https://news.cgtn.com/news/3d45544e3059444e/share.html
Tang Yagang, vice head of the aerospace division of the No.1 institute of the China
Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASTC), said that the technology is
comparatively simple and a sea launch platform can be built by modifying freighters.
Countries in the equator region have growing needs for launching near-equatorial and lowinclination satellites, said Fu Zhiheng, deputy general manager of China Great Wall Industry
Corporation, affiliated to CASTC.

Source: Liam Cochrane, “Thailand’s Military-Installed Legislative Assembly to Impose 20-Year National Strategy on Future Governments,”
ABC Australia, 23 June 2017. http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-06-23/thailand-to-impose-20-year-blueprint-on-future-governments/8647174
The generals have given themselves sweeping powers to push through reforms — ranging from major rail infrastructure projects to
crackdowns on street food vendors and flower sellers.
This national strategy will be legally binding, effectively giving the military oversight of elected governments for the next 20 years.
“It is a pity that the national strategy law sets out principles which give the people little chance to participate, not in line with the spirit of
the constitution,” said former prime minister Abhisit Vejjajiva, according to the Bangkok Post newspaper.

OE Watch | August 2017

55

ASIA-PACIFIC
Indonesia to Boost Island Defenses with the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: After witnessing the Philippines face a more
than one month-long battle with militants from the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) in the city of Marawi, Indonesia has decided to boost
its island defenses. This is motivated by geographical necessity since
Indonesia and the Philippines share the same island waters, in addition
to a reported 40 Indonesians among the ISIS fighters in Marawi. The
accompanying passage from Indonesian-language Kompas discusses a
trilateral meeting between the Ministers of Defense of Indonesia, the
Philippines and Malaysia (which also shares the island waters). The
ministers agreed to conduct joint patrols and establish a Joint Intelligence
Forum, which will meet monthly to exchange information. While the
short-term focus will be on Marawi, the longer-term plan is to coordinate
armed forces and special forces trainings.
The concern from the Indonesian side is that fighters in Marawi can
find their way to the Indonesian islands of Bitung, Morotai, Tarakan,
Marore and Sangihe after they are done fighting the battle in Marawi.
These islands are in Indonesian territory but border on waters of the
Philippines. The Indonesian armed forces have considered deploying
troops to the Philippines but this is awaiting the decision of the Philippine
Congress. In the meantime, they will more closely patrol the maritime
border areas.
The article suggests that any Indonesian troops on Philippine land
would only deploy to the southern Philippine islands. This, according
to the article, would likely facilitate reciprocal agreements allowing the
Philippines to also chase ISIS fighters on Indonesian islands located in
joint waters. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Ini yang Akan Dilakukan TNI Terkait Teror ISIS
di Marawi (This is What TNI [Indonesian National Armed
Forces] Will do Regarding the ISIS Territory in Marawi),”
Kompas.com, 23 June 2017. http://nasional.kompas.com/
read/2017/06/23/17223161/ini.yang.akan.dilakukan.tni.terkait.
teror.isis.di.marawi
The Indonesian government is concerned about the development
of the situation of armed conflict between the Philippine military
and terrorist groups affiliated with the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) in Marawi, Southern Philippines. Indonesia agreed
to cooperate on marine patrols with the Philippines and Malaysia
in a trilateral meeting of the Ministers of Defense in Tarakan,
North Kalimantan. TNI [Indonesian National Armed Forces]
Commander General Gatot Nurmantyo said the operational
procedures of the Indonesian-Filipino-Malaysian Joint Sea
Patrol could create a strong foundation for joint efforts to tackle
terrorism in the border regions of the three countries. In addition,
said Gatot, the armed forces of the three countries also formed the
Joint Intelligence Forum.
In addition, Gatot said that until now the TNI has not planned to
engage in military operations to target the ISIS base in Marawi.
The Indonesian police along with the TNI have dispersed to the
connecting islands from the Marawi region to Bitung, Morotai
and Tarakan, along with the Navy and Air Force Patrols and
the Police. Nevertheless, TNI operations in the territory of the
Philippines are still awaiting the decision of the Philippine
Congress.

“The Indonesian government is concerned about the development of the situation of armed conflict
between the Philippine military and terrorist groups affiliated with the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) in Marawi, Southern Philippines.”

Celebes Sea

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Celebes_See.jpg, Public Domain

OE Watch | August 2017

56

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Armenia’s Security Cooperation Dilemma
OE Watch Commentary: The appearance of the Iskander
We are receiving arms from Russia. We acquire them
ballistic missile system at Armenia’s Independence Day parade in
September 2016 demonstrated the high level of security cooperation at the domestic prices of the Russian Federation. This
between Armenia and Russia, though the partnership has not been
is an important market for us.
without issues. The accompanying excerpted articles report on
how Russian sales of weapons and equipment to Azerbaijan is
Source: “Министр обороны Армении негативно относится к
causing concern for the Armenian government. Both articles
поставкам вооружения в Азербайджан (The Ministry of Defense of
provide insight into how this could impact security cooperation in
Armenia is seriously concerned with arms deliveries to Azerbaijan),”
the Caucasus.
News Armenia, 28 June 2017. https://news.am/rus/news/397518.html
The article from the independent news website News Armenia
…Armenian Defense Minister Vigen Sargsyan is concerned with the
discusses how the Armenian Ministry of Defense views the
supply of arms to Azerbaijan. He spoke about this at a press conference
Russian arms sales to Azerbaijan as a concern, citing Azerbaijan’s
on 28 June in response to a statement from Baku about the deliveries
“unpredictable government.” He adds that Armenians “are
of Russian arms…“I view the delivery of weapons negatively,” said the
receiving arms from Russia” and that they “acquire them at
minister, adding that Azerbaijan is such an unpredictable government
the domestic prices of the Russian Federation.” In the past year
that arms deliveries are fraught with serious danger, whether its Russian,
the Armenian government has looked for additional partners
Israeli or others’ weapons…Concerning Armenia’s cooperation with
to provide security assistance, including Armenian Defense
Russia, the minister noted that Armenian officials are satisfied…“We are
Minister Vigen Sargsyan’s visit to Iran in January. No significant
receiving arms from Russia. We acquire them at the domestic prices of
agreements have been made, but the Armenian government made
the Russian Federation. This is an important market for us…”
it well-known that it is looking for alternatives.

“

”

The article from Rosbalt, a Russian government news agency,
also looks at the Russian delivery of weapons to Azerbaijan and
how this has affected Armenian-Russian relations. The article
includes a report from Azerbaijan’s Ministry of Defense that the
recent “large shipment of modern arms will soon be sent to the
front lines,” referring to Karabakh and the Armenian-Azerbaijan
conflict. The article also notes that the shipment included the
Chrysanthemum-S anti-tank missile. This is in addition to
Azerbaijan “acquiring the Israeli multifunctional anti-tank missile
‘Spike’.” These acquisitions are taking place amid increased
tension between Armenia and Azerbaijan following the April
2016 clashes, which some reports labeled the worst since the 1994
cease-fire agreement.
While the Rosbalt article comes from a Russian perspective,
it captures Armenia’s dilemma in this situation, specifically that
“there should be a search for an ally which would not supply
Azerbaijan with weapons and take Armenia under its protection.”
The article notes that “some political circles in Armenia believe
that the “West will help” and in particular, “the signing of a
partnership agreement with the European Union should be sped
up.” Armenia has worked with NATO through the Partnership for
Peace program and its own Individual Partnership Action Plan,
but the main focus has been the development of a peacekeeping
battalion, rather than joining the organization.
Lastly, while the article states that “No one will fight for
Armenia,” on 28 June, Russian President Vladimir Putin
submitted the Joint Group Forces agreement to the Duma for
ratification (see: “The Reaction to the Russian-Armenian Joint
Force, OE Watch, January-February 2017). The agreement
creates a joint Russian-Armenian force to respond to an attack on
Armenia. Ultimately, Russia remains one of the most important
security cooperation partners for Armenia, even if Azerbaijan
continues to acquire Russian weapons. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

Source: Zhorbenadze, Irina. “«Хризантемы» для Азербайджана
пахнут войной (The “Chrysanthemums” for Azerbaijan smell like war),”
Rosbalt, 3 July 2017. http://www.rosbalt.ru/world/2017/07/03/1627563.
html
Armenia is seething with indignation: a new shipment of Russian arms
was recently delivered to the port of Baku. According to the Azerbaijani
Ministry of Defense, “the shipment is the latest military equipment from
Russia…and the “large shipment of modern arms will soon be sent to
the front lines.” The front line is that of Karabakh and the ArmenianAzerbaijan conflict. The defense ministry reports that the new weapons
will strengthen the combat and maneuver capabilities of advanced units
to defeat armored vehicles, fortified structures, air targets and other
enemy facilities…“How is this possible?” – they are asking in Yerevan,
but everyone here has long known about the $5 billion agreement of
Russian arms sales to Azerbaijan…
…the Azerbaijani media gave an almost complete and illustrated
report on exactly what was added to the country’s military inventory…
Of particular note, there are a dozen of the “Chrysanthemum-S” antitank guided missiles…Armenian experts say that Azerbaijan is counting
on receiving 100 T-90 tanks from Russia and is acquiring the Israeli
multifunctional anti-tank missile “Spike”…There are now few people
in Yerevan who have the right to say that Russia, with its deliveries
of weapons to Azerbaijan, is doing a good job of trying to maintain a
balance of power in the region. One conclusion – there should be a
search for an ally which would not supply Azerbaijan with weapons and
take Armenia under its protection. A question then comes up: who, except
Russia, will sell Armenia something like the “Iskander” and “Smerch”?...
Some political circles in Armenia believe that the “West will help” and
in particular, the signing of a partnership agreement with the European
Union should be sped up. However, the reality of an anticipated
“partnership” is a complete desecration from the point of view of solving
Armenia’s problems of Nagorno-Karabakh with Azerbaijan. No one will
fight for Armenia, even the CSTO, which is supposed to in the event the
country is attacked…
OE Watch | August 2017

57

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Central Asian Peacekeepers in Syria?
OE Watch Commentary: The governments of Central Asia
have been watching the conflict in Syria for a number of years,
particularly since their citizens have joined and fought with
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and other affiliated
groups. However, other than Kazakhstan’s efforts to host peace
talks in Astana, they have not become directly involved. The
accompanying excerpted articles report on the possibility of
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan sending a peacekeeping force to
Syria. Despite some confusion about the potential mission,
the articles shed light on the likelihood of a peacekeeping
deployment taking place.
On 23 June, the Russian government reportedly requested
members of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
to make a contribution for a peacekeeping force in Syria, though
a few reports made the request appear to be a demand. The
article from Kazinform, a Kazakh government news agency,
includes a quote from Alexander Lavrentiev, Russia’s special
envoy to Syria, that “We do not impose the situation on anyone.”
It also notes that “the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan
stated that the country is not negotiating with anyone on the
issue of sending its soldiers to Syria.” The Kazakh government
has generally preferred to put effort toward resolving the conflict
in Syria through hosting negotiations in its capital Astana,
which have taken place several times over the past couple of
years.
The article from the Russian daily newspaper Kommersant
also discusses the possible peacekeeping force and it includes
one of the most important indicators of the likelihood of
Kyrgyz units deploying. It states that “Kyrgyz law allows the
republic to send peacekeeping forces as part of a UN mission
when granted a mandate.” Kyrgyzstan actually sent several
experts on mission to the UN Supervision Mission in Syria
from May-July 2012. Nothing is mentioned about Kazakhstan’s
laws regarding sending peacekeepers, but if the development
of the Kazakhstan Peacekeeping Battalion (KAZBAT) is any
indication, the Kazakh government also sees a UN mandate
as the only viable path to a peacekeeping mission. The
development of KAZBAT, with assistance from NATO, has
been focused on preparing the unit for a UN mission, not with
the CSTO. Ultimately, both Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan could
send peacekeepers to Syria, however small a contribution it
might be, but it is unlikely to happen without UN backing.
End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan stated
that the country is not negotiating with anyone on the
issue of sending its soldiers to Syria.”

UNSMIS deployment map as of July 2012

Source: United Nations Cartographic Section,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:UNSMIS_map_2012.png, Public Domain

Source: Baymanov, Damir. “Возможность направления военных РК в
Сирию прокомментировал спецпредставитель Президента РФ (The
special representative of the President of the Russian Federation commented
on the possibility to deploy the Republic of Kazakhstan’s military to
Syria),” Kazinform, 5 July 2017. http://www.inform.kz/ru/vozmozhnostnapravleniya-voennyh-rk-v-siriyu-prokommentiroval-specpredstavitelprezidenta-rf_a3042982
“…The question now is which country will engage military observers for
a peacekeeping mission to Syria. No one questions the participation of the
Russian contingent. That is why we requested all CIS states to consider,
within reasonable limits, sending a contingent for joint participation in
monitoring the situation. We do not impose the situation on anyone…,”
Alexander Lavrentiev stated at a press briefing of the results of the
international conference on Syria in Astana…the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan stated that the country is not negotiating with anyone on
the issue of sending its soldiers to Syria. “The question of how security
and the effectiveness of the four zones of de-escalation in Syria is ensured
is currently in the hands of the guarantor states of the Astana process…,”
Kazakhstan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement…

Source: Ivan Safronov, Aleksandra Dzhordzhevich, and Mikhail Korostikov. “Наблюдатели порядка (The Observers of Order),”
Kommersant, 23 June 2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3332229
“…The Russian proposal to deploy forces from Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan to Syria to the zones of de-escalation was discussed by Ibrahim
Kalin, Press Secretary of the Turkish President Recep Erdogan…“We expect this issue to be discussed in more detail during the meetings in
Astana in July,” said Kalin…
…Kyrgyz law allows the republic to send peacekeeping forces as part of a UN mission when granted a mandate…(it is) believed that only a
symbolic number of soldiers from Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan can be sent to Syria. In this case, “one observer and a dozen soldiers will be
enough to maintain the designated zones of de-escalation…”
OE Watch | August 2017

58

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Pakistan Continues to Search for Missing Officer
OE Watch Commentary: When Lt Colonel Mohammad
Habib Zahir, a retired Pakistani Army officer, went missing in
Nepal in early April, it was believed that he had been abducted
by agents of India’s foreign intelligence agency, the Research
and Analysis Wing (R&AW), in order to arrange an exchange
for Kulbhushan Jadhav, who had been on trial in Pakistan for
espionage. The accompanying excerpted articles provide an
update on the case and show that Pakistan’s investigation into
the whereabouts of Zahir continues.

Source: “Missing Pak diplomats,” Pakistan Observer, 19 June 2017.
http://pakobserver.net/missing-pak-diplomats/

The article from Pakistan Observer, an English language
daily newspaper, initially reports on two Pakistani diplomats
who went missing in Afghanistan and then brings up the case
of Zahir. The article mentions Zahir’s disappearance after
Jadhav received a death sentence, but it states that Zahir “was
in the team that nabbed Kulbhushan Yadav in March 2016”
and that “Indian agencies had been on Zahir’s trail for long.”
No other sources have mentioned that Zahir had been involved
in Jadhav’s arrest.

… Pakistan has expressed serious concern over disappearance of its two
diplomats based in Jalalabad, Afghanistan… the incident comes in the wake
of death penalty for Indian RAW agent Kulbhushan Yadav and subsequent
disappearance of Muhammad Habib Zahir, retired Lt Col of the Pakistan
Army. Col. Habib disappeared from Lumbini near Nepal’s border with India
and [is] now suspected to be in Indian custody, [he] was in the team that
nabbed Kulbhushan Yadav in March 2016…The Indian Express, quoting
sources in Security Establishment, reported on April 12 that ‘Indian agencies
had been on Zahir’s trail for long’

The article from the Indian news website First Post reports
on statements by Pakistani officials about the case, including
what steps they are taking to find Zahir. The article discusses
that Abdul Qadir Baloch, the Minister for States and Frontier
Regions, gave a report to Pakistan’s Senate that there is “no
evidence that the Indian intelligence is behind the reported
abduction” and that the case “could not be taken to the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) or the UN.” He also stated
that “We are hundred per cent sure that Indian intelligence
agency R&AW is behind the kidnapping but the evidence to
this effect is not final.”
Not long after a Pakistani military court sentenced
Kulbhushan Jadhav to death, India filed a petition to the ICJ in
May on grounds that the trial violated international law. The
ICJ issued a stay of execution for Jadhav in May and the case
will continue later this year. The First Post article also notes
that “Senator Rehman Malik of the Pakistan People’s Party
urged the government to take the issue to the ICJ,” though it is
not stated if he meant taking it to the ICJ as part of the Jadhav
case or separately. While Pakistani officials may not have
enough evidence of Indian involvement in the disappearance,
the articles show that they continue to investigate and search
for Zahir. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Habib disappeared from Lumbini near Nepal’s border
with India and [is] now suspected to be in Indian custody,
[he] was in the team that nabbed Kulbhushan Yadav in
March 2016.”

Source: “Lt-Col Habib Zahir’s disappearance in Kathmandu: No proof India
abducted him, says Pakistan minister,” First Post, 8 June 2017.
http://www.firstpost.com/india/lt-col-habib-zahirs-disappearance-inkathmandu-no-proof-india-abducted-him-says-pakistan-minister-3530883.
html
There is no evidence that the Indian intelligence is behind the reported
abduction of a retired Pakistani colonel in Nepal…the Minister for
States and Frontier Regions Abdul Qadir Baloch informed the Senate on
Wednesday that the purported kidnapping of retired Lt Colonel Mohammad
Habib could not be taken to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) or the
UN on the basis of assumptions… Baloch added: “We are hundred per cent
sure that Indian intelligence agency R&AW is behind the kidnapping but the
evidence to this effect is not final.”
But he said the Habib issue appeared to be linked with the conviction of
alleged Indian spy Kulbushan Jadhav in Pakistan… He said the Foreign
Office was trying to obtain “solid evidence” and Nepal had been asked to get
in touch with three Indian nationals who had received Habib at the airport
when he flew into Kathmandu. He said it was unclear if the three were Indian
government employees or civilians or working for a private firm…Senator
Rehman Malik of the Pakistan Peoples Party urged the government to take
the issue to the ICJ and the UN…

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the state became
independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation with Russia, the United
States and other partners, but there have also been internally driven efforts that could have just as significant an impact.
One of these efforts over the past several years has been the increase in the number of professional contract soldiers in
the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have contract soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end
2016. While the result has yet to be announced, an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up
of contract soldiers will show how this effort has been progressing and the impact this could have on the capabilities of
the country’s Armed Forces and on the Central Asian region.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194884
OE Watch | August 2017

59

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Does ISIS Pose a Threat to India?
by Animesh Roul
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Terrorism Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 13, dated 30 June 2017,
Edited for OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/islamic-state-pose-threat-india/

OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
does not, on the face of it, have a physical presence in India. However,
security services have arrested over 90 ISIS sympathizers, and uncovered
at least six recruitment and indoctrination networks. In addition, at least
two attacks can be attributed to Indian affiliates of the group. Although
there is no official data to show how many Indians have joined ISIS in
Syria, Afghanistan or elsewhere, there are reports of ISIS militants of
Indian origin who have either been killed or injured while fighting abroad.
Should India be more worried about an ISIS threat?
Investigations show ISIS is appealing to Indian youth through social
media channels, messaging platforms and online jihadist discussion
forums. The group encourages those it engages to travel to Iraq and Syria
or places where ISIS affiliates have a presence, such as Afghanistan. The
southern Indian state of Kerala tops the list for the most residents arrested
over ISIS links, with 21 arrests of this nature. The October 2016 arrest
of at least six men, including one from Kerala, who were part of an ISISinspired group called the “Ansar-ul-Khilafah Kerala,” exposed the spread
of grassroots Islamism in Kerala through social media platforms like
Telegram and Facebook. This rise in radicalization in Kerala is blamed
mainly on the growth of online preaching activities and easily accessible
online propaganda materials, as well as material physically distributed by
lay preachers and Islamic centers.
The figures from other states — Telangana (16), Karnataka (9),
Maharashtra (8), Madhya Pradesh (6), Uttarakhand (4), Uttar Pradesh
(3), Tamil Nadu (4) and Rajasthan (2) — speak volumes about the panIndian reach of ISIS’s message and ideals. ISIS also has some propaganda
directly focused on India. A May 2016 video message titled “The Bilad
al-Hind [Land of India] – Between Pain and Hope,” featured what was
supposedly a Syria-based exclusively Indian fighting unit. In the film,
ISIS threatens to wage jihad against India and urges all Muslims to take
revenge against the injustices to Indian Muslims in Kashmir, for the
demolition of Babri Masjid and for the communal riots in Gujarat and
Muzaffarnagar. Most of the militants featured in the video are suspected to
be former Indian militants who fled India in recent years.
The first two accompanying passages point out that in mid-June, the US
State Department designated Mohammad Safi Armar, an Indian militant,
as a “Specially Designated Global Terrorist.” Armar, who goes by the nom
de guerre Yousuf al-Hindi, is noted as the chief recruiter for ISIS in India.
He has faked his own death a number of times in the past, but is believed
to be alive. The second passage claims that he is the first Indian-origin ISIS
militant to be sanctioned by the US.
As the third passage points out, India’s Home Minster Rajnath Singh
recently underscored that, despite a sizeable Muslim population, ISIS has
not been able to gain a foothold in India. That confidence notwithstanding,
ISIS’s violent ideals have clearly managed to entice some Indian youth into
its fold. End OE Watch Commentary (Roul)

Source: US names IS’ top India recruiter a global terrorist,”
The Hindu, 15 June 2017. http://www.thehindu.com/news/
international/is-india-recruiter-named-in-us-terror-list/
article19077720.ece
“The Islamic State group’s top India recruiter and a senior
coordinator of its European attacks network were named
Thursday on the United States’ terrorist sanctions list.”
...
“Armar, a native of Karnataka, is the Islamic State group’s
leader and chief recruiter in India, the department said. It
blamed him for cultivating “dozens” of IS supporters involved in
building the group’s operations in the country.”
Source: Karnataka born ISIS chief recruiter Mohammad Shafi
Armar named ‘global terrorist’ by US,” Financial Express.com
(India), 16 June 2017. http://www.financialexpress.com/indianews/is-chief-recruiter-in-indian-subcontinent-mohammed-shafiarmar-named-global-terrorist-by-us/720969/
“The fugitive chief recruiter for ISIS in the Indian subcontinent
Mohammed Shafi Armar was today named a ‘Specially
Designated Global Terrorist’ by the US, becoming the first
Indian leader of the dreaded terror outfit against whom America
has slammed sanctions.”
Source: Dev Goswami, “ISIS failed in India despite country’s
large Muslim population: Rajnath Singh,” India Today, 3
June 2017. http://indiatoday.intoday.in/story/isis-failed-inindia-despite-countrys-large-muslim-population-rajnathsingh/1/970005.html
“India is the second largest country as far as Muslim
population in the world is concerned. I can say with full
responsibility that despite such a large population (of Muslims),
... ISIS has not been able to set foot,” Rajnath Singh said.

“The fugitive chief recruiter for ISIS in the
Indian subcontinent Mohammed Shafi Armar
was today named a ‘Specially Designated
Global Terrorist’ by the US, becoming the
first Indian leader of the dreaded terror
outfit against whom America has slammed
sanctions.”

OE Watch | August 2017

60

