NEW WEBSITE!

community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

NEW WEBSITE!

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #6
July 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

RUSSIAN ADVANCES IN
MILITARY TECHNOLOGY
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
4
5

Turkish Perspectives on the Qatar Crisis
Israeli Perspectives on the Qatar Crisis
Qatar’s Isolation May Reconfigure Alliances in
Yemen
6 Iran: Why has Qatar Approached Us?
7 Iranian Reformist: Kabul Attack is American Plot
8 Iran: Khamenei Speaks on Voter Participation
9 Russia’s Rosneft Signs Oil Deal with Iraq’s Kurdistan
Region
10 Syria’s Popular Mobilization Forces
11 ISIS Suspected in Assassination of Uzbek Rebel
Commander in Syria
12 Protests Threaten to Upend Tunisia’s Delicate
Balance

AFRICA

13 Africa Already Suffering from Climate Change
14 Boko Haram’s Revived Urban Strategy?
15 Nigeria’s Negotiation over Chibok Schoolgirls
Becomes Propaganda Battle
16 DRC: Increasing Instability in an Already Unstable
Country
17 Somalia: al-Shabaab Attacks Puntland Military Base
18 A Proposed Additional Mandate for AMISOM:
Develop Somalia’s Capacity to Govern
19 Somaliland: If Necessary to Maintain
Independence…War

LATIN AMERICA
20
20
21
23
24

On Russia’s Return to Latin America
Cuba is the Lynchpin
Instructive Boundary Dispute in Colombia
Illegal Mining Note
Illegal Immigration Problems Continue to Plague
Colombia
25 Human Trafficking: A Shared Interest of Mexican
Drug Cartels
26 Increasing Levels of Violence Reported in Tijuana,
Mexico
27 Israel to Finance Refurbishment of Honduran
Military Equipment

ASIA-PACIFIC

28 Japan’s Amphibious Ambitions
29 China Establishes First Combat-Level, Big Data
Center for Disaster Recovery
29 Is China’s Endeavor for Technological Innovation
Paying Off?
31 Chinese Game of “Go” Offers Parallels to Strategic
Thought
33 Tensions in North Korea: The View from China’s
Northern Theater Command
34 ISIS Bombings in Jakarta: An Indonesian View

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

35 Examining “Dushanbe Anti-Terror 2017”
36 Trilateral Security in the Caucasus
37 Armenia and India Build Strategic Relationship

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

38 New Over-the-Horizon Radars Increase Russian
Capabilities
40 New Radio and Optical Telescopes Improve Russian
Space Monitoring and Missile Warning Capabilities
41 Russia Adds Second Satellite to Missile Warning
Constellation
42 The Six Robots of Russia
43 The Barguzin Rail Mobile ICBM: Pros and Cons
44 Smart Antipersonnel Mines
45 Greater Kremlin Control over the Internet?
46 Russian Perspectives of Soft Power
47 30th Anniversary of Mathias Rust’s Flight to Moscow
48 Army Subordinate to National Guard?
49 National Guard: Defense Against Color Revolution
50 Kaliningrad-A Russian Perspective
51 Ground Forces Northern Fleet Winter Training
52 Build-up of Russian Western Arctic Capabilities
Continues
53 Kola Flotilla Winter Training

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:Uran-9 combat unmanned ground vehicle
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2016-Static-part4/iFDCvGPp/A , CC BY 4.0 [http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy]

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 6

July | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter
Jacob Zenn

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Asia-Pacific

David Hunter-Chester
Cindy Hurst
Tim Thomas
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Eduard Abrahamyan
Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Tim Thomas

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Perspectives on the Qatar Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: The news that Saudi Arabia
and key Gulf states cut off diplomatic relations with
Qatar shook Turkey, a close regional ally of Qatar. The
accompanying passages by Turkish analysts discuss the
dilemmas that the situation presents for Turkey and the
risks associated with taking a clear stance alongside Qatar.
As the first passage notes, Turkey’s first dilemma is that it
has very good political and economic ties with Qatar, while
also trying to develop strategic ties with Saudi Arabia and
other Gulf countries. The passage claims that this crisis will
likely bring Turkey to a “fork in the road.” Qatar invests
heavily in Turkey, and Turkish companies do business in
Qatar in fields ranging from construction to defense to
finance. The two countries share similar views on regional
issues including Syria, Egypt and the Muslim Brotherhood.
They also have an important military relationship, with
Turkey building a military base in Qatar.
Turkey’s second dilemma is that, as a close regional ally
of Qatar, the crisis may create the appearance of a TurkeyQatar-Iran triangle. As the passage notes, Turkey already
has “somewhat of an alliance relationship” with Iran given
that the two countries, along with Russia, are the guarantor
states of the Astana process for Syria. The appearance of an
Iran-Qatar-Turkey triangle may “place Turkey in the same
category as those who support terror,” as a foreign policy
analyst for the mass daily Hürriyet warns in the fourth
passage. This triangle is also ironic, given that one of the
original goals of building a base in Qatar was to counter
Iranian interests in the region.
Against this complex background, as the second passage
notes, initial reactions from the Turkish government
included voicing “sadness” and calls for “dialogue.”
President Erdoğan engaged in telephone diplomacy with
Russian President Putin, Saudi King Salman and the
Emirs of Qatar and Kuwait, saying that Ankara would do
everything to help end the crisis.
Despite the initial calls for dialogue, the Turkish
government then appeared to take a side. The third passage
discusses the government’s decision to pass two bills
approving deployment of Turkish soldiers in Qatar and
training of the Qatari gendarmerie. The passage points out
some of the opposition voices to this decision, with some
asking what Turkish soldiers would do in the event of an
effort to topple the Qatari Emir. One member asks, “Who
will our force confront? If [Qatar wants] to use those troops
to preserve the Qatari ruling family, shall we be supporting
that objective? Will we be involved in the internal security
operations of Qatar? Please don’t subject Turkey to this
nasty nonsense.” Similarly, the author of the second passage
calls for caution, claiming that Turkey has been “once
bitten” in Syria and must act “twice shy” on this issue,
urging for diplomacy and utter care in its stance. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: “Katar nerede? Katar krizi nedir? Katar krizi Türkiye’yi etkiler mi?
(Where is Qatar? What is the Qatar crisis? Would the Qatar crisis impact
Turkey?),” Sozcu.com.tr, 7 June 2017. http://www.sozcu.com.tr/2017/gundem/
katar-nerede-katar-krizi-nedir-katar-krizi-turkiyeyi-etkiler-mi-1884829/
The AKP [Justice and Development Party] administration of 15 years, who
has always had a good relationship with Saudi Arabia, had selected Qatar as
its “closest ally” in the region. In fact, in his statement following the QatarSaudi crisis, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan gave the impression that he was
leaning towards standing with the Qatari government.
Furthermore, like Qatar, Turkey also does not have “enemy relations”
with Iran. In fact, on the issue of Syria, there is somewhat of an “alliance
relationship” between Ankara and Tehran, via Russia. Turkey, Russia and
Iran are the three guarantor states of the “Astana process” which was created
for the solution of the Syrian crisis.... In the aftermath of the Qatar crisis, it is
almost certain that the AKP government will come to a “ fork in the road” on
this issue.
Source: Murat Yetkin, “Katar krizi: Dokunan yanabilir (The Qatar crisis: Those
who touch it may get burned),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 6 June 2017. http://www.
hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/murat-yetkin/katar-krizi-dokunan-yanabilir-40481039
Turkey’s first reaction [was] Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu’s words of
“sadness” and “dialogue” [which] is due to [the following] reason: Ankara
does not want bad relations with Saudi Arabia, or with Qatar, who has an
important role in investments coming into Turkey right now.... it is a positive
step that President Erdoğan has, as the term leader of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, initiated bilateral phone diplomacy with the region’s
leaders.
... It would be useful for us to proceed as “twice shy” after we have been
“once bitten” in Syria.
Source: Fehim Taştekin, “After rushing to Qatar’s aid, Turkey may have to
rethink its Mideast ties,” Al Monitor.com, 8 June 2017.
http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/06/turkey-qatar-why-ankarasending-soldiers-to-doha.html#ixzz4jYAOyAWn
Turkey, which had earlier decided to build a base in Qatar, fast-tracked
through the parliament ...two accords approving deployment of Turkish
soldiers ... and to train the Qatari gendarmerie...
Opposition parties in Turkey’s parliament called for Turkey to remain neutral
in the Arab world... Öztürk Yılmaz, deputy chairman of the main opposition
group, the Republican People’s Party, said: “We know that some countries
want to topple the Emir and replace him with a new ruler. Who will our force
confront? If [Qatar wants] to use those troops to preserve the Qatari ruling
family, shall we be supporting that objective? Will we be involved in the
internal security operations of Qatar? Please don’t subject Turkey to this nasty
nonsense.”
Source: Verda Özer, “Arap krizi bize de sıçrar mı? (Would the Arab crisis jump
to us?),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 6 June 2017. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/
verda-ozer/arap-krizi-bize-de-sicrar-mi-40481029
If we position ourselves next to Qatar ... we may be placed in the same
category as those who “support terror,” both in the eyes of the Gulf and the
West.
OE Watch | July 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Israeli Perspectives on the Qatar Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
passages from Israeli sources discuss the pros and cons
of the Qatar crisis from Israel’s perspective. While
there are several pros, including potentially reduced
support for Hamas in the region, for Israel, this also
means a risk of Hamas “lashing out at Israel to show
its relevance,” as one author points out. On the other
hand, there is hope for increased stability in the region
and less of a focus on Israel as “the center of the
region’s problems.”
As the first passage from Haaretz points out, the
crisis between Saudi Arabia and Qatar may have
ramifications in the Gaza Strip. It notes that Qatar
has been one of the last backers of the Hamas regime
in the Gaza Strip, and that the crisis may force Qatar
to reduce its support for Hamas. It claims that this
“increases the risk of fighting in the summer due to the
water and electricity shortage in the Gaza Strip.” The
piece also points out that the organization has been
encouraging demonstrations, some of them violent, by
residents near the security fence. The piece notes that
“the worsening of the distress in Gaza is of concern to
Israel’s top security echelons, and in recent weeks has
led to widespread preoccupation with the possibility of
another round of fighting this summer...”
The Jerusalem Post also notes this risk, but also
makes optimistic assessments for Israel. It points
out, for example, that Hamas may find itself isolated,
allowing Israel the “leverage to encourage the group
to change its ways.” Second, it notes that Israel has
shared interests with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf
states in opposing Iran. It points out that the crisis
encourages those states that oppose Qatar to see Israel
as a partner against Hamas and Iran. In addition, it
claims that Israel will likely see more stability in its
region if Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other states
work in concert. Third, it highlights that “if the Arab
states are more concerned with Iran and Qatar than
they are with the Palestinians, that takes pressure off
of Israel.” In other words, the crisis reminds the region
that Israel is not “the center of the region’s problems”
given that nowadays, “the Palestinian issue is dwarfed
by larger conflicts in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Libya – and
now – in the Gulf.”
The final passage by an Italian-Israeli expert on
Middle East conflicts points out that the move against
Qatar may mean a stop to the stream of money
flowing to Hamas (along with Hezbollah, the Muslim
Brotherhood and others). The author also discusses
that “the forces that could create stability, namely
Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, the Gulf countries, and
Israel with them for the first time are much stronger,
while Iran loses on all fronts and ISIS is in trouble.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Reducing support for Hamas increases the risk of
fighting in the summer... in the Gaza Strip.”
Source: Amos Harel, “‫הניפל סאמח תא קחוד ראטק רבשמ‬, ‫תורשפאמ םיגאדומ לארשיבו‬
‫( ץיקב ףסונ תומיע לש‬The Qatari crisis is pushing Hamas into a corner, and Israel
is concerned about the possibility of another confrontation this summer),”
Haaretz.com, 6 June 2017. https://www.haaretz.co.il/news/world/middle-east/.
premium-1.4156462
“The severe crisis between Saudi Arabia and Qatar may have ramifications in
another arena, closer to Israel - the Gaza Strip... In recent years Qatar has been
one of the last backers of the Hamas regime in the Gaza Strip.
... Reducing support for Hamas increases the risk of fighting in the summer due
to the water and electricity shortage in the Gaza Strip. In the past two weeks,
the organization has been encouraging demonstrations, some of them violent, by
residents near the security fence...
The worsening of the distress in Gaza is of concern to Israel’s top security
echelons, and in recent weeks has led to widespread preoccupation with the
possibility of another round of fighting this summer...”
Source: Seth J. Frantzman, “Five Reasons Why Israel Should Care about the Qatar
Crisis,” The Jerusalem Post, 5 June 2017. http://www.jpost.com/Middle-East/Fivereasons-why-Israel-should-care-about-the-Qatar-crisis-494891
The new pressure on Qatar has encouraged it to expel Hamas members and
will reduce its support for the group... [S]pending money on the Gaza Strip and
hosting Hamas may seem like a liability they don’t need now. Hamas will find itself
with even fewer allies, which could give Israel leverage to encourage the group
to change its ways. More likely, Hamas may lash out against Israel to show its
relevance...
Israel has shared interests with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states in opposing Iran.
Because Qatar has supported Hamas, the new crisis encourages those states that
oppose Qatar to see Israel as a partner against Hamas and Iran. This relationship
has already been quietly growing in recent years, but the crisis with Qatar allows
writers in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf to speak out more strongly against Hamas...
So long as Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other states work in concert, the
winds of stability will blow in Israel’s direction as well...
“Israel benefits when it is not the center of attention and certainly when it is not
under pressure. ... If the Arab states are more concerned with Iran and Qatar than
they are with the Palestinians, that takes pressure off of Israel .... Over the years,
Israel has gone from being seen as the center of the region’s problems to today,
when the Palestinian issue is dwarfed by larger conflicts in Syria, Iraq, Yemen,
Libya – and now – in the Gulf.”
Source: Fiamma Nirenstein, “Riyadh, Doha and Tehran: how the usual pattern
changes,” Il Giornale, 8 June 2017. http://www.fiammanirenstein.com/articoli.
asp?Categoria=5&Id=4053
“...with the move against Qatar earlier this week, in addition to the Muslim
Brotherhood, Iran, all Shiite militias, Hezbollah and also Hamas are getting hit
hard, the stream of money could have a tough stop...”
“Now the forces that could create stability, namely Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan,
the Gulf countries, and Israel with them for the first time, are much stronger, while
Iran loses on all fronts and ISIS is in trouble.”
OE Watch | July 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Qatar’s Isolation May Reconfigure Alliances in Yemen
OE Watch Commentary: On the surface, Qatar’s
expulsion from the Saudi-led Arab Coalition fighting
in Yemen will not have a major impact on the course of
the war, given the largely symbolic and political nature
of Qatar’s participation. The withdrawal of Qatar’s
approximately 1,000 soldiers from the Saudi border
province of Najran was orderly and their positions
were quickly filled by Saudi forces. Many supporters
of the Saudi-led campaign in fact believe that Qatar’s
formal withdrawal from the Yemeni battlefield will
benefit the Arab Coalition’s efforts, as the author of the
first accompanying passage insinuates.
Beneath the surface, though, Qatar’s expulsion
from the Arab Coalition may dramatically change the
Yemeni battlefield. Throughout the conflict, influential
Qatari-funded media outlets have been supportive of
the Saudi position. We can now expect a more critical
tone, which could further weaken support for the
unpopular Saudi-led intervention. The second article,
taken from al-Jazeera’s English-language website,
describes the Yemen War as a “quagmire” which
“has thrust many Yemeni families into poverty and
despair.” Breaking with the protocol it has followed
throughout the conflict, it does not assign blame for
Yemen’s ills to Saudi Arabia’s opponents.
The Saudi-led coalition is fragile. Relations between
Yemeni allies of Saudi Arabia and the UAE have
soured recently (for more see: “Saudi-UAE Friction in
Yemen,”
, May 2017). Qatari-funded media
could further sharpen these divisions, if it so wished.
Yemen’s Islah Party is a key component of the Saudi
alliance but it is also part of the Muslim Brotherhood
and close to Qatar. Although the party officially
supports the Saudi-UAE measures against Qatar, there
have been “disagreements and defections” within the
party as a result, according to the third accompanying
article.
Meanwhile, the coalition fighting against Saudi-led
forces appears split with regard to the feud between
Qatar and Saudi Arabia-UAE. As the final passage
notes, Yemen’s ex-president Ali Abdullah Saleh’s party
issued a strong statement of support for the measures
to isolate Qatar, while his Huthi allies condemned
the actions. The possibility of a full reconfiguration
of alliances between the major players in Yemen is
hardly out of the question, and the longer Saudi-Qatari
tensions continue, the more likely it becomes. End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…In the Yemeni camp opposed to the legitimate
government there has been an interesting split…”
Source:
‫هل يتأثر العمل العسكري في اليمن باستبعاد قطر من التحالف العربي؟‬
“Will Qatar’s sidelining from the Arab coalition affect military efforts in Yemen?”
Erem News, 6 June 2017. http://www.eremnews.com/news/arab-world/gcc/864095
Many Yemenis are unhesitant in welcoming their country’s severing of diplomatic
ties with Qatar … the effects could be tangible if it is proven that Qatar played the
role of double agent and is proven to have communicated with the coup militias
[Huthis]. All of this will help uncover the cases of erroneous airstrikes that hit
friendly targets in the south and popular markets in the north, and which put the
Arab Coalition in an uncomfortable position.
Source: “Ramadan in Yemen: Fasting by day, starving by night,” al-Jazeera, 4 June
2017. http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2017/06/ramadan-yemen-fastingday-starving-night-170603112143166.html
Throughout the Muslim world, Ramadan is meant to be a joyful and spiritual
occasion. But in war-torn Yemen, there is little room for joy these days… The war,
which has continued for more than two years, has thrust many Yemeni families into
poverty and despair… Although Ramadan will last just one month, it is unclear how
much longer Yemen’s quagmire will drag on.
Source:
‫خالف وإنشقاقات بني إخوان اليمن حول قطر‬
“Disagreements and defections among Yemen’s Muslim Brothers over Qatar,” Aden
al-Ghad, 8 June 2017. http://adengd.net/news/262798/
Even though the Islah Party, which is the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood
in Yemen, issued a statement two days ago supporting the suspension of diplomatic
relations with Qatar, leaders and activists in the party are critical of the decision
and appear to sympathize and fully support Doha. A source in the party spoke of
“defections and disagreements in the party following the suspension of relations
with Doha by some countries.” These disagreements came to light with Muslim
Brotherhood leader Shawki al-Qadhi’s criticisms of the Gulf countries on his
Facebook page…
Source: ‫قطع اليمن العالقات مع قطر مجرد تحصيل للحاصل‬
“The tautology of Yemen’s cutting of relations with Qatar,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 7
June 2017. https://goo.gl/8AB12e
In the Yemeni camp opposed to the legitimate government there has been an
interesting split, with deposed president Ali Abdullah Saleh’s party issuing a
strongly worded statement welcoming the measures taken against Qatar and
identifying with Saudi Arabia and the UAE. The Huthis, on the other hand, had not
taken an official position until the head of the so-called Supreme Revolutionary
Committee Mohammed Ali al-Huthi said in a rare statement: “We condemn the
targeting of Qatar and are ready to collaborate with Qatar, given that we know
them to be honest and trustworthy after they mediated (during the Saada Wars
between 2004-2010).”

OE Watch | July 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Why has Qatar Approached Us?
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 June 2017, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates,
Saudi Arabia, and Egypt severed diplomatic relations with Qatar citing the Persian
Gulf state’s support for both the Muslim Brotherhood and Iran. While Qatar’s
outreach to Iran caused consternation in many Arab capitals, it also created some
confusion in Iran. In this excerpted editorial from the Iranian newspaper Khorasan,
editorialist Hamid Rahimpour, a political hardliner, explores the reasons why Qatar
sought reconciliation with Iran.
Rahimpour suggests that fear of Saudi Arabia drove recent Qatari policy and
emphasizes the importance of the Qatari-Saudi border dispute. While this conflict is
real, it is not sufficient to explain recent rapprochement between Doha and Tehran.
The Saudi-Qatari dispute is decades-old and there is no reason why it should suddenly
now become an overriding concern. In addition, Saudi Arabia has border disputes
with the United Arab Emirates and Oman, but neither Abu Dhabi nor Muscat turned
toward Tehran out of fear of or pique toward Saudi Arabia.
Qatar’s relationship with Iran is part of a broader Qatari strategy. Qatar has long
sought to maintain diplomatic neutrality: It hosts offices for Hamas, a US-designated
terrorist group, while also maintaining quiet, informal relations with Israel. It hosts
the Al-Udeid Air Base, used by US Central Command as its regional headquarters,
even while hosting an office for the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, as the Taliban
call their would-be entity. Even before its current outreach, Qatar had cooperative
working relations with Iran, with which it shares a submarine gas field in the Persian
Gulf—called the North Dome field by Qatar and the South Pars field by Iran.
While the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) is upset by alleged recent Qatari
official meetings with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the broader concern
might be a huge ransom—reputed to be $1 billion—which the Qatari government
allegedly paid to Iran to win the release of a Qatari hunting party taken hostage of a
Shi’ite criminal gang in southern Iraq where pro-Iranian militias hold sway. After all,
most GCC leaders are more upset with the Sultanate of Oman’s outreach to and warm
relationship with Iran.

Source: “Chera Qatar beh Iran Nazdik Shodeh Ast?
(Why Has Qatar Approached Iran?),” Khorasan, 28
May 2017. http://khorasannews.com/newspaper/
page/19546/2/576465/0
“…What happened behind the scene that compelled
the Emir of Qatar to adopt such a stance? The truth
is that the Qataris are afraid -- not of Iran, but of
their neighbor that has an arsenal worth hundreds
of billions of dollars and has again attempted to
purchase more weapons, especially since Qatar
has a long-standing territorial dispute with Riyadh.
The Saudis’ $110-billion arms purchase should be a
source of major concern for the small Persian Gulf
littoral countries… The war in Syria also revealed
the serious rivalry between Qatar and Saudi Arabia,
and both countries tried to overtake each other on
this issue…
Qatar is now trying to form new alliances in the
region and to redefine its role. Its good relations
with Turkey, as well as its relations with Russia,
and its efforts to approach Iran much more could
be assessed from this angle. This is why the Emir
of Qatar was among those Arab countries that
congratulated Hassan Rouhani on his victory for
second term and called for the expansion of relations
with Iran. The Emir of Qatar also had a telephone
contact with our president and described relations
with the Islamic Republic of Iran as long-lasting,
historical, and strong. All these actions indicate that
Qatar is not satisfied with the expansion of the role
of Saudi Arabia, which is seeking to isolate the other
Arab countries, and it intends to come closer to other
regional countries and adopt an independent policy.”

Whatever annoyance GCC officials might have with Qatar’s Iran outreach, that
Iranian authorities would see that as greater than the long-standing animosity in Arab
capitals caused by Qatar’s support for the Muslim Brotherhood, however, suggests
some delusion in Iranian circles as they project their own animosity toward Saudi Arabia
onto other states. This may then reflect how the Islamic Republic’s growing antipathy
-toward Saudi Arabia has become the lens through which Iranian analysts filter other
events in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The truth is that the Qataris are afraid
not of Iran, but of their neighbor [Saudi
Arabia]…”
Image: “Ukraine vs. Pro-Russian”
Image Source: Andrew Butko, https://www.flickr.com/
photos/121483302@N02/14690671827, Licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported | Wikimedia Commons

UKRAINE’S HIDDEN BATTLEFIELD
by Robert Kurz
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195079

This paper was previously published as a book chapter:
Kurz, Robert. “Ukraine’s Hidden Battlefield.” In Cultural Perspectives, Geopolitics & Energy Security of Eurasia: Is the Next Global Conflict Imminent?
edited by Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov, Mr. Gustav Otto, and Colonel Lee G. Gentile, Jr., 93-99. Fort Leavenworth: Army University Press, 2017.

OE Watch | July 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Reformist: Kabul Attack is American Plot
OE Watch Commentary: Conspiracies run deep
in Iranian society and both reflect and fuel the Iranian
government’s current xenophobia. The excerpted news
report from the Iranian state news agency is a case in
point. Muhammad Reza Tabesh, now in his 17th year
in Iran’s parliament, claims that the bombings in Kabul
that took place on 31 May, and which killed at least 150,
were meant to “pave the way and [justify] America’s
and its allies’ greater military presence and intervention
in the region,” along with several other conspiratorial
statements. This is important for several reasons.
First, because of who he is: Tabesh comes not from
a principalist or ‘hardliner’ background where such
conspiracies find fertile ground but rather from the
reformist camp with which many Western diplomats seek
to engage. Indeed, he is also the nephew of Mohammad
Khatami, president between 1997 and 2005, and perhaps
the Islamic Republic’s most prominent reformist.
Second, Tabesh’s comments might reflect a growing
desire on the part of Iranian officials to influence
Afghanistan. In the December 2001 Bonn Conference,
Iranian diplomats worked with American counterparts to
help set up and support Afghanistan’s central government
in Kabul. But, even while Tehran has long paid lip service
to Afghanistan’s sovereignty and unity, Iranian leaders
have long sought to be the predominant influence in
western Afghanistan, where Persian culture predominates
and which has a long history until 1858 as a part of Iran
proper. Tabesh’s attempts to blame the United States for
terrorism in Kabul may signal a growing Iranian effort to
augment Tehran’s influence in Kabul at the expense of the
United States.
Regardless, Tabesh’s anti-American analysis illustrates
that suspicion against the United States exists across the
entire political spectrum inside the Islamic Republic and
is not simply limited to a hardline minority. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Such incidents are not random and
[are] indicative of ... clever plotting in
place to change the rules of the game
in the east of Asia and pave the way
and justification for America’s and its
allies’ greater military presence and
intervention in the region.”

Mohammad Reza Tabesh.

Source: By Saeed Faramarzi, http://dl.nasimonline.ir/FileRepository/1393/08/23/IMG09493760.
jpg, [CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

Source: “Tabesh: Hadiseh Kabul Tawte’ahaye baraye Tawjiyeh Hozur-e Amrika
dar Montaqeh Ast (Tabesh: The Event [bombing] in Kabul is a Conspiracy to
Justify the Presence of America in the Region),” Islamic Republic News Agency,
3 June 2017. http://www.irna.ir/fa/News/82553155/
According to a Sunday report from the Islamic Republic News Agency,
Muhammad Reza Tabesh said the explosions in Kabul were brutal and terrorist
actions. Iran itself has been a victim of terrorism in its various forms. With
sympathy for the families expressed, he strongly condemned this criminal
incident. He added, “Such incidents are not random and indicative of having
clever plotting in place to change the rules of the game in the east of Asia and
pave the way and justification for America’s and its allies’ greater military
presence and intervention in the region.”
The Member of Parliament from Yazd also said, “The American president who
in a surprising move pulled out his country of the Paris [Climate Change] Pact
and endangered the environment and human existence will not certainly refrain
from these actions in order to save his country’s bankrupt economy, sell more
weapons and plunder rich resources of the regional countries.”
Tabesh at the end of his remarks stressed that he hoped that Muslim countries
would display unity and brotherhood, and that regional governments would
with foresight and with attention to the demands of the people, would rid
themselves of these plots.
OE Watch | July 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Khamenei Speaks on Voter Participation
OE Watch Commentary: Iranian authorities have long cited
high voter participation in Iranian elections as proof of both the
legitimacy of those elections and of the popular acceptance of
the Islamic Republic. The accompanying excerpt from Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei’s speech on the 28th anniversary of the
death of revolutionary leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini
underscores this point. That Iranian authorities feel they must
repeatedly defend the legitimacy of both the Islamic Republic’s
elections and system of clerical rule, however, perhaps reflects
regime vulnerability on the issue, a case in which ‘the lady doth
protest too much.’

Source: “Enghalab-e Gari Ya’ni Masulyan Taslim Zurguye va Dochar
Anfial Nashavand” (“The Revolutionary Officials Do Not Succumb to
Bullying”) Leader.ir, 4 June 2017. https://goo.gl/f6VMAo
“This was truly great. This was a credit for the country. This was a credit
for the Islamic Republic’s system. This indicated the general public’s trust
in the Islamic Republic’s system. Of course, unfortunately - I do not know
if due to misunderstanding or else - some deny this and say people’s vote
has nothing to do with the Islamic Republic’s system. Yes, it does. This
vote, even by those who may have objections against the Islamic system,
means they have accepted the framework of the system since they cast
votes within this framework and trust it and consider it efficient.”

Khamenei’s focus on voter turnout 16 days after Iranians went
to the polls to vote for president—re-electing Hassan Rouhani
to a second term—may reflect concern that popular participation in Iranian elections is not as high as Iranian statistics suggest. While voting
lines were long in Tehran and the government extended poll hours three times on the evening of 19 May 2017, some Iranian Kurdish civil
society groups boycotted the elections. In order to encourage greater participation in peripheral areas inhabited by sectarian and ethnic
minorities less enamored with clerical and Persian rule, Iranian authorities reportedly scheduled local council elections for the same day
as the presidential election. In addition, in outlying provinces proof of voting in the election is a prerequisite for civil servant jobs, such
as public school teacher or civil engineer, or to qualify for government loans. Anecdotally, however, relatives of Iranians in rural districts
and smaller provincial towns say it is common for residents to spoil ballots for national offices after filling in ballots of local offices after
receiving stamps on their birth certificates to show proof of presence at the polling station. Notably, Iranian authorities do not release figures
on spoiled or empty ballots nor do they allow foreign reporters to observe elections in outlying provinces.
If voter participation in Tehran is around 70 percent but only around 20 percent of eligible voters in outlying provinces like Kordestan
and Sistan va Baluchistan cast ballots, then it suggests by Khamenei’s own logic that the Islamic Republic has a legitimacy problem. While
Khameni insists that “This vote… means they have accepted the framework of the system,” it appears the opposite could just as easily be
true outside major cities like Tehran, Mashhad, and Isfahan. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“This vote… means they have accepted
the framework of the system.”

Iranian officials gather inside the Ayatollah Khomeini’s mausoleum on the 28th anniversary of his funeral to hear his successor,
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei speak.
Source: Leader.ir, http://leader.ir/media/album/news/54044_895.jpg, public domain

OE Watch | July 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s Rosneft Signs Oil Deal with Iraq’s Kurdistan Region
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 June, Russia’s state-owned
oil company Rosneft signed a two-year contract with Iraq’s
Kurdistan Region for the export of crude oil. The accompanying
passages from Iraqi Kurdish sources discuss this development.
The first passage from Rudaw, a Kurdish-media network
discusses the details of the oil deal with Russia. The passage
notes that the sides will “expand cooperation...in exploration
and production of hydrocarbons, commerce and logistics.”
Referencing a statement issued by Rosneft, the passage notes
that Rosneft will gain access to the major regional transportation
system with the throughput capacity of 700 thousand barrels per
day, which is planned to be expanded up to 1 million barrels per
day by the end of 2017.
Some Kurdish sources see more in this deal. As the second
passage claims, the deal with Russia “provides Kurdistan with
new leverage while also providing indirect endorsement to a
future Kurdish state.” It points out that Russian support is “vital
for Kurdish aspirations...both now and in the future.” It also
suggests that Russian support provides a “powerful alternative”
to the regional players such as Iraq and Turkey, and also
“diversifies the Kurdish reliance on the US.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“The major deal with Rosneft, under
the auspices of Putin, provides indirect
endorsement to a future Kurdish state.”

Source: “Rosneft and Kurdish ministry sign long-term contract on
oil and gas,” Rudaw.net, 2 June 2017. http://www.rudaw.net/english/
kurdistan/020620173
“Russian oil giant Rosneft and the Kurdish government have signed
a series of documents that aim to expand cooperation between the two
sides “in exploration and production of hydrocarbons, commerce and
logistics.”
...Rosneft will gain access to the major regional transportation system
with the throughput capacity of 700 thousand barrels per day, ... “which is
planned to be expanded up to 1 mln bbl per day by the end of 2017.”
[A statement issued by Rosneft said:] “The new agreements will allow
to talk about full entry of the Company in one of the most promising
regions of the developing global energy market with the expected
recoverable reserves in the order of 45 billion bbl of oil and 5.66 trillion
m3 of gas (according to the estimate of the Ministry of Natural Resources
of Kurdistan Region). The agreements provide for further phased
investments of Rosneft in Kurdistan Region.”
Source: Bashdar Ismaeel, “With eyes on statehood, Kurdistan bolsters ties
with Russia,” Kurdistan24.net, 6 June 2017. http://www.kurdistan24.net/
en/economy/48405f2e-6604-46c8-ab2d-668ef48c1540
“As a dominant global power and a major influence in the region,
Russian support is vital for Kurdish aspirations and ensuring its
prosperity both now and in the future.
Russian backing also provides the Kurds a powerful alternative gateway
to the regional players such as Baghdad and Ankara but also diversifies
the Kurdish reliance on the US...
Facing a difficult economic crisis over the past three years, the KRG
deal with Russian giant Rosneft, reportedly the largest signed at the
International Economic Forum in St. Petersburg (SPIEF), provides
Kurdistan with new leverage and breathes life and renewed credibility
into the Kurdish oil sector that was stagnating...
The major deal with Rosneft, under the auspices of Putin, provides
indirect endorsement to a future Kurdish state.”

Greater Zab River near Erbil, Iraq’s Kurdistan Region.

Source: By jamesdale10 [CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AGreater_Zab_River_near_Erbil_Iraqi_Kurdistan.jpg, CC BY 2..

OE Watch | July 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syria’s Popular Mobilization Forces
OE Watch Commentary: According to local media
reports, the first Syrian Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF)
were recently established in the Kurdish-majority Hasakah
Province, located in Syria’s northeast corner near the borders
with Turkey and Iraq. The Syrian PMF are named after
the successful Iraqi militias, many of which are directly
supported by Iran. According to the first accompanying
passage, from the Qatari daily al-Araby al-Jadid, Iran aims
to expand the PMF model to “provide cover for the Iranian
Revolutionary Guards and the sectarian militias operating
in Syria” and transform its proxy militias “into a legitimate
force in Syria, similar to the 5th Corps that was formed by
Russia nearly a year ago.” As the passage describes, the new
Syrian formation will be headed by a regime insider who
heads a subgroup of the Arab Tayy (Tai) tribe in villages
near the town of Qamishli, from where most if not all its
fighters are to be drawn.
Until recently, most Syrian loyalist militias were part
of the Syrian National Defense Forces (NDF). However,
since at least 2015 the Syrian government has sought to
rein in the NDF and incorporate its components into the
army chain of command. Given the success of the PMF
brand in Iraq, it seems natural to test the model in Syria.
This is especially true in areas near the border with Iraq,
where Syrian and Iraqi PMF may operate in tandem.
Most of Hasakah Province is under the control of
Syrian Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG) forces.
As the second passage notes, the YPG has explicitly
stated its opposition to Iraqi PMF crossing the border.
The establishment of a Syrian PMF may be a clever
workaround. The PYD has not commented on the new
Syrian PMF, and according to the third passage, from
a Hasakah Province news website named al-Khabour,
armed PMF forces have been allowed to pass unhindered
through Kurdish checkpoints.
The PYD is the main component of the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF). Many of the Arab tribes whose
territories are controlled by ISIS distrust the Kurds. To
mitigate the ethnic sensitivities that come with taking
this territory, the SDF has sought to increase the number
and prominence of Arab fighters in its ranks. If the Syrian
PMF is able to successfully recruit in Hasakah, it will end
up drawing from the same pool that the SDF depends on
to successfully take over ISIS-controlled territory. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Iraq and Syria with Hasakah and Nineveh provinces highlighted.

Source: Own work (Lucas Winter), based on Syria-Iraq location map with highways & roads added only in Iraq for use
on the Syria-Iraq war maps templates & modules by Deuar, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/db/
Syria-Iraq_location_map1a.png, [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0 (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0)]

Source:
‫النّظام السوري يستنسخ مليشيا الحشد الشعبي في الحسكة‬
Jalal Bakur. “Syrian regime clones Popular Mobilization Forces in Hassakah
Province,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 7 June 2017. https://goo.gl/fXjj1e
The new militia’s core will consist of Arab tribesmen, particularly from the
Tayy tribe, as well as Kurds, Assyrians and others who wish to join… The new
militia will be led by Ali Hawas al-Khalif, a leader of the al-Rashid clan, which
is part of the Tayy tribe. He is a government loyalist who previously worked in
the Ministry of Higher Education and lived in Damascus… The new militia is
to be a support force for the Syrian Army after a short training period and will
focus on fighting “terrorist organizations.” Three names were proposed for the
militia: Jazira Shield, Arab Tribal Sons Forces, or Syrian Popular Mobilization
Forces. The latter was chosen after the Iraqi forces of the same name. According
to statements by Yasser al-Farhan, a member of the Syrian opposition coalition’s
political council, Iran wants to guarantee its influence in Syria, and the
formation of the Syrian Popular Mobilization Forces is to provide cover for the
Iranian Revolutionary Guards and the sectarian militias operating in Syria.
Al-Farhan claims that Iran wishes to transform its sectarian militias into a
legitimate force in Syria, similar to the 5th Corps that was formed by Russia
nearly a year ago.
Source:
‫الوحدات الكردية تحذر الحشد الشعبي من دخول سوريا‬
“Kurdish units warn Popular Mobilization Forces against entering Syria,”
al-Jazeera, 1 June 2017. https://goo.gl/m7lpj5
Kurdish forces in Syria were quick to warn Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces
against entering areas under their control in Hasakah Province with the pretext
of pursuing ISIS. Talal Silu, the spokesman for the Syrian Defense Forces, the
bulk of which are from the Kurdish PYD, said yesterday “We will confront any
attempt by the PMF to enter areas under our control and will not allow any
forces to enter these areas.”

Source:
‫إيران تُنشئ حشد شعبي وسط صمت مليشيا ب ي د في مدينة القامشلي‬
“Iran creates Popular Mobilization Forces amidst PYD silence in Qamishli,” al-Khabour, 5 June 2017. https://goo.gl/WWdA3m
The Syrian PMF’s most important base is in the city of Qamishli, near the bases of the PYD. The PMF members move freely in areas under
PYD control and pass through unhindered with their weapons across PYD checkpoints.
OE Watch | July 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
ISIS Suspected in Assassination of Uzbek Rebel
Commander in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: On 18 April, the Uzbek
commander of an al-Qaeda linked Uzbek group in
northwestern Syria was assassinated. The accompanying
excerpts from Arabic-language sources discuss different
theories regarding the assassin and shed light on some of the
dynamics on the ground. The excerpts suggest continued
rivalry between the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
and al-Qaeda linked rebels; along with concern among rebel
ranks regarding infiltration by ISIS or other intelligence
operatives.
Salahuddin al-Uzbeki, the leader of the predominantly
Uzbek Imam Bukhari Brigade in Idlib, northwestern Syria
was assassinated along with three of his companions after
their evening prayers. As the excerpted Arabic-language
article for the pro-rebel Syrian nonprofit media organization
Enabbaladi discusses, ISIS is suspected to be behind the
murder. This would suggest that ISIS is not only considered
a threat in areas it still controls in eastern Syria, but also in
other rebel-controlled areas in northwestern Syria. ISIS and
rebels aligned with al-Qaeda have been rivals on ideological
grounds since 2014. The loss of Salahuddin will deal a blow
to the Uzbek militants as, according to the article, Salahuddin
had prior experience in Afghanistan with the Taliban and a
solid reputation among the rebels.
The article also reports that Salahuddin was assassinated
by an Uzbek militant, who worked as a medic in the Imam
Bukhari Brigade and had been in Turkey in the period
prior to the assassination. A source in Ahrar al-Sham, a
Syrian rebel group that has been loosely tied to al-Qaeda
in Syria, confirmed that Hayat Tahrir al-Sham captured the
assassin. Hayat Tahrir al-Sham is the re-branded al-Qaeda
affiliate in Syria, which is separate from but at times allied
with and other times in competition with Ahrar al-Sham.
The source suspected that the assassin was paid off by ISIS
to carry out the assassination. Another theory, as discussed
in the Arabic-language excerpt from Eldorar.com, is that
an ISIS cell in Afghanistan ordered the assassination. ISIS
in recent months has been attempting to raise its profile in
Afghanistan and may have seen Salahuddin as a potential
threat to its expansion operations in the country with his
al-Qaeda and Taliban loyalties and roots in militancy
in Afghanistan. Yet, at the time of the writing of the
Enabbaladi article, there were also suspicions that the
assassin met Russian intelligence agents in Turkey, who
turned him against Salahuddin.
The Imam Bukhari Brigade has offered a one-million
Syrian pound reward for more information about the
assassin’s activities prior to the assassination. But until
this information is extracted through an informant or
interrogation of the assassin, the death will raise concerns
in rebel ranks about the extent to which the rebels have been
infiltrated by ISIS or other intelligence operatives. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Security sources in Idlib hinted at the possibility that
the Uzbek element was an agent of Russian intelligence,
or paid off by [ISIS].”

Al-Nusra Front members in Maarrat al-Numan.

Source:Voice of America, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAl-Nusra_Front_members_in_Maarrat_alNuman.jpg, CC BY 3.0.

Source:
‫تحرير الشام تعلن اعتقال قاتل صالح الدين األوزبكي‬
“Tahrir al-Sham announces the arrest of the killer of Salahuddin al-Uzbeki),”
enabbaladi.net, 19 April 2017. https://www.enabbaladi.net/archives/146598
Tahrir al-Sham announced the arrest of the murderer of Saluhuddin,
commander of the Imam Bukhari Brigade of Ahrar al-Sham.
The Imam Bukhari Brigade is offering an amount of one-million Syrian
pounds for information about the killer of its leader, according to leaflets
showing four different pictures of the accused, and distributed in the city of
Idlib. Saluhuddin, along with three of his companions, were killed by an Uzbek
member after they finished Maghrib prayer on Friday in his media office in
Idlib.
A source, who declined to be named, said that the Uzbek killer had previously
worked in the medical branch in the brigade, and returned from Turkey
recently. The source quoted security sources in Idlib, hinting at the possibility
that the Uzbek element was an agent of Russian intelligence, or paid off by
[ISIS].
Source:
‫قاتل صالح الدين أوزبكي يفصح عن الجهة املُد ِ ّبرة لعملية االغتيال‬
“(The assassin of Salahuddin al-Uzbeki reveals the leader of the
assassination),” Eldorar.net, 1 May 2017. http://eldorar.com/node/111056
The Ahrar al-Sham source confirmed that its Special Forces handed over
the suspect to the movement’s security office, as [the suspect] revealed that
he received the order to assassinate Salahuddin from the Islamic State in
Khorasan in western Afghanistan.

OE Watch | July 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Protests Threaten to Upend Tunisia’s Delicate Balance
OE Watch Commentary: The outlook for Tunisia,
often considered the Arab Spring’s sole success story, is
beginning to look bleak. For over two months, Tunisian
protesters have sought to shut down oil and phosphate
production sites in the country’s south. In mid-May
Tunisian President Beji Caid Essebsi deployed the
Tunisian military to guard facilities in these economically
marginalized areas. Later that month a protester was killed
when the Tunisian National Guard stormed a protest camp
near an oil facility deep in the rocky desert of Tunisia’s
southern tip. Unrest quickly spread to the provincial
capital of Tataouine, where protesters stormed and burned
down police and national guard installations.
According to the first excerpted article, from the
Tunisian Arabic-language daily al-Maghreb, the situation
in Tunisia is “extremely complicated” and “could explode
at any moment.” With the deployment of military and
security units, the author warns that the country may fall
into a “dangerous slippery slope, from peaceful protests
calling for work and development to provocations against
security forces and the military in an attempt to foment
clashes.” According to the second accompanying passage,
written by a former Tunisian Minister of Culture in the
widely circulated Qatari newspaper al-Araby al-Jadid,
the Tunisian military is ill-suited to deal with protesters.
Citing a former Tunisian army spokesman, the author
notes that “the army does not have tear gas to deal with
protesters, it has bullets.”
The Tunisian economy has begun suffering from
halts to oil production and inflation is running high.
The promises of the Arab Spring remain unfulfilled,
particularly regarding male unemployment in the
country’s central and southern provinces. As the
provincial youth struggle with the same issues that
led them to protest in late 2010, a new class of ultrarich Tunisians has emerged since the “revolution.” As
described in the third accompanying passage, most of
these newly affluent Tunisians are engaged in smuggling,
whether of fuel, drugs, commercial products or weapons.
Indeed, smuggling has become the Tunisian economy’s
largest sector according to the article. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫تصعيد خطير في تطاوين أدى لوفاة الشاب أنور السكرافي وإصابات عديدة في صفوف األمنيني واملحتجني حذار‬
Ziyad Krishan, “Dangerous escalation in Tataouine leads to the death of Anwar
al-Skrafi and injuries among security and protesters. Beware!” al-Maghreb, 23
May 2017. https://goo.gl/tk5JPQ
We are facing a dangerous slippery slope, from peaceful protests calling for
work and development to provocations against security forces and the military
in an attempt to foment clashes and create a state of obstruction and violence
which could lead the protest movement of Tataouine’s young men into a maze
with no known exit. We are facing an extremely complicated situation that could
explode at any moment… Tunisia has no other way of saving itself except for
telling the truth to our children and refuting these destructive stereotypes and
holding all parties responsible
Source:
‫الجيش التونسي وترويض االحتجاجات‬
Al-Mahdi Mabrouk, “The Tunisian military and the normalization of protests,”
al-Araby al-Jadid, 14 May 2017. https://goo.gl/s74nTa
Many parties and civilian and social organizations opposed the president’s
recent decision, considering it an unconstitutional adventure without
consequences… The army’s former spokesman, retired Col. Mukhtar Nasser,
said: “The army does not have tear gas to deal with protesters, it has bullets”…
The decision may not have been taken at the right time, especially since the
army does not have the skills and knowledge to deal with these protesters, as
this is not part of their duties. Leaders of the protest movement, especially in
in Kamur (the southern oil area) have the major responsibility to preserve the
peaceful nature of the protests and avoid clashing with the army to avoid a
slippery slope…
Source:
‫أثرياء تونس الجدد في زمن الثورة‬
Tawfik al-Madini, “Tunisia’s new ultra-rich in the age of revolution,” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 6 June 2017. https://goo.gl/nVhPYU
The Tunisian revolution did not bring about fundamental change in the
political, social, economic, cultural or legal situation of young Tunisian
males due to its having strayed from the national democratic project which
all Tunisians want. Among the threats to this revolution is the emergence of a
new and extremely affluent class of Tunisian society… There is a consensus in
Tunisia that the new class of ultra-rich has developed alongside the weapons
trafficking which has increased over the past few years, as well as the
smuggling of drugs and Chinese products. There is a large mafia in charge of
fuel and other things and millions used to smuggle products from Algeria and
Libya. As a result, smuggling represents 55% of the economy, making it larger
than the official economy.

The Adaptive Transformation of Yemen’s Republican Guard
by Lucas Winter

This paper presents an analytical summary of the Yemeni Republican Guard’s adaptation to changing conditions in Yemen
following the 2011 resignation of Ali Abdullah Saleh. The Yemeni Republican Guard has effectively amalgamated with Huthi
forces into a hybrid that pairs young, ideologically motivated foot soldiers with trained operators of heavy weaponry and advanced equipment. This is similar in structure to successful fighting groups emerging from the battlefields of Syria and Iraq,
and may provide a template for the type of forces that will define the region’s operational environment for years to come.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194879
OE Watch | July 2017

12

AFRICA
Africa Already Suffering from Climate Change
OE Watch Commentary: Africa, according to the accompanying article,
knows that climate change is a reality. Besides a recent study showing that 20
of the 30 African countries examined are warming faster than the world as a
whole, there is the everyday reality on the ground, including massive droughts
such as the one in Ethiopia that followed
the strongest El Niño ever recorded.
These droughts have left millions in
urgent need of food and water. The
accompanying passage from an article
written by a noteworthy activist on
the issue, provides some insight into
African views on climate change and
offers ideas on how to implement
ambitious renewable energy projects
across Africa to help fight it.

“Climate change is a reality for us and we
are already living with its impacts.”

With climate change causing so
much misery on the continent, many
African nations are pushing ahead with
efforts to mitigate the factors, such as
the release of greenhouse gases, that
contribute to it. However, much of
Africa does not have the resources to
As part of the effort to combat climate change, African nations are installing solar panels such as the ones
go it alone. In other words, Africa is
pictured here at an administrative building in Liberia.
Source: UN Photo/Christopher Herwig, https://www.flickr.com/photos/un_photo/4080560401/in/photolist-7dzWrF-adT68b-p2nRwD-q4gSFK-dZnsh1-7eqj6Q-p7cnff-7emq6D-7vhtadiRUuDK-dpbuGB-7eqiiq-7eqi6u-9JiNqL-iQ6Gn-7empw8-abg18E-ab3riB-fsZX3c-7emoLZ-8AWiRd-rkpCMw-8tDFuv-ab6gV7-7empND-ab3rne-7emoGX-7zRUNx-8tGFFb-7eqio7-7eqisNdependent on the rest of the world for
oJSTr8-7eqieE-5SRKBk-7eqiTm-7eqiXm-ddYz6d-8tGGvW-oJwgrh-7eqjd9-7eqiP9-8tGHMy-5t65o-8tGEL7-cEwaPj-7eqiwj-Kxy38g-7ZRh3p-5sZG1-5t6c4, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.
funding to combat climate change, and
whether or not that funding is forthcoming is dependent on global cooperation
Source: Wanjira Mathai, “Africa: With or Without
initiatives such as the Paris Agreement. The author calls for effective local
The US, Africa Must Push Ahead With Paris Climate
action to match global governance frameworks such as the Paris Agreement or
Pledges,” AllAfrica.com, 2 June 2017. http://allafrica.com/
the Sustainable Development Goals, agreed in 2015.
stories/201706020125.html
A prime example of this effort is Kenya’s ambitious goal to achieve 95 percent
In Kenya, our government has declared a national
electrification by 2021. In 2016 alone 1.3 million customers were added to the
emergency and Ethiopia is battling a new wave of drought
grid with expectations that another 1.5 million will be added this year. However, following the strongest El Nino on record.
unless the electricity produced comes from renewable resources, there will
Climate change is a reality for us and we are already
be no improvement in overall emissions compared to the present use of diesel
living with its impacts. A recent study of 30 African
generators and burning biomass to perform functions such as light homes.
countries by the Washington DC-based think tank, the
Therefore, as the article states, large scale investments in solar, geothermal,
Brookings Institution, showed two-thirds are warming
and the like will be necessary. However, as the article asks, how can global
faster than the world as a whole. Science tells us that
governance and cooperation help deliver such projects?
extreme weather events affecting the continent are only set
The article notes that the Global Foundation in Sweden is offering a $5
million prize for the best ideas to reshape global cooperation on critical issues
that impact everyone. In turn, perhaps a new model for global cooperation that
comes out of this competition will help determine the best funding mechanism
for projects such as the Kenya electrification scheme,
The article’s author, Wanjira Mathai, is the Chair of the Wangari Maathai
Foundation, which was created by her late mother, a Nobel laureate who
founded the Green Belt Movement. Despite numerous challenges, including
being attacked and jailed, the mother’s tenacity led to tens of millions of
trees being planted. It will be interesting to see if the daughter and the Global
Challenges Prize – for which she is an ambassador - can also overcome
a tremendous challenge: the challenge to implement ambitious renewable
energy projects across Africa to help fight climate change. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

to worsen.

The fact is, the sweeping promises contained in global
governance frameworks such as the Paris Agreement or
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), also agreed in
2015, must be matched by effective local action if they are
to succeed, in Africa as elsewhere.
If this [electrification] goal is to be achieved, large scale
national investments in solar energy must also become
part of the equation, as well as ambitions for geothermal
electricity and the future prospects for natural gas.
The Paris Agreement has been recognized as an example
of a new, more inclusive form of global governance that
includes pledges from cities, companies and other vital
entities. But it is not moving nearly far or fast enough.”
OE Watch | July 2017

13

AFRICA
Boko Haram’s Revived Urban Strategy?
OE Watch Commentary: Despite recent Nigerian military successes
against Boko Haram, including taking their stronghold in the Sambisa
Forest, the Islamic terrorist group is still active. And, as the recent attack
on the northeastern city of Maiduguri revealed, still deadly, with at
least 15 people killed. The accompanying article discusses a video in
which the group claimed responsibility for the attack, and the messages
contained in it.

“As you look for us in the bush, we shall
hunt you in the cities…”

On 8 June, Boko Haram struck Maiduguri’s suburbs using anti-aircraft
guns and three suicide bombers. As the accompanying article relates,
shortly after the attack, the terrorist group released a video essentially
bragging of the attack and showing off their bounty, including large
quantities of ammunition and supplies. A voice in the video reports
that contrary to claims of Boko Haram fighters having been killed, they
are hale and hearty. Possibly in reference to the military operations
that resulted in the loss of their Sambisa Forest base, it goes on to say
that while you “are looking for them in the bush, they will hunt you in
the cities.” With this being Boko Haram’s first and only major assault
on a city in 18 months, it is unknown whether they are truly turning
once again towards attacking cities or if it was a one-off urban target of
opportunity that presented itself.
The video, which is approximately 21 minutes long, shows the fighters
going through brush and crossing a bridge with technicals – pickup trucks
with heavy weaponry mounted in the bed – as they appear to approach
the edge of a town or city. Intermingled are pictures of security passes
and Nigerian military supplies, though it is unknown whether these are
from the raid on Maiduguri or previous ventures.
Also in the video, according to the article, is Abubakar Shekau, or at
least someone who appears to be Abubakar Shekau, a leader of one of
the two branches of Boko Haram. The Nigerian military has reported
his death several times before. Suggestions that he may be using body
doubles adds to the confusion of whether or not it is actually him.
As Boko Haram has sought to establish a caliphate in the Lake
Chad basin, more than 20,000 people have been killed and 2.7 million
displaced. These figures make the situation one of the world’s largest
humanitarian emergencies, one that impacts not just Nigeria but also
the neighboring countries of Niger, Chad, and Cameroon. Though it
has suffered several defeats in the past months, like Abubakar Shekau,
reports of its demise may be premature. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Boko Haram recently attacked the city of Maiduguri in the northeastern
part of Nigeria. Over the years the conflict has led to refugees flowing into
neighboring Niger, Chad, and Cameroon.
Source: CIA World Factbook, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ni-map.png, Public Domain.

Source: “Nigeria: As You Look for Us in the Bush, We Shall Hunt
You in the Cities, Says Boko Haram,” AllAfrica/Vanguard, 12 June
2017. http://allafrica.com/stories/201706120104.html
Boko Haram, in a new video, has claimed responsibility for the
attack on Maiduguri on Wednesday night that killed at least 15
people.
“God has enriched us with the arms and ammunition on display,
and we shall deploy such weapons we seized against you… the war
is still ongoing,” said the video. “As you look for us in the bush, we
shall hunt you in the cities…
There is no dialogue between us, only fire for fire.” The video
also showed a man who appears to be Abubakar Shekau, leader
of one of two branches of the jihadist group, standing in front of
fighters and weaponized vehicles and speaking Arabic, though the
Nigerian military has repeatedly claimed to have killed him.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094
OE Watch | July 2017

14

AFRICA
Nigeria’s Negotiation over Chibok Schoolgirls
Becomes Propaganda Battle
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 May, the Nigerian government
announced that it had exchanged five Boko Haram prisoners for the
release of 82 of the more than 100 Chibok schoolgirls still held captive by
Boko Haram since 2014. Boko Haram used the exchange as propaganda,
prompting a response from the Nigerian Army. The excerpted article
from Nigeria’s Premium Times demonstrates the Nigerian Army’s
response; showing the extent to which the counter-insurgency struggle in
Nigeria is taking place not only on the battlefield but also in the field of
information warfare.
Less than one week after the exchange, Boko Haram released two videos.
The first video showed one of the released Boko Haram commanders
claiming the government was lying about having released only five
commanders and not also paying ransom money to Boko Haram. The
commander also said Boko Haram will soon attack Nigeria’s capital of
Abuja and that the group still maintains an Islamic State in the Sambisa
Forest of northeastern Nigeria. Several hours later, Boko Haram released
a second video of four of the Chibok schoolgirls with one girl saying she
would refuse to return to “the land of infidels” and called on her parents to
accept Islam and join Boko Haram.
In response to these developments, as the Premium Times reports,
Brigadier General S.K. Usman, the Director of the Nigerian Army’s Public
Relations Department, released a statement. The statement calls the Boko
Haram commander’s allegations spurious and says that the Chibok girl’s
words reflect how some of the girls have been indoctrinated in captivity.
Usman also reiterates that the military would continue clearance operations
of Boko Haram from its bases in the Sambisa Forest and that the Nigerian
Air Force would continue its bombardment on Boko Haram positions.
Usman also urged the public not be vulnerable to this type of propaganda
from Boko Haram. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The attention of [the] Nigerian Army has been
drawn to video clips released by Boko Haram
terrorists who were exchanged for the abducted
Chibok school girls.”
Source: “Nigerian Army reacts to new Boko Haram Chibok
girls video,” Premium Times, 13 May 2017. http://www.
premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/231125-nigerian-armyreacts-to-new-boko-haram-chibok-girls-video.html
“The Nigerian Army has dismissed as propaganda a new video
released by the terrorist sect, Boko Haram, purporting to show
some abducted Chibok school girls explaining why they would
prefer to remain in the group’s custody rather than return to
their families. Another clip showed one of the Boko Haram
commanders recently released by the Nigerian government in
exchange for 82 Chibok girls. The militant in the video said
more than five Boko Haram commanders were released in the
swap deal, and warned of an imminent bombing of Abuja.
We would like to assure the public that the Nigerian Army
is totally committed to the Federal Government’s determined
efforts of rescuing all abducted persons and peace in the
country. We will not relent our determined efforts of clearing
the remnants of the Boko Haram terrorists as manifested
through the ongoing clearance operations. The Nigerian Air
Force is unrelenting in its bombardment while other Security
Agencies are equally doing their best. We should not give in to
terrorist propaganda and empty threats.”

Parents of Chibok kidnapping victims.

Source: Voice of America, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AParents_of_Chibok_kidnapping_victims.png. Public Domain.

OE Watch | July 2017

15

AFRICA
DRC: Increasing Instability in an Already Unstable Country
OE Watch Commentary: Sub-Saharan Africa’s largest country is devolving
into chaos as the President refuses to leave office, ethnic strife spreads, and old
cross-border struggles become inflamed. As the accompanying article discusses,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) now faces the risk that local
conflicts will lead to a nationwide war.

“The DRC faces a greater risk of local

conflicts evolving into nationwide war and
instability than it has for several years.”

On the political front there had been
hope that President Kabila, who was
supposed to step down from office in
December 2016 but did not, would abide
by an agreement which would lead to a
transitional government. This would be
followed by elections at the end of 2017,
and then he would finally vacate the
presidency. However, implementation of
that agreement has been very slow and
was dealt a further setback by the death
of 84 year old veteran opposition leader
Etienne Tshisekedi in February. Shortly
after that the Catholic bishops who had
been mediating the talks decided no
progress was being made and withdrew
from the process. Presently the fragmented
opposition lacks a clear path forward,
leaving Kabila, who has been in office
Although the DRC is showing increasing signs of instability, the number of
peacekeepers, such as the ones pictured above, is slated to decrease.
since January 2001, to continue ruling on
Source: MONUSCO/Abel Kavanagh, https://www.flickr.com/photos/monusco/16505903219/, CC BY-SA 2.0
his own terms, even ignoring his earlier
agreement to appoint a prime minister from the opposition. Violence has ensued
Source: Jay Benson, “Don’t look away now: DR Congo is
at greatest risk than for years,” African Arguments, 15 May
as security forces have killed protesters demanding Kabila step down. Should
2017. http://africanarguments.org/2017/05/15/dont-lookKabila not provide a timeline for leaving office, there is fear, as the article states,
away-now-dr-congo-is-at-greatest-risk-than-for-years/
that the violence could significantly escalate.
Violence is not just occurring in the capital and other large cities. For years,
in the eastern portion of the country armed groups such as M23, FDLR, ADFNALU, Mai Mai, and periodically the Congolese military battled each other in
ever shifting alliances. Local populations were and continue to be victimized
as these groups fight for a piece of the prize: the country’s enormous mineral
wealth. Indeed, economists often point to the DRC when discussing the theory of
“the resource curse,” also known as “the paradox of plenty,” that countries with
vast wealth often have worse development outcomes. As bad as these conflicts
are, they have usually been localized to the North and South Kivu Provinces.
Now, conflict is spreading beyond those two provinces, including to the Kasai
region, which is angry over a lack of government services. From 1997 to 2016
Kasai saw only 3.6% of the violent events in the DRC, but as the article notes,
in the last five months of 2016, that number tripled to 10.4%. In one particular
incident, Jean-Pierre Mpandi, a local leader who had called for greater autonomy,
was killed in a gun battle with Congolese security services. Almost immediately
tensions exploded, with scores of police officers decapitated, followed by
retaliations resulting in multiple massacres of civilians.

Recent months in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC) have seen border incursions by rebels, decapitation
of police, civilian massacres, and the collapse of talks
aimed at overcoming the country’s political impasse.

The article’s author calls for more action on the part of domestic actors, such
as the security forces, to mitigate the violence, though admits that this will not
be an easy task. He also calls for international peacekeepers to help quell the
spiraling violence, but that too is problematic, especially as the UN Security
Council voted in March to decrease the number of peacekeepers in the DRC.
However, should the violence continue to escalate, it is not just stability in the
DRC that is threatened, but the entire region. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

What start off as primarily local conflicts can reorient
towards national-level cleavages and drive wider
instability. Furthermore, in the case of the DRC, this
has significant potential to draw in neighboring states
seeking to support their preferred proxies and ensure
their own security. This is precisely what happened in the
devastating Second Congo War from 1998 to 2003.

Such news has become depressingly common in a country
that has struggled with instability for decades. But the
recent combination of events is not just more of the same.
The DRC faces a greater risk of local conflicts evolving
into nationwide war and instability than it has for several
years.
[Kabila’s] failure to step down led to widespread street
protests in 2016 and bloody reprisals by security services.
The eastern DRC – particularly North and South Kivu
provinces – has long been seen as the tinderbox of the
nation. Ethnic heterogeneity and high population density
have led to a complex constellation of ethnic and resourcebased tensions.

OE Watch | July 2017

16

AFRICA
Somalia: al-Shabaab Attacks Puntland Military Base
OE Watch Commentary: On 8 June, the Islamist militant group alShabaab carried out an attack on a military base in Puntland, a region in
the northeastern part of Somalia. The accompanying passages from African
sources discuss the attack.
According to the first accompanying article, 61 government troops were
killed, though the second accompanying article reports 40 dead, reflecting
the difficulty in obtaining consistent and accurate reports from the country.
The militants killed three army commanders, and seized weapons and 16
vehicles. The Af Ufur military base they attacked is approximately 70 km
from the port city of Bossaso. Government forces were able to eventually
push the terrorist group into the remote Galgala Mountains.
This is not the first large scale attack by the terrorist organization on a
military installation. In January 2017, an al-Shabaab raid reportedly killed
57 Kenyan soldiers stationed at a Kenya Defense Forces (KDF) base in the
southern part of the country in an area known as Jubbaland. A year before
that al-Shabaab overran a KDF camp in El-Adde, killing 100 troops.
Though al-Shabaab periodically carries out small attacks in Puntland, it
is relatively rare for the group to carry out such a large attack there, a stark
contrast to the situation in central and south Somalia. It is thought this might
be because while the Somali Armed Forces, which are part of the Somali
government, often go unpaid, the Puntland forces receive a regular salary.
Puntland is shown in stripes, though other maps might vary based

It should be noted that there are Islamic extremists in Puntland, including
on whether or not disputed areas are included.
Source: CIA World Factbook, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Puntland.gif, Public Domain.
an al-Shabaab splinter group that pledges support to the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). The larger al-Shabaab force is
Source: “Al-Shabaab fighters storm military base in Somalia,” The
mainly south of Puntland and linked to al-Qaeda. The two groups
East African/BBC, 8 June 2017. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/
are antagonistic towards each other. While the first article claims
Shabaab-attack-Somalia-Puntland/2558-3961372-grue73/index.html
it was the al-Qaeda linked faction, much like the death toll, this
Somalia’s militant Islamist group al-Shabaab says it has carried out
information is subject to change.
a major assault on a military base in the semi-autonomous region of
Puntland.
Before this attack, Puntland was known for piracy, not Islamic
terrorism. Now it is known for both. End OE Watch Commentary
Its fighters killed 61 government troops and seized 16 vehicles in the
(Feldman)
dawn raid, the group said.

“Somalia’s militant Islamist group

al-Shabaab says it has carried out a
major assault on a military base in...
Puntland.”

Source: “Somalia: 50 Puntland Forces Killed in Its Worst Attack By
Alshabaab,” Dalsan Radio (Somalia), 8 June 2017. http://radiodalsan.
com/en/50-puntland-forces-killed-in-its-worst-attack-by-alshabaab/
Alshabaab militants have been operating from the Galgaala mountains
executing attacks on Puntland administration security agents and posts.
Alshabaab claimed it killed 60 soldiers but a source from within
Puntland administration indicates 40 as the death toll.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | July 2017

17

AFRICA
A Proposed Additional Mandate for AMISOM:
Develop Somalia’s Capacity to Govern
OE Watch Commentary: AMISOM, the African
Union Mission in Somalia, has pushed al-Shabaab
from major urban centers, thus providing the nascent
government a chance to take root. However, as the
accompanying article notes, sometimes after an area is
secured from al-Shabaab, it is handed over to this young
government that in some instances does not yet fully
have the ability to adequately govern, creating a void
that could allow al-Shabaab to return. To remedy this
problem, two experts from the South African Institute
for Security Studies discuss that AMISOM should do
more in the area of building Somalia’s institutional
capacity. They note that this would enable better
governance, justice, and security. Along these lines, the
African Union (AU) has requested that the UN, under
whose approval AMISOM operates, enhance AMISOM’s
civilian component.

“The challenge to secure areas recovered from al-Shabaab
and hand over primary responsibilities to Somali security
actors continues to vex the mission because of the gap in
institution-building.”

Two factors stand out in this request for AMISOM
to take on the additional task of institutional capacity
building. First, AMISOM’s funding for present
operations is already precarious; it is uncertain additional
funding would be forthcoming for an additional mandate.
Second, the AU plans to withdraw all of its forces from
AMISOM Formed Police Unit 3rd contingent Commander Bamuzibire Samuel (Left) walks with
Somalia by 2020, meaning any AMISOM initiative to
Benadir Hospital Director, Dr Abdirisak Hassan (In white coat) and AMISOM Police PIO Edwin
build Somalia’s institutional capacity would need to
Mugera at a food donation event, at Benadir Hospital in Mogadishu, Somalia on 3rd March, 2015.
AMISOM Photo/ Awil Abukar
start relatively soon.
Source: By AMISOM Public Information (Flickr), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9a/Amisom_Police_Donates_Food_Items_To_Benadir_
Hospital-1_%2816497285887%29.jpg [CC0], via Wikimedia Commons

Two important roadmaps were recently endorsed
at the London Conference on Somalia. The first,
simply titled “Security Pact,” emphasizes rebuilding
Somalia-led security institutions while the second, a
New Partnership for Somalia, describes how Somalia
and the international community can together meet
the country’s needs. However, both of these roadmaps
establish separate implementing bodies and do not
clearly articulate their relationships with AMISOM. As
the authors of the accompanying article argue, a single
entity bringing stakeholders and partners together
is needed if these roadmaps are to be successfully
implemented. They also argue that AMISOM, with its
vast experience in Somalia, should be that entity.
The article notes that given the failed state of
Somalia, AMISOM’s initial mandate, beyond just
providing security and fighting al-Shabaab, should
have included development related objectives. UNled missions in Darfur and South Sudan had such
comprehensive mandates, and they also benefited
from more reliable funding. Whether or not AMISOM
finally gets such a comprehensive mandate as well as
better funding remains, like many issues surrounding
Somalia, uncertain. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Source: Meressa K. Dessu and Omar S. Mahmood, “AMISOM needs a mandate for
peace and development,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 31 May 2017.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/amisom-needs-a-mandate-for-peace-and-development
And in its last push to defeat the extremist group before the mission’s planned
total withdrawal from Somalia by 2020, AMISOM continues to seek financial and
logistical support.
The mission is unique in that it is entirely dependent on unreliable funding
from partners and donors; its main troop contributors are Somalia’s neighbors
– Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda – who all have security interests in the
country; and it is engaged in an all-out war with al-Shabaab.
Based on these challenges, AMISOM has seen both major success and outright
failure over the past decade, compounded by severe losses in manpower.
While the mission has been praised, it has also received criticism for not having
done enough in terms of building the capacity of Somalia’s institutions, especially
regarding governance, security and justice. The challenge to secure areas recovered
from al-Shabaab and hand over primary responsibilities to Somali security actors
continues to vex the mission because of the gap in institution-building.
In this sense, it could be argued that AMISOM doesn’t have the proper mandate
or capacity to support the establishment and enhancement of Somalia’s institutions,
which are vital for state rebuilding.
Given the failed state of Somalia, AMISOM should have been given a
comprehensive mandate that goes beyond just providing security. It should include
helping to build state institutions, strengthening rule of law and justice, supporting
peacebuilding, facilitating reconciliation of conflicts among the divided clans and
sub-clans, monitoring human rights, and coordinating humanitarian support.
OE Watch | May 2017

18

AFRICA
Somaliland: If Necessary to Maintain Independence…War
OE Watch Commentary: It was 1960 when the territory
known as British Somaliland gained its independence, creating
the Republic of Somaliland. Its identity as a separate independent
nation was quite short-lived because only a few days later it joined
what had at one time been Italian Somaliland to form the Republic
of Somalia. Then, after the collapse of the Siad Barre regime in
1991, the Republic of Somaliland arose again, or at least attempted
to do so, by unilaterally declaring independence from the rest of
Somalia. However, as the accompanying article reports, despite
Somaliland following a different path than much of the rest of
Somalia by having elections, maintaining relative stability, and
possessing a developing economy, 26 years after their call for
independence, no other nation has yet to recognize it as a separate
sovereign state. With Somalia finally having a government
again, albeit one beset by numerous problems, Somaliland is
concerned that it will be subject to pressure to forego its dream of
sovereignty.

“And if they want to exert what they may call their
right to rule Somaliland from Mogadishu, then we
will fight them and you will have a war.”

How strongly does Somaliland feel about maintaining the
independence it has shown from the rest of Somalia for over
25 years? As Dr. Saad Ali Shire, Somaliland’s “Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation” declares in the
accompanying article, he hopes Somaliland and Somalia can settle
their differences peacefully, and indeed there have already been
talks, but if Somalia insists on ruling Somaliland, the latter is
willing to go to war with the former.
Dr. Shire also states “the world should be ashamed for
not recognizing Somaliland’s sovereignty.” He goes on to
describe positive changes that have taken place in Somaliland,
including five one-man-one-vote elections since its declaration
of independence; and other changes making it a more credible
political entity when dealing with other countries. As an example,
in the 1990’s when Somaliland representatives would go to the
UK they would meet with junior officers, now they meet with a
minister.

Source: James Wan, “‘Otherwise we’ll have to go to war’: Somaliland
demands recognition 26 years on,” African Arguments, 22 May 2017.
http://africanarguments.org/2017/05/22/otherwise-well-have-to-go-to-warsomaliland-demands-recognition-26-years-on/

Even when united with Somalia from 1960 to 1991, things did
not go well for Somaliland. With the overthrow of Siad Barre and
the ensuing chaos, Somaliland was quite anxious to be free from
Somalia--what many were calling a failed state. There have been
times when it seemed international recognition might happen,
but those have mostly come and gone. Today Somaliland is still
considered a part of Somalia by the international community,
though some countries, such as the UAE mentioned in the article,
have signed agreements with the Somaliland government and not
the Somali one.

In the 26 years since, Somaliland has continued to call for recognition.
In the meantime, it has succeeded in many of the ways the rest of Somalia
has failed. It has maintained relative stability. It has held elections. And it
has developed on various economic and social measures.

Although the article does not discuss it, there are other
fractures in Somalia, and even within Somaliland itself there
is a territorial dispute, with a region in the northwest declaring
it does not recognize Somaliland’s control over it. The nascent
Somali government would like to see the country united, but as
Somaliland’s threat of war against unification demonstrates, not
all share that vision. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Political situation map of Somalia.

Source: By James Dahl (Ingoman), https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Somalia_map_states_regions_districts.png, Public Domain.

I think that’s the only other alternative. They are claiming Somaliland as
part of Somalia. And if they want to exert what they may call their right
to rule Somaliland from Mogadishu, then we will fight them and you will
have a war. We will interfere in their internal affairs if they interfere in
our internal affairs, so we will have a sort of hostile relationship and a
hostile relationship is not good for us, for them, or the region.

And yet, still no one has heeded its calls to be accepted as a sovereign
nation.
Somaliland of 2017 is different to Somaliland of 1991. We’ve rebuilt the
country and economy. We’ve had five one-man-one-vote elections. We
have stability and have made a lot of social progress.
I think the world should be ashamed of itself for not recognizing
Somaliland. We’re denied our rights by being denied sovereignty... There’s
no country in the world that can say we don’t like Somaliland because
we’re causing them damage. On the contrary. Full recognition can only
help the international community deal with pressing challenges such as
terrorism and piracy.
OE Watch | July 2017

19

LATIN AMERICA
On Russia’s Return to Latin America
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying reference provides one Spaniard’s analysis regarding Russian diplomatic and militarydiplomatic initiatives in Latin America. The translated portion speaks for itself. In the full opinion piece, the writer compares Russian strategy
in the Americas to that of Washington, and makes clear that most of Russia’s efforts are with anti-American (Bolivarian and pro-Bolivarian)
regimes. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“They see them as a muscular bear that can show its teeth to Washington.”

Source: Yoani Sánchez, “El Kremlin ha vuelto a América Latina (The Kremlin has returned to Latin America),” 14yMedio, 28 May 2017.
http://www.14ymedio.com/opinion/Kremlin-vuelto-Vladimir_Putin-La_Habana-Cuba-Raul_Castro-Union_Sovietica_0_2225777406.html
The Russian advance party takes positions in Latin America in several countries, [including] petroleum support to Cuba and even the
restoration of the Capital Building in Havana….
In Central America, Nicaragua functions as an entry door for the voracious superpower….
Nevertheless, Havana continues to be the principle ally on this side of the world. …
Russia just pulled Raul Castro out of a quagmire following the decrease in petroleum shipments from Caracas. In the idyllic years with
Chávez, Cuba got some 100,000 barrels of Venezuelan crude daily, but in recent months that amount has been reduced by more than 40%.
… The Russian petroleum company Rosneft has come to the aid of Castro and promised to provide the Island with 250,000 tons of petroleum
and diesel, some two million barrels. The rescue operation leaves a trail of doubts about how the Plaza of the Revolution is going to pay
Moscow…
Their [the Russians] buddies on this side [in Latin America] need Moscow to provide them with armaments and cover their backs in
international organizations. They [some Latin American leaders] see them as a muscular bear that can show its teeth to Washington every
time it is needed. In exchange, they [the Latin Americans] are giving them [the Russians] positions on the ground, intelligence information
and the calculated loyalty of a person [Putin] who expects a lot in return.

Cuba is the Lynchpin
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying opinion piece
is from a well-established Latin American author and journalist
who writes from what we might describe as a libertarian or
perhaps anarcho-capitalist vantage point. His point is a simple
one -- that we should look to Cuba as the chief orchestrator of
the Venezuela situation, with Russia, China and Iran as willing
sponsors/partners. The article begins by relating a recent
trip to Russia taken by Raúl Castro’s son Alejandro. The
accompanying diagram of the Raul Castro family tree was not
part of the Lechín article, but rather is included here as an aid
to OE Watch readers. Alejandro appears at the bottom center.
End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Juan Claudio Lechín, “Cuba estrangula a Venezuela
(Cuba strangles Venezuela),” La Patilla, 12 June 2017.
https://www.lapatilla.com/site/2017/06/12/juan-claudiolechin-cuba-estrangula-a-venezuela/; Peru21, 12 Jun
2017 http://peru21.pe/opinion/juan-claudio-lechin-cubaestrangula-venezuela-2285139

Family Tree of Raúl Castro.

Source: By Basilio (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File%3AFamily_Tree_of_Ra%C3%BAl_Castro.jpg, CC BY SA 3.0

Colonel Alejandro Castro Espín, heir of his father Raúl in
the communist monarchy installed in Cuba 50 years ago,
was in Moscow in April. Every year he goes to a global meeting invited by General Patruchev, Russian Director of Intelligence. Also there
was General Vladimir Padrino, Venezuelan Minister of Defense. Padrino returned after just a few days. Sputnik News informed toward the
end of May that Castro Espín is staying in Moscow at the Service of State Intelligence (SRV), as in past occasions, according to spokesperson
María Zajárova, who stated that ‘whatever the solution (in Venezuela) it should be governed by the Constitution’.
The Venezuelan opposition celebrated and thought that Putin had abandoned Maduro. It did not notice that Russia also offered itself as
mediator of a peaceful dialog ‘without destructive foreign meddling’ (being a foreign power). The Russian-Cuban ruse…did not crystalize….
[As an] alternative tactic, the Cuban ‘parliament’ supports the Maduro constituent assembly…
It would help a great deal if the brave Venezuelan opposition were to publicly and insistently point to Castroism as the enemy operator -backed by Iran, Russia and China…
OE Watch | July 2017

20

LATIN AMERICA
Instructive Boundary Dispute in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: According to Colombian reportage,
a majority of people in the small town of Belén de Bajirá see
themselves as Antioqueños (Antioquians), that is to say, from the
Colombian Department of Antioquia. Many maps (including
Google) locate the town inside the departmental boundaries
of Antioquia, while others place it right on the departmental
border. Meanwhile, the government of the neighboring
Department of Chocó, the national government administration
of Colombian President Manuel Santos, some technicians from
the national geographic institute, and apparently the leaders of
the FARC, assert that the municipio (county) of Belén de Bajirá
is boundaried within Chocó. Add in river course changes and
place name changes. The many alternative facts and arguments
of the case provide a catalog of fuel for and complications of
violent conflict and explain some of the reasons for having
precise, accurate administrative boundaries in the first place.
Saúl Hernández, a columnist for Periodismo Sin Fronteras,
points out that most of the county budget has for years come
out of the Antioquia departmental budget, that people in the
county vote for representatives to the Antioquian legislature and
for the Antioquian governor, that the school and medical clinic
are associated with Antioquia. Although recent maps from the
national institute show the main road to the town of Belén de
Bajirá leading to and from Riosucio in Chocó, Google maps and
images belie the notion. It is evident that much heavier traffic
arrives in town from Antioquia. It is perhaps understandable
that at least one of the accompanying references accuses the
national mapping institute of some map-shenanigans.
To outsiders, the problem might seem an easily solvable
kerfuffle based on territorial habit and technical imprecision.
The stakes, however, may be quite high. The county lies
along a natural smuggling corridor to Panama and beyond.
There are deposits of various minerals suitable for mining (or
at least illegal mining), and the soil and weather are apt for
export plantation crops. That the FARC would assert a policy
opinion on the matter is in itself food for concern. Readers
should not discard the fact that Antioquia is the homeland of
former president and enemy of the FARC, Álvaro Uribe Vélez.
Antioquia is a center of geographical opposition to the FARC
and to the power sharing agreement brokered between the
Santos Administration and the FARC leaders. It may be that the
department is paying a visible, territorial and emotional price for
not winning.
The complications don’t stop there (if anywhere). Some
Chocoan voices are now claiming that because most of the
inhabitants of Chocó are Black and most of the people of Belén
are Black or Zambo, that the town must be placed in Chocó.
Such a racially-based argument is apparently a novelty and
somewhat off-putting to people in Belén, given what the writers
seem to view as a traditional culture of racial fluidity and
indifference. (continued)

“...it is a shame that they want to present this as some
kind of social justice issue.”
Source: Saúl Hernández Bolívar, “Bajirá es Antioquia (Bajirá is
Antioquia),” Periodismo Sin Fronteras, 7 June 2017. http://www.
periodismosinfronteras.org/bajira-es-antioquia.html
…The village of Belén de Bajirá began to form in 1967, in 1975 the
Antioquian government established it as a corregimiento [a pre-county
township] of Mutatá [an Antioquian county]. For its part, just in 2000,
the Chocó Legislature declared it a county of that department, but the
Council of State [federal] annulled the order seven years later. …
Of the Mutatá county budget, which is currently at 18,000 million pesos
a year, 3,000 million are destined for Bajirá. There is a medical center
from the department of Antioquia, as well as schools and an aqueduct
that covers a good part of the population. They vote for the mayor
of Mutatá, for the Governor of Antioquia, and for representatives to
the Antioquia legislature. Antioquia collects taxes there and the land
registry is managed by Antioquia…
…it is a shame that they want to present this as some kind of social
justice issue, as some kind of struggle between the poor Black people of
Chocó and the big land owner Antioquian exploiters. Better instead to
ask if Chocó’s interest in these lands have to do with the supposed riches
in gold, coltan and nickle, that in any case the communities are not
permitted to mine legally, as has been happening in the country, or if this
is about an interest on the part of some delinquents to take power over
more of the region and its rents.
Source: Víctor Andrés Álvarez Correa, “Belén de Bajirá: comercio
cerró y pueblo marchó en defensa de soberanía de Antioquia (Belén de
Bajirá: businesses close and the people march in defense of Antioquian
sovereignty),” El Colombiano, 7 June 2017. http://www.elcolombiano.
com/antioquia/belen-de-bajira-pueblo-marcho-en-defensa-de-lasoberania-de-antioquia-EG6686644
…They are looking to make a clamor that they consider justified. Belén
de Bajirá was paralyzed yesterday and thousands of persons marched
through its narrow muddy streets to ask the National Government, once
again, to allow them to decide which Department Antioquia or Chocó,
they want to belong….
Nevertheless,, those territories -- said Leopoldino Perea, leader who is
promoting the Chocoan sovereignty--, remain united to form the county
of Belén de Bajirá, and that it is on track to being the second most
important in that Pacific Department.
‘I don’t know why all the marching and arguing, if the reasons are
technical and scientific, Belén de Bajirá is Chocoan and we don’t accept
the Antioquian expansionist spirit.’
As for the protests and strikes, which promoters promise will continue
until the government refrains from publishing the map and accepts a
popular consultation so that the inhabitants can decide…

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Instructive Boundary Dispute in Colombia
All in all, there are arguments to be made.
One resolution method supposedly available in
Colombia would be a popular consultancy or
prior consultation. With a popular consultancy,
the locals decide. That construct has been
rejected by the Santos Administration, however,
evidently because the results would so likely be in
favor of Antioquia. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: Editors, “Descartan consulta previa para decidir el futuro de Belén de Bajirá
(The prior consultancy to decide the future of Belén de Bajirá has been rejected),” El
Espectador, 7 February 2017. http://www.elespectador.com/noticias/nacional/descartanconsulta-previa-para-decidir-el-futuro-de-belen-de-bajira-articulo
The dispute between the departments of Antioquia and Chocó for 2,050 square
kilometers that comprise the territory of Belén de Bajirá doesn’t ever end. Friday, one of
the possible solutions to clarify the conflict was discarded by the Interior Ministry. The
proposal had been the prior consultation, a right held by ethnic communities in order to
take part in in decisions that directly affect them.

“I don’t know why all the marching and arguing.”

Antioquia Department in Colombia.

Source: By Shadowfox (Own Work), Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AColombia_-_Antioquia.svg, CC BY SA 3.0

Mutatá County in Antioquia.

Source: By Shadowfox (Own Work), Wikimedia Commons,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Colombia_-_Antioquia_-_Mutat%C3%A1.svg, CC BY 3.0

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked
concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up
debate and critical thinking. As Geoff
Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the
ideas in it will be contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | July 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA
Illegal Mining Note
OE Watch Commentary: Illegal mining, taken as a
separate theme or subject of research, is greatly useful
for understanding violent conflict as a broader area of
study. Colombia and Peru have long mining histories
and also long histories of organized violence. We can
presume a correlation. In recent years, a great many
journalists and scholars have treated the challenge of
illegal mining in Latin America and elsewhere. The
accompanying references are two recent entries. They
highlight and allow us to encapsulate part of the violent
dynamic that men can create whenever the earth offers
up something that can be transported and sold -- and
when no good system is put in place to resolve the
contentions that such an offering generates.
The first reference reports on an event that is
becoming more common in Colombia. The high court
there determined that county governments could hold
local popular consultations (referendums) to decide
if mining would be permitted in their counties, and
could shut down existing operations. Cajamarca is
one such mountain town; it is or was home to a major
gold deposit and the presence of a major international
mining corporation in the process of exploiting it. The
locals, organized by activists from there and elsewhere,
achieved a vote against the operation. Now the company
announces that it is shutting down, and the community is
facing a loss of jobs as well as the loss of developmental
money poured into the community by the company.
The second reference bespeaks another legislatively
induced problem. This report is from neighboring Peru.
There the country has long been interested in alleviating
and helping to formalize informal entrepreneurship.
At the same time, it has wanted to confront organized
crime. As the references attest, illegal mining is a
natural generator of small claims confrontations and
lawlessness, a lawlessness that is often exploited by
criminal gangs. The larger and more ruthless gangs
are the more successful. Unfortunately, when the
exploitative big corporations leave, the terrain is open
to informal efforts. Such small entrepreneurship is
compelled more rapidly when the disappearance of a
major company means instant unemployment of a large
number of trained miners. If the environmentalists
organizing the ‘No’ vote in Cajamarca were actually
environmentalists, then they are in for an unfortunate
environmental surprise. Meanwhile, the biggest and
best organized of the criminal gangs may very well be a
guerrilla organization like FARC or a remnant thereof.
End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…find language that allows for
differentiation between illegal mining
and informal mining…”

“…it is stopping indefinitely its exploratory works and all
social investment…”

Gold-mine “Yanacocha” bei/ near Cajamarca (Peru).

Source: By Euyasik (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/45/Yanacocha-Goldmine.jpg, [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BYSA 4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

Source: Editors, “AngloGold Ashanti se va (por ahora) de Cajamarca (AngloGold
Ashanti is leaving [for now at least] Cajamarca),” Semana, 27 April 2017. http://
sostenibilidad.semana.com/medio-ambiente/articulo/anglogold-ashanti-se-va-porahora-de-cajamarca/37665
…The emphatic ‘No’ from the inhabitants of Cajamarca to the mining project of
La Colosa [the name of the mines] had a repercussion this Wednesday. After 14
years of presence in this Tolima county, the South African firm AngloGold Ashanti
announced that it is stopping indefinitely its exploratory works and all social
investment that it was carrying out there….
For their part, the reaction of the promoters of the ‘No’ in Cajamarca has been
moderated. Renzo García, member of the Environmental Committee for the
Defense of Life, indicated that ‘the decision is positive in the sense that it is trying
to respect the will of the Cajamarcan people. The declaration of AngloGold is
positive, but it better not be a momentary posture, but permanent given that the
[popular] consultation has a binding character.…
Source: Editors, “Minería ilegal: Aramayo suspende trámite de polémico proyecto
(Illegal Mining: Aramayo suspends the [legislative] process of the controversial
bill),” El Comercio, 8 May 2017. http://elcomercio.pe/peru/mineria-ilegalaramayo-suspende-tramite-polemico-proyecto-419084
…Congresswoman Alejandra Aramayo, of the Popular Force [party currently
not in power in Peru], presented bill 1095 in March that laid out two modifications
to the norms that classify the crime of illegal mining and that establish the
parameters to confront it as an organized crime. Nevertheless, according to what
has become known through her twitter account, she has suspended the legislative
process. According to what she writes in the publication, the bill was not
withdrawn, but rather the process suspended in order to find language that allows
for differentiation between illegal mining and informal mining.
OE Watch | July 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA
Illegal Immigration Problems Continue to Plague Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: In recent months,
Colombian authorities have been fighting an uphill
battle against illegal immigration into the country
that seems to have no end in sight. As the first
excerpt notes, thousands from Venezuela try to enter
Colombia daily hoping to acquire basic necessities
such as food and water, and if they are lucky, a day
of work. From Ecuador, Cuban and Haitian migrants
have flocked into Colombia in hopes of continuing
their journey north. The problem is obvious, but
from the Colombian perspective, migration problems
are newsworthy for two reasons, as discussed in the
accompanying passages.
First, as the excerpt from El Espectador discusses,
Colombian immigration is partially self-perpetuating
in the sense that select government institutions are
directly linked with illegal immigration in certain
parts of the country. Second, as the excerpt from La
Patria notes, the Colombian government has been
hit by an additional wave of Venezuelan immigration
given the worsening situation in the neighboring
country. Colombia realizes that it is fighting an
immigration crisis and has proposed several solutions.
These include creating a national committee that
will focus solely on human trafficking/illegal
immigration in addition to working with neighboring
countries in creating shared plans to fight this issue
collaboratively. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“Colombian authorities recently dismantled an illegal
human trafficking network that was aided by employees of the
National Migration Service, the National Registry, and the
Directorate of Criminal Investigation...”
Source: “El triste éxodo de los venezolanos a Colombia (The Sad Exodus of
Venezuelans Entering into Colombia)”, La Semana, 31 March 2017. http://
www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/venezolanos-en-colombia-y-colombianosrepatriados/519657
“No one knows for certain how many illegal Venezuelans are currently living in
Colombia, but what is known is that 55,000 entered the country legally between 2012
and 2016. However, Daniel Pages, the President of the Venezuelan Association in
Colombia estimates between legal and illegal Venezuelans, there are approximately
1,200,000 living in the country. Pages further indicated that many of the Venezuelans
entering the country illegally are simply looking for food, shelter, or a day of work
given the grave situation in Venezuela.”
Source: “Venezolanos ilegales en Colombia, problema por resolver (Illegal
Venezeualan Migrants Living in Colombia Continue to be Problematic)”, La Patria,
03 February 2017. http://www.lapatria.com/nacional/venezolanos-ilegales-encolombia-problema-por-resolver-347120
“2016 represented the year with the highest levels of illegal Venezuelan immigration
into Colombia and 2017 is on track to exceed 2016 levels. Daniel Pages, the
President of the Venezuelan Association in Colombia affirmed this idea by stating
that the Venezuelan immigration situation is not likely to end any time soon because
the situation in Venezuela continues to worsen. For this reason, he has asked the
Colombian government to support Venezuelans entering the country and to help them
find work.”

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
CELEBRATING 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | July 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA
Human Trafficking: A Shared Interest of Mexican Drug
Cartels
OE Watch Commentary: Mexican drug cartels do not
generally work together unless it is somehow related to
increasing their overall profit margin. In some cases, more
powerful cartels will work with smaller organizations to move
drug shipments across key trafficking points along the USMexico border, but again, this is related to monetary gain. As
the first accompanying passage discusses, in recent months,
authorities have noted that cartels are now joining forces
to increase their profit margins through human trafficking
activities. While this has likely occurred for years, this is the
first time that it is being publicly reported in Mexico.
The second passage discusses a report by SIEDO (Assistant
Attorney General’s Office for Special Investigations on
Organized Crime in Mexico), which claims that currently,
rival criminal organizations such as the Sinaloa Cartel, Juarez
Cartel, Los Rojos, Los Guerreros Unidos, Los Ardillos, Los
Zetas, the Gulf Cartel and the New Generation Cartel of
Jalisco (CJNG) have forged alliances in 17 Mexican states
to engage in human trafficking. The report also indicates
that drug cartel plaza bosses have woven webs of complicity
with authorities at all levels, politicians and public officials
to generate multimillion-dollar profits via human trafficking
activities. The third excerpt further provides insight on areas
where this type of activity is most common.
Security experts are hypothesizing that dominant drug
cartels have signed pacts and created alliances for human
trafficking because the profits are too lucrative to ignore.
However, the fourth excerpt suggests that these pacts will
likely be temporary until cartels can find ways to control
human trafficking business in their territories exclusively,
hence generating more profits for their own organizations.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Organized crime groups in Mexico are
willing to set aside their bloody fights
over territory when the business venture
is human trafficking, a particularly
profitable crime...”

Source: “Bandas de trata de personas y cárteles: una relación cercana
en México (Human Trafficking Networks and Cartels Work Together in
Mexico),” Vice News, 01 May 2017.
https://news.vice.com/es/article/trata-de-personas-y-carteles-relacioncercana-en-mexico
Organized crime groups in Mexico are willing to set aside their bloody
fights over territory when the business venture is human trafficking,
a particularly profitable crime that generates $150 billion per year
throughout the world, according to a report released by the International
Labor Organization (ILO) entitled “Profits and Poverty: The Economics of
Forced Labor 2016”.
Source: “Une a carteles trata de personas (Cartels Joint Forces in
Human Trafficking),” El Diario, 24 April 2017. http://diario.mx/
Nacional/2017-04-23_a6ba83c6/une-a-carteles-trata-de-personas/
Investigations carried out by SIEDO indicate that the following
organizations have joined forces and or created alliances to carry out
human trafficking activities in Mexico: Sinaloa Cartel, Juarez Cartel, Los
Rojos, Los Guerreros Unidos, Los Ardillos, Los Zetas, the Gulf Cartel and
the New Generation Cartel of Jalisco.
Source: “México tiene 20 zonas con alta incidencia en trata de personas
(Mexico has 20 Zones with High Incidence of Human Trafficking
Activity),” Proceso, 30 July 2016. http://www.proceso.com.mx/411900/
mexico-tiene-20-zonas-con-alta-incidencia-en-trata-de-personas
The most common areas for human trafficking activity in Mexico include:
Tijuana and Mexicali in Baja California; Nogales, Sonora; Ciudad Juárez,
Chihuahua; Acapulco, Guerrero, Cancún, Quintana Roo, Nuevo Laredo
in Matamoros, Tamaulipas; Tapachula, Chiapas; Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco;
Los Cabos, Baja California Sur; the Federal District, Tlaxcala, Veracruz,
Hidalgo and Oaxaca.
Source: “Une a carteles trata de personas (Cartels Joint Forces in
Human Trafficking),” El Diario, 24 April 2017. http://diario.mx/
Nacional/2017-04-23_a6ba83c6/une-a-carteles-trata-de-personas/
Jose Reveles, a journalist and expert on security topics, clarified that
drug cartels will nearly always reach agreements or seek alliances to
maintain access to the illegal profits when it suits their needs; even if they
are archenemies. Afterwards, they commonly break the alliances and try to
take control of routes on their own or after the arrangement no longer suits
both or multiple parties.

OE Watch | July 2017

25

LATIN AMERICA
Increasing Levels of Violence Reported in Tijuana, Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: Since around 2009, violence levels
in Tijuana, Mexico have remained relatively stable, but the
beginning of 2017 has brought a striking increase in violence
to Tijuana and the surrounding region, as competition
between different criminal groups has put the key border
city on a path for its bloodiest year in nine years. As the first
accompanying passage discusses, state authorities from Baja
California, Tijuana’s home state, have reported that 334 people
were murdered in the border city during the first three months
this year, a potentially historic homicide rate that represents a
vast increase over the murder rate seen in recent years.
Open sources are speculating that the uptick in violence can
be attributed to the arrest and subsequent extradition of Sinaloa
Cartel leader Joaquin ‘El Chapo” Guzman to the United States.
Prior to 2009, the Tijuana Cartel controlled nearly all operations
in the state, but after years of fighting and a slow deterioration
of this group, the Sinaloa Cartel stepped in and assumed
control of this key trafficking territory that lies directly along
the US-Mexico border. With the extradition of El Chapo, the
Sinaloa Cartel is in re-organization mode while, as the second
passage notes, remains of the Tijuana Cartel are joining forces
with the New Generation Cartel of Jalisco to regain territory
they lost to the Sinaloa Cartel. Authorities must act quickly to
avoid a repeat of 2009 when Tijuana was classified as one of
the 10 most dangerous cities in the world due to territory wars
between cartels. The Mexican government appears to be aware
of brewing violence and has already sent 300 soldiers to Tijuana,
but time will tell if this intervention is enough to stop the battle
between two organized crime groups anxious to control one of
the most desired border crossing points between Mexico and the
United States. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...this year alone there have been 334 murders in the first
3 months of 2017 which has alerted authorities to brewing
violence in the state and particularly in Tijuana.”
Source: “Balaceras en Ensenada, Mexicali y Tijuana (Shootouts Reported
in Ensenada, Mexicali and Tijuana),” Zeta Tijuana, 02 February 2017.
http://zetatijuana.com/2017/02/27/balaceras-en-ensenada-mexicali-ytijuana/
“In Tijuana, data from the past five years shows both the numbers of
homicides and the rates of killings fell following extreme violence in 2009
and 2010. In 2011, there were 418 recorded homicides, which fell to 320 in
2012. In both years, that placed Tijuana seventh among the 10 most violent
cities in the nation and marked a sharp decline from the 1,250 homicides
in 2010 and the 1,094 in 2009, according to the report. However, this year
alone there have been 334 murders in the first 3 months of 2017 which has
alerted authorities to brewing violence in the state and particularly in
Tijuana.”
Source: “Suman 334 muertos en 3 meses por violencia en Tijuana (334
Murders Reported during First Three Months of 2017 in Tijuana),” El Sol
de Hidalgo, 02 April 2017. https://www.elsoldehidalgo.com.mx/republica/
justicia-republica/suman-334-muertos-en-3-meses-por-violencia-en-tijuana
“Any past agreements between cartels to end violence appear to be gone.
What appears to be happening is that remnants of the Tijuana Cartel have
joined forces with the New Generation Cartel of Jalisco (CJNG), to fight
the Sinaloa Cartel. This new alliance, which calls itself the New Generation
Cartel of Tijuana, will likely continue battling the Sinaloa Cartel in Tijuana
as well as in other parts of the state which in turn will continue fueling
violence.”

Panoramic View of Tijuana, Mexico.

Source: By http2007, (http://www.flickr.com/photos/http2007/4699469636/), [CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | July 2017

26

LATIN AMERICA
Israel to Finance Refurbishment of Honduran Military
Equipment
OE Watch Commentary: In late 2016, the Honduran National
Congress approved an agreement signed between the Honduran and
Israeli governments for the refurbishment of part of the Honduran Air
Force’s fleet of combat aircraft, helicopters, and naval vessels. The
accompanying passages from local sources discuss the importance of
this agreement, particularly in helping the Honduras military’s fight
against drug traffickers and gangs in the region.
According to the deal, Israel will provide equipment and
maintenance to Honduran army assets to include refurbishment
of 10 Northrop F-5E/F Tiger II, 10 Cessna A-37B Dragonfly, nine
Embraer EMB-312 Tucano fixed-wing aircraft, and its entire
helicopter inventory, which includes six Bell UH-1H, six 412EP,
and two Hughes 500D platforms. As the first excerpt discusses, this
agreement is important for helping Honduras in its ongoing efforts
to fight rampant drug trafficking in the region. This excerpt further
outlines that the total cost of the refurbishment is estimated at $209
million and should be completed by the end of 2017.
As the second passage points out, Honduran President Juan
Orlando Hernández said that the refurbishments and acquisition of
the new technology will give the Honduran government capabilities it
has never had before to “protect its territory, sovereignty and people.”
Hernández has indicated that up until now criminals often had more
resources and better technology than the government. It is also a
known fact that gangs, organized crime and drugs have long plagued
Honduras, and for many years, the country had a reputation for being
the “murder capital of the world.” And although the homicide rate
in Honduras has fallen by 30% over the past five years, from 86.5
per 100,000 people in 2011 to 60 per 100,000 last year, it still suffers
from some of the highest murder rates in the world. Therefore, the
Honduran government is hopeful that the new military equipment
will help their military keep pace with drug traffickers and gangs
operating in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...the refurbishments and acquisition of new
technology ... will help combat violence in
the country perpetrated by gangs and drug
traffickers.”
Source: Israel invertirá $200 millones en repotenciar las FF AA de
Honduras (Israel to Invest $200 Million to Refurbish Honduran
Air Force)”, La Tribuna, 16 January 2017. http://www.latribuna.
hn/2017/01/16/israel-invertira-200-millones-repotenciar-las-ff-aahonduras/
The strict defense of the national territory and the fight against
organized crime derived from drug trafficking have forced the state
security forces to rethink their strategies and improve their fighting
weapons. Part of this strategy is re-powering the war instruments
which the State already has. To fulfill part of this mission the current
Honduran government signed a support agreement with the State
of Israel, which consists of providing equipment and maintenance
to Honduran army assets to include refurbishment of: 10 Northrop
F-5E/F Tiger II, 10 Cessna A-37B Dragonfly, nine Embraer EMB-312
Tucano fixed-wing aircraft, and its entire helicopter inventory, which
includes six Bell UH-1H, six 412EP, and two Hughes 500D platforms.
Source: “Honduras firma convenio con Israel para fortalecer su
Fuerza Armada Diario Latino (Honduras Signs Agreement with Israel
to Strengthen its Armed Forces),” Diariocolatino.com, 3 February
2017. http://www.diariocolatino.com/honduras-firma-convenio-israelfortalecer-fuerza-armada/
Honduran President Juan Orlando Hernández stated that the
refurbishments and acquisition of new technology are items
that cannot be ignored as these items will help combat violence
in the country perpetrated by gangs and drug traffickers. He
further indicated that these acquisitions will “protect its territory,
sovereignty and people.”

A Small Box That’s a Big Deal: How Latin
American Countries Are Using CubeSATs
and Why it Matters
by Kevin Freese
The Army is the Defense Department’s largest space user and
the space domain is an essential part of the current and future
operational environment. A relatively new satellite technology
– the CubeSAT – is now making it easier for countries such as
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay to launch their space
programs. By facilitating traditionally non-spacefaring nations
to develop space programs, CubeSATs will give such nations a
greater voice in international space policies and laws. For the
United States, this will mean increased necessity to take the
interests of other nations into consideration when operating in
space.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195397
OE Watch | July 2017

27

ASIA-PACIFIC
Japan’s Amphibious Ambitions
OE Watch Commentary: At the end of March Japan stood
In order to successfully take on the mission of
up an Initial Operational Capability for its Amphibious Rapid
Deployment Brigade (ARDB). Japan’s Ministry of Defense
defending the islands, we must continuously improve
plans to stand up the Full Operational Capability of the ARDB
our capacity to conduct amphibious operations. I
in March 2018. The 3000-man brigade will be equipped with
refurbished Amphibious Assault Vehicles (AAV-7), an indigenous,
want you to tenaciously tackle this mission.
air-transportable Maneuver Combat Vehicle, and MV-22 Osprey
tilt-rotor aircraft, among other enablers. The unit is being formed
-WAIR Regimental Commander Toyoda Ryūji
from, and will replace, a 500-man light infantry unit, the
Source: “陸自水陸機動団新設まで１年 準備部隊の編成完結 [長崎県],
Western Army Infantry Regiment (WAIR), stationed in Sasebo,
(One Year until the GSDF [Full Operational Capability] Amphibious
Kyushu.
Brigade is Established: The Preparatory [Initial Operational Capability]
The Government of Japan (GOJ) has expressed concerns in
Unit has been Formed, Nagasaki Prefecture),” Nishi Nippon Shimbun, 28
March 2017, morning edition, https://mainichi.jp/articles/20170329/ddl/
official strategic documents for its so-called offshore or remote
k42/040/338000c
islands (by law Japan’s four largest islands, plus the island of
Okinawa, are designated main islands, while all other islands
The Ground Self-Defense Force, on 27 March, in Ainoura Base, Ogataare classified, in English, as offshore or remote islands) –
chō, Sasebo City, held a ceremony recognizing the establishment of
especially those in the southwest – since at least 2004. Those
four additional units, as well as an induction-training unit, into its
concerns have only heightened in recent years with China
[Initial Operational Capability or IOC] preparatory Amphibious Rapid
aggressively challenging international norms in the South and
Deployment Brigade, formed to defend remote islands. The Amphibious
East China seas. Japan was a leading Great Power between
Rapid Deployment Brigade will be established [will reach Full Operational
World War I and II in developing amphibious doctrine (at least
Capability or FOC] in March 2018.
against uncontested shores) and armored ship-to-shore vehicles,
but it has not had an amphibious capability since 1945. For most
For the Self-Defense Force in its history not to
of the time since 1945 Japan has embraced a norm, best described
have this capability is basically unlike many of the
by political scientist Andrew Oros, of domestic anti-militarism.
The militarism referred to would not be labeled as such by most of
countries of the world. Our use of this capability will
the rest of the world, but would simply be considered normal and
also be unusual.
wise military preparedness in a world of uncertain threats.

“

”

“

”

It is a measure of the GOJ’s concern, and of changing attitudes
among Japan’s populace, that this new capability is being
pursued. These changing attitudes are recognizable in the first
article quoted, in that the establishment of the unit is straightforwardly reported, with no hint of disapproval. The first
article is from Kyushu, where the unit will be located. Kyushu
is historically conservative, and supportive of the Self-Defense
Force (SDF). But the changing attitude is also evident in the
second article, from one of Okinawa’s main newspapers.
Okinawa is historically sensitive to all things military. Yet,
the facts, again, are reported relatively straightforwardly. The
article’s author does make his disapproval known, though subtly.
By saying “specific scenarios . . . are not clear,” in training
and exercises, he is stoking concern and worry among many
Okinawan about the kinds of training conducted on facilities
that Okinawans who do not work there have little access to.
When he says the original 3000-man ARDB might grow, and
Okinawa may be where the new personnel are stationed, he is
touching on the nerves of readers who, for the most part, feel
Okinawa already bears an outsized military burden. Finally, by
using the word, “ittaika,” when talking about the integration
of forces, he is using a word that carries a specific, negative
connotation. To many Japanese, and particularly in Okinawa,
ittaika means Japan’s SDF could fall under another country’s
command, and be drawn into another country’s wars. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hunter-Chester)

-Western Army Commanding General Ogawa
Source: “米海兵隊から技能習得、将来は沖縄も配備候補？陸自「水
陸機動団」発足へ準備進む (Having Acquired Its Skills from the U.S.
Marine Corps, in the Future will it Be Stationed in Okinawa? Progress on
Establishing the Amphibious Brigade Continues),” Okinawa Times, 30
March 2017, http://www.okinawatimes.co.jp/articles/-/90832
On the 29th one year had passed since enacting the security law which
expanded the SDF’s overseas missions and allows for the exercise of
collective self-defense rights. However, the amphibious unit which will
recapture offshore islands emphasized, “We will recapture our country’s
own territory, invaded by other countries. This is a big difference with the
US Marine Corps; we will not be doing this outside our own country.”
The Western Army Infantry Regiment, the mother of the Amphibious
Brigade, has been training not only in the United States but also on US
military facilities in this country.
Specific scenarios in training and joint exercises are not clear. In the
“Guidelines for Japan-US Defense Cooperation Guidelines” revised in
April 15, just before the new security act was passed, strengthening and
updating Japan-US joint planning was stipulated.
In March 2018 the amphibious brigade will be comprised of two regiments,
but another regiment may be added within the next mid-term defense
buildup plan (2019-2023). Okinawa is among the candidates for stationing.
If the integration of Japan and the United States progresses, an increase in
the influence on Okinawa cannot be avoided.
OE Watch | July 2017

28

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Establishes First Combat-Level, Big Data Center
for Disaster Recovery
OE Watch Commentary: Recently, the Central Military Commission of
the People’s Liberation Army newspaper published the following excerpted
article announcing the establishment of China’s first combat-ready, big data
center for disaster recovery. According to the article, the data recovery
center “blazes a new path for civil-military integrated development in the
domain of civil defense.”
China has made huge strides in information-based technologies in recent
years and, as the accompanying article states, views data as “the blood
of economic development, and the lifeblood of future warfare.” The data
recovery center, located somewhere in China’s northeastern province of
Jilin, is said to be nuclear-resistant, chemical-resistant, magnetic storm
resistant, and natural disaster-resistant. In addition to physical protection,
the article claims that the data recovery center possesses magneto-optical
integrated data storage technology that will prevent any hackers from
tampering with protected records. Information flow to and from the data
recovery center is further protected by security measures that include
quantum encryption-based communications technology, which cannot be
intercepted (without alerting the users). China has been endeavoring to be
the first to perfect quantum information based technologies.
There are a few nuances worth noting in the article. For example, where
the author refers to the data recovery center being “magnetic stormresistant” one might assume that China is also preparing to protect itself
from an adversary’s electro-magnetic pulse weapon. Also, the author’s
reference to China’s “long march” is probably an understatement of China’s
current prowess. What is certain, however, is the country’s determination
to become even stronger in one of the areas that it deems of utmost
importance – informationization and information security. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Liu Jianwei, “吉林省着力探索人防领域军民融合发
展新路: 全国首家战备级大数据灾备中心启用 (Jilin Province
Blazes a New Path for Civil-Military Integrated Development in
the Domain of Civil Defense, Puts into Operation China’s First
Combat Ready Data Center for Disaster Recovery),” Jiefangjun
Bao, 23 May 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/mil/201705/23/c_129615078.htm
“Data is the blood of economic development, and the lifeblood
of future warfare.”
“The disaster recovery center has nuclear-resistant, chemicalresistant, magnetic storm-resistant, natural disaster-resistant,
and contingency response capabilities, which guarantee that
data may be truly kept in a safe and well-protected condition,”
said Wang Yonghui while giving his explanation. In addition
to the advantages of physical protection, they also introduced
magneto-optical integrated data storage technology to prevent
hacker intrusion from tampering with original records and
changing copies. In the aspect of data transmission technology,
the security measures include the adoption of the quantum
encryption-based communications technology, which provides
full-cycle encryption to the transmission of core data between
users and the disaster recovery center, thus guaranteeing the
security of data in the course of transmission.
“Facilitate the development and utilization of civil defense
resources for combat readiness in the form of combining their
peacetime and wartime functions is a task for us in the age of
information, and we have just taken the first step on the long
march!”

Is China’s Endeavor for Technological Innovation Paying Off?
OE Watch Commentary:
Innovation is clearly at the
top of Chinese President Xi
Jinping’s agenda. According
to Xi, as cited in the first
article, “If we do not recognize,
respond to and pursue
changes, we could fall into a
strategically passive situation
and miss the opportunities for
development, and even miss
an entire era.” According to
the article, China invested
more than two percent of its
gross domestic product on
research and development and
is pushing to form the “largest
scientific and technological
innovation team in the world.”
(continued).

Source: “为科技创新的强劲势头点赞 (Promoting the Strong Momentum of Scientific and Technological
Innovation (CHO2017052003453155),” Renmin Ribao, 20 May 2017. http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/
html/2017-05/20/nw.D110000renmrb_20170520_6-01.htm
“It will not do without innovation and it will not do to if we are slow in innovation either. If we do not
recognize changes, do not respond to changes, and do not pursue changes, we could fall into a strategically
passive situation and miss the opportunities for development, and even miss an entire era.” General
Secretary Xi Jinping’s inference has captured the heavy component of innovation-driven development
strategy in the entire national development and pointed out the internal logic of China’s indomitable and
continuous input in independent innovation in the past 40 years.
… some deep changes are quietly taking place: in the aspect of talented personnel, China is forming the
largest scientific and technological innovation team in the world; in the main scientific and technological
field, China is increasingly entering the first phalanx, from running from behind to catch up to gradually
running shoulder to shoulder with the others; in the aspect of scientific research environment, scientific
and technological institutional reform has been steadily promoted, and the scientific spirit and innovation
awareness is growing vigorously in the whole society….International media have even said with sighs about
these major changes, “the momentum of innovation is shifting geographically to the East.”
The road for the march toward the forefront of an innovative type of country and become a world scientific
and technological power in the future is similarly not the boundless plain. However, with today’s massive
and solid accumulation, by seizing the historical opportunity at the historical juncture, we have the
confidence to rely on scientific and technological innovation to re-define “China’s strength” and create new
Chinese miracles.

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2017

29

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: Is China’s Endeavor for Technological
Innovation Paying Off?
The second article offers a brief summary of some of
the country’s most recent innovations, which include the
maiden voyage of the country’s first homegrown, large
passenger jet, the C919 in early May; the launch of the first
indigenously made aircraft carrier; construction of the world’s
first quantum computing machine; and in-orbit refueling of
cargo spacecraft Tianzhou-1. In addition, after two decades
of trying, China finally mastered combustible ice mining
technology, which, according to the article, is an “efficient and
clean energy that holds strategic importance for future global
energy development.”

Source: “Spotlight: China’s Major Technological Breakthrough Win Thumb
Up From International Community,” Xinhua, 22 May 2017. http://news.
xinhuanet.com/english/2017-05/22/c_136304767.htm

The third article goes into some detail on China’s newest
development – the “baby quantum computer.” According to
past Chinese press, the country has been making significant
progress on quantum encryption, even going so far as
to have launched the first quantum satellite in 2016 for
experimentation. Achieving a quantum computer, however,
poses a much bigger challenge to physicists, with some saying
a fully capable quantum computer could be decades away.
China’s “baby quantum computer” is described as something
that “can’t even beat the mobile phone in your hand.” While
these developments might appear trivial to some, they are
important milestones for China, demonstrating its growing
capacity to innovate. As noted in the first article, China “is
increasingly entering the first phalanx, from running from
behind to catch[ing] up to gradually running shoulder to
shoulder with the others.” As the country continues to push
beyond its baby-steps and to gain momentum in technological
innovation, the impact to both its military and economy will
surely grow. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Experts believe that the success shows China has mastered combustible ice
mining technology.

“…the momentum of innovation is shifting
geographically to the East.”

In recent weeks, China has successively brought to fruition a batch
of significant technological programs including a maiden trip of first
homegrown large passenger jet C919, launch of a first indigenously made
aircraft carrier, construction of world’s first quantum computing machine
and in-orbit refueling of cargo spacecraft Tianzhou-1.
Last week, China made its first success in mining at sea combustible ice, an
efficient and clean energy that holds strategic importance for future global
energy development, after two decades of continuing efforts.

As China makes rapid progress in science and technology, other nations in
the world are also increasingly seeking partnerships with it.
Source: Yu Fei, Xu Haitao, and Zhou Lin, “Unveiling China’s Baby Quantum
Computer,” Xinhua, 23 May 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/201705/23/c_136307623.htm
The “baby” quantum computer, unveiled in early May, is the first quantum
computing machine based on single photons that could go beyond the early
classical -- or conventional -- computer.
“Although the ‘baby’ quantum computer can’t even beat the mobile phone
in your hand, it’s a milestone. The first electronic computer in human
history, which is so big that it filled several rooms, is worthless today, but
it is of great scientific significance. We have to develop step by step from
science to technology and then to application,” Lu (Chaoyang, a 34-year-old
professor at the University of Science and Technology of China and one of the
developers of the prototype quantum computer) says.
Pan (Jianwei, one of China’s premiere quantum physicists) reckons Chinese
scientists could realize manipulation of 100 quantum bits within 10 years,
which means the capacity of one quantum computer would be a million times
the total capacity of all the computers currently in use.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | July 2017

30

ASIA-PACIFIC
Chinese Game of “Go” Offers Parallels to Strategic Thought
Source: Zhou Xiaoyu, “Strategic Thinking in the Game of Go,” China Military Science, No. 6, 2015, pp. 54-60.
OE Watch Commentary: “Go” is
a Chinese strategy board game for two
players using black and white “stones”
with the objective of encircling your
opponent to capture stones and areas on
the board. Territory is counted along with
captured stones to determine the winner.
It is often described as an intellectual
game that imitates military struggles
and teaches the rudiments of the art
of warfare. A 2015 article from China
Military Science offered insights from
the game that are still relevant to China’s
development or application of strategic
thought. End OE Watch Commentary
(Thomas)

…“For strategy, like the Go game, one must first understand his or her opponent’s specific
situation. If one does not even know who his or her opponent is, let alone understand the
specific situation of the opponent, his or her strategy will lose its object, which is likened to
releasing an arrow without aiming at a target, and the so-called strategy will ultimately have
no meaning. Only if commanders can fully understand the opponent’s essential characteristics
and force application patterns or trends, can the commanders not be confused by the
falsehoods of the enemy…

“The opening move in Go is very much about the overall view of the situation [whole board
thinking], namely, one should first occupy the big points and then engage with “the war….”
This is the same as why
Since ancient times, there has been a saying
there must be an overall
in China that both the theory of Go and the art
view in military strategy,
stressing the establishment
of warfare are similar. The deep philosophy
of strategic fulcrums and
contained in Go and its simple yin and yang
the completion of war
preparedness in advance
philosophy as well as its game thinking are
before starting the
the essence of traditional Chinese culture,
implementation of the specific actions. For a country, it should determine
which continually has an important impact on
the important strategic support points and the important strategic places
in accordance with its surrounding countries and geographic and
military strategic thinking…. For strategy, like
environmental situations and conditions; deploy important forces in the key
the Go game, one must first understand his or
parts and the key areas in order to ensure its own security and stability.
The view of the overall situation in terms of military strategy is to start from her opponent’s specific situation. If one does
national interests and the overall interests of the war… Only by planning
not even know who his or her opponent is,
and deploying actions from the height of the overall situation and stressing
seeking global interests instead of local interests, can one have the chance
let alone understand the specific situation of
of winning the war…
“What corresponds to the fixed pattern play (joseki) is the unusual play.
Go is known as ‘games which have been played for a thousand years but no
two of which are the same.’ What is stressed is the thinking patterns and the
progressive spirit of players who do not follow fixed pattern play (josekis)
but strive to seek new ways to play. Similarly, innovation in military
strategy is also an important way to win a war. There is the teaching that ‘a
victory never repeats itself’ from the ancient military book, which is also a
reflection of the thought of seeking changes and innovation….

“

the opponent, his or her strategy will lose its
object, which is likened to releasing an arrow
to aim at no target, and the so-called strategy
will be ultimately have no meaning”

“In strategy when we do not know the true intention of our opponent, we can also make some actions locally where there will be no decisive
impact on the overall strategic interests; or we can create some false information that does not involve our own strategic intent. Then, we can
make the correct judgment or decision by observing the corresponding reactions of our opponent so that the true intention of our opponent
can be found out. Mastering probe [moves] is an important means used to win Go games for a player; for a strategist, it is an important
capability to be able to deal with a strategic crisis. Only if one is a broad-minded, quick thinking and emotionally stable person, can it be
possible for he or she to fear nothing in the face of any danger, and dexterously use appropriate probe measures….
“We should learn from the way of thinking of a master Go player…On the one hand, we should pay attention to those seemingly important
strategic places and points; on the other hand we should also handle them flexibly with open minds in accordance with the practical battlefield
situation…a critically important point which could not be given up by either side is, namely, a ‘key stone’ in Go terms. Whoever lost this point
would lose the battle and the campaign. Currently, China has issues of territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests in places such
as the Diaoyu Islands, the South China Sea, etc. These issues are all major strategic issues which are related to China’s national interests…

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: Chinese Game of “Go” Offers Parallels to
Strategic Thought
“The so-called management of isolated weak groups (zhi gu) makes a group of stones come alive in the territory of one’s opponent. In the
process of Go playing, this is a key tactic which may turn passive moves into active moves. This can not only make oneself come out of a
passive situation, but also make one’s opponent be trapped in a passive situation. For military strategy, when the weak side is encircled by a
strong side, there is the issue of how to conserve strength in order to wait for the growth of one’s strength to be strong enough to be engaged
in a decisive combat….
“Playing endgame (shou guan in Go terms) is the end of concluding a Go game. It is also the last step to turn a winning game into a won
game. Doing a good job in playing endgame can possibly turn an unfavorable game situation into a winning game; not doing a good job in
playing the endgame can also turn a winning game into a losing game. Similarly in the war in Iraq, although the US Military won the victory
on the battlefield, it has failed to appropriately deal with Iraq’s post-war problems….”

Go board, at a Go-weekend, Hoge Rielen, Belgium.

Source: By Donarreiskoffer (Self-photographed), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2e/Go_board.jpg, CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0/)], via Wikimedia Commons

In 2016 Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have reorganized
the country’s security forces and reestablished
the nation’s military prowess. This study, Kremlin
Kontrol, aims to describe how control over the
security services and the military have hastened
those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | July 2017

32

ASIA-PACIFIC
Tensions in North Korea: The View from China’s
Northern Theater Command
by Peter Wood
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol.17, Issue 7, dated 15 May 2017, “Strategic Assessment: China’s Northern Theater
Command,” Edited for OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/strategic-assessment-chinas-northern-theater-command/

OE Watch Commentary: At the
end of April, China’s Defense Ministry
announced it would be conducting
“live fire drills” near the border with
North Korea. This followed weeks of
rumors that the People’s Liberation
Army (PLA) was deploying in large
numbers close to the Korean peninsula,
which the Ministry of Defense
spokesperson subsequently denied.
North Korean revelations of new
missile types, several missile tests and
China’s response to US deployment of
THAAD missiles have all contributed
to escalated tensions in the region.
An examination of China’s Northern
Theater Command (NTC), its military
organization responsible for Northeast
Asia, provides insight into China’s
interests in this region, particularly
toward the Korean peninsula.
For China, its 1,300 km border
with North Korea is a major source of
instability. The small, isolated country
is a trafficker of methamphetamines, a source of political refugees, and origin of violence as members of the Korean army regularly cross
into China to commit robberies or even murders. An additional concern is internal conflict in North Korea or overthrow of the Kim
regime. The excerpted editorial from the People’s Daily under the pseudonym Zhong Sheng (a homophone for “Voice of China”) argued
that the “situation on the Korean Peninsula... is nearing collapse.”
While careful not to place blame, the editorial made clear that action
Source: “钟声 (ZhongSheng), “朝鲜半岛需要负责任行动” (The
needed to be taken by North Korea to avoid deepening the problem
Korean Peninsula Needs to Take Responsible Action), 人民日报 (The
arising from its nuclear program and that the Chinese people “...never
People’s Daily), 30 April, 2017. http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/
fear any form of provocation or test.”
html/2017-04/30/nw.D110000renmrb_20170430_2-03.htm
140 million Chinese people live in Northeast China, densely
concentrated around Changchun, Shenyang and Dalian, near North
Korea, and would be affected by an outbreak of violence on the
Korean Peninsula. The Korean Peninsula’s west coast and the river
crossing at Dandong, in particular, is the primary route for trade and
would be the primary axis of advance in a crisis. The NTC is tasked
with protecting this vital region. Its composition and deployments
reflect that task.

“For a while now, people’s concern have deepened that the Korean
Peninsula situation is headed to total ‘collapse’. [...] China is not
directly involved in contradictions of the Korean Peninsula problem,
and China does not hold the key to resolving it. [...] Presently, all
parties involved need to refrain from mutually provocative words
and actions. North Korea must comply with UN Security Council
resolutions and must not continue its nuclear development. At the
same time, the United States and South Korea need to refrain from
continuing or even expanding military exercises and deployments
targeting North Korea. [...] The People of China love peace, but never
fear any form of provocation or test.”

China presumably has some contingency plan for a collapse of
North Korea. The Younger Kim’s repeated use of violence against
close political allies and reshuffling of top positions in the military
at least suggests that some power struggles are occurring. A mass
movement of North Korean civilians across the border into China is a major concern, particularly given the dense population centers not
far from the border, and the economic importance of Northeast China. While details are hard to come by, China has a number of border
security regiments and People’s Armed Police units that could be used to help control the situation. With the tensions in North Korea at
their highest point in the past decade, the NTC will likely receive more attention, even as China extends its military reach to the south and
east. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)
OE Watch | July 2017

33

ASIA-PACIFIC
ISIS Bombings in Jakarta: An Indonesian View
OE Watch Commentary: On 24
May, there were two explosions at a bus
terminal in Kampung Melayu in East
Jakarta, Indonesia. Three policemen
and two attackers, believed to be suicide
bombers, were killed. The Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) claimed the
operation. The next day, Indonesia’s
Minister for Political, Legal and Security
Affairs made a statement in which he
discussed the rationale for the attacks, as
well as his insight on their global context
and some measures Indonesia would take
to combat terrorism. The accompanying
passages from Indonesian-language
Detik.com provide these comments by
Minister Wiranto.
According to Wiranto, the attacks had
two objectives. The first objective was to
portray ISIS’s omni-presence, praise the
bombers as martyrs and make the death
toll seem as large as possible. In other
words, the attack was an attempt by ISIS
to appear more powerful than it actually is. The second
objective of such attacks, he claims, is to undermine
the credibility of the state itself.

2016 Sarinah-Starbucks Jakarta Attack 8.

Source: By Gunawan Kartapranata, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3A2016_Sarinah-Starbucks_Jakarta_Attack_8.JPG, CC BY-SA 4.0.

At the same time, the Minister recognizes that the attack in Jakarta
was not an isolated incident, even though it was the first major terrorist
attack in Indonesia since a previous ISIS-claimed suicide attack
operation at a Starbucks and a mall in Jakarta in January 2016. Only
two days before the attack at Kampung Melayu, an ISIS-claimed
suicide bombing at a music concert in Manchester, United Kingdom
killed 22 mostly young girls. The Manchester attack, according to
the Minister, had the same basic characteristics as the Jakarta attack
even if it was larger in scale. The Minister also warned about ISIS
consolidation in the southern Philippines, which coincidentally saw a
series of ISIS-claimed operations in Marawi, Mindanao beginning at
about the same time as the Minister’s statement.
To address concerns about terrorism the Minister encourages more
regional cooperation. He notes, for example, that Indonesia, Australia,
New Zealand, Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines are working
together in the waters around the southern Philippines, where he says
ISIS is operating. The Minister also notes that Indonesia and Australia
have been tracking ISIS’s spread from Syria and Iraq to other regions of
the world. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Wiranto: Aksi Bom Kampung Melayu Punya Kesamaan
dengan Manchester (Wiranto: Bombing of Kampung Melayu Has
Commonality with Manchester),” Detik.com, 25 May 2017. https://
news.detik.com/berita/3511596/wiranto-aksi-bom-kampungmelayu-punya-kesamaan-dengan-manchester
Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal and Security Affairs
Wiranto strongly condemns the suicide bomb attacks that occurred
at the Kampung Melayu terminal in East Jakarta. “Although the
bomb attacks in Manchester, England and in Kampung Melayu
have different perpetrators, they have the same character, that is
first to show their existence and second to make the death toll seem
as big as possible and ultimately threaten the existence of the State,”
said Wiranto in his statement at the Soekarno-Hatta International
Airport in Jakarta.
Wiranto said Indonesia and Australia from the beginning have
been following information on ISIS expansion and spreading power
to all regions after ISIS’s base in Syria was attacked. To that end,
Indonesia and Australia agreed to build stronger cooperation to
neutralize ISIS’s consolidation around Sulu waters. The countries
that will join in the cooperation are Indonesia, Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines.

“Although the bomb attacks in Manchester, England and in Kampung Melayu [Jakarta]
have different perpetrators, they have the same character, that is first to show their existence
and second to make the death toll seem as big as possible and ultimately threaten the
existence of the state.”
OE Watch | July 2017

34

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Examining “Dushanbe Anti-Terror 2017”
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s joint military exercises
with Tajikistan over the past few years have shared a number
of similarities, including the involvement of a large number
of soldiers, weapon systems and equipment while working
through a scenario of combating a terrorist group, which
had conducted an incursion across the Tajik-Afghan border.
The accompanying excerpted articles report on “Dushanbe
Anti-Terror 2017,” an exercise by Russian and Tajik forces
conducted through the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) Antiterrorism Center (ATC). The exercise
involved a similar scenario to recent joint exercises in
Tajikistan, but there are a few key differences worth noting.
One of the most significant differences between
“Dushanbe Anti-Terror 2017” and other recent RussianTajik exercises is noted in the article from the Russian
newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta, which reports on how
“the ‘Iskander-M’ missile system was transferred from
Russia for the first time” for an exercise. This is in addition
to Russia transferring Mi-8 transport and Mi-24 attack
helicopters, and Su-24M bombers to Tajikistan for the
exercise, effectively creating “an aerospace umbrella.”
Russia used this equipment for the one of the stages of the
exercise, which took place at a training facility outside of
Dushanbe and involved a combined arms assault against
a terrorist group. The article also reports that while the
exercise took place “within the framework of the CIS
Antiterrorism Center (ATC),” “there are only two main
participants – Russia and Tajikistan.”
The article from Tajikistan’s Asia-Plus notes another
stage of the exercise that took place in the city of Dushanbe,
during which “the special forces of Tajikistan and Russia
will free a captured TV station.” It is also mentions
that “these are the first exercises carried out by the CIS
Antiterrorism Center with the participation of the armed
forces of Commonwealth states.” This is another key
difference from previous CIS ATC joint exercises, which
involved special purpose units or personnel from internal
security forces of member states, but not from their armed
forces. The second stage of the exercise in Dushanbe is
similar to previous CIS ATC exercises, particularly the
tactical aspects of it, but the article reports that the exercise
was only “…observed by delegates of the CIS Antiterrorism
Center.”

“...(the exercise) is being held within the framework of
the CIS Antiterrorism Center, but there are only two main
participants – Russia and Tajikistan...”
Source: Mukhin, Vladimir. “Содружество создает воздушно-космический
зонтик (The Commonwealth is creating an aerospace umbrella),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 26 May 2017. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2017-05-26/2_6996_zontic.
html
…The commander of the Central Military District, Colonel-General Vladimir
Zarudnitsky, stated that the “Iskander-M” missile system was transferred from
Russia for the first time for this exercise…(the exercise) is being held within
the framework of the CIS Antiterrorism Center, but there are only two main
participants – Russia and Tajikistan…
…A pair of Mi-8 and Mi-24 helicopters were transferred from the Tolmachevo
airbase to Tajikistan and a group of Su-24M bombers came from Shagol
airbase to the Ayni airfield outside of Dushanbe…
Source: Yuldashev, Avaz. “Спецназ Таджикистана и России освободит от
террористов захваченный телецентр в Душанбе (Special forces of Tajikistan
and Russia will free a captured television station from terrorists in Dushanbe),”
Asia-Plus, 30 May 2017. http://news.tj/ru/news/tajikistan/security/20170530/
spetsnaz-tadzhikistana-i-rossii-osvobodit-ot-terroristov-zahvachennii-teletsentrv-dushanbe
Within the framework of the international exercise “Antiterror-2017” that
began on 30 May in Tajikistan, the special forces of Tajikistan and Russia
will free a captured TV station in the capital…Around 2000 soldiers of the
Russian Army, more than 3000 service members of Tajikistan and more
than 400 combat aircraft, armored vehicles and artillery are involved in the
antiterrorism exercises that started today in two military facilities of Khatlon –
Kharbmaydon and Lyaur.
These are the first exercises carried out by the CIS Antiterrorism Center with
the participation of the armed forces of Commonwealth states…The exercises
are being observed by delegates of the CIS Antiterrorism Center – Russia,
Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Belarus and Uzbekistan…
Source: Kostenko, Yuliya. “Действующая система ОДКБ может не
среагировать на новые угрозы (The current system of the CSTO might not
respond to new threats),” 24.kg, 25 May 2017. https://24.kg/obschestvo/52703_
deystvuyuschaya_sistema_odkb_mojet_nesreagirovat_nanovyie_ugrozyi/
The current system of the CSTO might not respond to new threats. This
was stated today by Tokon Mamytov, Chairman of the People’s Assembly of
Kyrgyzstan... According to Mamytov, integration mechanisms are needed. “If
they are not updated, they will not work in 5 years. Also, cooperation with
security agencies of neighboring states should be developed…The fact that we
carry out exercises is good. However, tomorrow it will not function…,” said
Mamytov…

The article from the Kyrgyz 24.kg provides some insight
into why a CIS ATC exercise would only include two
member states in an active role and look more like an
exercise of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), which grew out of the framework of the CIS. All
current members of the CSTO are also active in the CIS
ATC. The article reports on a statement from Tokon Mamytov, a Kyrgyz government official and former head of Kyrgyzstan’s Border
Guards service, who said that “The current system of the CSTO might not respond to new threats” and “The fact that we carry out
exercises is good. However, tomorrow it (CSTO) will not function.” Over the past several years CSTO members have expressed some
doubts about the organization and what it would do for them against external threats. Overall, the articles show how Russia continues
to be actively involved in preparing for potential threats to Tajikistan and appears to be looking at additional ways to respond to them.
End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
OE Watch | July 2017

35

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Trilateral Security in the Caucasus
OE Watch Commentary: The trilateral relationship
between Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey that began
in June 2012 continues to take shape and as the
accompanying excerpted news briefs report, security
has become an important part of the relationship. The
article from the Georgian news website Civil.ge reports
on the joint military exercise “Caucasian Eagle 2017”
and how it “is the third trilateral special forces drill.”
The article also mentions how two weeks before the
exercise, the “Defense Ministers of Azerbaijan, Georgia
and Turkey held the fifth trilateral defense ministerial
summit in Batumi and discussed, among other issues,
joint military exercises and security for regional
economic projects.” It has been reported that additional
exercises are planned for later this year and in 2018.
The Turkish newspaper Daily Sabah reports on
another joint exercise between Turkey and Azerbaijan
and that it “took place in Nakhichevan, an exclave of
Azerbaijan” and that “According to a statement issued
by the Azerbaijani defense ministry, the drill was in
line with the previous agreements.” It is well known
that Azerbaijan’s relationship with Turkey dates back
a number of years and this other exercise demonstrates
that the trilateral relationship takes place outside of
that.
Lastly, the article from the Armenian news agency
Arka reports on the reaction from an Armenian
perspective to the recent joint exercise between
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey. The article states that
the exercise is “unlikely to trigger escalation of tension
in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict zone.” Nevertheless,
according to Ruben Safrastyan, the director of the
Institute of Oriental Studies of the Armenian National
Academy of Sciences, the “joint military exercises are
directed against Armenia.”
Other reports on the trilateral exercise did not include
much information on its scenario. The Georgian
Ministry of Defense released footage of the exercise
(see: http://agenda.ge/news/81038/eng) which shows
the special forces units involved in the exercise
conducting a number of drills, but nothing appeared to
be focused against any particular state or enemy force.
While Armenia has tense relations with Azerbaijan
and Turkey and no diplomatic ties with either, its
relationship with Georgia has been relatively good. If
the trilateral security relationship continues to develop,
Armenian-Georgian relations will be worth following.
End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“This is the third trilateral special forces drill by
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey.”

Members of the Azerbaijani Special Forces during a military parade in Baku 2011.
Source: WalkerBaku, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASpecial_forces_azerbaijan.png, CC BY-SA 3.0

Source: “Georgia Hosts Joint Military Exercises with Azerbaijan and Turkey,”
Civil.ge, 5 June 2017. http://civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=30159
Special forces units of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey launched joint “Caucasian
Eagle 2017” exercises on June 5. The drills are hosted by Georgia and they will
last till June 14…This is the third trilateral special forces drill by Azerbaijan,
Georgia and Turkey. The latter hosted the previous two exercises… On May 23,
Defense Ministers of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey held the fifth trilateral
defense ministerial summit in Batumi and discussed, among other issues, joint
military exercises and security for regional economic projects…
Source: “Turkey, Azerbaijan launch joint military exercise,” Daily Sabah, 12 June
2017. https://www.dailysabah.com/diplomacy/2017/06/12/turkey-azerbaijanlaunch-joint-military-exercise
Turkish and Azerbaijani armed forces launched joint military exercises on
Monday… The exercises took place in Nakhichevan, an exclave of Azerbaijan, and
are the latest in the series…According to a statement issued by the Azerbaijani
defense ministry, the drill was in line with the previous agreements…
Source: “Joint military exercises of Turkey, Azerbaijan and Georgia not to trigger
tension in Nagorno-Karabakh, expert says,” Arka, 23 May 2017. http://arka.am/en/
news/politics/joint_military_exercises_of_turkey_azerbaijan_and_georgia_not_to_
trigger_tension_in_nagorno_karabakh/
Joint military exercises to be conducted by Turkey, Azerbaijan and Georgia in
June and September are unlikely to trigger escalation of tension in the NagornoKarabakh conflict zone, Ruben Safrastyan, director of the Institute of Oriental
Studies of the National Academy of Sciences, said today… Nevertheless, he believes
that the joint military exercises are directed against Armenia. “The very fact of
conducting such military exercises should alert us. Look at the map, and it becomes
obvious that these exercises are directed against Armenia. We see that Turkey is
seeking to break the established balance of power in the region in favor of Georgia
and Azerbaijan,” Safrastyan told reporters…
OE Watch | July 2017

36

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
Armenia and India Build Strategic Relationship
by Eduard Abrahamyan
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, dated 23 May 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/armenia-india-build-strategic-relationship/

OE Watch Commentary: With Azerbaijan and Pakistan currently pursuing a
strategic partnership, Armenia and India have decided to step up their cooperation
across several dimensions. Indeed, the past six months were marked by a visible
reinvigoration of Armenian-Indian bilateral ties, which culminated with a visit to
Yerevan, on 24 April, of a high-level Indian delegation led by Vice President M.
Hamid Ansari. The Indian vice president held meetings with Armenia’s Foreign
Minister Eduard Nalbandyan, Prime Minister Karen Karapetyan and President Serzh
Sargsyan. The meetings resulted in the signing of three important agreements.
The most interesting of the three agreements is related to India’s intention to build
an Earth observation satellite (EOS) for Armenia. Under this deal, New Delhi agreed
to train Armenian scientists in the use of the system and handling and interpreting
its data. Reportedly, the satellite will be operated by a joint Armenian-Indian group
of specialists, serving the needs of both countries. Armenia has sought its own
observation satellite since 2011, and has approached both Western countries and
Russia as potential partners for cooperation. Then, in 2016, Yerevan procured the
Iskander-E short-range, land-mobile ballistic missile system from Moscow, which
added further motivation for Armenia to gain access to its own Earth observation
satellite. Even though EOSs are predominantly devoted to peaceful purposes, such
satellites could likely also be used to provide guidance, navigation and control
services for various military operations.
From this perspective, the cooperation with India on a shared EOS becomes
particularly important against the background of Armenia’s mounting standoff
with Azerbaijan. As the first accompanying passage demonstrates, the escalatory
military rhetoric, progressively amplified by officials in Yerevan and Baku, has
pushed Armenia to openly declare it could use its Iskander-E system for “active”
(i.e. pre-emptive) defense measures. This boosts India’s importance for Armenia,
as their partnership on satellite data collection and analysis can help make Armenia
less dependent on Russia—its critical security ally that plays an ambivalent if not
fomenting role in the Karabakh dispute.
As the second accompanying passage notes, both parties seek to foster mutually
beneficial comprehensive strategic cooperation. The solid groundwork for such an
intensive alignment was allegedly laid out as early as 2011, when two large Armenian
delegations, led by Foreign Minister Eduard Nalbandian and subsequently by then–
National Security Council Secretary Artur Bagdasaryan, visited New Delhi. Since
then, India has repeatedly stressed its interest in investing in Armenia’s military
industry complex and establishing a joint arms production consortium.
Looking ahead, Yerevan and New Delhi are preparing to sign a “strategic”
accord focused on partnership in defense and security. The pending document will
cover mutual support and military cooperation. The agreement is supposed to be
forged later this year, during Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan’s visit to India.
Furthermore, Armenia’s Ministry of Defense (MoD) delegation led by Chief of
Political Department Levon Ayvazian on 16 May undertook a four-day long visit
to India reportedly to figure out the opportunities of mutual military engagements.
The Armenian and Indian sides agreed to cooperate in peacekeeping, mountainous
training, joint military exercises and in other dimensions. At the meeting with
Shambhu S. Kumaran, India’s MoD Joint Secretary for Planning and International
cooperation, the sides also discussed mutually beneficial options for joint militaryindustrial production. Amidst the amicable atmosphere on 20 May, the parties signed
two agreements on military education and military-technical cooperation expressing
willingness to expand partnership in the near future. End OE Watch Commentary
(Abrahamyan)

“When asked ... about the possibility
of Indian-Armenian defense ties, Ansari
stressed that the two states intend to
further mutually beneficial comprehensive
cooperation...”
Source: “The speech of President of Armenia Serzh
Sargsyan in front of the army servicemen and to
their relatives,” President.am, 25 March 2017. http://
www.president.am/hy/press-release/item/2017/03/25/
President-Serzh-Sargsyan-awarded-Soldiers-inArtsakh/
“Last April, we threw back the adversary, which
violated international agreements, on all directions;
we ruined their plans, we smashed them altogether
in the information war of those days. In one year,
we fortified our border and armed our troops
to the extent that today our frontline is simply
unrecognizable. Today, our guys are following the
movements of the enemy in the depth of its own
territory. Today, super modern, devastating striking
power aims at the entire territory of our warhungry (belligerent) neighbor, including its vital
infrastructure. And today, the Commander-in-Chief of
Armenia without batting an eyelid will, if needed, give
the order to strike with the Iskander-E missiles. In the
neighboring country they know it all too well.”
Source: “Armenia and India to discuss military
cooperation,” Asbarez.com, 26 April 2017. https://goo.
gl/sde1XU
“When asked by reporters about the possibility of
Indian-Armenian defense ties, Ansari stressed that
the two states intend to further mutually beneficial
comprehensive cooperation in the areas of common
interest. Ansari arrived in Armenia on Monday and
held talks with President Serzh Sarkisian and Prime
Minister Karen Karapetian the following day. During
the meetings the sides agreed on the need to expand
the agenda of cooperation in various areas in an
effort to lift the cooperation to the strategic level”.

OE Watch | July 2017

37

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
New Over-the-Horizon Radars Increase Russian
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The Soviet
Union had a considerable ground based
missile warning element, consisting of
many over-the-horizon (OTH) radars spread
across the Soviet Union, operated by the
Radiotechnical Troops. Even in the best
of times, the Soviets acknowledged some
significant gaps in radar coverage, especially
in the northeast sector. Russia’s OTH radar
capabilities rapidly deteriorated as the Soviet
Union dissolved. Several of these radars
were now in foreign countries, including
Skrunda (Latvia), Mukachevo and Sevastopol
(Ukraine), Kutkashen (Azerbaijan), and
Balkhash and Gulshat (Kazakhstan). Russia
reached agreements with a few of these new
states, but most foreign based OTH radars
were removed or destroyed. Russia was in
dire financial straits for most of the 1990s
and made no serious efforts to reinvigorate
OTH radar capabilities. New OTH radar
construction began only in the late 2000s. The
accompanying passages from Russian sources
discuss the capabilities of the new Voronezh
radars and report that the complete deployment
of these radars will close all missile warning
gaps, providing a level of coverage that even the
Soviet Union could not achieve. (continued)

Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “Выследят и предупредят: Система предупреждения о
ракетном нападении замкнулась (They Will Track Down and Warn: Missile Attack
Warning System Now Self-Contained),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 23 March 2017.
https://rg.ru/2017/03/23/u-rossii-vnov-poiavilos-edinoe-radiolokacionnoe-pole.html
Voronezh over-the-horizon radar stations have covered the country with an unbroken
radar field. They can see thousands of kilometers beyond its borders. We can no longer be
[caught off guard].
The Russian President has issued a message of thanks to the designers of the Voronezhes
-- the collective of the Long-Range Radio Communications Scientific Research Institute
(NIIDAR) Science and Production Complex. These radar systems are distinguished not
only by an enhanced degree of far-sightedness, but also by so-called high factory readiness.
The fact that the highly complex radar stations are virtually entirely assembled and tested
in factory conditions made it possible to install them along the entire perimeter of Russia’s
state border within a very short space of time…Last year, for the first time in their history,
and for the first time in the world, NIIDAR’s specialists managed to carry out preliminary
and state tests of two new Voronezh-DM radar stations at once and then to hand them over
to the client -- the Ministry of Defense. Rossiyskaya Gazeta has learned certain details of
the, without exaggeration, unprecedented work to introduce two Voronezh-DM at once near
Yeniseysk and Barnaul…
A system for the fully automated processing of the test results was successfully created
during the actual process of handing over the first Voronezh-DM radar stations to the client
…UAVs and powerful electronic warfare systems were utilized. It turned out that it was
virtually impossible to jam the Voronezhes. In the near future, Voronezh-DM radar stations
will take up combat duty near Barnaul and Yeniseysk and a Voronezh-M radar station
will take up combat duty in Orsk. In the words of experts, the new radars are capable
of recording launches of ballistic and cruise missiles from the air and ground and from
submarines at a distance of up to 6,000 kilometers. A high-speed computer instantaneously
determines the missile’s flight trajectory and the likely place where the warhead will fall to
earth.

“During the course of their modernization the
latest Voronezh type radar stations became able to
detect and track hypersonic aerial vehicles over the
course of their entire flight.”

Voronezh-M Radar

(continued)

Source: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, http://structure.mil.ru/structure/forces/cosmic/
weapons/more.htm?id=10342850@morfMilitaryModel, CC 4.0

OE Watch | July 2017

38

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: New Over-the-Horizon Radars Increase Russian
Capabilities
The Russian Federation uses several classes of OTH radars, to
include the Dnepr, Daryal, Volga, and Voronezh. The Voronezh
class phased-array radars are the most modern and reportedly have
a detection range up to 6,000 km horizontally and up to 8,000 km
vertically, with the capability to track up to 500 objects. These
radars are core components of Russia’s missile warning, space
object identification, and terrestrial airspace monitoring programs.
The Voronezh-DM operates in the decimeter radio wavelength
(UHF), the Voronezh-M in the meter range (VHF), the VoronezhVP (high-capacity) in the meter range (VHF), and the proposed
Voronezh-SM will operate in the centimeter range/S-band (UHF/
SHF). As discussed in the accompanying article from Rossiyskaya
Gazeta, since Russia has resumed OTH radar construction, four
new Voronezh radar stations have been deployed in the Leningrad,
Kaliningrad, Irkutsk and Krasnodar Kray regions. Two more
Voronezh radars are undergoing operational testing in Krasnoyarsk
and Altay Kray, and a new Voronezh radar is undergoing
preliminary trials in the Orenburg Oblast. Construction of a new
Voronezh radar station in the Arctic Circle began in 2015, and
construction of a new Voronezh radar station in northwest Russia is
also under consideration. Russia has touted new technologies which
have sped construction and reduced power requirements by over
fifty-fold. All Soviet-era OTH missile warning radars are scheduled
to be decommissioned in the next few years. As the accompanying
article from Izvestiya mentions, these radars are now even capable
of detecting and tracking hypersonic glide vehicles. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin and Aleksey Ramm, “«Воронеж» отследит
американских гиперзвуковых «бегунов» (The Voronezh Will Track
American Hypersonic ‘Sprinters’),” Izvestiya Online, 16 May 2017.
http://izvestia.ru/news/697562
American “sprinters”, hypersonic aerial vehicles (GZLA) which
develop speeds of 5-6 kilometers a second, will not remain undetected
by Russia’s missile attack warning system (SPRN). During the course
of their modernization the latest Voronezh type radar stations became
able to detect and track hypersonic aerial vehicles over the course of
their entire flight. The “sprinters” are especially created to bypass
the Russian missile attack warning system. Until recently their flight
trajectory was in the “dead” zone of the missile attack warning
system. It was impossible to detect them, and even more so, to track
them…
“Our Voronezh radar stations are indeed able to ‘see’ any advanced
means of aerospace attack at a very great distance,” Izvestiya was
told by Dmitriy Stupin, Deputy General Designer of the RTI Concern
[the manufacturer]. “In designing them to meet the challenges of
yesterday, a potential for serious modernization capability was
embedded in our stations. Radar stations of the Voronezh line may be
modernized both from the point of view of their power capabilities, as
well as their informational tasks. Moreover, they have the capability
of also extending their antenna ‘field,’ increasing the power of the
transmission systems, and increasing the capability of accuracy
and resolution measuring parameters. And finally, there are also
programming and algorithmic solutions. All of this ensures essential
parameters for successfully resolving aerospace defense tasks.”…

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign articles and other media
that our analysts believe give
military and security experts an
added dimension to their critical
thinking about the Operational
Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | July 2017

39

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
New Radio and Optical Telescopes Improve Russian
Space Monitoring and Missile Warning Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Space Monitoring
System (SKKP) [Системой Контроля Космического
Пространства (СККП)] is designed to monitor artificial
Earth satellites and other space objects, and is integrated
with the Russian Missile Attack Warning System (SPRN)
[Системой Предупреждения о Ракетном Нападении
(СПРН)]. The accompanying passages from Russian sources
discuss the capabilities of Russia’s latest space monitoring and
missile warning systems.
The SKKP primarily monitors the low earth orbits
(altitudes from 120-3,500 km with orbital inclinations from
30° to 150°) and geostationary orbits (altitudes from 35,00040,000 km with orbital inclinations from 35° to 105°). The
SKKP uses three main complexes, the Krona low-orbitobject radio-optical surveillance complex located in the
vicinity of Nakhodka, Russia, in the Northern Caucasus.
The Krona complex has capabilities in the radio and optical
bands, to include centimeter and decimeter band radars
and a laser-optical locator. The Okno complex is located
in the vicinity Nurek, Tajikistan, and is intended to detect
space objects, determine their movement parameters, and
collect photometric characteristics. The complex was
modernized in 2014, and is now considered an “Okno-M.”
This modification reportedly allows the automatic detection
and identification of space objects, and calculates their
orbits at altitudes of 2-40,000 km. An Okno-S complex is
reportedly being constructed near Spassk-Dalniy, Russia. As
the accompanying articles discuss, the Altay optical-laser
complex detects and tracks space objects based on reflected
solar radiation and laser measurements. The Altay complex
has two ground-based optical laser systems, one with a .60
meter telescope, and another with a 3.12 meter telescope
that is capable of obtaining detailed images of low-orbiting
spacecraft. There will reportedly be a total of four such
systems, with the others planned for Kaliningrad, the Far
East, and Crimea.
The SKKP uses the data collected from dedicated,
collateral, and contributing sensors to maintain Main
Catalog of Space Objects. This catalog contains information
on 12,000 space objects, as small as 20 centimeters. The
Russian Federation plans on constructing, or has constructed,
10 additional facilities for space object identification. These
facilities will allow for the tracking of objects as small as
10 centimeters, this capability will reportedly more than
double the number of items in Russia’s current space catalog.
In April 2017, it was announced that Russia would create
four new laser-optical and four radiotechnical space object
identification complexes to provide global and continuous
monitoring of outer space on all axes by 2020. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The creation in Russia of four new laser-optical and
four radio systems for identification of space objects
will make it possible by 2020 to implement global and
continuous monitoring of outer space at all altitudes and
in all planes and inclinations...”
Source: Dmitriy Grigoryev, “ВКС России развернет новейшие системы
контроля космоса (The Russian Aerospace Forces Will Deploy the Latest
Space Monitoring Systems),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 1 April 2017.
https://rg.ru/2017/04/01/vks-rossii-razvernet-sistemy-novogo-pokoleniiadlia-kontrolia-kosmosa.html
The Aerospace Forces Space Troops Have begun the deployment of
new-generation specialized ground space monitoring systems, the Russian
Ministry of Defense Information and Mass Communications Department
reports.
The communique states that the creation of four new laser-optical and
four radiotechnical space object identification complexes on Russia’s
territory will permit it to provide global and continuous monitoring of
outer space on all axes by 2020.
The first new-generation laser-optical complex has already completed
state tests and has begun alert duty on the territory of Altay Kray.
Source: Vitaliy Nevar, “Космические войска РФ развертывают
новейшие комплексы контроля (Four New Systems Will Allow
Continuous Monitoring of Space at All Altitudes and in All Planes and
Inclinations),” TASS Online, 30 March 2017. http://tass.ru/armiya-iopk/4140090
The Space Troops of the Russian Federation Aerospace Forces have
started to deploy specialized new-generation ground-based space
monitoring facilities, according to the Russian Federation Defense
Ministry.
“The creation in Russia of four new laser-optical and four radio
systems for identification of space objects will make it possible by 2020 to
implement global and continuous monitoring of outer space at all altitudes
and in all planes and inclinations,” the Defense Ministry said.
The first new-generation laser-optical system has already passed the
state tests and put on combat duty in Altay Kray, the Defense Ministry
explained.
The ministry also reported that over the entire period of combat duty in
space monitoring using monitoring equipment, hundreds of thousands
of special operations were carried out during which over 15,000 space
objects have been detected and tracked.
Monitoring of the ceasing of ballistic existence of about 5,000 space
objects was also conducted, and more than 300 warnings issued
concerning dangerous approaches of space objects with operational
spacecraft of the Russian orbital grouping…
OE Watch | July 2017

40

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Adds Second Satellite to Missile Warning
Constellation
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation is currently
fielding its third generation of missile warning satellites. Russia’s
second generation of satellites, the Oko series, consisted of
eight satellites with infrared payloads. The Oko-1 (71Kh6)
type satellites operated in a geostationary orbit, while the Oko2 (72Kh6) satellites operated in highly elliptical orbits. The
Oko series had some serious limitations, and even with a full
constellation, they were only able to identify the fact of a missile
launch, but could not determine the missile’s ballistic trajectory.
Russia’s last Oko ceased operation in the fall of 2014.
The first satellite of Russia’s third generation of missile
warning satellites, the Tundra (14F142) series, was launched in
2015. As the accompanying article from Rossiyskaya Gazeta
explains, the Tundra (14F142) series will fill a 10 satellite
constellation, and be in similar orbits as the Oko series, but will
also be capable of detecting launches and ballistic trajectories.
According to a January 2017 article in Rossiyskaya Gazeta,
Russia now plans on deploying the remaining nine satellites by
2022. The accompanying article from Interfax discusses the 25
May launch of Russia’s second Tundra missile warning satellite,
Kosmos-2518. Although the addition of this new missile warning
satellite will enhance Russian space-based capabilities to detect
missile launches, Russia will likely still rely on over-the-horizon
radars (OTH) for initial launch detection, until the Tundra
constellation is adequately filled. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“The availability of two satellites will enable the
military to begin full-scale trials of the network…”

Source: “Missile attack warning satellite launched from Plesetsk,”
Interfax, 26 May 2017.
The Russian Space Forces launched the second missile attack warning
satellite from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region on
Thursday [25 May 2017], the newspaper Kommersant said on Friday.
“To Kommersant’s knowledge, the second Tundra satellite of the unified
space tracking and combat control network has been put into orbit. The
availability of two satellites will enable the military to begin full-scale
trials of the network, the deployment of which was due back in 2009,” the
newspaper said…
The ministry said satellite telemetry had been steady and systems had
been functioning properly. The Space Forces took control of the satellite
code-named Kosmos-2518. The ministry did not say what kind of satellite it
was.
“According to the trusted website Russianforces.org, the launched
Kosmos is a Tundra satellite of the unified space tracking and combat
control network (product 14F142), incorporated in the space echelon of
the missile attack warning network. A Russian Defense Ministry source
confirmed the information to the newspaper and underlined that the Space
Forces would now be able to begin full-scale trials, now that the minimum
necessary number of satellites of the series is in orbit: the first satellite of
the network (Kosmos-2510) was delivered to orbit in November 2015,” the
newspaper said…

Source: “Nikolay Grishchenko, “Российские военные проведут учения в космосе (Russian Military to Conduct Exercises in Space),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 4 May 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/05/04/rossijskie-voennye-provedut-ucheniia-v-kosmose.html
The Aerospace Forces of Russia will this year conduct exercises in command and control of the satellite grouping in the event of a warning
of a missile attack by a hypothetical adversary. This is reported by the Department of Information and Mass Communication of the Russia
Federation Ministry of Defense… Command staff exercises in command and control of the orbital grouping in the course of a missile attack
warning and the provision of information support for Russia’s Armed Forces will take place under the direction of the Aerospace Forces
(VKS) commander in chief,” the announcement from the military department says.
It was reported earlier that the Russian military have begun flight development tests of the orbited first vehicle of the Unified Space System
grouping. Employment of the Tundra satellite will reduce the detection time for launches of a potential adversary’s ballistic missiles and will
considerably enhance the operational effectiveness and reliability of information concerning missile threats.
This year, in addition, it is planned to use Soyuz-2 launch vehicles to put one or two missile attack early warning system (SPRN) satellites
into orbit from the Plesetsk space launch facility. Once all the vehicles have been orbited the SPRN’s space echelon will reach 10 satellites
and will be capable of pinpointing launches of ballistic missiles from any region of the world immediately after they have launched.
According to open-source data, the Russian Federation Defense Ministry’s space grouping numbers at least 140 variously tasked vehicles.

“The Tundra satellite will reduce the detection time for launches of a potential adversary’s ballistic
missiles and will considerably enhance the operational effectiveness and reliability of information
concerning missile threats.”
OE Watch | July 2017

41

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Six Robots of Russia
OE Watch Commentary: Russian robots
are gaining weight. Recently a reconnaissancestrike robot weighing as much as 20 tons was in
line for testing at the Kalashnikov Concern. The
robot, still without a name (naming conventions
are usually assigned via purpose/maker/gender/
etc.), follows behind a growing number of capable
Russian robots, including the Soratnik (support
ground operations, reconnaissance, guard
facilities, mine clearing), Nerekhta (arms-bearer,
combat assistant, urban or rugged terrain warfare
capable), Uran-6 (mine clearance machine),
and Uran-9 (strike and reconnaissance) robots.
The Platforma-M and Argo (both participate in
offensive operations in Syria) are other robotized
systems. All six have been used in Syria and each
displays an amazing array of capabilities. The
accompanying excerpts describing the Soratnik
BAS-01G BM Soratnik unmanned ground vehicle.
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2016-Static-part3/igF3JbrV/A, CC 4.0
platform and the Nerekhta robot offer a detailed
understanding of their capabilities. The article
notes that Nerekhta has been proposed as part of the gear of the “soldier of the future.” The article also featured a detailed description of the
Uran-9’s capability, while the other three robots’ capabilities were described to a lesser degree. End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Russian Robots in Syria: Argo and Platforma-M Strike, Akatsiya Finishes Off. Kalashnikov’s Developments Will
Soon Strengthen Combat Might of ‘Smart Iron,” Svobodnaya Pressa, 14 May 2017.
“The robot [Nerekhta] is capable of tackling a wide range of tasks – something that is determined by the collection of interchangeable
modules. They include combat, reconnaissance, transport, patrol, sanitary modules. . . . Several algorithms are enshrined in the combat
system: “Follow me,” “take the planned route,” the protection and reconnaissance regimes, and others. At the same time commands can be
given by gestures, by voice, or by means of a remote control panel. The distance at which the robot carries out controlling commands can be
as great as 5 km.”
Soratnik and Nerekhta Capabilities
The Soratnik is a tracklaying platform with interchangeable combat modules and weighs in at nearly seven tonnes. The vehicle develops a
speed of up to 40 km per hour and can cover 400 km without refueling. It can keep going for 10 days and nights in the passive regime. This
time is reduced if a combat task is being fulfilled.
The collection of combat modules makes it possible to tackle a wide range of tasks – to carry out reconnaissance, to patrol and guard the
state border and also strategically important facilities, to carry out mine clearance, to dismantle obstructions, and to support ground subunits
on the battlefield. The system can also be used to bring in ammunition, fuels, and lubricants and to evacuate the injured.
The modules are provided with various weapons – 7.62mm and 12.7mm-caliber machine guns, 30mm and 40mm-caliber grenade launchers,
and also Kornet antitank guided missiles. It is proposed that this list can be extended in the future. Surface-to-air missiles from a portable
system may be included in it.
The system can operate in conjunction with other automated combat units, including UAVs. To improve the Soratnik’s efficiency, it is
provided with two ZALA AERO UAVs manufactured by the concern.
The Nerekhta robot – a joint development of the Advanced Research Foundation and the Degtyarev Plant in Kovrov – has also “put in an
appearance” in Syria. It is a unique development, since it is proposed to use the Nerekhta as part of the gear of the “soldier of the future.”
Something like an arms-bearer and combat assistant capable of operating under various conditions, both in a city and on really rugged
terrain. The robot was created on an armored tracklaying platform corresponding to the fifth protection class. It can take a direct hit by a
7.62mm-caliber bullet from an assault rifle or a sniper’s rifle. It can be fitted with approximately 10 different combat modules that are fitted, so
the developers claim, with the utmost simplicity: “You have to tighten four nuts.”
The robot is capable of tackling a wide range of tasks – something that is determined by the collection of interchangeable modules. They
include combat, reconnaissance, transport, patrol, sanitary modules. . . . Several algorithms are enshrined in the combat system: “Follow
me,” “take the planned route,” the protection and reconnaissance regimes, and others. At the same time commands can be given by gestures,
by voice, or by means of a remote control panel. The distance at which the robot carries out controlling commands can be as great as 5 km.
“At the same time the Nerekhta possesses machine intellect, thanks to which it is capable of acting independently. For example, it can identify
targets and ascertain which of them pose the greatest threat to the fighter being “watched over,” and it can make a decision on the means of
neutralizing and annihilating them.”
OE Watch | July 2017

42

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Barguzin Rail Mobile ICBM: Pros and Cons
OE Watch Commentary: Russia decided
a few years ago that its 1980s rail mobile
ICBM, the Molodets (MBR RT-23 three-stage,
solid fueled ICBM with ten warheads on each
missile; NATO designation is the SS-24 Scalpel)
required an upgrade. This development became
an imperative in 2012 for Russian President
Vladimir Putin, the Russians note, when the US
announced that it planned to deploy ballistic
missile sites in Europe. The new version of the
Molodets was dubbed the Barguzin (a name
associated with a breed of agile sables). Both
the Molodets and the Barguzin are known as
combat railway missile complexes (BZhRK).
The Barguzin operates as an apparent passenger
train. However, its standard appearance is used
to camouflage or hide the existence therein of an
ICBM. Russian planners believe the Barguzin
inserts both uncertainty and ambiguity into the
plans of US strategists, since the latter recognize
the enhanced survivability and probability
that the BZhRK will survive a first strike. The
Russian complex is very difficult to track, even
under the best of circumstances.
The accompanying excerpts from Russian
sources explain the pros and cons of the system.
The first accompanying excerpt from Oruzhiye
Rossii, a news agency focused on Russia’s
military industry, discusses the pros; while
the second passage from i-Mash.ru, a Russian
website that collects and reports on engineering
information, discusses the cons. Clearly the pros
are in command at this point in the discussion.
End OE Watch Commentary (Thomas)

Source: “«Ядерные поезда» России отправляются в путь (The ‘Nuclear Trains’
Are Leaving the Station),” Oruzhiye Rossii, 9 March 2017. http://www.arms-expo.ru/
news/novye_razrabotki/yadernye_poezda_rossii_otpravlyayutsya_v_put/?sphrase_
id=12309861
The BZhRK looked like an ordinary railroad train with refrigerator, mail and
baggage and even passenger cars…Each train consisted of several cars. One car was
the command post; three others with roofs that opened were the launchers with the
missiles. And the launching of the missiles could be done both from pre-planned stops,
as well as from any point along the route. For this purpose the train would stop, a
special device would push the contact electric cable suspension to the side, the launch
container would be placed in the vertical position, and the missile would be launched.
Only a professional eye would be able to distinguish the BZhRK from the ordinary
commercial trains plying the expanses of Russia by the thousands. (The launch
modules with the missiles each had eight pairs of wheels, and each of the remaining
support cars had four [pairs of wheels].)
The fact is that there will be no heavy missiles in the new BZhRK. The complexes
will be armed with the light RS-24 missiles that are used in the Yars complexes. And
because the weight of the car turns out to be equal to that of an ordinary [railroad car]
ideal camouflage of the combat train is possible.
It is true that the RS-24 [prior version] has a total of four warheads, and there were
ten of them on the old missiles. But here it must be taken into consideration that the
Barguzin itself will not be carrying three missiles, as was earlier the case, but twice
as many. This, of course, still means 24 [warheads] instead of 30. But one must not
forget that the Yars is practically the most modern development and their probability
of overcoming ballistic missile defenses is much higher than that of their predecessors.
The navigation system has also been upgraded. Now it is not necessary to input target
coordinates in advance, they can all be changed as operationally required.
In the course of a day such a traveling complex can cover up to 1,000 kilometers,
moving over any of the country’s railroad networks, indistinguishable from an ordinary
train with refrigerator cars. There are plans to have five Barguzin BZhRK regiments
accepted into the inventory prior to 2020. This corresponds to 120 warheads. Judging
from all accounts, the BZhRK will become the strongest argument and, in fact,
our main ace in the dispute with the Americans concerning the expediency of the
deployment of a global ballistic missile defense system.

Source: “Эксперт скептически отнесся к использованию БЖРК «Баргузин» (Expert Skeptical about Use of ‘Barguzin’ Rail Mobile
Missile System),” i-Mash.ru, 21 April 2017. http://www.i-mash.ru/news/nov_otrasl/90716-jekspert-skepticheski-otnessja-k-ispolzovaniju.
html
Barguzin military rail mobile missile systems (BZhRK) which are being developed in Russia are difficult to operate and in no way superior
to existing Topol-M and YARS mobile ground missile complexes, RNS was told by Major-General Vladimir Dvorkin, chairman of the
Organizing Committee of the International Luxembourg forum on Preventing Nuclear Catastrophe.
“The current attempt to revive the idea of the Barguzin BZhRK can be linked with the ‘competition’ factor between the Russian design
bureaus that produce Russian intercontinental ballistic missiles. These BZhRKs will represent no special ‘danger’ to the enemy any different
from other missiles. However, the specific difficulties associated with their use will remain,” said Dvorkin, who earlier headed the Russian
Federation Defense Ministry 4th Central Scientific Research Institute (specializing in strategic weapons research), after the presentation of
the book “The Prevention of Crisis in Nuclear Arms Control and Catastrophic Terrorism.”
“Excessive technical difficulties associated with its maintenance, operation, and missile launch also had an impact,” Dvorkin said.

OE Watch | July 2017

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Smart Antipersonnel Mines
OE Watch Commentary: Although there has been an international effort to ban the production, use, and stockpiling of antipersonnel
mines, the Russian military industry continues to develop and improve this class of weapons. The accompanying excerpt from the government
newspaper, Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, describes a new antipersonnel mine which is being touted as the “world’s first remote-controlled
antipersonnel mine with a proximity fuse.”
According to the excerpt, this “smart” mine is able to distinguish “signals from ground vibrations beneath the mine and compare them against
signatures held in memory.” This ability will purportedly ensure that the mine is activated against human targets and not four-legged animals.
When activated, the “body of the mine jumps up to a height of about one meter and the main charge then detonates with its lethal ‘sprockets.’”
The electronic brain of the mine can also be deactivated remotely, making it “possible to collect them and subsequently lay them somewhere
else.”
The manufacturer claims that the “mine’s seismic target sensor and advanced electronics make it impossible to disarm.” Perhaps the most
interesting attribute of this new mine is that “it is impossible to hack into the [mine’s] microchip because its components are in their entirety
developed in Russia.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“It is impossible to hack into the microchip because its components are in their entirety developed in
Russia.”

Source: Nikolay Grishchenko, “В России создана ‘умная’ мина с шурикенами (Russia Develops ‘Smart’ Mine With Shurikens),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 24 May 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/05/24/reg-cfo/v-rossii-sozdana-umnaia-mina-s-shurikenami.html
The Federal Service of National Guard Troops servicemen will hold a practical demonstration of the POM-3 Medalyon antipersonnel mine
at a training ground near the town of Krasnoarmeysk near Moscow. Sappers will also show the capabilities of this remote-controlled smart
mine….
…He said that this is a unique development: The cartridge’s POM-3 mine is the world’s first remote-controlled antipersonnel mine with a
proximity fuse. It has a proximity target sensor and five fixed self-destruction times. The POM-3’s effective radius has been increased by 30
percent.
…The Medalyon’s main feature is a microchip, an electronic brain that governs its operation. It is this that provides protection against false
detonations and also unsanctioned disarmament. The new mine is fitted with a proximity fuse detonated by a seismic sensor that is fired into
the ground underneath the device to maintain concealment. Special electronics receive the signals from ground vibrations beneath the mine
and compare them against signatures held in memory. If the vibrations are similar to those of a person and indicate the approach of a target,
a propellant charge is detonated. The body of the mine jumps up to a height of about one meter and the main charge then detonates with its
lethal “sprockets.”
…The electronics in the Medalyon enable a sapper to control the fuses remotely. This means that without having direct contact with the
mines, a military engineer can not only set their main operating parameters but also deactivate them. This makes it possible to collect them
and subsequently lay them somewhere else…. the mine’s seismic target sensor and advanced electronics make it impossible to disarm. Any
unsanctioned attempt to approach the mine will be terminated.
It is impossible to hack into the microchip because its components are in their entirety developed in Russia.

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further, he has
taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian territory
that was taken, from his perspective, illegally. This
book describes Putin and the military’s use of various
strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s new equipment
and reform initiatives, and Putin’s geopolitical quest
for influence in the Arctic and Ukraine. Included in the
discussion are some of the unintended consequences
of his actions (negative world opinion, sanctions, NATO
responses, etc.).
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195605/download

OE Watch | July 2017

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Greater Kremlin Control over the Internet?
OE Watch Commentary: As in many other countries,
Internet use has grown significantly in Russia over the past
decade. Today, over 70% of the Russian population connect
to the web on a daily basis, with more Russians bypassing
traditional media (e.g. TV, newspapers, radio) and getting
their news from various websites. As monitoring, and to a
certain degree, controlling the flow of information remain
Kremlin priorities, it is not surprising that authorities
continue to propose and enact measures to monitor and
regulate Internet traffic.
In early May 2017, the Kremlin released a 30-page decree
titled “Strategy for the Development of an Information
Society through 2030,” which spells out how the Russian
government hopes to harness new information technologies.
Highlights of this strategy came up during a recent
roundtable, in which panelists analyzed it in detail. The
first excerpt from the popular Russian daily news source,
Moskovskiy Komsomolets provides some of these insights.
One of the quoted experts claimed that the new strategy “is
aimed at creating a new society -- a knowledge society.”
Other experts were a bit more skeptical, positing that the
new strategy might lead to “a ban on anonymous user
names.” Another panelist pointed out that while the edict
was filled with all sorts of prescriptions for protecting users’
personal data, “we do not have a system to handle this. And
there is no real plan for implementing this strategy.” There
are additional concerns that further government monitoring
of the Internet and “the protection of confidentiality” might
“simply be turned into a business, a paid service.”
The second excerpt, also from Moskovskiy Komsomolets,
describes proposed legislation which would increase
penalties, from “12 to 20 years in prison” for those who
disclose “information about the ways in which facilities
classified as ‘critical’ are protected from hackers. This
legislation would also require government agencies to
strengthen their information security, pointing out that “in
2016 more than 70 million computer attacks were carried
out against government agencies.” The third excerpt from
the business daily RBK describes proposed legislation which
would restrict those employed by the military or security
services from posting information on social media accounts.
The law would require users to report all the information
they have posted on the Internet, pointing out that such
disclosures in the past have revealed Russian military
involvement in Ukraine and Syria.
As in other countries, the Internet is having a profound
influence on the flow of information within society. Today
the Internet remains largely free of any censorship or
government control in Russia. Recent legislation, however,
suggests that the Kremlin plans to exert greater control over
Internet traffic, while providing greater security for both the
individual citizen and key government infrastructure, and
perhaps building “a knowledge society.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Source: Mikhail Zubov, “Путин стал главным по Интернету: к чему
это приведет (Putin Becomes Internet Supremo: Where This Will
Lead),” Moskovskiy Komsomolets, 18 May 2017. http://www.mk.ru/
politics/2017/05/17/putin-stal-glavnym-po-internetu-k-chemu-eto-privedet.html
We had not seen May edicts from Putin for a long time, but this year one
appeared -- an edict on the “Strategy For the Development of an Information
Society through 2030.” The document put a significant proportion of Internet
users on their guard as it is possible to conclude from it that the state will be
introducing a ban on anonymous user names. And generally that the rules for
utilizing the Net will become almost more strict and regime-controlled than
the road traffic regulations. Moskovskiy Komsomolets conducted a roundtable
on this topic in the course of which leading experts voiced their opinion about
the “Strategy.” …For his part, Denis Davydov, executive director of the Safe
Internet League, feels that this strategy does not deprive users of the right to
anonymity at all but, on the contrary, protects them… It is aimed at creating a
new society -- a knowledge society.”
The ‘Strategy’ prescribes that we should not rush things,” Aleksey Shuchkin,
a senior expert in the protection of information, said. “… We have laws and
strategies that are both good and bad… but the main problem lies in their
implementation. The ‘Strategy’ is aimed at protecting people on the Net. It is
very important that attention has been drawn to this; Putin’s signature on this
issue is valuable. But we do not have a system to handle this. And there is no
real plan for implementing this strategy....” “I suggest that under the ‘Strategy’
the protection of confidentiality will simply be turned into a business, a paid
service,” Ivan Zasurskiy, head of the Moscow State University Department of
New Media, feels.
Source: Marina Ozerova, “Хакерам за игры с государством грозит до 20
лет заключения (Hackers Face up to 20 Years in Prison for Games With
State),” Moskovskiy Komsomolets Online, 14 May 2017. http://www.mk.ru/
politics/2017/05/14/khakeram-za-igry-s-gosudarstvom-grozit-do-20-letzaklyucheniya.html
By the end of May the State Duma hopes to approve the second, decisive
reading of the package of laws on the security of the Russian Federation’s
critical information infrastructure. It will be possible to receive 12 to 20 years
in prison for disclosing information about the ways in which facilities classified
as “critical” are protected from hackers….
…in 2016 more than 70 million computer attacks were carried out against
government agencies…
Source: Inna Sidorkova, “Минобороны предложило обязать
военнослужащих отчитываться за соцсети (The Defense Ministry proposed
that military members report social networks),” RBK, 30 May 2017. http://
www.rbc.ru/politics/30/05/2017/592d50479a79471e2a1545e8
By the end of May the State Duma hopes to approve the second, decisive
reading of the package of laws on the security of the Russian Federation’s
critical information infrastructure. It will be possible to receive 12 to 20 years
in prison for disclosing information about the ways in which facilities classified
as “critical” are protected from hackers….
…in 2016 more than 70 million computer attacks were carried out against
government agencies…
OE Watch | July 2017

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Perspectives of Soft Power
OE Watch Commentary: Russian political and
military leaders continue to examine the circumstances
surrounding the collapse of the USSR. Given the current
anti-Western climate, many Russians are inclined to
blame the Soviet Union’s dissolution on the nefarious
plans of the West, particularly the “soft power” tools
used by the US. The accompanying excerpt from the
relatively centrist news source, Nezavisimoye Voennoye
Obozreniye [Independent Military Review], describes
a recent conference in Moscow which examined this
topic.
The article begins by claiming that soft power is
“regarded as a very effective alternative to forceful
methods in transforming the world,” and according to
the conference host, “soft power allows stakeholders
to transform the opponent’s consciousness in such a
way that in the future they act in full accordance with
their enemy’s interests.” The article focuses particular
attention on the remarks made by retired Soviet/
Russian General Leonid Ivashov, who now serves as
the President of the Academy of Geopolitical Studies.
Known for his strong anti-Western sentiments, General
Ivashov drew direct parallels with how the US used soft
power to dismantle the USSR during the Cold War to the
actions it is allegedly deploying against Russia today.
According to the excerpt, Ivashov claimed that during
the Cold War, US soft power transformed the thinking
among people living in socialist countries “from science,
technological advances and space into consumer wants
and financial needs.” The purpose of this transformation
was to allow the US to gain supremacy over these
“socialist countries by destroying their traditions,
undermining their moral values, and instigating
mistrust toward their political leadership.” These soft
power tools were used in concert with greater defense
spending which ultimately allowed the US to “deliver a
destructive blow against the USSR.”
Ivashov insisted that these same tools are being
exploited today by the US “to liquidate the international
independence of various countries.” These American
soft power tools are capable of “destroying the cultural,
spiritual and historical traditions of nations, peoples,
governments and civilizations.” They are also employed
to “disorient the system of military development
and weaken the defenses of probable enemies.”
These objectives are facilitated by a domestic “fifth
informational column” which help “to transform the
country… until its absolute submission to external
control.” Ivashov concluded his presentation on a
problematic note, pointing out that Russia could very
well lose its sovereignty if it loses the capacity to
defend against these soft-power threats. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“…soft power allows stakeholders to transform the
opponent’s consciousness in such a way that in the future they
act in full accordance with their enemy’s interests.”
Source: Vladimir Ivanov, “Эффективнее войск и вооружений: Стратегия “мягкой
силы” все более активно используется в мировой политике (Effective troops
and weapons: The strategy of “soft power” is increasingly used in international
politics),” Nezavisimoye Voennoye Obozreniye, 19 May 2017. http://nvo.ng.ru/
concepts/2017-05-19/5_948_straegy.html
…There are many works of Western and domestic experts devoted to the
application of “soft power”. In them, this force is “regarded as a very effective
alternative to forceful methods in transforming the world…” Today, many
politicians and military personnel are beginning to clearly understand it….
Discussion of the role and importance of “soft power” in modern conditions was
the topic of an international scientific-practical conference: “The strategy of ‘soft
power’ in the context of information warfare,” which was held April 20 at the
Moscow State Linguistic University….
…Opening the conference, the Acting Rector Irina Kraeva noted the importance
of the forum…. “soft power allows stakeholders to transform the opponent’s
consciousness in such a way that in the future they act in full accordance with their
enemy’s interests.”
…One of the first conference who expressed their thoughts was the doctor of
historical sciences, professor, president of the Academy of Geopolitical Studies,
retired Colonel General Leonid Ivashov…. The professor said that ‘soft power’
remains in one of the first places in the list of threats to Russia’s national security….
Ivashov reminded…’soft power’ helped to abolish the bipolar structure of the world,
sprawling world socialist system and the Warsaw Pact, which provided a measure
of stability in international relations…. This social programming reformatted the
minds of citizens of different countries and to translate their interest “ from science,
technological advances and space into consumer wants and financial needs.”
…Ivashov explained that operation “Cold War” was designed to separate social
groups and nationalities of the socialist camp, and weakening socialist countries by
destroying their traditions, undermining their moral values, and instigating mistrust
toward their political leadership.…All this was done in order to weaken the Soviet
Union… and deliver a destructive blow against the USSR….
…General Ivashov pointed out that the information tools have been updated
but they are still designed to liquidate the international independence of various
countries…. At still another level, these information weapons are designed to
disorient the system of military development and weaken the defenses of probable
enemies.
…The purpose of today’s operations is to change the consciousness of the
population of various countries. By proclaiming that their culture is superior, these
clever information attacks are capable of destroying the cultural, spiritual and
historical traditions of nations, peoples, governments and civilizations…. with the
help of a “fifth informational column,” they will be able to transform the country,
subject to information attacks, to managed objects and put them in the frame
absolute submission to external control.
…He noted that Russians have a conscientious genetic code, and injustice
provokes protest…. The West, however, values profit above every other
consideration, and is willing to use violence to achieve it.…
OE Watch | July 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
30th Anniversary of Mathias Rust’s Flight to Moscow
OE Watch Commentary: 28 May 2017 marked the 30th anniversary of Mathias Rust’s unexpected flight into the USSR and his landing
adjacent to Red Square in Moscow. Ever since the incident occurred, there have been questions as to how the 18 year-old German was able to
pilot his small Cessna aircraft through the Soviet Union’s robust air defenses to reach the country’s capital. In the accompany excerpts from the
popular daily Komsomolskaya Pravda, military journalist Viktor Baranetz recalls the details, consequences and some of the conspiracy theories
surrounding this flight.
The article begins by describing the route Rust flew,
pointing out that once “the investigation began, generals
and colonels who were responsible for the defense of the
country’s air space, in one voice repeated: it is nonsense that
the ‘Cessna’ crept in unnoticed by Moscow.” The author
describes some of the communications by Soviet air defense
personnel who tracked the flight, to include comments
by the Commander of the Leningrad Air Defense Army.
According to this officer, military reluctance to engage this
aircraft stemmed from the downing of KAL 007 by Soviet
forces three years earlier, when instructions had been issued
which “prohibited the shooting down of passenger and light
aircraft.”
The article points out how Soviet leader Gorbachev
exploited this incident to remove some of the top military
leadership (to include the Defense Minister) who had been
opposed to various aspects of perestroika. “All told, nearly
Cessna used by Mathias Rust.
a dozen generals and more than 20 senior officers were forced to
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mathias_Rust_Cessna_172_(34019399252).jpg, CCA-SA 2.0
retire, and two mid-grade officers were sent to prison” because of this
incident. Not surprisingly, over the past 30 years, many conspiracy theories have appeared which posit that this embarrassing incident was not
a result of “sloppiness,” but rather high-level scheming. According to one of the versions quoted in the article, “this was a brilliant operation
by Western intelligence services…. The goal was simple - to weaken the position of the Soviet Union in the international arena.” The author
concludes the article by recalling one of the anecdotes from the incident. “Two pilots are visiting Red Square. One asks the other for a cigarette,
but his comrade replies, ‘You want what? You can’t smoke at the airport!’” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Rust gave a royal gift to Mikhail Gorbachev.”
Source: Viktor Baranetz, “Как немецкий летчик ‘снял’ верхушку Советской Армии (How a German Pilot ‘Removed’ the Top of the Soviet
Army),” Komsomolskaya Pravda, 26 May 2017. https://www.kp.ru/daily/26683.4/3706007/
…On the morning of 28 May 1987, Rust took off from the Finnish airport, and 20 minutes later left the airport control zone. Rust ceased
communication with air traffic control at 13:00 and disappeared from Finland’s airspace…. Rust crossed the Soviet border near the town of
Kohtla-Jarve (Estonia) and headed for Moscow….
…When the investigation began, generals and colonels who were responsible for the defense of the country’s air space, in one voice
repeated: it is nonsense that the “Cessna” crept in unnoticed by Moscow….it was immediately detected by our radar facilities…. General
Kromin, Commander of the Leningrad Air Defense Army, hesitated. He remembered the instructions which entered into force after the South
Korean “Boeing” was allegedly hit “by mistake” after it violated the Soviet border. These instructions prohibited shooting down passenger
and light aircraft….
…Rust gave a royal gift to Mikhail Gorbachev. As the main force behind Perestroika, Gorbachev had developed difficult relations with top
military officials. The military leadership, headed by Defense Minister Sergei Sokolov had turned into political opposition to Gorbachev. But
Gorbachev had no compelling reason to get rid of the unwanted generals. But the Rust incident gave him a magnificent occasion for this…. All
told, nearly a dozen generals and more than 20 senior officers were forced to retire, and two mid-grade officers were sent to prison….
…At first, the prevalent version of this exploit pointed to sloppiness…. Later, a version appeared that this was supposedly an operation of
Western intelligence agencies that agreed with Gorbachev. The goal - to remove opposition in the military toward Kremlin policies…
Igor Morozov, deputy of the State Duma of the Russian Federation, a member of special operations in Afghanistan: “This was a brilliant
operation by Western intelligence services…. The goal was simple - to weaken the position of the Soviet Union in the international arena.”…
Anecdote: “Two pilots are visiting Red Square. One asks the other for a cigarette, but his comrade replies, ‘You want what? You can’t smoke
at the airport!’”
OE Watch | July 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Army Subordinate to National Guard?
OE Watch Commentary: Kremlin-supported media consistently stress
that under the current leadership, Russia continues to grow stronger, both
domestically and on the world stage. In their rendition, Western attempts to
punish Russia (for its involvement in Ukraine) via economic sanctions have
failed miserably and the country is back up off her knees after the humiliations
of the 1990s. And while there might be some truth behind these assertions,
there are also growing concerns that the country may be headed in the wrong
direction and that popular protests could become more of a problem. With
presidential elections scheduled for March 2018, the Kremlin has begun to take
measures to make sure that domestic dissatisfaction does not get out of hand.
The brief excerpt from the centrist news source, Vedomosti Online, describes a
recent presidential edict which would allow Army units to be “transferred to the
operational subordination of National Guard district commanders.” In essence,
during domestic “extraordinary situations,” military units could follow the
orders of the National Guard. Subordinating regular army units under National
Guard control is a significant change of policy. The article points out that prior
to the creation of the National Guard, “the Internal Troops, on whose basis the
National Guard was created, were not able to make use of the army… When
necessary Internal Troops units could be made subordinate to the army, but not
vice versa.”
The article points out that “the edict does not explain in what instances the
President intends to subordinate servicemen to the National Guard.” It also
reminds that this policy has actually been used in the past, since “during the war
in Chechnya there were instances where army subunits were subordinate to the
Internal Troops command.” Still, some of the reader comments to the on-line
article express concern that there may be more profound reasons for this change.
One reader responds, “are we preparing for economic collapse?” Another points
out, “Perhaps his ‘highness’ fears that the Army will again refuse to shoot at
the people, as it did in 1991 and 1993. Perhaps he has placed greater trust in
Zolotov [Commander of the National Guard] and his ‘guards.’” Should domestic
dissatisfaction increase, subordinating military units to the National Guard may
help the Kremlin maintain the façade of solid national stability. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Source: Svetlana Bocharova, Alexei Nikolskiy,
“Президент разрешил Росгвардии командовать
армейскими частями (The President Has Allowed the
National Guard to Command Army Units),” Vedomosti
Online, 26 May 2017. https://www.vedomosti.ru/politics/
articles/2017/05/26/691571-rosgvardii-armeiskimichastyami
The National Guard, created by the President to
safeguard domestic security, will be able to call on
the army to fulfill its tasks, it emerges from a Vladimir
Putin edict published 25 May. In accordance with the
President’s decisions “ formations and military units of
the Armed Forces and other commands and bodies may be
transferred” to the operational subordination of National
Guard district commanders, the document says.
The Internal Troops, on whose basis the National Guard
was created, were not able to make use of the army, it
follows from the clause on the Internal Troops operationalterritorial combined formation (that is, the districts). When
necessary Internal Troops units could be made subordinate
to the army, but not vice versa. In his new edict the
President has also retained for himself the possibility of
subordinating National Guard formations and units to the
district army command….
…This norm is new, an interlocutor at the Defense
Ministry confirmed to Vedomosti. He said that the edict
talks of the possibility of using the army inside the country
and of using the National Guard beyond its borders. Since
the National Guard is responsible for the situation inside
the country and the Defense Ministry for the situation
abroad, it is logical that in specific situations the National
Guard command should outrank army officials and vice
versa, he explains. The edict does not explain in what
instances the President intends to subordinate servicemen
to the National Guard. We are talking of “extraordinary
situations,” Vedomosti’s interlocutor says.
In fact during the war in Chechnya there were instances
where army subunits were subordinate to the Internal
Troops command, although this was not formally specified
in documents, reserve Colonel Viktor Murakhovskiy says,
but now that possibility is there….
Reader Comments:
iskorodumov6: “are we preparing for economic
collapse?”
Taboshar6: “Perhaps his ‘highness’ fears that the Army
will again refuse to shoot at the people, as it did in 1991
and 1993. Maybe he has placed greater trust in Zolotov
and his ‘guards.’”

Flag of National Guard of Russia, Russia.

Source: Геральдический совет при Президенте РФ, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a3/Flag_of_National_
Guard_of_Russia.png, Public Domain

OE Watch | July 2017

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
National Guard: Defense Against Color Revolution
OE Watch Commentary: According to Kremlin propaganda, one of the
most insidious Western strategies is the concept of “Color Revolution,” or the
belief that popular revolution might be an effective tool in transforming and
weakening a country’s government. Senior Russian officials maintain that
instead of promoting genuine democracy, color revolutions are merely a tool to
further Western interests and influence. Russian military and security leaders
have written extensively on the necessity of effectively defending against color
revolutions. The accompanying excerpts from an article published in the centrist
newspaper, Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye [Independent Military Review]
written by Yuri Baluyevsky, former Chief of the General Staff (and now advisor
to the Russian National Guard), is a good example of this type of analysis.
Baluyevsky begins by describing the poor turnout in early May during a
planned protest by
the pro-democracy
group “Open Russia”
in cities around the
country, and points out
that to counteract any
disturbance, “tens of
thousands of soldiers
of the National Guard
were deployed to
protect public order and
public safety.” He then
describes the infernal
(Former) Russian Armed Forces General Staff Chief Gen. Yury
Baluyevsky.
Western designs
Source: http://www.defenseimagery.mil., Public Domain
which have helped to
spark such protests, asserting that their objective is to prompt the “opposition
toward violent riots and tough confrontation with the forces of law and order.”
He describes how this Western-funded strategy was employed in Serbia,
Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Syria and Ukraine.
According to Baluyevsky, there are three critical steps in the color revolution
process. “First, weakening the situation in the country by stoking an internal
crisis.” This is followed by allowing the country to descend to the level of a
“failed state.” The third and final stage is when Western banks or the IMF
grant loans under conditions which lead “to the complete impoverishment of
people, destruction of industry, agriculture, the sale of land and, finally, the
establishment of full economic control over the country.” Baluyevsky claims
that Ukraine has entered this third stage and that something similar could have
happened in Russia, but thanks to the prophylactic measures instituted by the
Kremlin (e.g. the creation of the National Guard) such a scenario has been
prevented.
Baluyevsky concludes his article by describing the domestic threats Russia
faces today (NGOs, information operations, opposition protests) claiming that
“the main threats to Russia are not external, but inside,” and that therefore “we
must be prepared to prevent threats from within.” According to Baluyevsky’s
logic, to confront and defend against these domestic threats, Russia must have a
robust and well-funded National Guard. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Yuri Baluyevsky, “Война не кончается, она –
замирает (War hasn’t ended, it has come to a standstill),”
Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 26 May 2017. http://
nvo.ng.ru/realty/2017-05-26/1_949_rosgvardia.html
On the eve of May Day throughout the country tens of
thousands of soldiers of the National Guard troops have
been deployed to protect public order and public safety.
These measures have been taken in connection with the
planned “Open Russia” nationwide protests in major cities
across the country…. But the protests did not materialize…
“Open Russia” has repeatedly tried unsuccessfully to use
tried and tested forms and methods of nonviolent action…
in fact, they often end up with the opposition in violent
riots and tough confrontation with the forces of law and
order.
…These new types of conflicts are clearly visible in three
stages. First, weakening the situation in the country by
stoking an internal crisis…The second stage… becoming
a failed state…. The third stage - the so-called saving
operation - granting loans from the International
Monetary Fund under certain conditions: reform, leading
to the complete impoverishment of people, destruction
of industry, agriculture, the sale of land and, finally, the
establishment of full economic control over the country.
Ukraine today is literally a step away from the completion
of the “revolution of dignity.” Just as in Ukraine, the
situation could develop in Russia, if timely, preventive
measures of financial, organizational and educational
nature had not been taken.
The Russian National Guard has been designed not to
frighten, but to prevent the reckless behavior of those
who cherish the idea of destabilizing the situation in the
country to bring the state to the same level which we
see today in Libya, Syria and Ukraine. Our activities
are focused on the protection of citizens, the protection
of public order and public safety, and in the long run,
the prevention of color revolutions. The creation of the
National Guard… is the answer to our society posed by
the challenge abetted by technology of so-called nonviolent resistance, which is still more accurately called
color revolutions. These technologies are constantly being
improved. … Information war, even if we do not want to
acknowledge it, will be carried out, and we, the troops of
the National Guard, will respond to it....
…The main threats to Russia are not external, but inside.
We must be prepared to prevent threats from within…. The
troops of the National Guard were established and operate
to protect Russia, our country…

“…The main threats to Russia are not external, but inside. We must be prepared to prevent threats from
within…”
OE Watch | July 2017

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Kaliningrad-A Russian Perspective
OE Watch Commentary: As a recent article from the centrist
publication Vzglyad [View] points out: “Kaliningrad has been the
focus of attention of world diplomacy.” The Kremlin leadership
maintains that their actions in and around Kaliningrad are purely
defensive and pose no threat to the wider region. Moscow does not
understand why NATO members are intent on increasing their defense
capabilities, and perceive this increased NATO military presence as
a threat. As the article indicates, to counter this risk, the Kremlin has
continued to strengthen its military forces within the Kaliningrad
region, maintaining that this buildup is defensive in nature. Typical of
many Russian assessments, the article fails to mention the Kremlin’s
continued aggression against Ukraine, portraying instead the NATO
military buildup in Eastern Europe and the Baltics as unwarranted,
aggressive signaling against Russia.
The article begins by pointing out that Russia is fully justified in
building up its military presence in Kaliningrad, since “compared to
1991, the grouping of our forces in the region has been reduced by
nine times and poses no threat to its neighbors.” It goes on to suggest
that the Baltic countries have deliberately exaggerated the Kaliningrad
threat to demand greater military assistance from NATO. To explain
NATO’s militaristic tendencies, it reviews the provocative results from
the recent Saber Strike and Baltops military exercises. It points out
that NATO aircraft routinely conduct “reconnaissance flights near
the Kaliningrad region, at times approaching 50-60 kilometers to
the border.” The article goes on to quote the Russian Ambassador to
Lithuania, Alexander Udaltsov, who claimed that “since the beginning
of the year, NATO has conducted 12 exercises of different levels in
this part of Europe - by the way, every year, their intensity and the
number of participants is increasing. Naturally, we cannot and will not
watch silently for such a calling and threatening display of power at
our borders.”
The article then goes on to quote two Russian military experts who
reinforce the assertion that any military increase in Kaliningrad is
fully justified given the expanded NATO threat in the region. The
first expert claims that the deployment of Iskander-M tactical missile
and the Caliber cruise missile could be used to protect Russian naval
and AF assets deployed in Kaliningrad. The article also includes a
quote from a former Russian lawmaker who asserts that the increased
NATO military presence close to Russia’s borders not only breaches
the Russia-NATO Founding Act, but these forces could be used as a
“a base, a springboard… in the transition from quantity to quality for
larger forces in the region.”
The reader comments to the article are also instructive. For instance,
“Russia can increase its military presence on its own territorywherever it deems it necessary, whether in Kaliningrad, the Kuriles,
Crimea, and we shouldn’t pay any attention to the cries of the Western
dogs.” Or, “Putin is no fool, and it’s essential to build up forces where
there’s a need.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Nikita Kovalenko, Mikhail Moshkin, “Россия может
усилить группировку в Калининграде (Russia may increase its
military forces in Kaliningrad),” Vzglyad, 8 June 2017. https://www.
vz.ru/politics/2017/6/8/873435.html
…Kaliningrad has been the focus of attention of world diplomacy.
EU representative urged Moscow not to build up its military forces
there. Earlier, Lithuania made alarmist statements about the
“aggressive militarization” of the Kaliningrad region. In fact, the
grouping of our forces in the region compared to 1991 has been
reduced by nine times and does not pose a threat to neighbors….
…the President of Lithuania Dalia Grybauskaite spoke about
the “aggressive militarization” of the Kaliningrad region. The
phantom of the “Russian threat” is used to justify the real military
concentration of NATO forces along the Russian borders….
…the Baltic States and Poland - have begun the annual US exercise
known as Saber Strike… involving US strategic bombers, fighter jets
and helicopters…. Last week, the US Air Force transferred three
strategic B-52 bombers to participate in the exercise Saber Strike and
Baltops…. Baltops began on June 1 and will last until the 16th….US
Air Force aircraft RC-135W and RC-135U, as well as NATO AWACS
aircraft and Swedish Gulfstream 4 made reconnaissance flights near
the Kaliningrad region, at times approaching 50-60 kilometers to the
border….
…the Russian Ambassador to Lithuania Alexander Udaltsov…
pointed out, that “since the beginning of the year, NATO has
conducted 12 exercises of different levels in this part of Europe - by
the way, every year, their intensity and the number of participants is
increasing. Naturally, we cannot and will not watch silently for such a
calling and threatening display of power at our borders….”
…Russia could respond to this series of exercises strengthening
groups in the Kaliningrad region…. Russia, he believes, would
increase air force assets in the region, and deploy tactical
“Iskander-M” and strengthen the Baltic Fleet ships with cruise
missiles “Caliber”.
…deputy head of the Kaliningrad branch of the “ER”, the
deputy of the State Duma of the 6th convocation, a veteran secret
service Andrei Kolesnik [said]…. “the increased NATO military
presence close to Russia’s borders not only breaches the RussiaNATO Founding Act, but these forces could be used as a base, a
springboard… in the transition from quantity to quality for larger
forces in the region.”
Reader Comments:
Oleg B. “Russia can increase its military presence on its own
territory-wherever it deems it necessary, whether in Kaliningrad, the
Kuriles, Crimea, and we shouldn’t pay any attention to the cries of
the Western dogs.”
Sasha L. “Putin is no fool, and it’s essential to build up forces where
there’s a need.”

OE Watch | July 2017

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Ground Forces Northern Fleet Winter Training
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpt is from an interview with
Vice Admiral Yevmenov, Commander of Russia’s Northern Fleet. The interview
focuses on the Northern Fleet’s contributions to Russia’s efforts in Syria as well
as naval training in the Arctic. The excerpt discusses ground forces training and
some impressive ground force road marches of 700, 1,000 and 2,000 kilometers
in Arctic winter and polar night. Northern Fleet strategic, operational and tactical
forces got a good workout during the most inhospitable time of the Arctic year. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: “Interview with Vice Admiral Nikolay
Yevmenov, Commander of the Northern Fleet,” Na
Strazhe Zapolyarya, 26 May 2017.
Tasks of Any Complexity in All Latitudes. The Northern
Fleet Stands Ready To Operate in All Areas of the
World’s Oceans
[Na Strazhe Zapolyarya] Comrade Commander, what
other tasks did the Northern Fleet perform during the
winter training period?
[Yevmenov] We attach particular importance to
improving the training of ground and coastal forces
servicemen. At the start of the winter training period,
a Northern Fleet Arctic motorized rifle group took part
in the Pomora Path Expedition. The route traversed
the territory of three regions of the Russian Federation
-- from the town of Onega in Arkhangel’skaya Oblast to
the settlement of Zarechensk in Murmanskaya Oblast,
amounting to about 1,000 kilometers. Our servicemen
covered the distance on A-1 snowmobiles towing sleds,
and tested new military equipment in extreme modes of
operation.
Subunits of a Northern Fleet Arctic motorized rifle
brigade completed a 700-kilometer march along the
Russian Federation state border as part of training for
raiding operations.
In addition, our servicemen participated in a unique
operation to test military and specialized equipment in
the Arctic. The tests took place during a march from
the settlement of Tiksi in Yakutiya to Kotelnyy Island
and back across the ice of the Laptev Sea, the straits,
and the coastal zone. On a route of more than 2,000
kilometers they tested the capabilities and reliability
of army snowmobiles, articulated caterpillar-tracked
transporters, and other specialized equipment designed
for operation in the Arctic.

Sleeve Insignia of the Russian Northern Fleet.

Source: By Thommy based on Russian Northern Fleet patch.png and Russian Airborne Troops patch.svg., https://
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/09/Sleeve_Insignia_of_the_Russian_Northern_Fleet.svg, via
Wikimedia Commons, public domain.

We should not forget that the foundations of the
Northern Fleet’s capabilities are the naval strategic
nuclear forces. For certain reasons we say little of
their activities. But I can assure you that the Northern
Fleet is capable of performing any task assigned to
it. Our submarines are regularly on duty and perform
patrol tasks both under the Arctic ice and in other areas
of the world’s oceans.

“We should not forget that the foundations of the Northern Fleet’s capabilities are the naval
strategic nuclear forces. For certain reasons we say little of their activities. But I can assure
you that the Northern Fleet is capable of performing any task assigned to it. Our submarines are
regularly on duty and perform patrol tasks both under the Arctic ice and in other areas of the
world’s oceans.”

OE Watch | July 2017

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Build-up of Russian Western Arctic Capabilities Continues
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passage from Russia’s
Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses the
recent opening of a Western Arctic
border facility in Arkhangel’sk. The
Arkhangel’sk Border Region controls
the ports on the Eastern side of the
White Sea while the Western side
ports belong to the Kola Border
Region. Both regions are important
economic parts of the Russian
Federation and Russia is upgrading
her border forces in both regions to
deal with increased traffic and to
control fishing in Arctic waters.
The Russian Federal Security
Service (FSB) Border Directorate
controls the land and water borders
of Russia. The FSB (formerly KGB)
commands the Russian Coast Guard,
which is a sizable force containing
armed frigates, light frigates,
large patrol vessels, patrol boats,
icebreakers, river craft, transport
aircraft and helicopters. These assets
are harbored at various bases which
control the waters in their region.
The Kola Peninsula, which borders
Finland and Norway, contains the
year-round port of Murmansk and
Map of the White Sea in Russia. Also showing the various bays and gulfs in the sea.
is home to the Northern Fleet. It is
Source: By NormanEinstein, May 17, 2006. Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:White_Sea_map.png, CC BY SA 3.0 svg, via Wikimedia Commons
clearly the most valuable region of
Russia’s Arctic. The second most important region is the neighboring region containing Arkhangel’sk, which is an important, but not yearround port. The two regions share the White Sea. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Anna Chistyakova, “Открылся арктический пункт базирования пограничных катеров РФ (Western Arctic Border Facility
Opens in Arkhangel’sk),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 27 May 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/05/27/reg-szfo/otkrylsia-arkticheskij-punkt-bazirovaniiapogranichnyh-katerov-rf.html
The base construction began in 2013 in the area of Naberezhnaya Severnoy Dviny [Northern Dvina Embankment] and Ulitsa Ioanna
Kronshtadtskogo [Saint John of Kronstadt Street]. Financing was provided by the “State Border of the Russian Federation” [RF] program.
The patrol ships base has been provided with the latest equipment.
Igor Konstantinov, chief of the Russian FSB Border Directorate with responsibility for the western Arctic area, stated that this creation of a
modern base would make it possible to provide better support, and to use the new technology to work with ships and shipping within the Border
Directorate’s zone -- the Arctic’s western sector. Further development and improvement of border infrastructure in the region are planned.
Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin spoke at a conference held on 29 March 2017 on Zemlya Aleksandry Island in the Franz Josef
Land archipelago. President Putin spoke on protecting Russia’s national interests in the Arctic. Igor Konstantinov referenced this speech,
stating “The Arctic today is an arena of contention for control of very valuable resources, and President Vladimir Putin stressed the special
significance of protecting our country’s interests in this strategic region”.
According to border service representatives, the improvement of the border guard facilities will also continue. At the present time, the zones
of responsibility of the Arkhangel’sk subdepartment include the coast of the Barents and White Seas, the Arctic islands, and the ports of
Arkhangel’sk, Mezen’, Onega, and Nar’yan-Mar.
The subdepartment’s main tasks include guarding the state border on the sea, the internal sea waters, and the Russian Federation’s exclusive
economic zone, provide state control over fishing, and maintaining order within the border zone. The protected border area extends more than
5,000 kilometers along the marine border line and more than 7,000 kilometers along the coastline.
OE Watch | July 2017

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Kola Flotilla Winter Training
Source: Anna Korolkova, “Interview with Oleg Golubev, Commander of Kola Flotilla,” Na Strazhe Zapolyarya, 2 June 2017.
OE Watch Commentary: The
Kola Flotilla is the tactical workhorse
of Russia’s Northern Fleet. It has
supported Northern Fleet mission in the
Mediterranean and Black Seas as well as
patrolling and training in the Arctic. The
accompanying passage from an interview
with Oleg Golubev, Commander of the
Kola Flotilla provides insight into its
ships’ combat training, mission and units.
It is interesting to note that the Coastal
Defense missile and Artillery Brigade
is still part of the Kola Flotilla and not
the newly-formed 14th Corps. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

[Korolkova] Oleg Vasilyevich, please tell us about the outcomes of training by the Kola
Flotilla’s formations in the
The Northern Fleet Red Banner Kola
winter training period.

“

[Golubev] The combined
formation’s combat training plan
was fulfilled and all missions were
accomplished. However, we could
have done some things better.
We did not manage to complete
everything that we intended
during the winter training period
due to weather conditions….

Exercises with a separate missile
and artillery brigade using the
latest Bal and Bastion shorebased missile systems were held in
the winter training period. The flotilla’s forces took part in missile, gunnery, and
torpedo training courses under the leadership of the fleet commander.

Mixed Forces Flotilla is the only Northern
Fleet combined formation that performs
a wide variety of tasks with various
types of ship -- oceangoing and coastal
minesweepers, small missile and large
amphibious warfare ships, small and
large antisubmarine ships, diesel-electric
submarines, and also a coastal missile and
artillery brigade.”

For the first time since the beginning of the 2000s, ships of the Kola Mixed Forces Flotilla held a training voyage during which it practiced
formations sailing, tactical maneuver, and having units, and subunits perform missions according to their primary design. Key episodes in
the training voyage were the conduct of a range of mine countermeasures for the fleet, an amphibious assault landing, and air defense drills.
Shipborne forces showed their ability to carry out their assigned tasks as part of a larger grouping, and as a result of the training, voyage
groups were prepared for carrying out operations as part of joint forces….
[Korolkova] Which are the leading surface ships and submarines in terms of combat training results?
[Golubev] The best submarine was the diesel-electric submarine Vladikavkaz, with the crew of the Kaluga commanded by Captain 2nd Rank
Vladimir Popov. Among the first-rank ships the greatest successes were scored by the large antisubmarine ship Severomorsk… Of the secondrank ships -- the large amphibious warfare ship Georgiy Pobedonosets…. Serious successes were also scored by third-rank ships: the small
missile ship Aysberg… the small antisubmarine ship Brest…the coastal minesweeper Yadrin, and the oceangoing minesweeper Mashinist.
The missile and artillery brigade…performed well. Among support units we can single out the observation area. The battalion of submarines
under refit… and the group of ships under refit and construction in Nizhniy Novgorod…Dmitriy Pedanov also carried out their assigned tasks
excellently….
[Korolkova] What tasks lie ahead for the Kola Flotilla in the summer training period?
[Golubev] We will be carrying out tasks according to our mission. This means both training by groupings of ships in the Barents Sea and
participation in long-range voyages.
The Northern Fleet continues to expand its presence in the Arctic and with every year the number of combat drills carried out in high
latitudes increases. A detachment of Kola Flotilla ships will once again set sail along the Northern Sea Route -- preparation has already
begun for carrying out the mission of an Arctic voyage. A number of tactical exercises are planned for the duration of the voyage. Further,
ships and submarines of the flotilla will be undertaking long-range voyages in various areas of the world’s oceans.

OE Watch | July 2017

53

