fmso.leavenworth.army.mil

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

Volume 7
Issue #1
Jan-Feb 2017

Special Essay

How ISIS Adapts:

ISIS Responses to
Airstrikes
Page 76

MIDDLE EAST
3
4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
22

Can Iran, Turkey and Russia End the Syrian Conflict?
Turkish Comments on the Assassination of the Russian Ambassador
Russian Comments on the Assassination of the Russian Ambassador
Turkey Launches Military Satellite
Turkey: No End in Sight to Terror Attacks
The Iranian Army’s Drone Jamming ‘Electronic Rifle’
Iran: Navy Now Hiring
Iran: Was Rafsanjani Murdered?
Iran: Internet Use Expands Exponentially
Iran Building High-Speed Catamaran
Iran: IRGC Ultralight Gyrocopter Crashes
Iran: New Karrar Tank to be Unveiled Soon
Gulf-Backed Yemeni National Army Falls Short
Yemen: Sana’a Government Appoints “Ballistic” Defense Minister
Egypt: Rapprochement with Damascus, End of the “October
Generation”
The Role of Intelligence in East Aleppo
The Syrian Army’s “5th Corps”
Dueling Perspectives on the Egyptian Army

AFRICA
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

South Sudan: Dry Season – and Potentially Genocide – Coming Soon
One Price of Zimbabwe’s Financial Difficulties…Typhoid
Boko Haram’s Forest Stronghold Falls to the Nigerian Military
The Trial of LRA’s Dominic Ongwen
Megacities and Megaproblems
Somalia: Al-Shabaab’s Staying Power
As Ethiopia Withdraws, Al-Shabaab and
ISIS Advance in Somalia

LATIN AMERICA
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
38
39

Will Colombian Resistance Consolidate around Mass Action?
Cuba After the Castros
Calls for a Military Coup in Venezuela
Colombia Racing toward Bolivarian Socialism and More War?
Latin America and the Caribbean Highly Vulnerable to CyberAttacks
Narco-Drones in Colombia
Brazilian Military To Tackle Cyber-Security
Bolivia’s Expanding Economic Ties with China
Colombia and Panama Join Forces to Strengthen Border Security
How Mexican Cartels are Changing the Rules of International Drug
Trafficking
Mexico Continues Support of UN Peacekeeping Operations

ASIA-PACIFIC
41
42
43
43
44
45
46
47
47
48
49

DPRK Exploits Dissent in ROK Saenuri Party
China: Leading the World in Nuclear Fusion Research?
China Seeks to Deepen Relations with the Philippines
Duterte’s Pivot to China
China Developing Technologies to Control the South China Sea
Buddhist-Muslim Fault Lines in ASEAN
China Emphasizes its Historical Rights in the South China Sea
China Sees the PLA Playing a Frontline Role in Cyberspace
China Developing a Commercial Space Sector
Female Suicide Bombing: A New ISIS Tactic in Indonesia and
Beyond?
Russia Deepens Military Cooperation with the Philippines

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
58
59
61
63
64
65
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
75

Russian Efforts to Counter Mini-UAV Threat
Institutional Army Adaptations for Changing Force Structure
Increasing the Punch and Reach of the T-14 Armata
Urban Warfare and Big Armor
Kremlin Election Influence?
Russian MiGs for Serbia
Russian Nuke Trains and China
Improved Chemical Weapons Defense
Strengthening Russian-Chinese Military Ties
Ongoing Ukrainian Military Reform
Robots on Ice
Spetsnaz to Syria as Military Police and Airfield Security
Northern Fleet Arctic Defense Involves 90,000 Personnel
Russian Airborne Acquires Truck Robot
Russian Defense Minister Summarizes 2016 Successes and
Problems
Russian Naval Might

SPECIAL ESSAYS
76
79

India Closer to Extending Nuclear Strike Range
Statistics on Afghan Special Operation Forces
How Does Georgia Prioritize its Air Force?
Who Provides Security at Gwadar Port?
The Russian-Armenian Joint Military Force
Security Assistance to Central Asia in 2017
Rohingya Refugees in India Raise Regional Terrorism Concerns
Al-Qaeda Calls on Central Asian Militants to Return to
Afghanistan

How ISIS Adapts: ISIS Responses to Airstrikes
Chinese Defense Contracts in Argentina

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, and Deliver
the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
analysis from a diverse range of
foreign articles and other media that
our analysts and expert contributors
believe will give military and security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
Materials, outside of the original foreign press
article, under copyright have not been used. All
articles published in the Operational Environment
Watch are not provided in full, and were originally
published in foreign (non-US) media.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and
graphics to these articles to conform to organizational
standards. Academic conventions, source referencing,
and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and
do not represent the official policy or position of the
Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or
the US Government. Release of this information does
not imply any commitment or intent on the part of the
US Government to provide any additional information
on any topic presented herein.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 1

January - February | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East

Robert Bunker
Karen Kaya
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Matthew Stein
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Kevin Freese

Asia-Pacific

Steven Galluzzi
Cindy Hurst
Tim Thomas
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Kevin Freese
Matthew Stein
Jacob Zenn

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Joseph McConnell
Tim Thomas

The Operational Environment Watch is archived and
available at: http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil.

				

Contact FMSO at:
usarmy.leavenworth.tradoc.mbx.fmso-web@mail.mil

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Keith French

ON THE COVER: Depiction of an F-16 aircraft flying over an airstrike.
Sources: Wikimedia Commons

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Can Iran, Turkey and Russia End the Syrian Conflict?
OE Watch Commentary: On 20 December, Iran,
Russia and Turkey started a joint process to reach
a political solution in Syria. The three countries
issued a declaration saying that they were ready to
act as guarantors in a peace deal between the Syrian
government and the opposition. The declaration
highlighted eight important points on the future of
Syria, including a meeting in Astana, Kazakhstan in
mid-January 2017, in which the sides of the Syrian
conflict would come to the table to reach an end to
the conflict. The accompanying passages discuss
whether this is realistic, and raise a few questions.
They also discuss Turkey’s shifting position on the
conflict.
The first accompanying passage is a segment
from a Turkish television interview with a Middle
East and Turkey expert. The expert notes that the
absence of the US and the UN are significant; as
is the absence of Saudi Arabia, the Gulf countries,
Qatar and Sunni groups. The absence of these
groups means that there is no viable side to represent
the Sunni opposition. Even though Turkey was
initially opposed to Assad, Turkey cannot represent
the Sunni opposition because, he says, “Turkey has
changed its position in the last few months, and is
now acting together with Russia. It has reduced its
objections to the regime...”
The expert also notes Turkey’s shift in position
on the issue of Assad staying in power. He notes
that Turkey “has accepted that the regime has
taken Aleppo, and that it will stay in power.” Until
recently, Turkey’s position was that, for the conflict
to end, “Assad must go.” The second passage also
notes Turkey’s dramatic U-turn on the issue. It
points out that “The eight-point declaration includes
clauses that are completely opposed to the position
of Turkey, who claimed that the Syrian civil war
would not end without the departure of Assad....”
The third passage also asks the question, “When
Turkey, Iran and Russia come to the table [in Astana
in mid-January], who will represent the opposition in
Syria? Who will represent the radical Sunni forces?
[It should be] Saudi Arabia and Qatar.” It points out
that these two countries are not at the table because
“they do not want to talk to Iran and Russia.”
Regardless of these issues, the first expert notes
that the deal should be taken seriously, because of
Iran’s presence. He claims that “Iran may be even
stronger than Russia on the ground. Iran is the one
who extends the main support to Assad’s military,
with their militias and with Hizbullah. Russia is
effective with its air power in the region. So, [the
agreement] should be taken seriously...” End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The absence of Sunni groups, the Gulf countries, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, and countries that support the opposition, raises
a question.”
Source: Ömer Taspinar, “Transatlantik: Moskova’da üçlü zirve ve Karlov suikasti
(Transatlantic: Tripartate summit in Moscow and the Karlov assassination),”
Medyaskope.tv, 21 December 2017. http://rusencakir.com/Transatlantik-Moskovadauclu-zirve-ve-Karlov-suikasti/6360
Question: ... We have a very interesting 8-point agreement document. There
are some very clear points... For example, there is an agreement to preserve the
territorial integrity of Syria. There is the agreement for Turkey, Iran and Russia
to act as guarantor countries in the starting of negotiations between the regime
and the opposition. Another point is the agreement to fight against Nusra and ISIS
together. And of course, there is mention of Syria’s secular identity, in the first
clause [of the agreement]. Each of these are extremely important points. First let’s
ask this: Is this a realistic agreement?
Answer: First of all, the absence of the United States and the United Nations at the
table [are significant] and I would also like to draw attention to the Saudi Arabia
dimension of the issue. The absence of Sunni groups, the Gulf countries, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, and countries that support the opposition, raises a question mark.
Because Turkey has changed its position in the last few months. Turkey is now
acting together with Russia. It has reduced its objections about the regime. Even
though the Turkish Foreign Minister said yesterday, “We should include groups like
Hizbullah in the agreement, we are disturbed by the presence of Hizbullah and the
support they get externally there, while we are fighting terror,” both the Russian
Foreign Minister and the Iranian Foreign Minister highlighted that Hizbullah was
not in the same group with the PYD and the YPG; and that they are focused on
terror organizations recognized as such by the United Nations. So they focus is
more on jihadi groups such as al Qaida, al Nusra and ISIS. This agreement is
against them. And it should be taken seriously. Because Iran may be even stronger
than Russia on the ground. Iran is the one who extends the main support to Assad’s
military, with their militias and with Hizbullah. Russia is effective with its air power
in the region. So, [the agreement] should be taken seriously but the fact that the
opposition is not being represented raises a question in the United States. Where is
the opposition? Where is the free Sunni opposition? How will they be represented?
Turkey’s engagement with Russia and Iran is also central to the Turkey-Kurdish
issue now. It is being perceived that [Turkey] has accepted that the regime has
taken Aleppo, and that it will stay in power.
Source: “Üçlü zirvede Ankara’dan ‘U dönüşü’: Türkiye de Şam hükümetine
‘yardıma hazır’ (Ankara’s ‘U-turn’ at the tripartite summit: Turkey is also ‘ready to
help’ Damascus government),” Diken.com.tr, 21 December 2016, http://www.diken.
com.tr/uclu-zirvede-ankaradan-u-donusu-turkiye-de-suriye-hukumetine-yardimahazir/
“According to the declaration published on the website of the Russian Foreign
Ministry... the declaration notes that all three countries [Iran, Russia, Turkey]
respect the territorial integrity of Syria and note that they do not believe the solution
is a military one. The eight-point declaration includes clauses that are completely
opposed to the position of Turkey, who claimed that the Syrian civil war would not
end without the departure of Assad....”

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: Can Iran, Turkey and Russia
End the Syrian Conflict?
Source: Rusen Çakir, “Transatlantik: Suriye Ateskesi & Yeni
Soguk Savas mi? (Transatlantic: The Syria Ceasefire and a New
Cold War?),” Medyaskope.tv, 30 December 2016. http://rusencakir.
com/Periscope/Transatlantik-Suriye-ateskesi-ve-Yeni-SogukSavas-mi/1576

“The tripartite summit will take place in mid-January in Astana.
When Turkey, Iran and Russia come to the table, who will represent
the opposition in Syria? Who will represent the radical Sunni
forces? Saudi Arabia and Qatar. But they are not at the table,
because they don’t want to talk to Iran and Russia.”

Turkish Comments on the Assassination of the Russian
Ambassador
“We know that this is a provocation aimed to disrupt the normalization
OE Watch Commentary: On 19
December, an off-duty Turkish policeman
brazenly shot Russia’s Ambassador to
Turkey, at an art gallery in Ankara. The
assassin shouted “God is Great; Don’t forget
Aleppo,” suggesting that he was avenging
Russian actions in Aleppo. The attack
came just after Turkey and Russia brokered
a deal that left the city of Aleppo in Syrian
government hands. The accompanying
passages from Turkish sources discuss the
Turkish perspective on the incident.
The first passage features Turkish President
Erdoğan’s statement immediately after the
incident and his phone call with Russian
President Putin. Erdoğan first offers his
condolences to the “entire friendly Russian
nation” and to Putin. He claims that the
incident was a “provocation aimed to disrupt
the normalization process of Turkey-Russia
relations.” Erdoğan points out that Turkey
and Russia have been working in “serious
solidarity” on the issue of Aleppo and on
the resolution of the humanitarian crisis in
Syria, saying that, “The steps that we have
taken together to stop the drama in Aleppo,
in getting those victims out of there [and to]
Idlib, and even bringing them to our country,
is the product of Turkish-Russian solidarity...”
The second passage features comments
by a Turkey expert who claims that both
Turkey and Russia blamed the West for the
assassination, by saying that “The West is
trying to drive a wedge between us.” He also
points out that Turkey-Russia relations are
quite strong given Moscow’s attitude that
“this is normal, things like this happen,” and
noting that Moscow was able to continue
meetings with Turkey (and Iran) the next day
as if nothing happened.

(continued)

process of Turkey-Russia relations, but neither the Russian government
nor the Republic of Turkey will fall prey this provocation.”
Source: “Büyükelçi suikastine Erdoğan’dan açıklama (Statement from Erdoğan [on]
the Ambassador Assassination),” Yenicag.com.tr, 20 December 2017. http://www.
yenicaggazetesi.com.tr/buyukelci-suikastine-erdogandan-aciklama-153213h.htm
Erdoğan said, “This evening, Russian President Mr. Putin and I had the chance to assess
the incident... On behalf of my country and nation, I would like to express our condolences to
the entire friendly Russian nation, and to the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Putin.
We know that this is a provocation aimed to disrupt the normalization process of TurkeyRussia relations, but neither the Russian government nor the Republic of Turkey will fall prey
this provocation.
Erdoğan, who said that the incident was being investigated in detail, continued:
“I see this attack on the Russian Federation Ambassador as an attack on Turkey and
the Turkish Nation... And of course, it is an open provocation targeting Turkish-Russian
relations. I am sure that our Russian friends see this as well. The fact that our relations
with Russia are being conducted in a spirit of serious solidarity, especially on the issue of
Aleppo and on the resolution of the humanitarian crisis in Syria... The steps that we have
taken together to stop the drama in Aleppo, in getting those victims out of there [and to]
Idlib, and even bringing them to our country, is the product of Turkish-Russian solidarity...
And of course we are determined to continue this. In the meeting I had with President Putin
after the incident, we are unanimous in our opinion that this was a provocation, and there is
absolutely no controversy on this point.”
Source: Ömer Taspinar, “Transatlantik: Moskova’da üçlü zirve ve Karlov suikasti
(Transatlantic: Tripartate summit in Moscow and the Karlov assassination),” Medyaskope.tv,
21 December 2017. http://rusencakir.com/Transatlantik-Moskovada-uclu-zirve-ve-Karlovsuikasti/6360
Both Turkey and Russia decided to blame the West, in a way, [saying] “The West is trying
to drive a wedge between us.” This can be the result of the discomfort of not having the
United States at the table as we move towards a solution in Syria right now. And because the
FETÖ [organization] is seen as being supported by the United States, especially in Turkey,
this kind of a conspiracy theory was offered. But in fact, we see clearly how strong TurkeyRussia relations are right now. If an Ambassador is murdered, and he is murdered by a
Turkish policeman, if such a serious fiasco takes place in Turkey, and Moscow says, “it’s
normal, things like this happen,” and the next day, Moscow is able to continue meetings with
Turkey and Iran like nothing happened, this shows that there is serious fury against the West.
Especially in Ankara and Moscow.”

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: Turkish Comments on the
Assassination of the Russian Ambassador
It is true that Turkish-Russian relations have
been warming; especially as the two sides have
worked together towards a cease-fire in Syria in
late December. As Turkish security expert Metin
Gürcan notes in the third passage, Russian-Turkey
cooperation was evident on the ground in Syria with
the evacuation of opposition groups from Aleppo.
He also points out that on December 28-29, the
Russian Air Force provided air support for Turkey’s
Operation Euphrates Shield; highlighting that this
was a first.
Interestingly, the assassin was a policeman who
previously worked on security details; including for
Turkey’s President, which has raised questions about
security and intelligence. The Russians may also
have questions about how an unauthorized person
lurking behind the Ambassador went unnoticed.
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: Metin Gürcan, “Russia pleased with deepening US-Turkey rift over Syria,”
Al Monitor.com, 5 January 2017. http://fares.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/01/
turkey-united-states-rift-deepening-over-syria.html
Russian-Turkish cooperation, which was evident on the ground in Syria with the
evacuation of opposition groups from Aleppo, has sidelined the United States and
Europe. Following that move, Moscow and Ankara guaranteed a Syria-wide ceasefire starting Dec. 30.
Although it is not clear exactly what the cease-fire agreement stipulates and who will
be supervising it, the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has agreed to abide
by it and will be participating in the proposed talks in Astana, Kazakhstan. These are
clear signs of Assad’s acquiescence to the Russia-Turkey initiative.
Cooperation between Ankara and Moscow is also indicated by the Turkish military
command’s statement that the Russian air force bombed Islamic State (IS) targets
south of al-Bab, Syria, on Dec. 28-29, in support of Turkey’s Operation Euphrates
Shield.
This was the first time Russia had provided air support for Euphrates Shield, which
has been going on for some 130 days, claiming the lives of 40 Turkish soldiers.

The funeral of Russian Ambassador to Turkey, Andrey Karlov in Moscow, December 22, 2016.
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Карлов,_Андрей_Геннадьевич#/media/File:Farewell_to_Andrei_Karlov_(2016-12-22)_06.jpg

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Russian Comments on the Assassination of the
Russian Ambassador
OE Watch Commentary: The assassination
of Russian Ambassador Andrey Karlov
in Ankara, Turkey on 19 December took
place just as the Syrian Armed Forces,
supported by Russia, completed Operation
Dawn of Victory to regain control over the
city of Aleppo from various rebel groups.
The accompanying excerpted articles from
Russian media report on the assassination and
provide insight into Russian perspectives. One
of the most immediate concerns following
the assassination was how this could impact
Russian-Turkish relations.
The first article from Novaya Gazeta reports
on the reaction from the Russian Foreign
Ministry and it shows how quick Russian
officials were to state that the assassination
would not damage relations. The article notes
that Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
followed this up with a similar statement.
The article from Kommersant and the
article from TASS report on statements from
other Russian officials, who showed more
of a reaction to the assassination. President
Putin’s Press Secretary Dmitry Peskov and
the Russian Minister of Defense Sergey
Shoigu each described the murder as an
act of terrorism, but Peskov also referred
to it as a provocation just as the city of
Aleppo fell to Syrian Armed Forces. This
is somewhat similar to other sources in
Russia that speculated the assassination took
place to undermine Russian efforts in Syria.
Additionally, Shoigu’s comments appear to
show some acceptance of the assassination as
a part of ongoing operations.
The final article from Kommersant does not
include any official statements, but presents
another view of the assassination worth
noting. The article examines how security
is provided at Russian embassies and how
security at events like the art exhibit where
Karlov was killed is tight only when a local
official is present, almost excusing Turkey.
Immediately following the assassination, a
team of Russian investigators flew to Ankara
to work with Turkish authorities. The Russian
government is likely to review security at
events outside the embassy grounds and
request that Turkish authorities provide
additional measures, but the assassination
does not appear to have damaged RussianTurkish relations. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“Peskov called the incident a provocation and drew attention to
the timing of the murder, which had not been chosen by chance.”

Source: “Лавров назвал цель организаторов убийства российского посла в Турции
(Lavrov named the goal of the organizers of the killing of the Russian ambassador
in Turkey),” Novaya Gazeta, 20 December 2016. https://www.novayagazeta.ru/
news/2016/12/20/127590-lavrov-nazval-tsel-organizatorov-ubiystva-rossiyskogo-posla-vturtsii
…“The main goal of those who devised this barbaric act – is to undermine the
normalization of relations between Russia and Turkey in a number of ways to prevent
an effective fight with terrorism in Syria…” – the Foreign Minister said in a statement…
Also, Erdogan put out a video message in which he said that the aim of the murder was to
damage relations between Russia and Turkey…
Source: “Дмитрий Песков: нападение на посла — фактически нападение на
страну (Dmitry Peskov: the attack on the ambassador – a de facto attack on the state),”
Kommersant, 21 December 2016. http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3177011
The press secretary of President Vladimir Putin, Dmitry Peskov, compared the attack
on the ambassador to Turkey, Andrey Karlov, with an attack on the state…“…(Putin)
considered it an act of terrorism…Outside of this, Peskov called the incident a provocation
and drew attention to the timing of the murder, which had not been chosen by chance…“…
There is a symbolic significance – the liberation of Aleppo.”…
Source: “Шойгу назвал убийство российского посла в Турции терактом в отношении
РФ (Shoigu called the murder of the Russian ambassador in Turkey a terrorist attack against
the Russian Federation),” TASS, 20 December 2016. http://tass.ru/politika/3890237
…According to Shoigu, the murder of the Russian Ambassador Andrey Karlov, is
connected to Russia’s fight with international terrorism. “We understand that such acts are
connected with our actions against terrorism. It must be immediately said that we will not
stop this fight…” – said the Minister of Defense…
Source: Pavel Tarasenko, Maksim Yusin, Kirill Krivosheev, Sergey Strokan, Georgriy
Stepanov, and Aelita Kurmukova. “Загранотряд специального назначения (The
protection detachment of special designation),” Kommersant, 22 December 2016.
http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3177293
The murder of Russian Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Turkey sparked a debate about how
to effectively provide protection of diplomats…the Duma called for measures to strengthen
the protection of Russian diplomatic missions…in international law, the responsibility
for the protection of embassies, both the protection of the building and of personnel, is
assigned to the host side…Generally the security of Russian diplomatic missions is assigned
to the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR). The entrance to the (diplomatic) institution is
guarded by a duty officer and the outer perimeter – local police…
…Experts and diplomats interviewed by “Kommersant” agree that the main problem in
Turkey and other countries – is not in protecting buildings, but security at off-site events…
According to one source, “…the social event had no local high-ranking officials. He added,
“If a Turkish minister participated in the exhibition opening, security measures would have
been provided at a different level…”…A solution might be “strict selection of events in
which the ambassador will participate in and a requirement of the host country to provide
increased security…”
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Turkey Launches Military Satellite
OE Watch Commentary: In the last few
years, Turkey has made important strides in the
fields of space and aviation. On 5 December, a
new milestone was reached: Turkish military
satellite Göktürk-1 was launched from French
Guiana as a Turkish air force project, to address
the country’s civilian and military intelligence
needs around the world. The accompanying
passages from Turkish sources discuss this
development and Turkey’s plans to establish
a Space Agency, which also has an important
military component.

“...Göktürk 1’s primary mission will be to answer the needs of the

The first passage notes that Göktürk-1’s
primary mission will be to answer the needs
of the Turkish Armed Forces, especially in the
fight against terrorism. The piece highlights that
the satellite will be used primarily for Turkey’s
operations in Turkey’s eastern and southeastern
regions, as well as in Iraq and Syria. It will
also have civil applications such as controlling
forested areas and monitoring natural disasters.

A new Turkish satellite ... is expected to contribute to the Turkish Armed Forces’ fight
against terror.. Göktürk 1 will also be used for civil applications such as controlling
forested areas, monitoring illegal construction, quickly determining the extent of damage
caused by natural disasters and monitoring harvests.

In the second passage, Turkish military expert
Metin Gürcan analyzes the launch of Göktürk-1,
noting that this is Turkey’s second active military
satellite (fifth overall). He notes that the ultimate
goal is to operate a fleet that “will cover South
America, eastern North America, Europe, Asia,
Western Australia and all of Africa.” When
that project is complete, Turkey will have direct
communication links with 91% of the world
population through its own satellites. Gürcan
also discusses some important obstacles that
Turkey faces in this field, including the absence
of a National Space Agency, the absence of a
comprehensive space policy, and the lack of
qualified experts.

Source: Metin Gürcan, “Türkiye uzayda kurumsallaşabilecek mi? (Will Turkey be able to
Establish [itself] in Space?),” Al Monitor in Turkish, 12 December 2016, http://www.almonitor.com/pulse/tr/originals/2016/12/turkey-second-military-satellite-launched-space.
html

However, there are some recent efforts to
overcome at least one of problems. As the
passage notes, there is currently a draft bill in
parliament to establish a Turkish Space Agency
(TUA). This agency would be modeled after
NASA and the European Space Agency, and
combine all space and aviation efforts under
one roof. It will also have a unit that will plan
and coordinate military and space operations
related to national security. It should be noted
that, along these lines, the Turkish Armed
Forces had, in 2015, created a “Space Roadmap”
which envisioned also establishing a “Space
Group Command” by the year 2023. With these
initiatives, it aimed to utilize the space dimension
to develop early warning capabilities for ballistic
missile threats and improve its visual intelligence
means. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Turkish Armed Forces, especially in the fight against terrorism...
The satellite is expected to be used primarily in Turkey’s eastern
and southeastern regions, as well as Iraq and Syria.”
Source: “New satellite to launch later this year, contribute to Turkey’s terror
fight,” Hurriyet Daily News, 16 September 2016, http://www.hurriyetdailynews.
com/new-satellite-to-launch-later-this-year-contribute-to-turkeys-terror-fight.
aspx?pageID=238&nID=103955&NewsCatID=341

However Göktürk 1’s primary mission will be to answer the needs of the Turkish Armed
Forces (TAF), especially in the fight against terrorism... The satellite is expected to be
used primarily in Turkey’s eastern and southeastern regions, as well as Iraq and Syria. It
is also expected to be used in military operations conducted in Syria.

Turkey’s efforts in the satellite space race have experienced turbulence over the years,
but they got a boost with the recent launch of its Göktürk-1 satellite, which will meet the
country’s civilian and military intelligence needs around the world... Göktürk-1 launched
Dec. 5 from French Guiana as a Turkish air force project and has become the country’s
second active military satellite and fifth overall.
...
Turkey wants to increase its number of satellites to 10 by 2023. The goal is to operate
a fleet that will cover South America, eastern North America, Europe, Asia, Western
Australia and all of Africa. When that project is complete, Turkey will have direct
communication links with 91% of the world population through its own satellites.
...
But Turkey has still not overcome a key institutional deficiency: It has no national space
agency. Incredibly, Turkey tried and failed to form an agency four times: in 1990, 1995,
2000 and 2011.
...
According to new plans under a draft bill being prepared, the Space Agency of Turkey
(TUA) will resemble such agencies in other countries and will be under full civilian
control, apolitical, self-sufficient... It will also have a unit that will plan and coordinate
military and space operations related to national security.
...
The country also lacks a space policy, which has to be a priority. TUA will have to
establish productive and robust relations in the country’s education, technology, trade,
economy, security and foreign policy spheres.
...
Another question Turkey will have to cope with is the problem of finding qualified people.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Turkey: No End in Sight to Terror Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey has been
reeling from back-to-back terrorist attacks. While
the New Years Eve attack on a nightclub in Istanbul
garnered a lot of attention, there were two attacks
that took place in December which also deserve
attention due to their implications for stability in
Turkey. The attacks mainly targeted security and
law enforcement; but also killed many civilians. The
accompanying passages discuss the unprecedented
outrage after the attacks, which have turned into an
“anti-Kurdish frenzy”, suggesting increased tension
in the country, with no end in sight to such attacks.
On 10 December, two explosions caused by a
car bombing and a suicide bombing outside a busy
stadium in Istanbul killed 46 people and injured
over 100, most of whom were law enforcement
personnel. As the first passage notes, the Kurdistan
Freedom Falcons (TAK), a branch of the PKK,
claimed responsibility for the attack. The second
passage points out that many in Turkey see no
difference between TAK or the PKK, and the
reaction is turning into outrage towards Kurds
in general, which in turn, also tends to take on
nationalist, anti-Western tones.
Then on 17 December, in a very similar attack, a
suspected car bombing in Kayseri killed 13 soldiers
aboard a bus and wounded at least 55 others. As the
second passage discusses, the bomb attack targeted
the 1st Commando brigade to which the killed
soldiers belonged. The 1st Commando brigade,
which contains special forces teams, had played an
active role against the PKK in Southeastern Turkey;
so many in the country pointed to TAK or the PKK
as the culprit. These are only the latest attacks in a
series of attacks since June 2015, when the peace
process between the Turkish government and the
PKK ended.
TAK is known for claiming responsibility for
some of the bloody attacks that the PKK conducts
in cities. TAK is known to function as part of the
PKK but displays itself as a completely independent
organization; and the PKK disavows any connection
with the TAK attacks. TAK is thought to have
been established by the PKK’s military wing in
2003-2004 to serve as the “special forces” of the
organization, although the PKK has promoted the
impression that the TAK is a separate entity. TAK
is perceived in Turkey as the PKK’s metropolitan
arm that conducts bombings in urban centers. The
theory goes that this subsidiary enables the PKK
to conduct attacks without having to claim direct
responsibility. TAK carries out most of its attacks in
major urban centers in central and western Turkey,
as opposed to PKK’s area of operations, which
typically focus on the country’s heavily Kurdish
southeast. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“...Outrage over the Istanbul bombing quickly became a
nationalist, anti-Kurdish frenzy, and from there it has taken an
anti-Western... turn.”

The 10 December attacks in Istanbul took place outside this busy stadium.
Source: https://tr.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Beşiktaş_saldırıları#/media/File:Vodafone_Arena.jpg

Source: “Alçak saldırıyı terör örgütü PKK’nın kolu TAK üstlendi (Terrorist PKK’s
branch TAK claimed responsibility for the brutal attack),” Star.com.tr, 11 December
2016, http://www.star.com.tr/guncel/alcak-saldiriyi-teror-orgutu-pkknin-kolu-takustlendi-haber-1166492/
The TAK, a branch of the terror organization PKK, claimed responsibility for the
brutal attacks (in Besiktas, Istanbul last night) which killed 30 policeman and 38
citizens; and injured 155.
Source: Cengiz Çandar, “Outrage over Istanbul bombing turns anti-Kurdish,” Al
Monitor, 14 December 2016, http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/12/
turkey-istanbul-bombing-outrage-takes-anti-kurdish.html#ixzz4TJ1Cj7kl
For the Turkish street, there is no difference between the TAK, PKK, HDP and the
Kurds. Thus, outrage over the Istanbul bombing quickly became a nationalist, antiKurdish frenzy, and from there it has taken an anti-Western, particularly anti-EU
turn.
... Turkey’s population is getting more nervous. With an already-weakened security
and intelligence apparatus, how can Turkey confront terrorist attacks and how can it
win against enemies everywhere?
Source: “Kayseri 1. Komando Tugayı hakkında bilinmeyenler (Little known facts
about the Kayseri 1st Commando Brigade),” Haberturk.com.tr, 17 December 2016,
http://www.haberturk.com/gundem/haber/1337696-kayseri-1-komando-tugayi
In an attack in Kayseri today, 13 soldiers from the Kayseri 1st Commando Brigade
have been martyred... Here are some unknown facts about the Kayseri 1st Commando
Brigade, which is a critical unit in the fight against terrorism.
The soldiers of the Kayseri 1st Commando Brigade were trained specifically for the
fight against the PKK. Within 5 months, in operations conducted in Hakkari and its
surrounding regions, they killed over 700 terrorists including some high level PKK
members and destroyed some 50 of their safe havens.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST

Top

The Iranian Army’s Drone Jamming ‘Electronic Rifle’
OE Watch Commentary: According to Iran’s
Defense Department, the Iranian army (“Artesh”)
recently developed a drone jamming device. The
Iranian army tested the portable electronic device
during a recent war gaming exercise dubbed
“Mohammad Rassoulallah IV.” The accompanying
article from Tasnim News, an Iranian state news
media outlet, discusses this device.

Source: “Avaleen tasaveer az ekhlalgar zed pahpadey artesh + veejagheeha (First
pictures of drone jamming device by the army and its mechanisms),” Tasnim News, 12
December 2016, https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/09/22/1265451/-‫اولین‬
‫ها‬-‫ویژگی‬-‫ارتش‬-‫ضدپهپادی‬-‫اخاللگر‬-‫از‬-‫تصاویر‬
Drone Jamming Device. Used for disruption. Capable of hacking. Functions: 1)
Frequency of 2/3 to 2/5 gigahertz; 2) 30-watt power range; 3) Antenna type LPDA

The device, which resembles a rifle, is
capable of locking on to a drone and jamming
its communications. Once the device locks
on to a drone, its operator is no longer in
control. It is also reported that it has hacking
capabilities, potentially rerouting a targeted drone.
Additionally, its hacking abilities may allow the
device user to safely land a drone. The article
explains that a drone operator may not regain
control once the jamming device locks on to its
target.
However, according to the article, the most
important feature of the device is that it is
lightweight for ease of use on the ground and
operable by one person. It is a small, electronic
box that is strapped on, much like a backpack,
with a single wire attached to the “riflelike” device. End OE Watch Commentary
(Keshavarz & Bunker)

Picture 1: Tasnim News reporter was present at the war games and reported on Iran’s newest
technology being tested by “Artesh” soldiers.
Source: https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/09/22/1265451/‫نیلوا‬-‫ریواصت‬-‫زا‬-‫رگلالخا‬‫یداپهپدض‬-‫شترا‬-‫یگژیو‬-‫اه‬

Picture 2 (above): The image shows the device can be strapped on, making it easy to carry,
and is lightweight.
Source: https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/09/22/1265451/‫نیلوا‬-‫ریواصت‬-‫زا‬‫رگلالخا‬-‫یداپهپدض‬-‫شترا‬-‫یگژیو‬-‫اه‬
Picture 3 (right): The accompanying image shows an Iranian soldier testing the drone
jamming device during a war game exercise.
Source: https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/09/22/1265451/‫نیلوا‬-‫ریواصت‬-‫زا‬‫رگلالخا‬-‫یداپهپدض‬-‫شترا‬-‫یگژیو‬-‫اه‬

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Navy Now Hiring
OE Watch Commentary: The
Islamic Republic of Iran maintains
dual militaries—a traditional military
charged with territorial defense and
the elite Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps, charged with defense of the
Islamic Revolution, meaning that
enemies can be both external and
internal. Each military incorporates
traditional services: ground forces,
navy, and air. And each military
maintains its own specialties. The
excerpted notice from an Iranian
recruitment website gives some insight
into how the Iranian navy seeks to fill
those specialties, criteria which likely
would also apply to other services.

“Recruits must have belief and commitment to absolute clerical rule.”

While the regular Iranian military
is conscript-based, the notice suggests
that the Iranian military must recruit
to fill certain specialties. There
is an ideological litmus test—the
recruitment notice mandates the
same sort of religiosity and political
loyalty to the Supreme Leader as the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
would. How this is measured beyond
a general background clearance is
uncertain but it could also serve as
a lever to purge officers at a later
date if notions of religious loyalty
change. These criteria also mean
that religious minorities—and Iran’s
Sunni sectarian minority—need not
apply. The question of membership in
political organizations is another effort
to ensure loyalty to the regime since,
technically, the Islamic Republic
outlaws political parties, some of
which exist but are externally based.

Source: “Estekhadam Niru-ye Darya-ye Artesh Jomhuri Islami Iran (Recruitment for the Islamic
Republic of Iran Navy),” http://iranestekhdam.ir, 28 November 2016, iranestekhdam.ir/-‫استخدام‬
‫ارتش‬-‫دریایی‬-‫نیروی‬

As noted in the passage, priority
is given to “children of martyrs,
children of veterans, children of
armed services personnel, and the
Basij,” followed by other servicemen.
The academic qualifications are
surprisingly low (a “C average” is
required for engineers and a “B
average” for graduate officers and
[those] in the health fields,”) perhaps
a reflection that many Iranians would
prefer to take engineering degrees into
more lucrative fields. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

Iranian Navy.
Source: Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, http://
khalijefars.irib.ir/documents/697655/1004675/nav1.jpg?t=1417840422497

Recruitment Contract (as an employee and an officer) in the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy
Officer employment contract (5 years) and employee contract (6 years) in the field of health,
medicine, and engineering in the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy.
A. General Conditions:
1. Faithful to the religion of Islam and possessing Islamic Republic of Iran citizenship.
2.	Adherence to Islamic law and the law of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Islamic moral
values
3. Belief and commitment to absolute clerical rule
4. No history of membership in political groups, organizations, and parties
5. Having a good reputation and no criminal background
6. No history of drug abuse nor disqualification for civil service
7.	Meeting the medical and physical qualifications as certified by the Naval health service: At
least 165 centimeters tall [5’5”] and eyesight without glasses of 10/8 [20/16 vision].
8. Age Requirements:
a. The maximum age is 30 years and 40 years for those with doctorates.
b. Officer candidates (contract officers) must be between 22 and 28 years old…
10. Lack of service commitment to other organizations and government agencies.
11.	Having a grade point average of 13 for engineers [C average] and 14 [B average] for
graduate officers and in the health fields.
B. Specific Conditions of Employment
1.	Having the qualification according to scientific experts, health, technical, medical for
officers as set forth in any specialty…
2.	Candidates who have work experience in the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy receive first
priority but those who have only served as contract employees in the armed forces cannot
volunteer.
3.	For employment in all specialties, priority shall be given to children of martyrs, children of
veterans, children of armed services personnel, and the Basij….
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Was Rafsanjani Murdered?
OE Watch Commentary: Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani was among
the Islamic Republic’s most prominent figures. He served as speaker of the
parliament, president, chairman of the Assembly
of Experts and chairman of the expediency
council. He was also the wealthiest man in Iran
and used his political influence and connections to
secure countless other investments abroad.
While in death, some analysts described
Rafsanjani as a moderate. However, a more
objective view of his record suggests otherwise:
He was a father of Iran’s then-covert nuclear
program and suggested in a 14 December 2001
sermon that it was not simply for deterrence. He
argued that Iran could eliminate Israel with one
bomb and had the territorial depth to absorb a
retaliatory strike. He further signed off on the
1994 bombing of the Jewish community center
in Buenos Aires and was involved politically in
the Reagan-era taking of American hostages in
Lebanon. He did reach out to the West, but this
was more often to seek economic relief than
political reform. At most, he played the role of
good cop in a carefully calibrated Iranian strategy
in which the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC) played bad cop.

“They killed my father.”

Iranians gather outside the hospital upon learning of Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani’s death,
8 January 2017.
Source: goo.gl/JISFqu

Events on the night of his death, however, provide some insight into the
fissures that permeate Iranian society. The excerpted blog post, based on
the Facebook reporting of two Iranian activists present outside the hospital,
describes the cries of Rafsanjani’s fourth child Mehdi Hashemi, a 47-yearold businessman. Mehdi Hashemi accuses the IRGC of killing his father by
poisoning his tea and furthermore suggests that the Supreme Leader was
involved in a cover-up. This episode exposes the deep distrust that even
the privileged political and business class of the Islamic Republic harbors
toward the IRGC and the Supreme Leader.
Further, even though Rafsanjani was ultimately buried near Tehran, the
fact that the regime considered at least briefly holding Rafsanjani’s funeral
in Mashhad 550 miles away “to avoid potential demonstrations in Tehran”
also exposes the distrust Iranian leaders harbor about their own people and
the recognition that any prominent funeral could provide a spark to broader
political unrest. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Mehdi Hashemi, Pedaram ra Koshtand (Mehdi
Hashemi: They Killed My Father),” Khabargar.co, 9 January
2017. http://www.khabargar.co/2017/01/blog-post_151.
html?m=1#more
The Facebook pages of political activists Mitra Yekta and
Goli Ebrahimi claimed that Mehdi Hashemi Rafsanjani was
present in a gathered crowd in front of the hospital where
his father’s body was, [and] kept screaming “they killed my
father.” Mehdi added that “my father had a meeting with
a group of IRGC commanders and drank a cup of tea or
something that gave him [an] instant heart attack. Mehdi
asked for [an] autopsy but Khamenei is against it. Others
have claimed that the planned funeral of Rafsanjani in
Mashhad is to avoid potential demonstrations in Tehran.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is about a
broader set of conflicts than just ‘insurgency.’ In its 144
sections, Geoff Demarest raises new and overlooked
concepts related to modern conflict in a provocative
manner designed to stir up debate and critical thinking.
As Geoff Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the ideas
in it will be contagious.”
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/WIrW_2015.pdf

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: Internet Use Expands Exponentially
OE Watch Commentary: Historically, Iranians have
embraced technology. The shah of Iran installed an indigenous
telegraph system in 1857, less than two decades after the
first commercial usage of
telegraphy in the United
Kingdom and just a decade
after American companies
began laying telegraph wires
in earnest. The same held true
for radio in the early twentieth
century: while Saudi clerics
condemned and resisted radio
and later television, both
Iranian political and religious
leaders embraced the new
technologies (and sought to
co-opt them for their own
purposes). The internet
has led the 21st century
communications revolution
and, after early uncertainty,
the Islamic Republic has
embraced it, even as it strives
to control what Iranians inside
the country can see.

“Internet usage has increased from 3.5 million to
nearly 40 million users”

The accompanying passage
from the Islamic Republic
News Agency quotes Iran’s
Iranian women online.
Source: Shafaf.ir, http://www.shafaf.ir/files/fa/news/1390/12/20/36121_586.jpg
Communication Minister as
saying that, since 2013, internet
Source: “Vizier-e Ertibatat: Karbaran-e Internet Dar Dawlat Tadbir va
usage has “increased from 3.5 million to nearly 40 million
Omid beh 40 Miliyon Rasid (Minister of Communications: Internet Users
users,” and that “internet penetration has increased to about
in the State Increased to 40 Million),” Islamic Republic News Agency, 6
50 percent of our country.” While the Iranian Minister of
January 2017. http://www7.irna.ir/fa/News/82375810/
Communication Vaezi can congratulate himself on expanding
internet access exponentially, even if his numbers are accurate
Internet Users Hit 40 Million
they are less impressive than they might look at first glance.
Mahmoud Vaezi, minister of communication, on Wednesday [January
According to the World Bank, the internet penetration rate
4], after attending a meeting of the Rudsar city council, stated in a
in the United Kingdom and United States are 89.8 and 84.2
conversation with the Islamic Republic News Agency correspondent, that
percent respectively. Iran is on par with China, which has a
since the beginning off the eleventh government [2013], internet usage has
45.8 percent penetration rate.
increased from 3.5 million to nearly 40 million users. He also mentioned
Iran’s population is 70 percent urban. If only 50 percent of
that internet penetration has increased to about 50 percent of our country
Iran’s population use the internet, then in all likelihood, Iran’s
and that this is a very good development in the field of communications.
rural population still lags behind in connectivity. However, if
internet penetration continues to grow, the Iranian government
may face security challenges. During the 1999 student unrest,
Gateways of Internet into
Iran, based on data from 2006
Iranian authorities shut down the cell phone system. A decade
and 2007. Originally reported
later, after the post-election unrest, Iranian authorities clamped
at http://www.gooyait.
com/1390/01/27/nationaldown on the internet and SMS technology. Technology
internetwork-vs-the-internet.
increasingly provides workarounds to enable freedom from
html. Numbers indicate the
bandwith in STM-1; each STM-1
government systems; so news from beyond government
is approximately equal to 155
Mbit/s.
sources may soon penetrate further into society. Whether this
Source: https://commons.
leads to unrest or better coordinated opposition movements
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Iran_
Internet_Input.svg
remains to be seen, but Iranian authorities certainly have
reason to be worried. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

12

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran Building High-Speed Catamaran
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic responded to years of
sanctions that undercut its ability to import advanced weaponry and spare parts
by creating a formidable indigenous military industry. Even after most sanctions
have been lifted as a result of the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), Iranian authorities have appeared to invest as much
if not more effort in their domestic arms industry than in simply purchasing
capabilities from abroad. If Iranian firms—in this case affiliated with Khatam
al-Anbia, the economic wing of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC)—can support manufacture of the entire supply chain, then Iranian
military officials need not worry about grounding or docking planes and ships
for want of replacement parts.
The excerpted article from an IRGC-affiliated publication suggests that,
rather than simply create depth on a few platforms, the Iranian military is
rapidly increasing Iranian capabilities on a broad range of platforms. As Iran’s
area of operations has shifted from the Persian Gulf to areas further afield—
the northern Indian Ocean, the Gulf of Aden, Red Sea, and perhaps even the
Mediterranean—it has taken pains to bolster its logistical capabilities and reach.
It is in this context that Iran’s new catamaran capability becomes important, if it
works. As the excerpt notes, it can carry troops and helicopters, enabling longrange operations in the ocean.
Iran’s new catamaran has many of the same capabilities as the HSV-2, a
catamaran that the United States Navy Military Sealift Command leased in
2003. While the US Navy initially sought to utilize the HSV-2 in mine-clearing
operations and as a platform for testing other equipment, she
ultimately was relegated for fleet support missions before
being leased to the United Arab Emirates and deployed by
Abu Dhabi off the coast of Yemen. On 1 October 2016,
Houthi rebels fired missiles that disabled the catamaran
which ultimately was towed to Eritrea. It is doubtful
that the Iranian navy could operate a ship with more
efficiency or greater capability than the US Navy.
Still, any platform which would allow Iran to carry its
helicopters further afield will complicate the operational
environment among all the littoral states of the Middle
East. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The joining of the Shahid Nizari
catamaran to the IRGC-Navy fleet will be
a turning point.”
Source: “Nasal-e Jadid Shanavarha Shahid-e Nizari Sepah
dar Hal Sakhtast (The Revolutionary Guards is Building a
New Generation of Catamarans, the Shahid Nizari),”
Tasnim News, 8 November 2016. www.tasnimnews.com/
fa/news/1395/08/18/1234381/-‫ناظری‬-‫شهید‬-‫شناورهای‬-‫جدید‬-‫نسل‬
‫است‬-‫ساخت‬-‫حال‬-‫در‬-‫سپاه‬
According to a report by the defense correspondent of
Tasnim, Admiral Ali Fadavi, commander of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps-Navy…said, a new Shahid
Nizari catamaran class will enter service this year. With
reference to the entry of the new vessels to the IRGC
fleet… the joining of the Shahid Nizari catamaran to the
IRGC-Navy fleet will be a turning point. According to the
head of the IRGC-Navy, this catamaran is constructed
at the Center for Self-Sufficiency and Jihad of the IRGCNavy and in the Shahid Mahallati Shipbuilding Institute
affiliated with Khatam al-Anbia and it has been delivered
to operational units. With reference to the aluminum hull
of the vessel, Admiral Fadavi said that it was 55 meters
in width, 141 meters in length, and 13 meters in depth,
and the lower friction with water increases speed and
reduces fuel consumption, and noted, “Today we see a
new achievement by our internal experts, with its ability
to carry both troops and helicopters, enabling longrange operations in the ocean. It can carry 100 troops,
is resistant to high waves, and it does well on overseas
missions.”

Iran’s New helicopter-carrying catamaran.
Source: Mashregh News, http://cdn.mashreghnews.ir/files/fa/news/1395/6/23/1847801_214.jpg

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

13

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: IRGC Ultralight Gyrocopter Crashes
OE Watch Commentary: Iran has long faced security
challenges along its rugged and sparsely populated border
regions, especially in its Kurdish and Baluch areas which are
prone to insurgency and smuggling. In recent
years, Iran has used unmanned aerial vehicles to
conduct surveillance in these regions. However,
the accompanying passage from a news portal
affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps (IRGC) indicates it now appears to
have switched to using lightweight, manned
gyrocopters for surveillance.

“The gyroplane crashed… when heading for its
reconnaissance mission”

The piece notes that an IRGC ultralight
gyrocopter crashed at the Saravan Airport
(in Iranian Balochistan, close to Iran’s border
with Pakistan), killing its pilot. This craft is
reminiscent of a military gyrocopter that the
Chinese military unveiled in January 2016, that
bore a striking resemblance to a recent German
prototype. There is some potential utility to
the craft beyond simply surveillance: Chinese
sources have suggested that they will use the
aircraft not only for surveillance but also for
Special Forces missions.
Both of these potential roles raise questions with regard to
the Iranian military’s use of the craft. Did Iran develop its
craft in parallel to the Chinese version or in cooperation with
Beijing? If Iran is utilizing manned vehicles to conduct aerial
reconnaissance along its southeastern border, does this mean
that its UAVs are less capable than it previously claimed?
Alternately, if Iran is using the Saravan airport in its Sistan and
Baluchistan province to base gyrocopters, is it developing the
capability to infiltrate forces across the Pakistani border just 30
miles away?
If the IRGC is successful at developing the gyrocopter
for Special Forces missions, it could pose some challenge to
neighboring states and the Gulf Cooperation Council. After all,
the relatively quiet and low-flying craft can evade radar notice.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Iranian Gyrocopters on maneuver.
Source: Tasnim News, https://goo.gl/8muPxT

Source: “Saqut-e Yek Farevand-e Havapeyma-ye Fowq Sabek Sepah dar
Saravan (IRGC Ultralight Gyrocopter Crashes in Saravan),” Tasnim News,
1 December 2016. www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1395/09/11/1254910/
‫رسید‬-‫شهادت‬-‫به‬-‫مصائبی‬-‫بهمن‬-‫خلبان‬-‫سراوان‬-‫در‬-‫سپاه‬-‫سبک‬-‫فوق‬-‫هواپیمای‬-‫فروند‬-‫یک‬-‫سقوط‬

IRGC Ultralight Gyrocopter Crashes in Saravan
According to a report by the defense correspondent for Tasnim, the
public relations office of the IRGC’s Qods Headquarters announced in a
statement, that a gyroplane belonging to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps crashed at the Saravan airport. The public relations announcement
from the Headquarters said, “The gyroplane crashed at the Saravan
airport this morning when heading for its reconnaissance mission. The
statement added, “The pilot Bahman Mosabi of the IRGC Air Force was
martyred in the crash.”

A Small Box That’s a Big Deal: How Latin American
Countries Are Using CubeSATs and Why it Matters
by Kevin Freese

The Army is the Defense Department’s largest space user and the space domain is
an essential part of the current and future operational environment. A relatively
new satellite technology – the CubeSAT – is now making it easier for countries
such as Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay to launch their space programs.
By facilitating traditionally non-spacefaring nations to develop space programs,
CubeSATs will give such nations a greater voice in international space policies and
laws. For the United States, this will mean increased necessity to take the interests of
other nations into consideration when operating in space.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/SWJ_A%20Small%20Box%20That’s%20a%20Big%20Deal_%20How%20Latin%20American%20
Countries%20Are%20Using%20CubeSATs%20and%20Why%20it%20Matters.pdf
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

14

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Iran: New Karrar Tank to be Unveiled Soon
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic of Iran is in
the midst of a significant military build-up, both in terms of its
own indigenous military manufacturing
capability and also with regard to its external
military orders. Given Iran’s efforts to
indigenously produce advanced platforms
and its willingness to reverse engineer
foreign products, the two streams of military
acquisition may not be fully separate. The
accompanying excerpt on Iran’s new Karrar
tank is a case in point.

“...this tank will be at the advanced level of the
Russian T-90”

The article excerpted here is from the
Basij Jihad and Martyrdom Retirement
Organization, a website read by past
and current members of the Basij, a
paramilitary force affiliated with the Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps. The passage
quotes Iran’s Deputy Defense Minister as
saying that he would soon announce good
news regarding Iran’s new Karrar tank.
Press discussion of this tank dates back a year when Defense Minister Hossein
Dehghan said that Iran was no longer interested in purchasing Russian T-90
tanks, and that the Karrar would have “greater mobility, fire rate, and space for
its crewmembers.” Analysis of early photographs, however, show an uncanny
likeness between the T-90 and the Karrar. Given the similarities between the
two tanks, it appears likely that Iranian engineers reverse engineered the T-90
or gained access to some of its plans.
The open desire of Iran to produce advanced platforms domestically and
its willingness to reverse engineer foreign products might ultimately create
reticence among Russian and Chinese military officials about the long-term
wisdom of high-technology sales to Iran when Iran might view such sales
as a means to build up its own indigenous weapons industry. Even if Iran
does not reverse-engineer designs, its investment in the capability to expand
its domestic military production shows either a lack of confidence that the
international community will continue to relieve it of sanctions or that the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps wants to keep its own people employed.
Either way, it appears that Iran seeks to increase its military capability and its
footprint in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin).

A photo purporting to show Iran’s new Karrar tank.
Source: MilitaryNews.ir, http://www.militarynews.ir/wp-content/
uploads/2016/07/karar1.jpg

Source: “Khabarhaye Khushi az “Tank Karrar” dar Rah
ast (Good News about the Karrar Tank is on the Way),”
bpsb.ir, 28 November 2016. http://bpsb.ir/?q=node/25533

New Karrar Tank to Be Unveiled Soon
Amir Hatami, Deputy Minister of Defense and Armed
Forces Logistics, in a conversation with the defense
correspondent of Tasnim, said regarding the latest status
of the Karrar tank, “In the near future, we will have
good news with regard to the Karrar tank.” He added,
“Certainly, apart from the Karrar tank, we will have
good news about one or two other issues in the aviation
domain.” He said the Karrar tank is the newest armored
product within the Ministry of Defense and Armed Force
Logistics. And the Minister of Defense, had earlier said
that this tank will be at the advanced level of the Russian
T-90.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is produced by the Threats Intelligence Support
Activity (US Army TRADOC G-2) and posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

15

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Gulf-Backed Yemeni National Army Falls Short
OE Watch Commentary: The Saudi-led military
campaign in Yemen suffers from a shortage of land
power. On paper, the Saudis have a capable domestic
partner called the Yemeni National Army (YNA).
The YNA bills itself as a fledgling national force,
trained and equipped with help from foreign backers
and organized as a conventional army capable of
taking and holding Yemen’s entire territory. As
the first accompanying article illustrates, the YNA
is very active on paper, regularly restructuring
to achieve optimal efficiency. Being good at
organizational management and self-promotion,
though, hardly translates to effectiveness on the
Yemeni battlefield.
The YNA’s foot soldiers come from the so-called
“Popular Resistance” forces that were initially
levied in 2012 to fight al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) and then again in 2015 to resist
Huthi incursions. The bulk of these militias are
made up of villagers from former South Yemen
motivated by personal and/or political interests
particular to their local communities. The second
accompanying article highlights the problem with
attempting to recruit southerners to fight with the
YNA outside of their home territories. The article
details failed efforts by former South Yemen defense
minister Haythem Qassim Tahir to convince over
5,000 trained and equipped fighters from the south
to fight in Yemen’s northwest corner. According
to the article, the soldiers revolted after a group of
them was told they would be airdropped to fight in
the Midi Desert near the border with Saudi Arabia,
rather than being deployed to defend southern
borders as they had initially been led to believe.
The rush to make the YNA appear viable by
bringing the greatest number of fighters possible into
its ranks has naturally created problems. As noted in
the third accompanying article from the Qatari daily
al-Araby al-Jadid, a commission following up on
the initial merging of the Popular Resistance into the
YNA found that the majority of new names on the
military rolls were fake, put there by local leaders
to gain power and influence. These local leaders
also pressed YNA leadership to grant inexperienced
but well-connected young men high military ranks,
in some cases entrusting them to command entire
brigades, despite their lack of experience.
Corruption and self-promotion aside, the YNA’s
key problem may be the absence of a unifying
ideology. In contrast to the Huthi Movement’s foot
soldiers, members of the Popular Resistance do not
fall under a single umbrella. Some seek southern
autonomy or secession, others hope to establish a
Saudi-inspired form of Shari’a rule, and most follow
local strongmen in the search for greater power and
material prosperity. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

“…the number of fake names exceeded those of actual
fighters on the ground…”
Source:
‫ألوية وواحدات وفقا ً لنظام األقاليم بدعم كامل من التحالف‬... ‫”الجيش اليمني يتشكل من جديد‬
(The Yemeni Army Restructured Again… Brigades and Units According to the
Regional System with Full Alliance Support),” al-Mashhad al-Yemeni, 24 November
2016. http://almashhad-alyemeni.com/news87804.html
“The National Army aims to establish new military units in liberated provinces
according to Yemen’s federalist system of six region, which Yemeni factions agreed
to as part of the National Dialogue… Leaders of the various military zones, with the
exception of Zone One, are engaged in heavy training and forming new brigades with
young leaders… “Army leadership is implementing a comprehensive plan throughout
Yemen, including areas under Huthi control. Army leadership seeks to overcome
a security vacuum in the case of a political settlement, so these forces may impose
control throughout the provinces in an orderly fashion. Alternatively, these units may
be used to impose military control over the provinces which remain under the control
of the putschists”…
Source:
‫”لماذا فشل هيثم طاهر في أول مهماته العسكرية مع التحالف؟‬
(Why did Haytham Taher Fail in his First Military Mission with the Alliance?),” Aden
al-Ghad, 6 December 2016. http://adenghd.net/news/233624
A military source told Aden al-Ghad that the failure of Brig. Gen. Haytham to send
southern soldiers to fight in Taiz comes a week after a failure to convince hundreds
of southern fighters to participate in an airdrop adventure in the Midi Desert to free
it from the Huthis and forces loyal to Ai Abdullah Saleh. The soldiers argued that the
battle does not concern them and does not align with the Southern goals which they
initially trained to accomplish… Last week, more than five thousand angry Southern
officers and soldiers mutinied after being told that they would fight in Midi…
Source:
‫ تعقيدات وعقبات‬:‫”دمج “المقاومة” بالجيش في تعز‬
(Incorporating the ‘Resistance’ into the Army in Taiz: Complications and Obstacles),”
al-Araby al-Jadid, 10 December 2016. https://goo.gl/wm34NN
Hadi issued orders to merge the “Resistance” into the army, after the southern
provinces were freed in June 2015. Most of the “Southern Resistance” was merged
into military units, and a military commission was established to follow up with the
decree in Taiz. Hadi’s order called for 15,000 fighters to be merged into existing
military brigades in Taiz… the plan, though, is going slowly and plagued by
complications and shortcomings. According to one military source: “Part of the
reason for the complications in merging is that from the outset it was based not on
traditionally recognized military procedures. Instead, faction leaders provided lists
with the names of their men, without their being any kind of standards… The first
attempt failed and President Hadi established a commission to explore the issue.
It found that the number of fake names exceeded those of actual fighters on the
ground… The Resistance factions, which are usually associated with political or
religious factions, were often brought into a single brigade which in turn took on a
specific political or regional identity… Some political factions put pressure on upper
leadership to confer high military ranks to educators, deputies and young recent
graduates lacking military experience. The situation reached the point that some
of them have been appointed as brigade commanders and campaign operations
commanders, which points to a future disaster within the army, which has been
systematically destroyed by the desire of some to take control over military and
security institutions…
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

16

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Yemen: Sana’a Government Appoints “Ballistic”
Defense Minister
OE Watch Commentary: In late November
2016, the Sana’a-based “Supreme Political
Council” announced the formation of a “National
Salvation Government.” This government would
be dominated by the Huthi Movement and the
General People’s Congress (GPC), the political
party of former president Ali Abdullah Saleh.
Brig. Gen. Mohammed al-Atefi, a young military
officer from an influential tribal grouping with
territories on the outskirts of Sana’a, was named
as defense minister. The accompanying passages
from local sources discuss al-Atefi’s appointment
to this post and what this suggests for the HuthiSaleh forces’ military doctrine.
Although often described as a “Huthi ally,” as in
the first accompanying excerpt, al-Atefi is a career
officer whom the Huthis believed would make
a good defense minister. As the second excerpt
explains, al-Atefi’s rise in the military has come
from a rare combination of competence and tribal
connections. The fact that he is an experienced
missile brigade commander who survived the
rocky transitional period is important, and
his appointment signals an intent to continue
emphasizing missiles and rocket artillery in the
emerging Huthi-Saleh military doctrine.
Over the last two years, the bulk of the Yemeni
military, which opposes Saudi intervention, has
amalgamated with the Huthi Movement to form a
hybrid force that combines the Huthi Movement’s
ideologically motivated foot soldiers with the
military’s (mostly Republican Guard) operators
of heavy and advanced weapons systems. This
force’s most advanced heavy weapons are ballistic
missiles and rocket artillery systems, including
some from pre-existing Soviet-era stocks and
others that have been imported or developed
domestically. Huthi-Saleh forces have emulated
the missile doctrine used by the Iraqi Army
during the First Gulf War, wherein concealing
personnel and equipment by minimizing launch
time became a priority. According to the third
accompanying excerpt from a study published
by a Kuwaiti military analyst, the Huthi-Saleh
alliance has furthered this tactic by effectively
setting up decoy targets which aircraft from
the Saudi coalition bomb in the mistaken belief
that they are transporter erector launcher (TEL)
systems. Indeed according to the author, the
Saudi-led coalition has failed to strike a single
mobile TEL. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

Source:
‫ من هو اللواء محمد العاطفي‬..‫”صالح يرضخ أمام الحوثيين ويعطيهم حقيبة الدفاع‬
(Saleh Bows to the Huthis and Gives Them Defense Ministry… Who is Brig. Gen.
Mohammed al-Atefi?),” Yemen Press, 30 November 2016. http://yemen-press.com/
news86638.html
The most prominent portfolio in the
current cabinet is defense minister, over
which the Huthis retained possession,
as was expected, after a long battle with
Saleh, who eventually bowed to their
pressure… Mohammed Nasser Ahmed alAtefi (b. 1969) is… commander of Yemen’s
Missile Brigades Unit…

Brig. Gen. Mohammed al-Atefi.
Source: http://www.almotamar.net/
pda/104091.htm

Source:
‫ الوزير “الباليستي‬...‫”محمد العاطفي‬
(Mohammed al-Atefi.. the ‘Ballistic’
Minister),” al-Arabi, 4 December 2016.
https://goo.gl/C1lLlo

The new defense minister graduated from the Military College as a 2d Lieutenant in
1986, gaining his first practical experience in the 6th Brigade (Republican Guard).
This brigade was back then located in al-Arqub, in the Khawlan District of Sana’a
Province. Al-Atefi is a native of this region, which allowed him to gain military and
tribal prominence from the outset… the new defense minister may be described as a
technocrat despite being appointed by the Huthis. He is a product of the military, which
for the Huthis is a plus. According to one source, when the Huthis began approaching
the headquarters to the Missiles Brigade Unit in 2014, al-Atefi addressed them saying:
“We don’t have anything here that concerns you, we just have heavy weaponry”…
In terms of training, information obtained by al-Arabi claims that al-Atefi received
unit commander training in the former Soviet Union, related to Scud missiles. He
subsequently turned west, receiving training on military terminology in the United
States, according to the source.
Source:
‫”دور إيران في المرحلة البالستية باليمن‬
(Iran’s Role in Yemen’s Ballistic Missile Stage),” Arabian Gulf Centre for Iranian
Studies, 10 October 2016. https://goo.gl/NHDybw (English version available at: http://
arabiangcis.org/english/studies/irans-role-on-the-ballistic-stage-in-yemen/)
The Arab alliance believes that the Saleh-Huthi enemy follows the Soviet launch model,
which involves a slow launch with time to set-up, tear-down, and adequately determine
the target. What is happening instead resembles what Iraqi forces did in the Kuwait
liberation war of 1991, when they launch quickly from sites prepared in advance and
remained there only for a few minutes. The time was decreased from 90 minutes to 10
minutes. The difficulty of hunting Scuds comes from the fact that they are mobile and
can be transported by heavy-load trucks. The missiles can be launched from roads
or from unpaved open areas, after which they can be quickly hidden. The missiles
can also be launched from previously prepared launch sites fortified by sandbags and
inaccessible shelters for the launch team… Unlike in 1991, the air forces have failed
to destroy a single mobile launch… In the cat-and-mouse game between pilots and
missiles, pilots who wait in the skies will lose… there is a direct link between successful
launches and bad weather conditions at launch sites… A decline in the number of
launches may give credence to claims that pilots have ended the missile threat, without
realizing that many of the alliance bombings may have struck dummy targets like fuel
tankers. The extent of the deception program needs to be properly understood.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

17

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Egypt: Rapprochement with Damascus, End of the
“October Generation”
OE Watch Commentary: On 24 November
2016, the Lebanese newspaper al-Safir published
an article claiming that the Egyptian military had
sent 18 helicopter pilots to a Syrian airbase earlier
that month. The newspaper, which supports the
Syrian government, described the revelation as “the
small jump in Syrian-Egyptian relations needed to
bring them back to their natural state.” It further
surmised that Egyptian intervention in Syria
would become “more than symbolic” to include
Egyptian special forces in coming months, though
it provided no details or evidence to back the claim.
The Egyptian Foreign Ministry was quick to deny
any Egyptian military deployment in Syria.
Media reports appear to agree that, at minimum,
the governments of Egypt and Syria are sharing
intelligence on jihadist insurgents. A Twitter
account linked to the Syrian opposition, which calls
itself the “Syrian General Intelligence Directorate,”
recently claimed that while there are no Egyptian
forces fighting on the Syrian government’s
behalf, Egyptian officers are in Syria to carry out
three missions: establish an air corridor between
Damascus Airport and Egypt’s Almaza Airbase
for the transfer of artillery rockets; collaborate on
intelligence sharing and targeted assassinations of
Syrian armed insurgents, particularly from Ahrar
al-Sham; and, share intelligence and fabricate
reports for Western intelligence agencies that
aggrandize the threat of Islamic movements.
Reports that the Syrian government has repatriated
captured Egyptians fighting in Syria further
bolsters claims of increased bilateral collaboration.
As the Egyptian military continues to formulate
its new role in the changing regional order, it
does so with a new generation of leaders. In midDecember, President Sisi replaced Egypt’s air
defense commander, who was the last member of
the “October Generation” in the Supreme Council
of the Armed Forces (SCAF), Egypt’s highest
military body. The “October Generation” refers to
those who directly participated in the Egypt-Syria
October 1973 War with Israel. The Egypt-Syria
alliance broke down before the conflict was over,
and after the war Egypt signed a peace deal with
Israel and moved away from Soviet influence and
closer to the United States. As a result, as the third
accompanying article notes, while many in the
“October Generation” trained in the Soviet Union,
those replacing them have mostly received training
in the United States. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

“…the small jump
in Syrian-Egyptian
relations needed to
bring them back to
their natural state…”

Source:
‫”طالئع عسكرية مصرية في سوريا‬
(Egyptian Military Vanguard in
Syria),” al-Safir. 24 November 2016.
https://assafir.com/Article/518343/
Archive

General Mahmoud Hegazy,
Egyptian Armed Forces Chief of Staff.
Source: http://www.mod.gov.eg/Mod/Mod_COS.aspx

… the vanguard of Egyptian forces in Syria, “the small jump in Syrian-Egyptian
relations needed to bring them back to their natural state”… Since the 12th of this
month an Egyptian unit consisting of 18 helicopter pilots has been based at Hama
Airbase. It is unclear whether they have begun participating in aerial operations… Four
senior officers from the Egyptian staff preceded the pilots, while two Egyptian brigadier
generals have been working out of the Syrian staff command headquarters in Damascus
for a month… Sources expect Egyptian involvements to be more than symbolic…
sending Egyptian special forces (Sa’ka) to more broadly support the Syrian Army.
Source:
‫ال توجد قوات عسكرية مصرية في سوريا صحيح‬
“There are no Egyptian Military Forces in Syria.” Syrian General Intelligence
Directorate (Rebel), Twitter Feed. 1 December 2016. https://twitter.com/SYRIA_GID/
status/804245858992594944
It is true there are no Egyptian military forces in Syria, but there are several Egyptian
officers working at three levels: 1. Establish an air corridor between Damascus Airport
and Egypt’s Almaza Airbase, for the transfer of artillery rockets… 2. Collaborate
in intelligence sharing and targeted assassinations of Syrian armed insurgents,
particularly Ahrar al-Sham… 3. Share intelligence and fabricate reports for Western
intelligence agencies that aggrandize the threat of Islamic movements.
Source:
‫ ‘جيل أكتوبر’ خارجه‬:‫”السيسي يهيمن على المجلس العسكري‬
(Sisi Takes Full Control of Military Council, Sidelining ‘October Generation’),” alAraby al-Jadid. 19 December 2016. https://goo.gl/Z3ZSWv
Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi’s changes to the leadership of Air Defense
and Naval Forces mean that the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) no
longer has members of the “October Generation”… This generation held most military
leadership positions during the era of Hosni Mubarak and Mohammed Morsi, as well
as the year and a half during which the SCAF ran the country after 25 January 2011…
The battlefield experience of Sisi and the other members of the current SCAF is limited
to the Gulf War and trainings with multinational forces. Most of them, in particular
Sisi, [Defense Minister] Sobhi, and Chief of Staff Mahmoud Hegazy (whose daughter is
marred to Sisi’s son), got their military degree in the United States during the 1990s…
The replacement of al-Taras as air defense commander was accompanied by the forced
retirement of many leaders in air defense who are loyal to Sami Anan, who was air
defense commander in the Mubarak era and later the Egyptian military’s chief of staff.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

18

MIDDLE EAST

Top

The Role of Intelligence in East Aleppo
OE Watch Commentary: According to
both loyalist and opposition media, the Syrian
government’s operation to retake East Aleppo
relied heavily on intelligence from agents,
infiltrators and informants. It is claimed that this
extensive network of operatives helped Syrian
firepower target vital rebel positions with precision,
while stoking chaos among the rebels. The
accompanying passages shed light on some of the
tactics that the regime used to prevail over rebel
forces in East Aleppo.
As the first accompanying article from a progovernment newspaper notes, such precise strikes
“can only be done by someone with correct
information on fortifications, defensive lines, and
preparedness of command centers and depots.”
The initial strikes led to devastating personnel
and equipment losses, creating suspicion and
disarray among rebel ranks. Loyalist agents
and sympathizers helped stoke the chaos while
encouraging evacuations, creating a feedback
loop that led to a rapid collapse in rebel defenses.
Loyalist success in Aleppo, according to the
article, was the result of “an intelligence operation
more than a military operation.” The article notes
that Syrian intelligence had worked since 2012
“to sow eyes, agents, and spies throughout the
military, security, economic and media apparatus
of East Aleppo’s armed groups.” This assessment
is corroborated in the second excerpt, from a prorebel news website.
As the third and fourth excerpts note, Syrian Air
Force Intelligence launched a major operation to
recruit and place informants in East Aleppo with
the start of military operations several months ago.
According to the third excerpt, from the opposition
news website al-Modon, pro-government forces
fighting in Northeast Aleppo included YPG fighters
from Aleppo’s Kurdish enclave. The YPG’s allies
in the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) include the
“Jaysh al-Thuwar,” a “moderate opposition” group
formerly based in East Aleppo. The passage notes
that SDF forces were even more instrumental than
government intelligence agencies “in terms of
intelligence operations and preparing the field via
its agents in Aleppo’s northeast neighborhoods.”
A key lesson for rebels in the post-Aleppo era is
that “the opposition ranks are feeble and easy to
infiltrate,” as the excerpt from the pro-rebel site
notes. This problem has loomed over Syrian rebels
from the outset. ISIS resolved it by establishing
a totalitarian system requiring overt displays of
loyalty on a regular basis. ISIS operates under the
assumption that its ranks are infiltrated, hence
the group’s continuous purges, particularly when
attacks against it are looming or underway. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫”عمليات استخبارية طويلة ومعقّدة سهّلت عودة حلب‬
(Long-term and Complex Intelligence Operations Paved the Way for Aleppo’s Return),”
al-Safir, 9 December 2016. https://assafir.com/Article/519856
Since the early days of the fall of East Aleppo, Syrian intelligence made efforts to sow
eyes, agents, and spies throughout the military, security, economic and media apparatus
of East Aleppo’s armed groups. In many cases it succeeded in infiltrating these groups
at the leadership level… “Armed groups collapsed after supporters and informants were
activated in the days preceding the launch of the army’s operations, and after the first
air and artillery strikes rebels realized they were left naked and unprotected, which
led to their collapse.” Striking with such precision “can only be done by someone with
correct information on fortifications, defensive lines, and preparedness of command
centers and depots.” In addition to the chaos and confusion that resulted from this,
a move of mutual recriminations of who had leaked information to the Syrian Army
created a lack of trust among the groups toward one another, ultimately leading each to
act independently from one another… the military commander in Aleppo of the Nur alZanki Movement said that there “were many traitors among those who carried weapons
and cameras alongside us for a long time”… According to the anonymous source, “the
fall of neighborhoods to the Syrian Army was an intelligence operation more than a
military operation.”
Source:
‫”عمالء النظام في حلب الشرقية‬
(Regime Agents in East Aleppo),” al-Modon, 6 December 2016. https://goo.gl/zEA4y1
… regime and YPG agents that provided a comprehensive picture of the opposition
on the ground, its fighters’ preparations and positions, amounts of ammunition, types
of fortifications, which were practically destroyed. Air, artillery and rocket strikes
hit rebel bases and gatherings near the front lines with great precision, and the
opposition lost many fighters. This affected morale and created chaos… ISIS loyalists
who had been expelled from the city were seen with regime militias as they controlled
the northeastern parts of Aleppo, including people from the family of Ghul Aghasi
“Abu Qaaqaa” known as a regime agent and who was killed years ago, as well as
prominent personalities in the al-Sakkhour and al-Haydariya neighborhood. Some of
the opposition civil service institutions such as the City Council and the Neighborhood
Councils were infiltrated, for some of their high-ranking members joined the regime as
soon as the humanitarian corridors were opened…The majority of civilians forced to
flee and return to the “nation’s embrace” had no other choice given the hunger, siege
and continuous bombing that killed and injured more than 3,000 people in merely two
weeks… Whatever the motivation of defectors, they have greatly harmed the opposition
at this delicate time, after recent events showed that the opposition ranks are feeble and
easy to infiltrate.
Source:
‫والمعارضة صامتة‬..‫الوحدات والنظام يتقاسمون األحياء الشمالية‬:‫”حلب‬
(Aleppo: YPG and Regime Divide Northern Neighborhoods and the Opposition is
Silent),” al-Modon, 29 November 2016. https://goo.gl/qgcCSi
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) were most effective in terms of intelligence
operations and preparing the field via their agents in Aleppo’s northeast
neighborhoods… [who] furnished loyalist militias with information on rebel positions,
advanced military positions, and number of fighters, given their knowledge of the area.
Most “Jaysh al-Thuwar” fighters, allied to the YPG, were two years ago members of the
opposition stationed in these very neighborhoods, most notable among them “Ghuraba’
al-Sham.”

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

19

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: The Role of Intelligence in East Aleppo
Source:
‫ عمالء النظام يعودون إلى أحضانه وميلشيا “التعفيش” تمنع المنظمات اإلغاثية من دخولها‬..‫”حلب‬
(Aleppo: Regime ‘Agents’ Return to its Embrace and Plundering Militias Prevent the Entry
of Humanitarian Organizations),” Zaman al-Wasl, 13 December 2016. https://www.
zamanalwsl.net/news/75575.html (translation via: http://syrianobserver.com/EN/
News/32098/Regime_Confirms_Intelligence_Agents_Played_Key_Role_Aleppo_Collapse)
A large number of rebel fighters who surrendered themselves to Assad forces and allied
militias were actually part of a regime intelligence operation tasked with overseeing the
fall of opposition-held Aleppo, well informed sources told Zaman al-Wasl. The sources
indicated that the success of the intelligence operations, supervised by the Air Force
Security branch in Aleppo and headed by Gen. Adeeb Salameh, led to the rapid capture of
the city’s eastern neighborhoods.
Salameh recently confirmed that the security branch had recruited huge number of agents
in the rebel’s ranks since the start of military operations in Aleppo.

Pre-War Aleppo
Source: By Alper Çuğun from Berlin, Germany (View over the city)
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/12/Aleppo._View_over_the_city_%281265976062%29.jpg

The Syrian Army’s “5th Corps”
OE Watch Commentary: On 22
November 2016, the Syrian Army
launched its latest recruitment drive,
establishing the “5th Corps” (al-Faylaq
al-Khamis) and encouraging military-age
Syrian males to join this new entity. The
timing is good, with loyalist advances
in Aleppo raising morale throughout
government-held territory. The salaries
and benefits offered are better than those
afforded to almost any loyalist militia and
magnitudes larger than that of an enlisted
Syrian soldier. Rampant unemployment
and increasing poverty, combined with a
desire to see the war come to an end, mean
these enticements will likely bear fruit.
The accompanying passages discuss this
initiative and the role that is envisioned
for this new formation as a “nucleus of
cooperation between Syria, Iran, Russia
and Hizbullah.”
As the first accompanying excerpt notes,
government employees will be allowed to
serve in the new corps for one year and
then return to their jobs;
(continued)

“… the 5th Corps is to be the nucleus of four-way collaboration and
cooperation between Syria, Iran, Russia and Hizbullah …”
Source: “Army General Command Announces the Formation of the Fifth Legion,” Syrian Arab
News Agency, 22 November 2016. http://sana.sy/en/?p=94123
…volunteers who will be recruited in the [Corps] must be all Syria men above 18 who are not
already conscripts or deserters, adding that the [Corps] will also accept volunteers who have
finished their military service and state employees under one-year renewable contracts. State
employees who will be recruited will keep all the rights and benefits they receive in their work
places, in addition to the regular amounts of money they will receive from the Legion.
Source:
‫ لهذه األسباب يتطوع المقاتلون بصفوف قواته‬..‫”هل سيساعد الفيلق الخامس األسد على حسم المعارك؟‬
(Will the 5th Corps Help Assad Finish the Battle?… This is why Young Men Volunteer to Fight
for his Forces),” alsouria.net, 23 November 2016. https://goo.gl/tA3ayL (translation via: http://
syrianobserver.com/EN/Features/32006/Will_Assad_New_Fifth_Corps_Help_Finish_Battle)
Abou Ali, a nickname for one of the volunteers in the National Defense Forces militia, told
Alsouria Net that he will leave his current brigade and join the Fifth Corps in the hopes of
getting a good salary and better incentives. He said that he was an employee in one of the
government factories but that it stopped production and the workers continued to receive their
salaries for three months, but that did not last long. A military patrol came to the factory and
gave all employees under 40 years old a deadline and two choices: Either go home without
salaries and thereby lose their work, or join the military sector.

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

20

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Continued: The Syrian Army’s “5th Corps”
they will continue drawing benefits
from their government jobs in
addition to the salary and benefits
from the new force. The second
accompanying excerpt shows that
many of the tens of thousands
currently fighting for progovernment militias may join the
new corps for economic reasons.
New recruits will not be the only
ones to fill the new formation’s
ranks. Over the past year, the
Syrian Army has tapped into a new
manpower reserve after signing
truces with a number of rebelheld communities. As the third
excerpt explains, the truces require
military-age males to regularize
their military service status. Those
who are on the wanted list for
evading conscription or reserve
duties are to report six months after
the truce was signed. The lucky
ones may end up in the 5th Corps,
rather than as regular conscripts.
Elite loyalist militias are also
slated to fall under the command
of the 5th Corps, including the
Desert Hawks and al-Quds
Brigade, both of which have played
critical roles in recent government
offensives. According to the
fourth accompanying excerpt,
experienced Hizbullah fighters
will exercise command roles in
the new formation. Perhaps most
importantly, the article claims, the
5th Corps “is to be the nucleus
of four-way collaboration and
cooperation between Syria, Iran,
Russia and Hizbullah.” As the
article details, it will seek to
correct the various coordination
and execution errors that have been
identified during the first year of
Russian intervention. Whether the
5th Corps can actually coordinate
effectively between the disparate
foreign loyalist militias, not to
mention avoid squabbles and
conflict between the Syrian Army
and regime warlords, is to be seen.
End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

Source:
‫”الهدن السورية تضخ آالف القاتلين في قوات النظام المتهالكة‬
(Syrian Truces’ Inject Thousands of Fighters into al-Assad’s Exhausted Forces),” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 2
December 2016. https://goo.gl/k8T3NP
The Syrian regime has transformed the truces with rebel forces on the outskirts of Damascus into
a useful means of supporting its army with additional fighters to play logistical roles by forcefully
enlisting those wanted for military service into the army. According to an opposition source the truces
in rural Damascus have provided government forces with around 40,000 additional fighters “to fill the
losses suffered by its forces”… These are the so-called “volunteers” that will form the newly declared
“5th Corps”… those wanted for service have 6 months from the date of the truce to get their affairs in
order, after which they either go to a temporary training camp, as occurred with some of the young
men of al-Hama who are currently at the al-Dreij training camp…
Source:
‫ وحلقة مرصّعة من حزب هللا‬..‫ تنسيق رباعي‬: ‫”الفيلق الخامس‬
(Fifth Corps: Four-Way Coordination… and Hizbullah’s ‘Halqa Muras’a),” al-Safir, 28 November
2016. https://assafir.com/Article/5/518637
As efforts are made to speed up the formation of the 5th Corps and its first deployment, there is a
parallel military, technical and legal effort to increase coordination between the various formations
linked to the Syrian Army and allied and reserve forces. This is meant to avoid the errors that were
discovered in previous experiences on the ground, such as poor coordination or execution… the 5th
Corps is to be the nucleus of four-way collaboration and cooperation between Syria, Iran, Russia
and Hizbullah over a year after Russian intervention in Syria… previous errors were studied by the
concerned parties in order to overcome them… Some are comparing the new formation to a Syrian
PMF that draws in volunteers from different Syrian demographic groups, especially from the country’s
east. The new formation is to fight major battles against ISIS and the Nusra Front and its allies…. The
“Desert Hawks” and “Quds Brigade” are expected to be at the forefront of the new formation and
represent its assault troops… Hizbullah leaders are expected to have a key role in leading groups of
fighters from the 5th Corps… The Corps’ advisers will be from among Hizbullah’s most experienced
and best-trained military leaders…

Syrian Armed Forces Emblem.
Source: By MrPenguin20 [Public
domain], via Wikimedia Commons
https://upload.wikimedia.org/
wikipedia/commons/8/8e/Syria_
Armed_Forces_Emblem.svg

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

21

MIDDLE EAST

Top

Dueling Perspectives on the Egyptian Army
OE Watch Commentary: In late November 2016,
Qatar’s al-Jazeera aired an hour-long documentary
depicting the life of an Egyptian conscript. As the first
passage discusses, this caused controversy among Egyptian
authorities, given that the portrayal could hardly be less
flattering. According to the film, most of the first 45 days
of training are spent doing menial tasks such as sweeping,
cleaning and marching. Target practice involves shooting
around a dozen rounds in total, and accounting for spent
shells is more important than hitting the target. The main
goal of basic training is preparing for military parades.
After basic training, conscripts are dispatched to their units,
where they become indentured labor for their superiors,
specializing in tasks such as gardening, cooking, and
construction, or working at one of the numerous military
industries or entertainment venues. Live-fire exercises are
for show, done with equipment that would be nearly useless
on the battlefield. The NCO class is portrayed as insecure
and vengeful, especially toward conscripts with higher
education levels. Relations between officers, NCOs, and
conscripts are depicted as abysmal.
Not surprisingly, the documentary enraged Egyptian
authorities and supportive media, who characterized
it as a hit-piece aimed at undermining the sovereignty
of the Egyptian state. Criticizing other Arab countries’
militaries - and especially the storied Egyptian military was, according to the author of the second accompanying
excerpt, “an unacceptable transgression and intentional
harassment” by Qatar. As the first excerpt notes, the
Egyptian Defense Ministry immediately issued a video
of its own, naturally painting a different picture of
conscript life. An Egyptian television channel close to the
government also did a segment on the daily life of Egyptian
Army’s Sa’ka (Special Forces).
Toward the end of the controversial al-Jazeera
documentary, a soldier explains how he and his fellow
conscripts often felt that if war were to break out, “another
Egyptian Army” would be there, ready and able to fight.
The idea of parallel armies is hardly farfetched, for while
much of the massive conscription force may look like a
corrupted civil service in all but name, a sizable force with
modern equipment and deep ties to foreign militaries also
exists.
Looming large in both documentaries is the question
of Sinai. Although relatively contained, the insurgency in
Sinai has simmered for over three years. Egyptian military
casualties have been high, particularly for conscripts
manning the military checkpoints that dot the northern
Sinai. The Sinai conflict has highlighted important
vulnerabilities in the Egyptian Army, including the
conscript army’s inability to curb casualties and the elite
troops’ difficulty in ending the conflict. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“… Soldiers and stories about

conscription in Egypt are an area
that no one dares write about…”

Source: By David Lisbona [CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via
Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bd/Statue_of_
heroic_Egyptian_soldiers_crossing_the_Suez_canal.jpg

Source: “Documentary on Egyptian Conscription Faces Strong Criticism.”
al-Monitor, 8 December 2016. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2016/12/egypt-military-conscription-al-jazeera-film.html
Soldiers and stories about conscription in Egypt are an area that no one
dares write about, much less make films about. But the Qatar-based Al
Jazeera media company recently decided to address the issue of conscription
in Egypt…. On Nov. 20, Al Jazeera broadcast the teaser of a documentary on
the issue. The clip sparked a wave of criticism and anger among media figures
and journalists in Egypt… In response to the teaser, the Egyptian armed
forces’ Department of Morale Affairs released its own film Nov. 24 titled “A
day in the shoes of a fighter,” describing life inside the military camps and
showing the treatment that soldiers receive during their service.
Source:
‫ سقوط أخالقى وجريمة مهنية‬..‫”عساكر الجزيرة‬
(Al-Jazeera’s ‘Conscripts’… Moral Failure and Professional Crime),” alShorouk, 30 November 2016. http://www.shorouknews.com/columns/view.
aspx?cdate=30112016&id=6dc13ac0-9ab7-44e8-b8d1-cb8fefb1656d
For Qatar’s al-Jazeera to merely consider producing a program on
the Egyptian Army without considering its contents is an unacceptable
transgression and intentional harassment of Egypt, a failed targeting of the
army. There is no moral or even professional justification for an Arab channel,
not even a domestic one, to produce a program on the Egyptian military
outside of the acceptable context.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

22

AFRICA

Top

South Sudan: Dry Season – and Potentially Genocide –
Coming Soon
OE Watch Commentary: It was 15 December
2013 when war broke out in South Sudan. That is
when President Salva Kiir accused Riek Machar, his
vice president and political rival, of plotting a coup.
With the exception of a brief truce, the country has
been engulfed in battle between the warring factions
ever since. Now, as the accompanying article relates,
with the dry season approaching, the fighting will
intensify, and the threat of ethnic cleansing hangs
over the world’s newest nation. There is no peace
process in place for the international community to
support in hopes of averting the almost certain launch
of major offensives that will come once the rain stops.
Ethnic killings have already begun to intensify,
especially near the southern town of Yei. There have
also been reports of targeted rapes and burning of
houses. As a result, thousands of people have fled
to neighboring Uganda in search of safety. In early
December the UN reported ethnic cleansing in parts
of South Sudan, and as the second accompanying
article relates, is considering an arms embargo on the
combatants.
There appears to be a stalemate. The South
Sudanese government, while militarily stronger than
the rebel opposition, is politically weaker. The rebels
appear to have strong support in much of the country,
but are unable to turn that into enough military
power to successfully attack government strongholds.
For the most part the fighting takes place in the
southern Equatoria region of the country where the
government troops control several garrison towns but
little else. With neither side able to deliver a complete
military victory or capitalize on battlefield gains and
turn them into political ones, the only future in sight
is more fighting as the rebels target President Kiir’s
ethnic group, the Dinka, and the government targets
Machar’s, the Nuer, with other groups often caught
in-between. As if the situation was not dire enough,
famine is threatening half the nation, brought on in
large part from farmers unable to tend to their fields.
The key to peace, the first accompanying article
asserts, is with South Sudan’s neighbors. If they
could find common ground and collectively apply
enough pressure, it might be possible to stop the
fighting. Unfortunately, many of those countries have
their own internal problems and competing interests
when it comes to South Sudan, making agreement
among them unlikely in the near term. This makes
the possibility of genocide, what perhaps could
be called Rwanda II, quite likely. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“What is
happening now,
there is clear
ethnic targeting
and if it grows,
if it becomes
massive, it
will not be
different to what
happened in
Rwanda.”

Riek Machar in 2012 when
he was Vice President of
South Sudan. Notice the
picture of President Salva
Kiir in the background.
About one year later they
would lead separate forces
against each other.
Source: Wikimedia
Commons

Source: “Ethnic war looms as South Sudan marks three years of clashes,” The East
African, 15 Dec 2016. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Ethnic-war-looms-asSouth-Sudan-marks-three-years-of-war/2558-3487212-item-0-mhng4f/index.html
Ethnic killings have intensified in recent months, particularly in and around
the southern town of Yei, pushing tens of thousands of people to seek refuge in
neighbouring Uganda.
Weeks earlier the UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, warned of “a strong risk of violence escalating along ethnic lines, with the
potential for genocide.”
But at the same time, “the rebels have proven unable to actually launch offensives
against major government strongholds,” because they are “way, way outresourced” by the government.”
Source: “UN considers arms embargo on Juba combatants,” The East African, 13
Dec 2016. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/UN-considers-arms-embargo-onJuba-combatants/2558-3484114-item-0-lyfe0xz/index.html
Yei in the last one month has experienced targeted killings, rape and burning of
houses, leaving thousands of families displaced.
The affected region is Yei in Central Equatoria, where fighting has intensified
between government forces and rebels, with humanitarian agencies reporting
that close to 4,000 ethnic militia known as Matiang Anyor have been deployed to
prepare for offensive.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

23

AFRICA

Top

One Price of Zimbabwe’s Financial Difficulties…Typhoid
OE Watch Commentary: Zimbabwe’s
financial difficulties have resulted in
crumbling infrastructure, layoffs of civil
servants, and, as the first article discusses,
an increase in the number of typhoid cases.
This is perhaps not surprising as the disease
spreads when an individual consumes water or
food contaminated by the feces of an infected
person. It can also spread through contact
with an infected individual. With broken
sewer pipes and fewer public health workers
to monitor water quality and encourage good
personal hygiene, as well as proactively get
ahead of any outbreaks, 2016 saw 2,160 cases
reported of the bacterial disease. Typhoid can
sometimes be difficult to detect, so the actual
number of cases may be significantly higher.
Zimbabwe’s economy is still experiencing
considerable difficulties. The past year
saw numerous cuts and rollbacks as
Zimbabwe struggled to meet demands set
by international lending institutions before
additional financial help would be approved.
Such a fiscally stringent environment where
many projects, including those related to
sanitation, are scaled back is not conducive
to disease control. Even basic services such
as trash collection, absolutely essential
for disease prevention, have been strongly
curtailed, as the second article describes,
because of a lack of fuel supplies and truck
maintenance.
Interestingly, this current outbreak of
typhoid actually began in 2012, on the heels
of a previous outbreak. It has basically been
festering in the background without sufficient
resources allocated to it. Now, with the
breakdown of the public health system, it is
erupting forcefully. According to the World
Health Organization, if left untreated, typhoid
has a fatality rate as high as 20%. It also
does not respect national boundaries. Case
reports from South Africa earlier last year
suggest that the disease spread there from
Zimbabwe. However, besides the concern that
it will continue to cross national boundaries,
there is another important risk. As the first
article describes, the breakdown in public
health that led to the typhoid outbreak could
lead to another disease, also spread by
contaminated water and already present in
Zimbabwe, to spike…cholera. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“...the fundamentals that must curb [typhoid] have continued
unaddressed, for instance lack of water and poor quality of that water
when it’s available, absence of proper sanitation and personal hygiene
are still with us.”

Curtailing public health initiatives, such as testing water quality, pictured here, can lead to
outbreaks of diseases such as typhoid and cholera.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Source: Lloyd Gumbo and Innocent Ruwende, “2,160 Cases Typhoid Reported Nationally,”
The Herald (Zimbabwe), 30 Dec 2016. http://www.herald.co.zw/2-160-typhoid-casesreported-nationally/
“These are diseases that have been forgotten in some parts of the world.”
2160 suspected cases were reported countrywide this year with authorities confirming 77
cases and seven deaths as of December 18.
Recent heavy rains in Harare seem to have compounded the problem as burst sewer pipes
and uncollected garbage continue to pose a health hazard in most suburbs.
Health and Child Care Minister Dr David Parirenyatwa, said poor water and sanitation
were the major drivers of water-borne diseases.
Community Working Group on Health (CWGH) director, Mr Itai Rusike, said it was
disheartening that some people lost lives to diseases such as typhoid and cholera, which
could be treated.
Source: Samantha Chigogo, “Council Struggles to Collect Garbage,” The Herald
(Zimbabwe), 30 Dec 2016. http://www.herald.co.zw/council-struggles-to-collect-garbage/
Harare City Council, which is battling to contain a typhoid outbreak, is struggling to
collect garbage as it emerged that 25 out of its 48 refuse trucks are down due to fuel
shortages and mechanical faults.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

24

AFRICA

Top

Boko Haram’s Forest Stronghold
Falls to the Nigerian Military “The Chief of Army Staff, Lt Gen Tukur Buratai has
OE Watch Commentary: It was called Camp Zero.
Located deep in the Sambisa Forest, it was perhaps the
last stronghold in Nigerian territory of Boko Haramthe Islamic terrorist group who killed an estimated
15 thousand, displaced over 2 million, and in 2014,
kidnapped over 200 schoolgirls in Chibok, in one of their
most infamous acts. As the accompanying articles relate,
Camp Zero is now in the hands of the Nigerian military,
who plan to turn their foe’s former forest hideout into a
training center, even directing that the military’s 2017
small arms competition be held there.
The terrorist group, which once held an area the size
of Belgium, had been driven by repeated army advances
into Camp Zero, a former colonial game reserve deep
in the Sambisa Forest. Now, thanks to “Operation
Lafiya Dole,” Camp Zero is in the hands of the Nigerian
military. As the accompanying passages claim, the
Boko Haram militants that occupied it have fled into the
surrounding forest.
Moreover, two major highways in Nigeria’s Borno
State, which had been closed for two years due to Boko
Haram activity in the region, have reopened. The
highways are important for transnational commerce.
Though the capture of Camp Zero and the opening of
the closed highways are certainly welcome relief from
the seemingly endless flow of reports of Boko Haram
atrocities, it would be a mistake to believe the terrorist
group, whose name translates as “Western education is
forbidden” has been entirely eliminated. There are still
Boko Haram militants present in the region, including the
remnants of the group that held Camp Zero. Additionally,
the terrorist group’s defeat has been reported before,
most notably in September 2015 when the Nigerian
military claimed there were no more Boko Haram camps
in the northeast part of the country, the very area where
Camp Zero is located. Nevertheless, these are positive
developments. The conversion of Boko Haram’s former
stronghold into an army training center is particularly
symbolic. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

disclosed that Sambisa Forest, which was recently
recovered from insurgents, will now serve as a training
center for the
army.”

The Boko Haram flag,
also used by several
other terrorist groups,
will no longer be flying
above Camp Zero.
Source: Wikimedia
Commons

Source: Francis Okoye and Tunde Ogontola, “Nigeria: Sambisa Forest Now
Army Training Centre,” Leadership (Nigeria), 27 Dec 2016. http://leadership.
ng/news/565210/sambisa-forest-now-army-training-centre-buratai
General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida has hailed the successful recovery
of Sambisa Forest by the Nigeria Military, saying it has further confirmed his
confidence that President Muhammadu Buhari will crush Boko Haram.
“It is going to be one of our training centers in the country as well as ground
for testing acquired equipment before putting them into operation. A similar
thing will be established at Alagarno, the former acclaimed spiritual base of
Boko Haram before their defeat there.”
The two major highways, which are transit routes for trade between Nigeria,
Chad and Niger Republic…were closed two years ago by the military because
of Boko Haram activities.
Source: Matt Broomfield, “Boko Haram ‘crushed’ by Nigerian army in final
forest stronghold,” Independent, 24 Dec 2016. http://www.independent.co.uk/
news/world/africa/boko-haram-nigerian-army-sambisa-forest-a7494176.html
Though severely weakened, the Islamist group continues to launch suicide
attacks across the state of Borno and in neighbouring Niger and Chad.
But the Nigerian military has previously made similar announcements,
claiming in 2015 that all their camps had been wiped out.

Nigerian forest.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

25

AFRICA

Top

The Trial of LRA’s Dominic Ongwen
OE Watch Commentary: Dominic Ongwen was only ten
when the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a terrorist group that
originated in Uganda, abducted him. Now that young boy is a
man, and also an LRA senior leader. As the first accompanying
article relates, on 6 December, the trial on Dominic Ongwen
opened before the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
Hague. Ongwen faces charges for war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including allegations of murder, rape, and sexual
slavery. His trial is the first time that the ICC is dealing with a
case where the accused was formerly a child soldier. The article’s
title, “…are child soldiers accountable when they become men?”
aptly summarizes the dilemma the court faces. The case will
likely set a precedent for future trials relating to numerous
conflicts in African nations, where children have fought and
continue to fight, for rebel groups and governments alike.
The LRA has not had an active presence in Uganda for several
years, though the devastation and fear that lingers are strong
reminders of their past actions. Still, in northern Uganda, the
epicenter of the LRA’s terror campaign, many of the people are
trying to move on and feel that rehabilitation and reconciliation,
not trial by the ICC, are the proper means for these former
combatants to reintegrate into society. As the first passage
demonstrates, rebels such as Ongwen are sometimes referred
to as victims who had to either follow the orders of their leader,
Joseph Kony, or be killed. Some also blame the government,
faulting it for not having done enough to protect children from
being abducted.
Making Ongwen’s case even more interesting is that he was
not captured; he surrendered in January 2015. Unfortunately
for him, though a blanket amnesty introduced by the Ugandan
government in 2000 resulted in approximately 30,000 rebels
forswearing the LRA, for various reasons it subsequently
excluded senior leaders. Still, amnesty has been promoted as a
way to end the conflict, and many of the Acholi, who constitute
a sizable percentage of the northern Ugandan people, want
amnesty to be extended to Ongwen and other senior leaders.
There are many other factors entangling this trial, including
several African leaders in recent years denouncing the ICC,
stating that only Africans should decide the fate of Africans.
Another is Kony’s past insistence there will be no peace deal
without the ICC withdrawing arrest warrants. It is, however,
the question of the culpability of an adult, standing accused
of heinous crimes, who like so many others in conflict-ridden
areas of Africa was abducted as a child, that is front and center.
It is the story of many African children pressed into war, such
as the two girls, about 7 years old, mentioned in the second
accompanying article, who killed at least 25 in a market in
Nigeria recently. They, however, won’t be standing trial as
adults…it was a suicide attack. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

“Many horrors will be recounted, but the case also
throws up deep ethical questions: is a child, brutalized
and turned into a killer, fully responsible for his or her
actions?”
Source: Samuel Okiror, “Kony’s Killers – Are Child Soldiers
Accountable When They Become Men?” IRIN, 5 December 2016. http://
www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/12/05/kony%E2%80%99s-killers%E2%80%93-are-child-soldiers-accountable-when-they-become-men
The trial of Dominic Ongwen, a senior member of the notorious Lord’s
Resistance Army, opens on Tuesday before the International Criminal
Court in The Hague. Many horrors will be recounted, but the case
also throws up deep ethical questions: is a child, brutalised and turned
into a killer, fully responsible for his or her actions? If the abuses of
government forces aren’t also being investigated, at what point does it
become victor’s justice?
...
Abducted by the LRA at the age of 10, Ongwen became a protégé of
rebel leader Joseph Kony and was forced to witness and carry out acts
of extreme violence. He will be appearing before Trial Chamber IX to
answer 70 charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
“I know it’s a delicate balance. It’s about accountability. It’s about
whether Ongwen was responsible for the atrocities or not,” Herman von
Hebel, the ICC registrar, told reporters….
In northern Uganda, epicenter of the two-decade-long insurgency,
Ongwen is not uniformly thought of as a monster. Among many former
LRA child soldiers, now back in their communities after amnesty and
reconciliation programs, there is sympathy.
“As a victim and survivor, I have accepted to forgive Ongwen for the
atrocities and suffering he caused,” Sarah Angee told IRIN [Integrated
Regional Information Networks]. “As a child soldier, he was conscripted
and indoctrinated to kill, maim, rape women, mutilate, attack camps,
abduct children, and other horrible atrocities.”
He is the only one of five indicted LRA figures to have surrendered,
giving himself up in [the] Central African Republic in January 2015.
With the exception of Kony, the other three wanted men are believed to
be dead.
Rather than the ICC’s retributive justice, Angee would like to see
Ongwen pardoned and, like many of the ex-LRA who returned home,
enrolled in a traditional Acholi reconciliation process known as Mato
Oput.
Ongwen’s call to the dock on Tuesday has prompted fresh calls for
investigations into alleged crimes committed by the army, the Ugandan
People’s Defence Force, during the long counter-insurgency war in the
north, in which human rights violations were committed.
A decade on from leaving Uganda, the LRA now numbers just a few
hundred, operating in the remotest regions of the Congo, Central
African Republic and Sudan, but the legacy of the group’s violence still
casts a long shadow over people’s lives.

For those wishing to follow the Ongwen case, the ICC page is
https://www.icc-cpi.int/uganda/ongwen.

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

26

AFRICA

Top

Continued: The Trial of LRA’s Dominic Ongwen
Source: “Girls aged 7 or 8 Commit Suicide Attack in
Nigeria,” Daily Monitor (Uganda), 12 December 2016.
http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/World/Girls--aged-7-or-8-commit-suicide-attack-Nigeria/688340-3483172-t13971z/
index.html
Two girls, thought to be only seven or eight years old,
conducted a double suicide attack in a northeastern
Nigerian market Sunday…
“I tried to speak with one of them, in Hausa and in English,
but she didn’t answer. I thought they were looking for their
mother. She headed toward the poultry sellers, and then
detonated her explosives belt.”
Known as “Night Commuters,” these are
Ugandan children who walked up to 12 miles
every night from rural areas to large towns in
order to avoid the fate of Dominic Ongwen…
abduction by the LRA..
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Megacities and Megaproblems
OE Watch Commentary: The majority of Africa’s population is still rural, but
this is changing rapidly. In 2016, Africa had the world’s highest urban population
growth rate (3.9%), suggesting that in less than two decades, about half of Africa’s
people will be living in a town or city. This urban growth will be uneven, with some
countries experiencing it more than others, but the overall trend is unmistakable. The
accompanying passage describes this trend, and discusses some of the challenges that
come with Africa’s rapid urbanization.
Mega-growth often means megacities, and by 2030, Africa is expected to have
six of them: Lagos, Cairo and Kinshasa will each host over 20 million people, while
Luanda, Dar es Salaam and Johannesburg will each host over 10 million. Meanwhile,
it is expected that Africa’s rural population will also continue to increase. Thus, it
is not a zero sum game, but rather the continent’s entire population, both urban and
rural, is increasing.
While rural migration to urban environments accounts for about 30% of the growth
of cities, the main driver is the significantly greater number of births than deaths in
many urban centers. The low food levels and high mortality rates that constrained
this natural population growth in the past, have given way to improved agricultural
production and modern health care, at least partially in several areas. As for that 30%
rural to urban migration, its causes include dissatisfaction with public services, land
pressures, and conflict. One case in point of conflict being the driver of migration is
the Nigerian city of Maiduguri: In 2009 it doubled in size to more than two million
as people fled from the Boko Haram insurgency in the northeastern part of the
country.
Though there are certain advantages megacities might possess, such as a
concentrated pool of workers, there are also numerous problems associated with them
including the proliferation of slums and crime. Additionally, urban environments
generally have a higher cost of living than rural ones, exacerbating the effects of
poverty, as the passage also notes. Being unable to afford adequate health care,
combined with the poor infrastructure prevalent in slums, particularly open air
sewers and lack of potable water, frequently leads to disease outbreaks. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The current speed of Africa’s
urbanization is unprecedented in
history. For some it is the ‘single most
important transformation’ that is
happening on the continent.”
Source: Julia Bello-Schünemann and Ciara Aucoin,
“African Urban Futures,” Institute for Security
Studies (South Africa), 29 Nov 2016. https://
issafrica.s3.amazonaws.com/site/uploads/af20.pdf
The current speed of Africa’s urbanization is
unprecedented in history. For some it is the ‘single
most important transformation’ that is happening on
the continent.
In Africa urbanization is happening in a context of
slow structural transformation and pervasive urban
poverty that compromise sustainable urban futures.
Megacities or large cities can be strategic
locations for political conflict and places of ‘relative
calm’ and security during civil war.
Gangs often grow out of urban areas and can serve
as alternative forms of service provision where state
institutions are weak.
To a great extent urban violence reflects structural
violence, understood as the lack of economic and
socio-political inclusion.
Urban governance in Africa has a history of
serving the interests of the few who are wealthy
versus the interests of the many who are poor.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

27

AFRICA

Top

Somalia: Al-Shabaab’s Staying Power
OE Watch Commentary: Despite suffering heavy
losses over the past several years, al-Shabaab is
apparently still quite capable of delivering a significant
blow. The accompanying articles from Somalian
sources describe the group’s most recent attacks, which
hinder Somalia’s already-struggling reconciliation and
reconstruction efforts.
As the first accompanying article notes, in late
November, a bombing which occurred in a market in
Mogadishu while Somalia’s President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud was visiting a nearby university, claimed at
least 25 lives. Though no one claimed responsibility,
suspicion fell on al-Shabaab. Shortly afterwards soldiers
arrested ten suspected members of the group.
As the second accompanying article relates, on 11
December, al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a blast
near the Mogadishu port that killed 16 people, sending
a message that its target was the military base near the
port. This suggests that the group is still capable of
launching attacks on the capital city, from which it had
been forced to withdraw five years ago.
Finally, as the third accompanying passage discusses,
on 17 December the group attacked Mahadaay, a town
in southern Somalia. As frequently happens in reports
from Somalia, there were conflicting claims which were
difficult to verify, and this instance was no different.
Al-Shabaab claimed to take control of the town from
Somali soldiers and allied troops; while the Somali
army claimed it had control of the town. There was,
however, at least one resident who stated that he saw alShabaab hoisting their flag over a building.
As the third piece points out, despite having been
ousted from the capital in 2011, al-Shabaab still has
a presence in large areas of southern Somalia and
often stages attacks across the country. These are only
the latest in a string of attacks by the group, whose
continuing attacks challenge a country that has suffered
through more than two decades of internal conflict.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“‘After heavy fighting between Somalia army and al-Shabaab
erupted …heavily armed al-Shabaab militants entered the
town,’ [a] local resident who spoke to Radio Dalsan said.”
Source: “Somalia: Mogadishu Bombing Death Toll Hits 25 As Police Arrest 10 Al
Shabab Suspects,” Dalsan Radio (Somalia), 26 Nov 2016. http://www.radiodalsan.
com/2016/11/26/photos-mogadishu-bombing-death-toll-hits-25-as-police-arrest10-al-shabab-suspects/
The blast hit a market in the Waberi area, while President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud was visiting a nearby university.
Soldiers carried out the operation in Waberi districts in Mogadishu to hunt down
Al-Shabaab suspects, and arrested 10 people suspected to be members of AlShabaab…
Source: “Al-Shabaab jihadists claim deadly Somali blast,” The East African, 11
Dec 2016. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Shabaab-jihadists-claim-deadlySomali-blast/2558-3482358-28yj87z/index.html
The terror group, in a statement distributed on its Telegram messaging account,
said the target was a military base close to the port.
The blast, which reportedly happened at around 7:30am local time, was enormous
and was heard across the city.
Source: “Al Shabaab Takes Control of Somalia’s Mahaday Town,” Dalsan Radio
(Somalia), 17 Dec 2016. http://www.radiodalsan.com/2016/12/17/al-shabaabtakes-control-of-somalias-mahadaay-town/
Islamist militant group al shabaab has reported taken control of Somalia’s
Mahadaay town from Somali army and allied troops.
However Somalia national army insists it still has control of the town.
After heavy fighting between Somalia army and al shabaab erupted in and then
heavily armed al-Shabab militants entered the town,” local resident who spoke to
Radio Dalsan said.
Al-Shabab was ousted from the capital, Mogadishu, in August 2011, but still has
a presence in large areas of southern Somalia and often stages attacks across the
country.

River Flotillas in Support of Defensive Ground Operations: The Soviet Experience
Lester W. Grau
In the history of warfare, ground and naval forces frequently have to cooperate. There are usually problems putting these two
forces together since their missions, equipment, training, communications and mutual unfamiliarity get in the way. These
problems are common during transport of ground force equipment and personnel aboard naval vessels, exacerbated during
amphibious landings and assaults and very difficult when operating together along major rivers. This article analyzes the Soviet
history of defensive river flotilla combat during the first period of the Great Patriotic War (World War II against Germany). It
outlines missions, the operational environment, lessons learned, the command and control problems experienced between naval
and ground forces and the challenges of conducting such operations.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/River%20Flotillas%20in%20Support%20of%20
Defensive%20Ground%20Operations%20The%20Soviet%20Experience.pdf
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

28

AFRICA

Top

As Ethiopia Withdraws, Al-Shabaab
and ISIS Advance in Somalia
OE Watch Commentary: In October 2016, Ethiopia
withdrew troops that were engaging in counter-insurgency
operations against al-Shabaab in neighboring Somalia.
Ethiopia has recently withdrawn from several other bases,
which were quickly occupied by al-Shabaab militants. The
accompanying passage from an Ethiopian news source
discusses Ethiopian officials’ reasoning for this withdrawal
and the implications of it.

“Ethiopia has recently withdrawn from several other
bases, which were quickly occupied by al-Shabab
militants.”

The article notes that, according to Ethiopian officials,
one cause of the withdrawal is the European Union’s (EU)
decision to reduce its support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) by 20%. Ethiopian officials also blame
Somali forces for not being prepared to maintain the territories
that Ethiopia abandoned, suggesting that the international
community failed to sufficiently train or support the Somali
forces.
In a statement in the article, Ethiopia’s Communications
Minister denies claims that Ethiopia’s internal chaos was
to blame for the withdrawal. He denies that protests in the
Oromia and Amhara regions of Ethiopia required the troops
that were deployed to Somalia to return home to stabilize
the situation. Nonetheless, the government’s difficulties in
managing the growing protests are suspected to be another
reason for the withdrawal.
The impact of Ethiopia’s withdrawal has been seen on the
battlefield. The reduction in counter-insurgent troops has
forced AMISOM to adopt a garrison strategy that leaves
al-Shabaab with more freedom to move throughout the
countryside, as the passage also notes. Since June 2016, alShabaab has retaken some ten towns in Somalia, including five
towns since Ethiopia began withdrawing from the country.
As al-Shabaab has retaken these towns, former al-Shabaab
factions now loyal to ISIS have filled in some areas that alShabaab left behind to focus on the more important territory
in southern Somalia that Ethiopia abandoned. While these
small areas in ISIS’s control in Somalia’s Puntland region
are not particularly significant, they at least serve as useful
propaganda for ISIS to advertise its presence in Somalia.
Ethiopia’s withdrawal and the coinciding advances by
al-Shabaab and ISIS may make current airstrikes against
al-Shabaab more relevant. However, even with air support,
ground forces may not be sufficient in number to retake towns
from al-Shabaab. If that ends up being the case, al-Shabaab
will likely continue to be a force in Somalia’s countryside
and could even once again threaten cities like Mogadishu and
Kismayo. Al-Shabaab will not necessarily use its resources to
carry out attacks abroad, however, as the militant group seems
to be focusing its attention now on expanding and controlling
territory abandoned by the Ethiopians. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

Protests against the Ethiopian government in the Oromia region near Somalia, are one of
the possible reasons why Ethiopia is withdrawing troops from the fight against al-Shabaab
in Somalia.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/ethiopia-protests-oromia-amhara-regions/3457240.html

Source: “Ethiopia withdraws troops in Somalia over ‘lack of support’”,
Addis Star, 26 October 2016. http://www.addistar.com/2016/10/26/ethiopiawithdraws-troops-somalia-lack-support/
Ethiopia has withdrawn troops from Somalia, where they had been
battling Islamist militants.
It blames a lack of international support for the move, following the EU’s
recent cut in its funding for foreign troops in Somalia.
Ethiopia is a major contributor of soldiers to the Amisom, the African
Union mission in the country. Ethiopia has recently withdrawn from several
other bases, which were quickly occupied by al-Shabab militants.
Officials in Somalia’s Bakol region say some residents have already fled
the area since the Ethiopian troops left, fearing an imminent of al-Shabab,
which is part of al-Qaeda.
Ethiopian Communications Minister Getachew Reda told the BBC that the
troops withdrawn from south-western Somalia were not part of Amisom.
“It is a separate batch deployed to provide support for Amisom and
Somali armed forces,” Mr Getachew said. He also denied reports that the
withdrawal was linked to unrest at home which led to a state of emergency
being declared, saying there were enough troops to handle that.
He said the Somali army should have been in a position to move in after
Ethiopia’s withdrawal.
“The international community has a responsibility either to train or to
support the Somali National Army,” he said.
He went on to warn that indifference would only pave the way for an alShabab takeover.
The European Union is the main contributor of funding for Amisom. But
it announced in June that its funding for the mission would be reduced by
20%.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

29

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Will Colombian Resistance Consolidate around Mass Action?
OE Watch Commentary: The next Colombian
elections are not until 2018, and while political
discussion in Colombia rarely wanes, it seems there is
an early, renewed energy for political organizing. As
the accompanying passages show, this is due mainly
to the recently concluded power-sharing agreement
that the FARC and the Santos government are about to
implement.
The first accompanying reference calls for repeated
“protest mobilizations, including the peaceful
occupation of plazas, streets, courts and offices”
and claims that “the so-called ‘implementation of
the accords’ of Santos with the FARC will not face
any obstacle at all if the country does not rise up
massively against those plans.” Different about this
is the open call for an all-forms-of-struggle approach
prominently including active demonstrations—mass
actions and occupations. The all-forms-of-struggle
philosophy, including especially the strategic use of
mass actions and take-overs, is historically the way of
the Latin American left. If, as we might expect, this
call for action is followed by organizational effort, then
Colombia’s near political future will highlight mass
physical-presence actions undertaken by anti-leftist
power brokers. Meanwhile, as the second reference
hints, the Colombian resistance movement that would
mount such coordinated mass actions is by no means
homogenous nor centrally led at this time. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the country had better recur… on a repeated basis
to the peaceful occupation of plazas, streets, courts and
offices.”
Source: Lia Fowler, et al, “Colombia: ampliar la resistencia contra los
planes Farc-Santos (Colombia: Expand the resistance to the FARC-Santos
plans),” Periodismo Sin Fronteras, 29 December 2016. http://www.
periodismosinfronteras.org/hay-que-pasar-a-la-accion-solicitud-al-centrodemocratico.html.
“Against every step taken by the Santos-FARC tandem the country must recur
on a repeated basis in that same way, with protest mobilizations, including
the peaceful occupation of plazas, streets, courts and offices, to block the
plans of the subversives and call attention to the entire world….The so-called
‘implementation of the accords’ of Santos with the FARC will not face any
obstacle at all if the country does not rise up massively against those plans.”
Source: Libardo Botero Campuzano, “2017: demoler la dictadura Santos-Farc
(2017: Take down the Santos-FARC dictatorship),” Periódico Debate, 30
December 2016. http://periodicodebate.com/index.php/opinion/columnistasnacionales/item/13792-2017-demoler-la-dictadura-santos-farc.
“The budget of success will be, without doubt, the conformation of a broad
coalition that leads the diverse battles that are watched: from the parliamentary
struggle, through the attacks in the witness stands, followed by mobilizations
and popular resistance in its multiple forms, leading to the parliamentary and
presidential elections of 2018…”

Suheil al-Hassan and the Syrian Army’s Tiger Forces
By Lucas Winter

This paper looks at the genesis, evolution and growth of the Syrian Army’s
“Tiger Forces” and their leader Suheil al-Hassan. The paper shows how Hassan
has played an important role since conflict began in 2011. It attributes his
transformation from special forces commander to leader of military campaigns to
an ability to harness the Syrian Army’s full infantry, artillery and airpower better
than any other loyalist field commander. Given the Syrian Army’s manpower
shortages, rampant corruption and rivalry-laden bureaucracy, this is no small feat.
Al-Hassan has become a key symbol in the Syrian loyalist camp, able to project
more combined arms power than anyone else in Syria. His success on the
battlefield comes less from tactical or strategic insights than from his ability
to thrive within the loyalist camp’s opaque and rivalry-laden bureaucracy. For
this he has become a symbol to regime supporters, proof that the war can
be won by working within the system.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Small%20Wars%20Journal%20-%20Suheil%20al-Hassan%20and%20the%20
Syrian%20Army%E2%80%99s%20Tiger%20Forces%20-%202016-07-22.pdf

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

30

LATIN AMERICA
Cuba After the Castros
OE Watch Commentary: Fidel Castro died
on 25 November. At that time, a lot of futurelooking articles were written all around the
Spanish-speaking world, and many of them
included the anticipated death of his brother
Raul as well. This is perhaps because the
two seemed ideologically and operationally
of a piece, and because the brothers
ameliorated the transition of power after
Fidel’s incapacitation by transferring effective
communist party leadership to Raul. The
accompanying references reflect a perspective
of writings generally not ideologically
favorable to the Castro regime. They point out
that the candidates lined up to lead the party
are no less ideologically Marxist-revolutionary
than their Castro mentors, and that part of
the up-and-coming set of leaders are Castro
family members. As the first passage notes,
it seems that whatever personalities rise,
the columnar institutions of power are the
Communist Party and the Revolutionary
Armed Forces.
It is too early to predict whether there will
be immediate, abrupt changes in government
policies, political freedoms, economic liberty
or foreign geopolitical alignment. Still, we
might witness increased violent suppression
if the security forces make clumsy responses
to public demonstrations during a chaotic
struggle for power at the top. Now might be
a good time to consider strategic options for
shaping or reacting to what can become the
end of the ‘Revolution’, its reformation or its
debilitated, dangerous efforts at survival. End
OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Top

“…Whatever the case, power in Cuba will be
articulated around …the Communist Party…and the
Revolutionary Armed Forces.”
Source: Carmen Campos, “Muere Fidel Castro. El futuro incierto de Cuba después de los
Castro (Fidel Castro Dies. The uncertain future after the Castros),” RTVE, 27 November
2016. http://www.rtve.es/noticias/20161127/futuro-incierto-cuba-despues-castro/1447675.
shtml
“Another possibility in the succession would be to maintain the Castroist hegemony with
Raul’s only son, Alejandro Castro, member of the all-powerful Revolutionary Armed
Forces, without the approval of which nothing moves in Cuba...Whatever the case, power in
Cuba will be articulated around two powerful structures: the Communist Party, guarantor
of the Revolutions political orthodoxy, and the Revolutionary Armed Forces (FAR), that
controls key sectors of the Cuban economy.”
Source: Yoani Sanchez, “El Día Después de Los Castro (The Day After the Castros),”
ABC dela Semana, 14 February 2014. http://www.abcdelasemana.com/2014/02/14/el-diadespues-de-los-castro/
“‘Every frustration is the daughter of excessive expectations’…Tired of tossing flowers to
the future and imagining shinning, I have come to believe that if we paint it in darkened
tones we will have more power to change it. It is time to think about tomorrow, because
castroism is dead even while it still walks, breaths and tightens its fist.”
Source: Manuel Trillo, “El régimen de Cuba moviliza a miles de personas para reafirmar su
futuro (The Cuban regime mobilizes thousands of persons to reafirm its future),” Finanzas.
com, 2 January 2017. http://www.finanzas.com/noticias-001/todos/20170102/regimen-cubamoviliza-miles-3545365.html
“This Monday Cuba has launched at the world a clear message of reaffirmation of the
dictatorial regime that has been ruling the island since 1959. Thousands of persons,
civilians as well as troops, marched past the Plaza of the Revolution…The regime carefully
attended to the symbolism of the event, trying to link the past, present and future and
thereby expressing the idea of perpetuity of the current communist authoritarian regime…”

For the past ten years, as Prime Minister and President,
Vladimir Putin has led an extensive reorganization and
reequipping of his country’s armed forces. Further,
he has taken several opportunities to reclaim Russian
territory that was taken, from his perspective, illegally.
This book describes Putin and the military’s use of
various strategic concepts, the Defense Ministry’s
new equipment and reform initiatives, and Putin’s
geopolitical quest for influence in the Arctic and
Ukraine. Included in the discussion are some of the
unintended consequences of his actions (negative world
opinion, sanctions, NATO responses, etc.).
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Thomas_Russian%20Military%20Strategy_Final_(2%20May%202016).pdf

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

31

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Calls for a Military Coup in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: In early December,
the Venezuelan National Assembly voted that
President Maduro had breached the constitutional
order and violated human rights. The pro-Maduro
minority abstained from the vote, claiming,
perhaps with some reason, that the vote was
tantamount to a call for a coup. This was only the
latest in a series of public suggestions supporting
military intervention into Venezuelans’ political
life. The accompanying passages from Latin
American sources provide insight into these calls
and reflect a deep hopelessness and desperation
among Venezuelans.
It is hard to say what the assembly’s vote means
in a practical sense, given its demonstrated
toothlessness. The accompanying references
suggest that legislators may have intended to give
legalistic overhead for the unapologetic calls for
military intervention to restore constitutional
order and course-correct from the current
path the country seems to be on. However,
the Assembly’s vote may only be a pathetic
political squeak, since the military leaders
who would administer such a coup appear just
as committed to Bolivarian socialism as are
Maduro’s people. However, as the accompanying
passages note, the Armed Forces have never
been completely behind Maduro; and some
officers within the military are not on-board
with the military’s leadership. Still, if Bolivarian
Socialism of the 21st century is what is really to
blame for Venezuela’s woes, then a coup by the
enthusiastically Bolivarian military command
might lend no more than some slightly more
fascist imagery and some marginally greater
efficiency to the country’s societal down-spiral.
As OE Watch has reported earlier, the military
high command is already in charge of extensive
slices of the Venezuelan economy. Furthermore,
now that Colombian President Santos has
imposed a political settlement that empowers
himself and the Bolivarian FARC, it does not
appear that those Venezuelans encouraged by
the prospect of physically toppling the Maduro
administration can look toward Colombia for
any effective assistance, diplomatic or otherwise.
Still, the writer of one of the accompanying
references insists there is a potentially activatable
resistance within the military ranks. It may be
that soon an increasing number of Venezuelan
voices will more openly seek salvation from
farther afield. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“...the National Assembly (AN) assigned ‘political responsibility’
to dictator Nicolas Maduro for the rupture of the constitutional
order, violation of Human Rights and for the economic crisis
that reigns in the country…Contrarily, ... the pro-regime
caucus withdrew in order to denounce what was, to them, the
consummation of a coup d’état...”
Source: Orlando Avendaño, “Venezuela: Asamblea declara ‘responsabilidad política’
de Maduro por ruptura del orden constitucional (Venezuela: Assembly declares
Maduro ‘politically responsible’ for rupture of the constitutional order),” Pan Am
Post, 13 December 2016. https://es.panampost.com/orlando-avendano/2016/12/13/
venezuela-asamblea-declara-responsabilidad-politica-de-maduro-por-ruptura-delorden-constitucional/
“Caracas— During the ordinary session this Tuesday December 13, the National
Assembly (AN) assigned ‘political responsibility’ to dictator Nicolas Maduro for the
rupture of the constitutional order, violation of Human Rights and for the economic
crisis that reigns in the country…Contrarily, during the debate in which the agreement
was approved, the pro-regime caucus withdrew in order to denounce what was, to
them, the consummation of a coup d’état...”
Source: Frente Patriótico, “Coronil Hartmann: Están dadas las condiciones para
que los militares presionen la salida inmediata de Maduro (Coronil Hartmann:
Conditions are set for the military to pressure Maduro’s immediate exit),” The Latin
American Freedom, 14 December 2016. http://noticiasvenezuela.org/2016/12/14/
coronil-hartmann-estan-dadas-todas-las-condiciones-objetivas-para-que-los-militarespresionen-la-salida-inmediata-de-maduro/
“The Armed Forces have never been completely behind Maduro. Distinct currents
and sectors move within that institution, and for that reason one of the most repeated
signals regarding the impossibility of dialog is the absence of parties, one can envision
whatever but in order to have a dialog, there needs to be two sides: two cohesive
groups, two sets of criteria…All the objective conditions are set for the military to
force the immediate exit of Maduro, but that fact is not enough on which to make
predictions regarding the subjective behavior of the military leadership. Frequent
indicators signal that there also exist incompatible opinions within the armed forces
about many topics, and one of them, as you indicate in your question, is the subject of
narcotics… ”
Source: Sofía Nederr, “Militares retirados llaman a la FANB a evitar un estallido
social (Retired officers call on the Bolivarian National Armed Forces to avert social
collapse),” El Nacional, 19 December 2016. http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/
politica/militares-retirados-llaman-fanb-evitar-estallido-social_63007
“Generals and admirals indicated that the chaos has been impelled by a lack of
leadership in the government and the opposition and the absence of planning for the
common welfare…He [a retired general] stated that there is no guarantee that the
elections for governors and mayors will be carried out this coming year. He affirmed
that the opposition politicians ‘with so many digressions have not been able to resolve
as much nonsense’.”
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

32

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Colombia Racing toward Bolivarian Socialism
and More War?
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Colombia: El momento político y las perspectivas (Colombia:
OE Watch Commentary: A lot has
been happening in Colombia that can be
tied directly, causally to the negotiations
that President Juan Manuel Santos entered
into with the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia (FARC), negotiations that
are now coming to fruition. It is not easy
to summarize the whole set of political
outcomes that the implementation process
seems to imply. However, there is vocal
opposition to the entire concert. The
accompanying excerpts from Colombian
sources provide a small representative
sample. As the passages demonstrate, for
these pessimistic voices, the changes are
a transition toward Bolivarian socialism,
initiated by a dictator, which to them Juan
Manuel Santos is quickly becoming.
The first attached reference, by one of
the best informed and most widely read
opponents of the current government,
lists twenty points (three of which are
excerpted) and reads like a combination of
bill of particulars, prediction and incipient
manifesto. Its piqued, relentless, unleavened
tone seems reflective of the mood of a large
swath of Colombians. The second, third
and fourth passages reveal that, to many
Colombian observers, the new social compact
was not legitimately born and is not about
to set the conditions for peace. To them, the
new course onto which Santos has taken the
country will soon enflame grievances and
polarize contenders. To these observers, the
coming years will be propitious for another
round of violent internal conflict.
The backdrop to this period in Colombia
is a diverse and resilient economy, a
population armed and educated in warfare
during decades of internal conflict, a
military institution as deeply offended as it
is ideologically split, and now, (according
to these angered local voices) a budding
leftist dictatorship with a whole new set
of Bolivarian friends. Coincidentally, the
prospects for peace in neighboring Venezuela
are not good either. Little from Venezuela can
be expected to help the situation in Colombia,
not even the obvious lesson of Bolivarian
failure. In Colombia, in other words, the
new dispensation promises much more
fight to come, not peace. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

The political moment and the prospects),” Periodismo sin Fronteras, 15 December 2016.
http://www.periodismosinfronteras.org/colombia-el-momento-politico-y-las-perspectivas.
html

“5. - The Constitutional Court, on approving the devious fast track, bent its own doctrine
and refused [to] continue being the guardian of the Constitution….7. Santos ceased being
president of the Republic. He changed into a threat to the current Constitution and for the
Colombian Republic…15. - The FARC comes out of Santos’ capitulatory adventure more
isolated and detested than ever. Their apparent successes augment the hate of Colombians
for that band of narco-terrorists, not only on the part of their direct victims, but the coutry in
general…”
Source: Plinio Apuleyo Mendoza, “La nueva cara de las Farc (The FARC’s New Face),” El
Tiempo, 15 December 2016. http://www.eltiempo.com/opinion/columnistas/la-nueva-cara-delas-farc-plinio-apuleyo-mendoza-columna-el-tiempo/16773987
“…What can they [military personnel] think when they see the commanders of the FARC free
and carefree, in multiple forums and interviews? What is certain is that in Oslo President
Santos made his usual apologies for the Armed Forces. In him, the effervescent rhetoric
always avoids reality when it does not correspond with his achievements. Throughout
four years he occupied himself listening and attending to the most categorical demands
of the FARC, converting them into unnegotiable elements of the Final Accord for peace.
Conversely, he never turned his sight to the poignant drama that something over twelve
thousand military are living, victims of false witnesses, suborned judges and unjust sentences.
In summary, we are watching a movie in this country in which, for the first time, the villains
are seen as the good guys and the good guys as the bad.”
Source: Alfonso Cuéllar, “El primer conejo de las FARC (The FARC’s first magic trick),”
Semana, 16 December 2016. http://www.semana.com/opinion/articulo/disidencias-de-lasfarc-el-primer-conejo-por-alfonso-cuellar/509734; Editors, “La nueva forma de lucha (The
new form of struggle),” Los Irreverentes, 16 December 2016. https://losirreverentes.com/lanueva-forma-de-lucha/
“It seems too convenient that the dissident factions of the guerrilla are exactly from its
[the FARC’s] fronts that are most involved with illicit narcotics….It turns out that these
subordinate commanders -cabecillas- are those responsibele for the organization’s drug
enterprise. They were crucial to the exponential growth of the FARC…During the peace
process, the FARC ordered the suspension of aerial fumigation and that permitted them to
fill the Colombian countryside with coca. In its new guise, the terrorist chiefs will implement
a new modality of ‘all forms of struggle’. In the cities they will proselytize and in the
countryside keep processing cocaine.”
Source: Rafael Nieto Loaiza, “Y fue peor (And it was even worse),” El Colombiano, 18
December 2016. http://www.elcolombiano.com/opinion/columnistas/y-fue-peor-AC5598640
“… And now it seems to them [magistrates of the court] that doing away with Congress
and transferring nearly absolute powers to the president is not at all problematic…the
citizen’s vote in October was not worth even one of the 280 million pesos the plebiscite
cost to conduct…[however] If the agreement with the FARC is ‘new’, as Santos and his
negotiators and the FARC and its negotiators have insisted, then there has been no direct
citizen participation [as the court had originally demanded] and therefore there is no
popular referendum. If it [the agreement] is the old one, there is no doubt at all that his
results do not respect or interpret in good faith, and he denied the popular referendum that
he had sought….Learn this name: Luis Guillermo Guerrero. He was the only magistrate with
character to defend the Constitution and vote in favor of democracy.”
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

33

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Latin America and the Caribbean Highly
Vulnerable to Cyber-Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: Latin America and the
Caribbean have one of the fastest growing internet
populations in the world. However, as the first
accompanying passage discusses, many countries in this
region are highly vulnerable to potentially devastating
cyber-attacks including data breaches, banking trojan
viruses (malicious computer programs), and mobile
malware. This is because government policy and the legal
framework required to prosecute these types of crimes
are either still in progress or non-existent in these regions,
making them attractive to cyber-criminals.
Both developed and developing countries have suffered
from cyber-crime. One lesson learned is that an essential
part of cyber-security is effective criminal justice,
due to the transnational nature of cybercrimes and the
international cooperation required to collect electronic
evidence. However, for international cooperation to happen,
strategies must be in place. This is where problems in Latin
America and the Caribbean begin. As the first passage
discusses, four out of every five countries in these regions
do not have a cyber-security strategy or plans for protecting
critical infrastructure. The piece also points out that two
of every three countries do not have command and control
centers for cyber-security.
Latin American and Caribbean leaders realize that they
need to develop plans. As the second accompanying
passage notes, some have even acceded to the Budapest
Convention which provides guidelines on creating
comprehensive legislation unique to cyber-crime in
particular. Still, there is significant work that needs to
be done in order for Latin America and the Caribbean to
thwart or at least deter cyber-crime. The development of
comprehensive policy; along with close cooperation and
information sharing between nations are an important first
step. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... despite increased improvements in technology in
the Caribbean and Latin America, these regions remain
highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks from data breaches,
banking Trojans, and mobile malware.”
Source: “Latin America and Caribbean Highly Vulnerable to Cyber-Attacks,”
Caribbean 360, 17 October 2016. http://www.caribbean360.com/business/
latin-america-caribbean-highly-vulnerable-cyber-attacks
Deloitte’s Global Chief Information Officer, Larry Quinlan says that despite
increased improvements in technology in the Caribbean and Latin America,
the regions remain highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks from data breaches,
banking Trojans, and mobile malware. He further stated that cyber-security
is a concern that will continue to grow worldwide and one that threatens to
engulf developing countries in Latin American and the Caribbean if the region
is not careful....
Four out of every five countries in Latin American and the Caribbean do not
have cyber-security strategy or plans for protecting critical infrastructure.
Furthermore, two out of every three countries in the region do not have a
command and control center for cyber-security and lack the capacity to
protect critical infrastructure.
Source: “The State of Cybercrime Legislation in Latin America and the
Caribbean.” Inter-American Development Bank, 16 March 2016. https://
publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7449
In Latin America, many states have succeeded in adopting substantive
criminal law provisions largely based on the Budapest Convention. However,
the main challenge in this region seems to be the adoption of specific
procedural law powers. While criminal procedure codes tend to be rather
modern, application by analogy of provisions that function well in the physical
world or reliance on the principle of evidentiary freedom are not sufficient to
address the specific challenges of electronic evidence in Latin America and the
Caribbean.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible
to foreign nations through observation,
tracking, and inference. The policy appears
to have three vectors. These three aspects—
peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner—dominate China’s cyber policy. Some
are always hidden from view while others are
demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide
with these vectors.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/3Faces%20of%20the%20Dragon.pdf
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

34

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Narco-Drones in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: In mid-November,
Colombian Police seized a drone used by narcotraffickers to send small cocaine shipments from
the Colombian jungle to Panama. This represents
the first case in which authorities have detected
this trafficking method in Colombia. It appears that
drug cartels are discovering that using drones to
transport drugs is cheaper and less risky, indicating
that this will likely be an increasingly popular
method. The accompanying passages from Latin
American sources discuss this phenomenon.

Source: “Descubren un ‘narcodron’ en Colombia; enviaba cocaína a Panamá
(Authorities Discover Narco-Drone in Colombia with Cocaine Shipment Headed to
Panama),” Excelsior, 15 November 2016. http://www.seguridadenamerica.com.mx/
noticias/de-consulta/secciones-revist-seguridad-en-america/noticias-de-control-deacceso/24684-descubren-un-narcodron-en-colombia-enviaba-cocaina-a-panama
The new system [the drone] was discovered last Tuesday [15 Nov] in Colombia during
an anti-drug operation near the town of Bahia Solano, in the jungle area of the Choco
Department, where 130 kilos of cocaine buried in the beach were discovered along
with parts of a remote control aircraft ready to be assembled, indicated General Jose
Acevedo, Regional Police Commander.

This first accompanying passage discusses that
the drone was discovered during an anti-drug
operation in Colombia. Drones currently being
utilized for this activity can transport 10 kilograms
of cocaine and travel up to 100 kilometers in a
single trip. This method was likely developed by
a group known as the Clan del Golfo (formerly
known as Clan Úsuga) which is the largest criminal
gang in Colombia dedicated to narcotrafficking and
illegal mining. As the second passage notes, this
same group is also known for its diverse trafficking
methods which also include using illegal migrants
to transport shipments from Colombia into Panama.
The use of drones by drug cartels is a new
phenomenon in Colombia; but as the third passage
notes, this tactic has been used by Mexican cartels
since 2011. In fact, by 2012, drone use along the USMexican border was highly prevalent as evidenced
by the US interception of 150 drones carrying
an estimated two metric tons of drugs, primarily
marijuana. Today, drones are being classified as the
“perfect drug mule” in Mexico and abroad as they
involve less risk to drug trafficking organizations
and their employees. The third passage further
points out they can even be produced domestically
in Mexico. Additionally, they cost significantly less
than drug tunnels and semi-submersibles and are
even capable of transporting cash shipments. The
popularity of drone use by drug cartels in Mexico
and Colombia is likely to increase; especially if
producers work on devolving more agile models that
can carry more weight and fly at lower altitudes.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... drug cartels have realized that

using drones to transport drugs
does not carry as much risk or cost
as much as traditional means of
transport (human traffickers, narco
tunnels, semi-submersibles).”

Blade 180 Qx Hd Quadrocopter Drone.
Source: https://pixabay.com/p-674238/?no_redirect

Source: “Policía revela ‘el hormigueo’, nueva modalidad del Clan Úsuga para sacar
droga del país (Police Reveal New Micro-Trafficking Scheme Utilized by Clan Úsuga
to Move Drugs from Colombia to Panama),” Noticias CM, 20 October 2016. http://
www.cmi.com.co/policia-revela-el-hormigueo-nueva-modalidad-del-clan-Úsuga-parasacar-droga-del-pais
Clan Usaga has known trafficking routes that extend from Uraba, Colombia into
Darien, Panama. Recently, this group began using migrants (Cuban, African, and
Asian) to transport drugs along this route. As part of this new modus operandi,
migrants carry anywhere from 25-30 kilograms of cocaine through the Darien
province. This journey is said to take up to 5 days.
Source: “Narco envía droga a EU… en drones (Drug Trafficking Organizations Using
Drones to Send Drugs to US),” Ejecentral, 17 August 2014. http://www.eluniversal.
com.mx/nacion-mexico/2014/carteles-fabrican-narcodrones-trasiego-eu-1022274.html
Mexican drug cartels are using drones to transport drugs across the US/Mexico
border. Authorities first became aware of this phenomenon in 2011 after multiple
drones detected by radar systems were shot down upon their entrance into the United
States. Since their first detection, two significant changes associated with drone use
by cartels have been reported. First, Mexican drug cartels are now placing orders to
drone producers in Mexican-based cities including the Federal District, Guadalajara,
Monterrey, Querétaro and Tijuana. This is a change because at the start of 2011,
virtually all drones owned and operated by cartels were produced abroad; primarily
in Israel. Second, drug cartels have realized that using drones to transport drugs does
not carry as much risk or cost as much as traditional means of transport (human
traffickers, narco tunnels, semi-submersibles).
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

35

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Brazilian Military To Tackle Cyber-Security
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passages discuss cyber
threats in Brazil and reactions to the
Brazilian government’s decision to task the
military with tackling cyber-security. As
the first passage points out, Brazil is the
target of an estimated 33-43% of all cybercrimes within Latin America. In 2015,
malware attacks alone exceeded 500,000—
not surprising considering that more trojan
malware has been detected in Brazil than
in any other country in the world. This may
be because Brazil-based cyber-criminals
have been very successful in copying
malicious software programs used in
Eastern Europe to steal bank information.
Furthermore, they have learned from
the mistakes of their counterparts which
has resulted in the creation of a rapidly
evolving malware enterprise.
Brazilian leaders have taken steps
to improve cyber-security, and as the
second passage notes, “rapidly mounted
a sprawling cyber-security and defense
infrastructure.” However, there is
widespread criticism about the new policy.
As the second passage notes, cyberexperts claim there is little known about
the actual threats. Thus, they claim that
policy is being created without really
exploring and identifying the source of the
threats, resulting in the creation of narrow
guidelines that do not fully encompass the
full extent of the threat.
Another controversial issue about
emerging cyber-policing (mainly by
Brazilian nationals) in Brazil is that
the Army Center for Cyber-Defense
known as CDCiber will play a major
role in overseeing security and enforcing
policy. On one hand, as the third passage
discusses, the creation of this center can
be viewed as Brazil’s effort to expand the
military’s role in the twenty-first century.
On the other hand, according to the fourth
passage, the military is seeking to expand
its reach and influence in cyberspace even
though it has never been involved in this
type of activity before. Some Brazilians
also disagree with the military’s new
cyber-policing powers, fearing that they
may violate freedom of expression and
privacy. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“The Brazilian government is giving more powers to the military
on a scale that cannot be justified. Moreover, it is strengthening an
apparatus that can be used to violate people’s rights, particularly
the rights of freedom of expression and privacy...”
Source: “Ataque cibernético no Brasil cresce 7 vezes mais que média mundial (Cyber-attacks
in Brazil 7 Times More Likely in Brazil than the Rest of the World),” Risco Seguro, 23 August
2016. http://riscosegurobrasil.com/materia/ataque-cibernetico-no-brasil-cresce-7-vezes-maisque-media-mundial/
In 2015, Brazil experienced the highest number of malware attacks in Latin America and
fell victim to an estimated 33-43% of all cybercrimes in the region. These attacks have been
attributed to opportunistic hackers using phishing tactics, malware, and home routers to steal
banking passwords and large amounts of cash from businesses. As for businesses in Brazil,
billions of dollars are stolen yearly as companies fall victim to digital thieves; many of which
have been identified as employees of the business they are stealing from.
Source: “Deconstructing Cyber Security in Brazil: Threats and Responses,” Igarape, 11
November 2014. https://igarape.org.br/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Strategic-Paper-11-Cyber2.
pdf
“And while concerns about cyber threats are growing across Brazil and Latin America,
comparatively little is actually known about them. There is virtually no debate about the
actors generating the threats, the actors’ interests and motivations, how they operate or how
they are connected to more traditional criminal or political organizations. Few specialists are
undertaking detailed assessments of these various – and in some cases very distinct – cyber
threats, much less evaluating public and private sector responses. In spite of a profound lack
of knowledge, the Brazilian government has nevertheless rapidly mounted a sprawling cyber
security and defense infrastructure. Oddly, the response is narrowly focused on just a few
dimensions of these threats – especially foreign ones. Of the many institutions involved, the
Brazilian Army’s Center for Cyber-defense (CDCiber) is a core component of the country’s
defense posture.”
There are several reasons why Brazil is pursuing a military-centered cyber-security and
defense architecture. For one, the armed forces are making a serious bid to expand their role
as a key actor in shaping the direction of Brazilian affairs. While Brazil’s democratic system
continues to mature, the military is also being restructured and is seeking a new role in
Brazil’s domestic and foreign future. This means shifting attention to emerging trans-border
threats (including cybercrime) and engaging in internal security operations.
Source: “DA CIBERSEGURANÇA À CIBERGUERRA (Brazil: From Cyber Security
to Cyber War),” Equipe Artigo 19, 20 August 2016. https://www.article19.org/data/files/
medialibrary/38291/Da-Ciberseguranc%CC%A7a-a%CC%80-Ciberguerra.pdf
“The Brazilian government is giving more powers to the military on a scale that cannot
be justified. Moreover, it is strengthening an apparatus that can be used to violate people’s
rights, particularly the rights of freedom of expression and privacy, despite the arguments
based on sovereignty and security that are used to justify the measures. The process has
lacked transparency throughout. Based on the Access to Information Law, we made a series
of information requests regarding details of the cyber programmes and the practices of State
authorities. In general, the responses have been insufficient,” per Laura Tresca, ARTICLE 19’s
Digital Rights Officer in Brazil.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

36

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Bolivia’s Expanding Economic Ties with China
OE Watch Commentary: In
October 2016, China pledged
$7 billion in funds that will
aid Bolivia in improving key
highway systems, building a
new steel plant and a new hydroelectric facility. This follows an
October 2015 pledge for a $7.5
billion loan to fund 11 strategic
projects envisioned in Bolivia’s
2016–2020 National Economic and
Social Development Plan, with
the work to be done by Chinese
companies. These deals represent
an unprecedented expansion
of economic engagement
between China and Bolivia.
The accompanying passages
discuss this growing economic
relationship.
The first passage by Spanish
El Pais notes China’s $7 billion
pledge to Bolivia, while the second
passage discusses the background
of Bolivia-China relations. It
points out that Bolivia’s ties to
China were historically limited,
and notes that the election of Evo
Morales in December 2005 created
a strategic opening for China’s
relationship with Bolivia. The
third passage discusses Chinese
contracts awarded by Bolivia and
points out that many of the current
projects have either been delayed
or have failed completely. This
excerpt also questions China’s real
intentions and raises the question
of why Bolivia is engaging in
risky financial endeavors that
are not benefiting the country.
Furthermore, the deals are
financially concerning for Bolivia
because they put the country in
over $14 billion of debt. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... the election of Evo Morales in December 2005 created a strategic
opening for China’s relationship with Bolivia...”
Source: “China aprueba crédito de US$7.000 millones para obras en Bolivia (China Approves 7 Billion
Dollar Credit Line to Bolivia),” El Pais, 21 October 2016. http://www.elpais.com.uy/economia/noticias/
china-aprueba-credito-millones-dolares.html
China pledged $7 billion USD to Bolivia in October 2016 which will be used to improve key highway
systems, establish a new steel plant, and build a new hydro-electric facility.
Source: Ellis, Evin. “Chinese Engagement with Bolivia Resources, Business Opportunities, and
Strategic Location,” Air and Space Power Journal, February 2016. http://www.au.af.mil/au/afri/aspj/
apjinternational/apj-s/2016/2016-2/2016_2_03_ellis_s_eng.pdf
The China–Bolivia relationship has not always developed so rapidly. From the 2003 conflict over
the export of Bolivian gas, until the resolution of Bolivia’s constitutional crisis in January 2009, the
lack of stability in the country both impeded the Bolivian government and gave pause to its Chinese
suitor. However, the election of Evo Morales in December 2005 created a strategic opening for China’s
relationship with Bolivia, albeit one which would take time. Even before assuming office, Morales
demonstrated an interest in building a closer relationship with China, traveling to the PRC in January
2006, where he publicly declared during a meeting with members of China’s politburo that he was a
“great admirer” of the PRC’s former revolutionary leader Mao Zedong. Since that visit, Morales has
returned to China twice: in August 2011, and in December 2013. The latest trip was designed to allow
Morales to be present when the PRC launched the satellite that it had built for Bolivia, the Tupac Katari.
Source: “Los problemas en América Latina de CAMCE, la empresa china detrás del escándalo de la
exnovia de Evo Morales (Chinese Company CAMCE Experiences Problems in Latin America following
Scandal Regarding Former Girlfriend of Evo Morales),” BBC Mundo, 15 March 2016. http://www.bbc.
com/mundo/noticias/2016/03/160314_problemas_empresa_china_camc_evo_morales_novia_bolivia_
ecuador_bm
Chinese contracts awarded by Bolivia include exploration for lithium and mineral salts, the
construction of facilities to extract and refine potassium chloride and cast zinc, the construction of a
plant for tin ore processing, and significant transportation and electricity infrastructure construction.
To date, many of these projects have been plagued by delays and difficulties. For example, work was
suspended on an urban bridge being built by the Shenzen-based company Vicstar in Cochabamba
when it began sinking into the earth. A highway being built by Sinohydro from Ivirgarzama to Ichilo
was paralyzed by five work stoppages in 14 months. A $250 million contract for a railway and road
connection between Montero and Bulo Bulo included the award of two segments to Chinese companies:
China Railway Road and CAMC Engineering, of which both were rescinded when neither company
could complete the work on schedule. These failures have led some to question what China’s real
intentions in Bolivia are and why Bolivia is engaging in such risky financial behavior.

“China pledged $7 billion

USD to Bolivia in October 2016
which will be used to improve
key highway systems, establish a
new steel plant, and build a new
hydro-electric facility.”

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

37

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Colombia and Panama Join Forces to
Strengthen Border Security
OE Watch Commentary: Border security has always been a
tough issue for Panama and Colombia. Their shared geography is a
hot spot for the trafficking of drugs, humans, and weapons, along
with money laundering, and even the illegal trade of rare birds
and wildlife. More specifically, the Darién Gap—classified as a
completely lawless jungle region along the two borders—serves as
an epicenter of illegal activity because it is completely controlled
by drug trafficking organizations and the FARC. As neighbors,
Panama and Colombia have historically worked together to combat
these issues. The accompanying passages discuss some new plans
to further this cooperation.
The first passage notes that Panama and Colombia plan to
increase inter-agency coordination in the areas of security,
immigration and intelligence to deal with issues such as the flow
of migrants and drug trafficking along the border. As part of their
commitment to improve border security, Panamanian President
Juan Carlos Varela and Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos
stated that they plan to install two security bases in La Olla and La
Balsa in addition to merging two other security outposts in Alto
Limón and La Unión. All of these bases are located in the Darien
Region and will be staffed with both Colombian and Panamanian
security forces. These are expected to be operational by early
2017. Additionally, Panama plans to purchase two patrol vessels
from Colombia to further reinforce security along coastal regions
with hopes of significantly reducing illegal immigration and
drug trafficking. The second passage quotes President Santos as
saying that this collaboration is expected to have positive impacts
in decreasing all types of illegal activity in the region. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“We ... plan to increase inter-agency coordination

in the areas of security, immigration and intelligence
to deal with issues such as the flow of migrants and
drug trafficking along the border.”
Source: “Panamá y Colombia instalarán bases de seguridad en
frontera (Panama and Colombia to Instal Security Bases Along
Shared Border),” Vivelohoy, 25 October 2016. https://www.
vivelohoy.com/ultimas-noticias/8736192/panama-y-colombiainstalaran-bases-de-seguridad-en-frontera
Panamian President Varela: “We (Panama and Colombia) can
always find more ways to collaborate and are planning to implement
new measures in fiscal year 2017. For example, we will be opening
new patrol and security stations in the Darien Region. We also
plan to increase inter-agency coordination in the areas of security,
immigration and intelligence to deal with issues such as the flow of
migrants and drug trafficking along the border.”
Source: “Panamá y Colombia refuerzan frontera (Panama and
Colombia Reinforce Border Security),” La Prensa, 26 October 2016.
http://www.prensa.com/politica/frontera-segura_0_4606039511.html
Colombian President Santos: “When there is collaboration, security
efforts are more effective and we are able to fight against organized
crime and criminality in general. When there is no collaboration,
criminals are adept at taking advantage of this situation to increase
their activities and illegal businesses.”

How Mexican Cartels are Changing the
Rules of International Drug Trafficking
OE Watch Commentary: Mexican cartels have expanded their operations into
Europe and are using Spain as their European distribution hub. This means that
the cash earned from cocaine sales somehow needs to be laundered in Europe
or sent back to Mexico. However, since Mexican cartels do not have the same
presence in Europe as they do in the United States, they have come up with new
ways of doing business and laundering money there. The accompanying passages
discuss how Mexican drug trafficking cartels are doing business in Europe.
The key event that shed light on this new business model was the arrest of
Mexican national Juan Manuel Muñoz Luevano in Madrid in March 2015.
According to the first accompanying passage, in October 2016, Spanish
prosecutors said that Muñoz worked “independently,” maintaining “business
relationships with various Mexican drug trafficking cartels” including the Zetas,
the Sinaloa Cartel, the Gulf Cartel and the Beltran-Leyva Organization. Thus,
the money laundering system run by Muñoz Luevano represents what many have
suspected for years: Mexican drug cartels are using franchise systems to manage
their affairs abroad. This idea represents a complete paradigm shift from past
operations as it involves utilizing locally established service providers who are
employees of the cartel but work independently. Obviously,
(continued)

“Operational changes being made by
Mexican cartels involves the utilization
of locally established service providers
through a ‘ franchise model.’”
Source: “La contabilidad de los Zetas al
descubierto (Accounting Practices of Los Zetas
Discovered),” El Pais, 19 October 2016. http://
internacional.elpais.com/internacional/2016/10/19/
actualidad/1476895093_548015.html
Authorities have identified Juan Manuel Luevano
Muñoz as an “important member” of the Zetas
organization. However, the arrest order issued
by Spanish prosecutors said that Muñoz worked
“independently,” maintaining “business relationships
with various Mexican drug trafficking cartels”
including the Zetas, the Sinaloa Cartel, the Gulf Cartel
and the Beltran-Leyva Organization.

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

38

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Continued: How Mexican Cartels are Changing
the Rules of International Drug Trafficking
franchise systems represent a more efficient method to conduct business in Europe
since Mexican cartels do not have the same reach or presence there as they do in the
United States, as discussed in the second accompanying passage.
Drug trafficking and money laundering are nearly synonymous because one cannot
exist without the other. Trafficking produces cash, but stricter banking laws across
the globe have made transferring money more difficult for criminal organizations.
For example, it is not possible to walk into a bank and deposit large amounts of cash
on a daily basis. Thus, cartels have individuals exclusively dedicated to laundering
money and moving cash proceeds from one destination to another. Previously, money
laundering was considerably easier for Mexican cartels as they tended to move drugs
to the US and the cash proceeds from product sales back to Mexico, Panama, and
Colombia. In many cases, money was even left in the US where it was used to invest
in businesses and real estate. While this model still exists, in appears that Mexican
cartels are coming up with ways to circumvent laws and still expand their presence
internationally. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Operan el narco como franquicias
(Drug Trafficking Organizations Operate as
Franchise Systems),” 24 Hora, 7 October 2013.
http://www.24-horas.mx/operan-el-narco-comofranquicias/
Operational changes being made by Mexican
cartels involves the utilization of locally
established service providers through a
“ franchise model.” In this manner large criminal
organizations contract more localized groups
along the smuggling corridors to Europe, giving
these networks access to drugs, contacts, and
logistical information regarding the transport of
the product across the Atlantic.

Mexico Continues Support of UN Peacekeeping Operations
OE Watch Commentary: In Mexico’s new
Fiscal Year (which coincides with the calendar
year), the Mexican government has recommitted
to supporting UN operations. Although Mexican
contributions to UN operations are few in
number, they are great in significance. The
accompanying passages from press releases by
the Mexican Navy discuss these operations.
As the first accompanying piece notes,
Mexico has already deployed personnel to Haiti,
Western Sahara, and Lebanon, integrated into
partner nation forces. Similarly, the second
piece discusses Mexico’s commitment to a
larger presence in Colombia.
Until recently, Mexico had been prevented
from participating in international operations by
legacy legal and policy restrictions. However,
Mexicans in different parts of the political
spectrum have supported the idea of non-combat
operations. The Mexican military broke the
mold following the 2004 Tsunami in Southeast
Asia, and has contributed to humanitarian
operations since then without much pushback.
In peacekeeping operations, the Mexican
military forces are considered observers rather
than combatants, and again are not meeting
significant resistance from the populace. As
this precedent becomes entrenched, Mexico will
likely continue to expand its role as a global
security partner and regional military force.
End OE Watch Commentary (Freese)

MINUSTAH Commander Joins School Collapse Rescue Operation in 2008.
Source: United Nations Photo, “MINUSTAH Commander Joins School Collapse Rescue Operation,” Flikr ,
7 November 2008, https://www.flickr.com/photos/un_photo/3332077564. Photo shared under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCOmmercial-NoDerivs 2.0 Generic.

Source: “México reafirma compromiso con la ONU, renovando el personal desplegado
en 2015 y 2016 Operaciones de Mantto. de la Paz de la Organización (Mexico
Reaffirms Agreement with the U.N., Renews Personnel Deployed in 2015 and 2016
U.N. Peacekeeping Operations),” Mexican Navy Press Release 245/16, 30 December
2016. http://www.gob.mx/semar/prensa/mexico-reafirma-compromiso-con-la-onurenovando-el-personal-desplegado-en-2015-y-2016-operaciones-de-mantto-de-la-pazde-la-organizacion?idiom=es.
Completing the plan for gradual Mexican participation in U.N. peacekeeping
operations, the Mexican government … developed in 2015 the following plan to replace
(continued)
Mexican military personnel … in operations in Haiti, Western Sahara,
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

39

LATIN AMERICA

Top

Continued: Mexico Continues Support of UN
Peacekeeping Operations
and Lebanon: (1) U.N. Mission to Stabilize Haiti (MINUSTAH) … in May 2016, a Major from the Defense Department (SEDENA) and a
Commander from the Navy Department (SEMAR) were deployed …. In December 2016, a SEDENA Captain replaced a Major … Later,
Mexican personnel in the Chilean contingent were replaced … by a SEDENA Major and First Sergeant, as well as a SEMAR Lieutenant
(2) U.N. Mission for the Referendum on the Western Sahara (MINURSO) … a SEDENA Major and a SEMAR Lieutenant Commander
were deployed … as replacements for two Mexican military observers deployed in this mission in 2015 … a SEDENA Major was deployed
in September for 12 months … Finally, a SEDENA Major was deployed as an observer in January for 12 months as replacement (3) U.N.
Provisional Force for Lebanon (UNIFIL) … In coordination with Spain, a Major and a Commander named by SEDENA and SEMAR joined
the Spanish General Staff in UNIFIL … both as replacements for two Mexican military personnel …
Source: “México despliega observadores en la Misión Política Especial de la ONU en
Colombia en apoyo al proceso de paz en ese país (Mexico Deploys Observers in U.N.
Special Political Mission to Colombia, in Support of Peace Process),” Mexican Navy Press
Release 246/16, 31 December 2016, http://www.gob.mx/semar/prensa/mexico-despliegaobservadores-en-la-mision-politica-especial-de-la-onu-en-colombia-en-apoyo-al-procesode-paz-en-ese-pais-89038.
This year, Mexico … has deployed Mexican observers to [Colombia] in the U.N. Special
Political Mission, which was authorized by the Security Council in January 2016 … the
Colombian mission has the mandate to lead the multilateral monitoring mechanism and the
verification of the Peace Accord signed by the Colombian government and the Colombian
Revolutionary Armed Forces – People’s Army (FARC-EP) … the 25 Mexican observers
… of which twenty have already deployed on this mission (15 from SEDENA and 5 from
SEMAR) … The mission will be comprised of 450 effectives, including approximately 20
observers in Bogota, 100 distributed in 8 regional zones, and the remaining distributed in
designated localities …

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
soldiers manning checkpoint in November 1990.
Source: United Nations Photo, “United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),” Flikr , 24
November 1990, https://www.flickr.com/photos/un_
photo/4176628647. Photo shared under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCOmmercial-NoDerivs
2.0 Generic.

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

40

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

DPRK Exploits Dissent in ROK Saenuri Party
OE Watch Commentary: As impeachment
proceedings in the Republic of Korea
(ROK) continue against the Park Geun-hye
administration, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) has taken every
opportunity to exploit the
situation. Political scandals
involving corruption and
political demonstrations
in the ROK provide
the DPRK regime with
material to disparage
the ROK democracy and
assert the superiority of
the DPRK government
to its own citizenry. The
accompanying passage
from an article in the state
news agency of North
Korea provides a good
example of the DPRK’s
narrative.
The piece refers to the
scandal of Park Geunhye sharing classified
information with Choe Sun
sil, a close friend to Park
and the ex-wife of one of
Park’s former Chiefs of Staff. The Korean
Central News Agency (KCNA) claims that
the policies of Park Geun-hye are the reason
the peninsula has yet to unify and further
asserts that any successor similar to Park
would result in further division between the
two countries and disgrace for the ROK.
KCNA’s commentary describes the actions
of the Saenuri Party as foolish as it attempts
to recover from the scandal and rebuild the
party’s image. The Saenuri Party is the ROK’s
most influential conservative party and the
ruling party in the ROK’s National Assembly.
The KNCA alleges that the ROK government
is a puppet of the US and implies that a ROK
government that was truly of the people
would be more independent of the US and
more willing to work with the DPRK toward
reunification.
The DPRK is likely looking to exploit this
political instability at a critical juncture in USROK relations as combined military exercises
continue to occur and United States Forces
Korea looks to transition Combined Forces
Command to the ROK. End OE Watch
Commentary (Galluzzi)

“It is the south Korean public mindset never to bring down the
torch of struggle until the pro-U.S. conservative forces including
Park and the ‘Saenuri Party’ are swept away and a new society
where people have become master of politics is built.”

Members of the Saenuri Party bowing in apology for the scandal involving Choe Sun sil and resulting in a
motion to impeach current ROK president, Park Geun-hye.
Source: http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/common/printpreview.asp?categoryCode=115&newsIdx=217575

Source: Pae, K.-h. “KCNA: ‘Saenuri Party’, Hotbed of Misrule and Corruption: KCNA
Commentary,” Korean Central News Agency, 14 December 2016. https://www.opensource.
gov/portal/server.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_0_200_203_121123_43/content/Display/
KPR2016121429511789#index=1&searchKey=24908626&rpp=10
Massive protests are staged before buildings of the “Saenuri Party” and offices of
“lawmakers” in Youido of Seoul, Taegu, Taejon, Inchon, Changwon and other areas.
[The] flag symbolic of the traitorous political party is being torn to pieces amid the uproar
of the people demanding the dissolution of the “Saenuri Party”.
…
Looking back on the traitorous political party, their main players were without exception
top-class sycophants and traitors, fascist murderers, anti-reunification maniacs and illfamed kingpin of thieves.
…
If the “Saenuri Party” is left intact, the second Park Geun Hye and second Choe Sun Sil
will appear, making south Koreans subject to unavoidable disgrace, distress, misfortune
and pain.
Recently the “Saenuri Party” is trying hard to find a stop-gap measure while talking about
its “revamp” after the passage of a motion calling for Park’s impeachment through the
“National Assembly.” But it is a foolish act.
It is the south Korean public mindset never to bring down the torch of struggle until the
pro-U.S. conservative forces including Park and the “Saenuri Party” are swept away and a
new society where people have become master of politics is built.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

41

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China: Leading the World in Nuclear Fusion Research?
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passages discuss the strides
that China is making to top the world in
nuclear fusion research. This could give
China an economic and geopolitical upper
hand.
According to the first article from
mid-2015, France had been building the
world’s largest nuclear fusion machine,
known as the International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor (ITER). However,
ITER was taking more time and money
than expected to complete. By 2015,
construction costs were three times more
(totaling $20 billion) than budgeted and
the expected completion date slipped from
2016 to 2019. Additionally, a number of
countries, including China, the European
Union, and the United States, have been
collaborating on the ITER project.
Now, in addition to its involvement
in the ITER project, China is investing
heavily in building its own reactor, which
is supposed to be bigger than ITER. It
may even be pulling ahead in fusion
research. The second article, published in
early December 2016, claims that Chinese
physicists recently “set a world record by
creating hydrogen plasma hotter than the
core of the sun, and which burned steadily
for more than one minute.” According
to Lou Guan nan, deputy director of the
Experimental Advanced Superconducting
Tokomak, a facility in China’s Anhui
province, the event was a milestone and a
confidence builder for China in harnessing
energy from fusion.
The second article also points out that
while other countries have been cutting
back on funding fusion research, China has
been increasing its budget, much of which
is supported by the central government.
The increased funding and opportunities
in China have reportedly attracted fusion
scientists from around the world.
Scientists believe that nuclear fusion
is the “holy grail” for producing “cheap
zero-carbon energy.” As concerns over
climate change and depleting sources
of non-renewable energy increase, the
country that manages to unlock the code
behind nuclear fusion stands to gain more
than just a pot of gold. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“China is a collaborator on ITER, along with the European
Union, the US and others. But it is investing heavily in building its
own reactor, the China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor, which
will be bigger than ITER and may be finished by 2030.”
Source: Fred Pearce, “China Spends Big on Nuclear Fusion as French Plan Falls Behind,”
New Scientist, 23 July 2015. https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn27944-china-spendsbig-on-nuclear-fusion-as-french-project-falls-behind
Nuclear fusion involves heating a plasma of hydrogen isotopes so that they fuse into helium,
releasing a large amount of energy in the process. Many physicists see it as the Holy Grail
for producing cheap zero-carbon energy.
Constructing ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor, a multi-national
project being built in France) has already cost three times as much as budgeted, and
completion has slipped from 2016 to 2019, with the first plasma experiments the following
year. [Steven] Cowley, [director of the Clam Centre for Fusion Energy in Oxford shire] told
the committee: “ITER says 2020, but I believe the first plasma will be [generated] in 2025.”
Burning plasma is unlikely before “the early 2030s”, he said. He likened the moment when
burning plasma is achieved to the moment in the early 1940s when the first “critical” nuclear
fission reactions were produced.
Only then will the international researchers, many of whom have been working together
for decades, move on to building a new plant that could generate continuous power – the
forerunner for what they hope will be commercial nuclear fusion by late in the century. “But
the biggest investment now is in China,” says Cowley. China is a collaborator on ITER, along
with the European Union, the US and others. But it is investing heavily in building its own
reactor, the China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor, which will be bigger than ITER and may
be finished by 2030, he said.
Source: Stephen Chen, “China One Step Closer to Harnessing Clean, Limitless Energy from
Nuclear Fusion,” South China Morning Post, 8 December 2016. http://www.scmp.com/news/
china/article/2044428/how-chinas-leading-world-nuclear-fusion-research
The nuclear fusion researchers kept the ionized gas burning steadily for twice as long as the
previous record, set four years ago at the same reactor on Science Island, home to some of
China’s largest research facilities.
“It is a milestone event, a confidence boost for humanity to harness energy from fusion,”
Lou told the South China Morning Post.
While still a long way short of the duration required to make commercialization of the
technology possible – which would be measured in decades, not minutes – scientists say the
breakthrough shows the pace of development on fusion research in China is leaving other
nations in the dust.
It could also help accelerate government approval of construction of the world’s first fusion
power plant, the proposed Chinese Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR).
“China is the only nation in the world increasing its budget for fusion research,” he said.
“The funding in Europe has been dwindling, a proposal for the construction of new research
facilities in the US was rejected by Congress, and progress in Japan has also stagnated.”
The funding and opportunities available in China have attracted fusion scientists from
around the world, eager to solve the world’s energy shortage and environmental pollution
problems once and for all.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

42

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China Seeks to Deepen Relations with the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: Whenever there
is a rift between the United States and another
country, particularly one of the Southeast Asian
countries, it is not surprising to see China
suddenly increasing its efforts in diplomacy,
sometimes even aggressively, to counter the
United States. The accompanying two articles
demonstrate China’s commitment to draw the
Philippines away from US influence.
According to both articles, the Philippines was
supposed to receive at least 26,000 rifles from the
United States. However, in November 2016, after
a US senator reportedly voiced opposition to the
deal due to human rights concerns, Philippine
President Rodrigo Duterte ordered his country’s
National Police to cancel the procurement. The
rift gave China a perfect opportunity to step
in. As further evidence, according to Duterte,
China was “pressing” him to accept the firearms,
which China had rushed to have shipped to their
southern neighbor. Finally, further sealing their
friendship, according to Duterte, the firearms
“are not for free but it’s a grant actually. If it’s a
grant payable in 25 years that is really practically
giving.”
Despite building tensions between China and
other Southeast Asian nations, China is intent
on building relations with countries that seem to
be pulling away from US influence, most likely
to tilt the balance of influence towards China in
hopes of discouraging any US intervention in the
area should the South China Sea situation become
explosive. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Duterte’s Pivot to China
OE Watch Commentary: Philippine President
Rodrigo Duterte has been criticized for his sharp
tongue and controversial policies. However, he
is reportedly making good headway in drawing
in international investment projects and creating
warmer relations with China.
The first article cites Philippine Trade Secretary
Ramon M. Lopez explaining that Duterte’s
leadership has helped the country’s economy
by drawing in new projects. As a result, the
Philippines experienced its second-highest level
growth in approved projects since 2000, with
foreign-investment pledges being 50 percent
higher than those in 2015.
Much of the increase is believed to be attributed
to Duterte’s international trips
(continued)
over the past six months to

“Duterte has been seeking close ties with China and Russia
following a rift with the United States over differences on his
war on illegal drugs.”
Source: Alexis Romero, “China to Give Weapons to Boost Philippine Security,”
Philstar, 11 December 2016. http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/12/12/1652751/
china-give-weapons-boost-philippine-security
China will provide weapons to the Philippines to boost its security capabilities as the
two countries push for warmer relations despite the South China Sea dispute.
Duterte has been seeking close ties with China and Russia following a rift with the
United States over differences on his war on illegal drugs.
Last month, Duterte ordered the Philippine National Police to cancel the procurement
of some 26,000 rifles from the US following reports that the deal was being opposed by
an American senator due to human rights concerns.
Source: Sandy Araneta, “Chinese Rifles Arriving – Du30,” Manila Standard Today,
11 December 2016. http://thestandard.com.ph/news/-main-stories/top-stories/223862/
chinese-rifles-arriving-du30.html
The firearms ordered by the Philippines from China are ready to be shipped, a month
after the United States decided to stop the sale of 26,000 rifles to Manila, President
Rodrigo Duterte said.
Duterte said the firearms deal will be payable in 25 years.
“So it’s really very easy for us,” he said. “We do not need to ask for these from other
[countries] because they [China] are willing to give them. It’s not free but it’s a grant
actually. If it’s a grant payable in 25 years that is really practically giving.”
Apart from China, Duterte said the government is also considering getting firearms
from Russia.

Source: “Duterte’s Extended Honeymoon Period,” Business Mirror, 3 January 2017.
http://www.businessmirror.com.ph/dutertes-extended-honeymoon-period/
President Duterte—with his rants and controversial policies, including his bloody war
against illegal drugs—immediately got open criticisms in his first months in office… His
China pivot and pronouncements on the “liquidation” of illegal-drugs peddlers even
drew a loud chorus from naysayers that capital flight stares the Philippines in the face.
But Trade Secretary Ramon M. Lopez …said the Board of Investments (BOI) exceeded
its target of increasing new project approvals by 7 percent in 2016, notching a
20.4-percent growth to P441.8 billion (P=Philippine peso).
The total investment approvals in 2016 came from 377 projects and are expected to
create about 67,615 jobs when these projects become fully operational.
Foreign-investment pledges in 2016 are 50 percent higher compared to 2015’s P59.5
billion. Lopez credits this achievement to the new administration’s numerous investment
road shows and the President’s state visits undertaken in the last four months.
In his China visit alone, Duterte got $24 billion in fresh investment commitments from
the public and private sectors.

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

43

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Continued: Duterte’s Pivot to China
Indonesia, Vietnam, Brunei, China,
Japan, Thailand, Malaysia, Cambodia,
and Singapore. In China alone, he
reportedly received $24 billion in
investment commitments from both the
public and private sectors.
The second article, from the website of
the Chinese Foreign Ministry, notes that
Duterte visited China in October 2016,
where he attended the China-Philippines
Trade and Investment Forum. The
theme of the forum, according to the
second article, was “New Chapter, New
Vitality, and New Development.” The
article indicates that not only are the
two countries drawing closer through
investments and trade, but also in the
cultural and political spheres. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Zhang Goali and President Duterte of the Philippines Jointly Attend China-Philippines
Trade and Investment Forum,” Foreign Ministry of the People’s Republic of China website, 20
October 2016. http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/zxxx_662805/t1408114.shtml
Zhang Gaoli (China’s Vice Premiere) expressed that during their fruitful talks, President Xi
Jinping and President Rodrigo Duterte have reached important consensus on achieving the
healthy and stable development of China-Philippines relations. The two heads of state witnessed
the signing of a series of cooperation agreements. Premier Li Keqiang met with President
Rodrigo Duterte, exchanging in-depth views on expanding practical cooperation between the
two sides. China-Philippines relations have turned over a new chapter. Both sides should well
implement the important consensus reached by leaders of the two countries and firmly grasp the
general direction of good-neighborly and friendly cooperation, so that bilateral relations can
cleave through the waves along the correct course.
Rodrigo Duterte said that both as Asian countries, the Philippines and China share similar
culture and philosophies. The Philippines appreciates China’s sincere assistance to the
development of other countries and respect for other countries, and regards the development
of its relations with China as a priority of its foreign policy. The Philippines is ready to deepen
cooperation in various fields with the Chinese side and welcomes China to further expand
investment in the Philippines, so as to facilitate the development of the country.

China Developing Technologies to Control the South China Sea
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese scientists are
heavily focused on developing technologies that would
help the country gain control of the South China Sea.
The accompanying passages discuss these technologies.
According to the first excerpted article, researchers
from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Huazhong University of Science and Technology have
experimented with methods to help shield the country’s
submarines from sonar detection. By placing rings
approximately 14 centimeters across, with periodically
etched grooves that direct sound waves in a specific
direction, they are making sonar travel around the rings
rather than bouncing back to their transmitter. This
would make the submarines undetectable.
In another technological endeavor, in early 2016,
the China State Shipbuilding Corporation, one of
the country’s two largest state-owned shipbuilding
enterprises, revealed plans to create an “underwater
Great Wall.” According to the second article, the
project, which is an updated and “improved Chinese
version” of the US system that offered “a significant
advantage in countering Soviet submarines during
the Cold War,” would consist of a network of ship and
subsurface sensors.
There is still a good amount of work to be done
and hurdles to overcome before China can put these
technologies to work. Nevertheless, with over 80
submarines, China has the world’s second largest fleet;
along with the perseverance and determination to
overcome any technical hurdle. This means that each
step China takes puts the country closer to controlling
the South China Sea. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

Source: Stephen Chen, “The Chinese Acoustics Research that Might Help Shield
Submarines from Sonar,” South China Morning Post, 5 December 2016. http://
www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/2051642/chinese-acousticsresearch-might-help-shield-submarines

The Chinese Acoustics Research that Might Help Shield Submarines
from Sonar
Chinese scientists are developing a technique they hope will be able to make
submarines invisible to sonar detection under the sea.
If successful, it would ultimately involve covering subs with special rings made of
aluminum alloys.
Other researchers have been working on the technology, but the Beijing and
Huazhong researchers said their system was the simplest… “It does not require
moving parts,” said one author of the Chinese paper, who asked not to be named.
However, he added that many problems remained to be solved before the
technology can be used outside the laboratory on submarines or to reduce noise on
aircraft.
Source: Catherine Wong, “‘Underwater Great Wall’: Chinese Firm Proposes
Building Network of Submarine Detectors to Boost Nation’s Defense,” South China
Morning Post, 19 May 2016. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/
article/1947212/underwater-great-wall-chinese-firm-proposes-building
The “Underwater Great Wall” is the construction of a network of ship and
subsurface sensors that could significantly erode the undersea warfare advantage
held by US and Russian submarines and contribute greatly to future Chinese ability
to control the South China Sea…
If the system is built by the corporation it would probably be bought by the PLA
Navy…
The corporation is proposing an improved Chinese version of the Sound
Surveillance System that for a time gave the US a significant advantage in
countering Soviet submarines during the cold war…
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

44

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Buddhist-Muslim Fault Lines in ASEAN
OE Watch Commentary: Malaysian officials
have recently blasted Myanmar’s leadership for
not taking action to stop the alleged persecution of
its Muslim Rohingya population. Both Malaysia
and Myanmar are members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), an organization
whose founding principle is non-interference in each
other’s domestic affairs. Thus, this act could trigger
a rift between ASEAN’s Muslim and Buddhist
members, affecting the group’s long-term cohesion.
The accompanying passages discuss this risk.

“It is unprecedented for an ASEAN leader to speak of a fellow
leader among the 10 member states in such a manner, and a
clear breach of the organization’s founding principle of noninterference in each other’s domestic affairs. Najib’s tirade …
risks triggering a damaging split between ASEAN’s Muslim
and Buddhist blocs that could have long-term consequences for
the group’s cohesion.”

Over the past few years, and especially in more
recent months, members of Myanmar’s Buddhist
population have targeted the Rohingya, a Muslim
Indo-Aryan group in the country’s Rakhine
state, claiming they are illegal immigrants from
Bangladesh. Over 1.1 million Rohingya are said to
be denied citizenship under Myanmar’s national law
and more than 10,000 of them have recently fled to
Bangladesh to escape a bloody army crackdown,
bringing with them stories of gang rape, torture,
and murder at the hands of Myanmar’s security
forces. However, Myanmar has done little to stop the
violence, with its officials denying the allegations.
The first article highlights a rally that took place in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, during which Malaysian
Prime Minister Najib Razak, addressing a crowd of
5,000 demonstrators, voiced his opposition to the
alleged abuses against the Rohingya. At the center
of Najib’s criticism was Myanmar State Counselor
Aung Sang Suu Kyi, the 1991 recipient of the Nobel
peace prize who, according to reports, has taken
little to no action to address the violence. “We want
to tell Aung San Suu Kyi, enough is enough…
We must and we will defend Muslims and Islam,”
promised Najib during his speech.
In the second article, Kavi Chongkittavom, a
senior fellow at Thailand-based Chulalongkorn
University’s Institute of Security and International
Studies, warns that Malaysia’s verbal attack and
meddling into the domestic affairs of a fellow
ASEAN country could cause a rift within the
organization. While, according to both articles,
analysts have questioned Najib’s motives in
verbally attacking Suu Kyi, Kavi argues that “it is
unprecedented for an ASEAN leader to speak of a
fellow leader among the 10 member states in such
a manner, and a clear breach of the organization’s
founding principle of non-interference in each other’s
domestic affairs.” ASEAN’s 10 member states are
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Phillipines, Singapore,
Thailand, Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and
Vietnam. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

ASEAN flag.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/43/Flag_of_Asean%2C_Philippine_Post_
Office.jpg

Source: “Suu Kyi Must Stop Rohingya ‘Genocide’ Malaysia PM,” Mizzima, 5
December 2016. http://www.nationmultimedia.com/news/breakingnews/30301408
“What’s the use of Aung San Suu Kyi having a Nobel prize?” Najib [Razak] asked a
raucous crowd… “We want to tell Aung San Suu Kyi, enough is enough... We must and
we will defend Muslims and Islam,” he said as supporters chanted “Allahu Akbar”
(“God is great”)… Myanmar has denied allegations of abuse, but has also banned
foreign journalists and independent investigators from the area… Muslim-majority
Malaysia has recently upped its criticism of Myanmar for its handling of the crisis…
But analysts said Sunday the issue is a convenient smokescreen for Najib, who is
fighting allegations he took part in the looting of billions of dollars of public cash
through state fund 1MDB [1 Malaysia Development Berhad].
Source: Kavi Chongkittavorn, “Regional Criticism of Myanmar’s Rohingya Policy
Risks ASEAN Split,” Nikkei, 8 December 2016. http://asia.nikkei.com/Viewpoints/
Kavi-Chongkittavorn/Regional-criticism-of-Myanmar-s-Rohingya-policy-risksASEAN-split
It is unprecedented for an ASEAN leader to speak of a fellow leader among the 10
member states in such a manner, and a clear breach of the organization’s founding
principle of non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs. Najib’s tirade raises
awkward questions about his motives, given the growing demands in Muslim-majority
Malaysia for his ouster amid accusations of corruption related to the state fund
1Malaysia Development Berhad. It also risks triggering a damaging split between
ASEAN’s Muslim and Buddhist blocs that could have long-term consequences for the
group’s cohesion.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

45

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China Emphasizes its Historical Rights
in the South China Sea
China’s maritime claim (red) and
UNCLOS exclusive economic
zones (blue) in the South China
Sea.
Source: https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:South_
China_Sea_vector.svg

OE Watch Commentary: The Xisha
Islands (Paracel Islands in English)
and Nansha Islands (Spratly Islands in
English) are two groups of islands and
other maritime features located in the
South China Sea (SCS). All of the islands
are under dispute as to ownership; with
China, Vietnam, Taiwan, the Philippines,
and other nations making claims. The
accompanying passage features statements
by the Commander of the Chinese
Navy discussing China’s “indisputable
sovereignty over them.”
In late December, Central Military
Commission member Admiral Wu
Shengli, Commander of the People’s
Liberation Navy, commemorated the
70th Anniversary of what is known in
Beijing as China’s recovery of these
islands. Shengli stated that China has
long owned the islands and traced their
heritage through the Han, Sui, Tang, Song,
and Ming dynasties. After World War II,
during which time the Japanese invaded
the islands, Wu noted that China recovered
them in accordance with the Cairo
Declaration and the Potsdam Proclamation.
He added that China’s sovereignty over
these islands is indisputable and that
their recovery is a national declaration of
China’s ability to safeguard its interests in
the SCS. Wu added that in recent years,
construction on the islands and reefs has
been legitimate and justifiable as it is
taking place on China’s own territory. To
ensure the peaceful development of the
countries around the islands, he offered
four proposals, which are stated in the
accompanying summary. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

“The Chinese government,
the Chinese people, and the
People’s Liberation Army
are determined and capable
to safeguard the national
sovereignty and security and
maintain peace and stability
in the South China Sea.”

Source: “The Chinese
and English Versions
of Remarks at Events
Commemorating the 70th
Anniversary of China’s
Recovery of the Xisha
and Nansha Islands,”
China Military Online, 24
December 2016. http://
english.chinamil.com.
cn/view/2016-12/23/
content_7421766_2.htm
“The Xisha and Nansha islands have been part of China’s territory since ancient times. China
holds indisputable sovereignty over the Xisha and Nansha islands.
...
The recovery of the Xisha and Nansha Islands is China’s firm maintenance of the postwar
international order. The Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam Proclamation, and the UN Charters
are the cornerstone of the postwar international order and the principles for maintaining peace
and justice.
...
The recovery of the Xisha and Nansha islands 70 years ago was an assertive claim of China’s
sovereignty over these islands.
...
The recovery of the Xisha and Nansha Islands is a victorious act of China to defend national
dignity, exercise territorial sovereignty, and uphold justice and peace.... The Chinese
government, the Chinese people and the PLA are determined and capable to safeguard the
national sovereignty and security and maintain peace and stability in the South China Sea.
...
The construction in recent years on islands and reefs of the Nansha Islands is legitimate and
justifiable as it is on China’s own territory.
...
[Wu’s four proposals:] First, respecting history is the prerequisite to maintaining peace
and stability and settling disagreement and disputes. To respect history, we must restore the
historical facts, clarify the causes, and tell right from wrong.
Second, maintaining stability is the key to follow historical trends and boost regional
prosperity. If any turbulence or war occurs in the South China Sea, the neighboring countries
will be the victims who will suffer the most.
Third, enhancing mutual trust is the foundation to develop friendly relations and realize
harmonious coexistence. To upgrade mutual trust, we should conduct frequent high-level visits,
and promote continuously the confidence and consensus between naval leaders.
Fourth, deepening cooperation is an important way to achieve mutual benefit, win-win results,
and common prosperity. We should strengthen security cooperation, enhance intelligence and
information exchange and sharing, and jointly fight against piracy and maritime terrorism
in order to maintain a good regional maritime order and security of the strategic line of
communication.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

46

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

China Sees the PLA Playing a Frontline Role in Cyberspace
OE Watch Commentary: In late December, China’s
Cyberspace Administration released a fifteen page
Cybersecurity Strategy. According to the document, the
government will protect cyberspace sovereignty and national
security. The accompanying passages discussing this document
shed light on the leading role that China sees its military
playing in cyberspace.
The passage notes that Beijing sees cyberspace as an
extension of its national soil. Thus, according to one security
expert, “just like [force] will be deployed on the front line for
attacks on China’s territory, military forces will be used for
the same defense purposes in cases such as key informational
infrastructure being attacked.” This indicates a primary
military role regarding information stability operations inside
the country.
The strategy document noted that the race to seize strategic
cyber resources is becoming increasingly fierce. For the past
several months Chinese President Xi Jinping has advocated
the desire to develop capabilities able to wipe out any attempts
to undermine China’s sovereignty in cyberspace. Without
cyber sovereignty, the country is faced with challenges that
include the potential toppling of the political system, the
ability to incite social disorder, or the paralysis of the financial
or telecom infrastructure. End OE Watch Commentary
(Thomas)

Source: Zhuang Pinghui, “China Sees the PLA Playing Frontline Role
in Cyberspace,” South China Morning Post Online (in English), 27
December 2016. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/
article/2057500/china-sees-pla-playing-frontline-role-cyberspace
A strategy document released by top Internet regulator Cyberspace
Administration said the use of the Internet for treason, secession, revolt,
subversion, or stealing or leaking of state secrets would be punished. It
also warned of penalties for working with ‘overseas forces’ for sabotage,
subversion, or secession.
“[China] will regulate internet activities within the country’s
sovereignty, protect the safety of information facilities and resources and
take all means, including economic, administrative, technological, legal,
diplomatic and military, to safeguard China’s cyberspace sovereignty,”
the -document said.
Tang Lan, an information security expert with the China Institute of
Contemporary International Relations, said Beijing saw cyberspace as
an extension of its national soil.
“Just like [force] will be deployed on the front line for attacks on
China’s territory, military forces will be used for the same defense
purposes in cases such as key informational infrastructure being
attacked,” Tang said.
China will boost cyber deterrence powers, vows President Xi Jinping.

China Developing a Commercial Space Sector
OE Watch Commentary: While much
of the world’s attention remains focused on
China’s manned space exploration and lunar
missions, the nation has also started paying
closer attention to the use of commercial space
activities. Until recently, the latter usually
referred to a space mission paid for by an
entity other than the Chinese government.
However, as the accompanying passages from
China Daily demonstrate, this is changing.
In the fall of 2016, the Chinese Aerospace
Science and Technology Corporation founded
the China Rocket Company Limited to begin
its own launch market. Included in their plans
is the ability to send three to five travelers
to heights of 80 km above the Earth as part
of a space tourism package. An additional
plan is to build a global communications
satellite network by 2020. It will consist of
60 small low orbit satellites and 20 ground
stations. The Hongyan satellites will improve
the positioning accuracy of the Beidou
Navigation Satellite System. End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

Source: Zhao Lei, “Telecom Satellite System to Encircle Globe,” China Daily Asia-Pacific
Online (in English), 13 December 2016. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2016-12/13/
content_27650078.htm
China Aerospace Science and Technology Corp plans to build a global real-time
communications satellite network by 2020, a senior company executive said.
Sun Weigang, chief engineer at the State-owned space giant, said the Hongyan satellite
system will be composed of 60 small satellites operating in low orbits and 20 ground
stations around the world.
The system will provide a wide range of civilian services such as ground data collection
and exchange, ship identification and tracking, mobile broadcasting as well as navigation
signal enhancement, he said.
Its automatic ship identification system will receive information from ships around the
globe and help monitor their situation. The mobile broadcasting function will be able to
transmit audio, video, images and other data. The navigation signal enhancement devices
carried by Hongyan satellites will improve the Beidou Navigation Satellite System’s
positioning accuracy...
Once the satellite network is formed, it will benefit a lot of sectors, including marine
industries, weather forecasting, transportation, environmental protection, geological
survey, and disaster prevention and relief,” Sun Weigang [chief engineer at the State-owned
Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation] said when he announced the plan at the
Fourth Aerospace Internationalization Forum in Beijing.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

47

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Female Suicide Bombing: A New ISIS
Tactic in Indonesia and Beyond?
OE Watch Commentary: The tactic of female
suicide bombing has been employed by several militant
groups in the last few decades, including secular Syrian
and Lebanese groups, the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka,
Islamist rebel groups in Chechnya, and the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) in Turkey. Al-Qaeda and ISIS
have generally avoided using the tactic on grounds
that their Salafi-jihadi ideology only permits men to
be suicide bombers—and combatants more generally.
However, as ISIS begins to lose its territorial Caliphate
in Iraq and Syria and focus on external targets outside
of the Middle East, it may be starting to allow the
tactic.
The excerpted Indonesian-language article discusses
an attempted Indonesian female suicide bomber
named Dian Yulia. Yulia began following an ISIS
Telegram forum and made contact with ISIS’s leader
in Indonesia—Bahrun Naim. Naim introduced her via
the internet to another ISIS supporter in Indonesia,
who became her husband even before they met. During
the courtship period after meeting her husband, she
was groomed to carry out a suicide bombing at the
Presidential Palace in Jakarta. Yulia was arrested before
she could carry out the attack.
Yulia drafted two wills before the intended attack,
which were published on a Facebook account, and republished by Tribune News. She explained her devotion
to religion and how her parents gave her the courage to
carry out the attack. She also wrote that she hoped she
would meet her husband again in heaven since they did
not spend much time together on earth.
While the trend of female suicide bombing is still
most prevalent with Boko Haram, there are indications
based on the excerpted article from Indonesia and other
reports from Libya, Syria and Bangladesh that the trend
is picking up elsewhere. Indeed, with ISIS spreading
its tentacles across the globe and seeking to catch
counter-terrorism officers off-guard, employing women
as female suicide bombers could be its next tactic. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“ What is the
background to Dian
being desperate
to become a
‘bride-bomb’
that would target
the Presidential
Palace?”
Sajida al-Rishawi, featured in the excerpted image, was a female suicide bomber deployed in
Jordan by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who was the leader of the predecessor of ISIS; now female
suicide bombings may be becoming an ISIS tactic yet again.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/female-suicide-bomber-in-france-was-among-many-inhistory/3065167.html

Source: “Wasiat Dian Yulia Novi: Ini Caraku Berbakti Pada Agama dan
Orangtuaku (Dian Yulia’s Will: This is the Way I Worship My Religion
and Parents),” Tribune News, 11 December 2016. http://medan.tribunnews.
com/2016/12/11/wasiat-dian-yulia-novi-ini-caraku-berbakti-pada-agama-danorangtuaku
The message was delivered by Dian Yulia in her will in a piece of paper that
was hand-written directly. The first will was addressed to her parents, while the
second will was addressed to her husband. Dian Yulia’s wills were uploaded on a
Facebook account, including her National Identity Card (KTP). The police said
[Dian Yulia] and the others were members of the group Ansar Khilafah Nusantara
(JAKDN), which is affiliated to ISIS. Priya Husada, who posted the wills on his
Facebook account, wrote, “What is the background to the Dian desperate to
become a ‘bride’ bomb that would target the presidential palace? Why did she
consider suicide as a way to heaven?”
According to [Dian Yulia], she was able to distinguish between what is good
and bad based on the religious knowledge that she has obtained. Dian continued
that after becoming a bride in suicide, she believed she would regroup in a more
beautiful paradise with her family. In a message to her husband, Dian said they
may not have a lot of memories together, but she thanks God for having felt the
beauty of being a wife.
Dian Yulia planned to blow up the Presidential Palace with a suicide bomb.

Transition in the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan - From Conscripts to Contract Soldiers

by Matt Stein

Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces have been working to modernize, reform and expand their capabilities since the
state became independent in 1991. Much of the attention on this development has been on security cooperation
with Russia, the United States and other partners, but there have also been internally driven efforts that could
have just as significant an impact. One of these efforts over the past several years has been the increase in
the number of professional contract soldiers in the Armed Forces, which is part of a plan to have contract
soldiers make up 99 percent of the Armed Forces by the end 2016. While the result has yet to be announced,
an examination of Kazakhstan’s effort to have its Armed Forces made up of contract soldiers will show how this
effort has been progressing and the impact this could have on the capabilities of the country’s Armed Forces and
on the Central Asian region.
http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/Stein%20-%20Transition%20in%20the%20Armed%20Forces%20of%20Kazakhstan%20-%20From%20Conscripts%20to%20Contract%20Soldiers.pdf
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

48

ASIA-PACIFIC

Top

Russia Deepens Military Cooperation with the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2014, Russia has escalated its
military operations in Ukraine and Syria in opposition to NATO
and the West; and has sought to diversify its military cooperation
in Africa and East Asia. Russia appears to be particularly focused
on countries that were close military partners with the West, such
as Mali; or that are rising military partners with the West, such
as Vietnam. As the excerpted article discusses, Russia is now
courting the Philippines for renewed military cooperation.
This development comes amid concerns from US officials about
Philippine President Duterte’s threats against human rights activists
and wide-reaching crackdown on drug traffickers involving extrajudicial killings. It also comes amid Duterte’s recent personal
attack on President Obama, after which President Obama cancelled
a meeting with him on the sidelines of the G-20 summit in
September 2016. Furthermore, when Duterte visited Beijing in
October 2016, he announced a separation from the United States
and a realignment with China. Duterte said that Russia, China and
the Philippines would be against the world together, although his
aides tried to play down the significance of such statements. On 17
November, Duterte also said the Philippines may follow Russia in
leaving the International Criminal Court (ICC) amid speculation
that Duterte himself could be indicted by ICC.
The article notes Duterte’s plan to visit Moscow in March
or April 2017 to discuss defense cooperation, the fight against
terrorism, and the war against drugs. This is consistent with
Duterte’s recent anti-US sentiments. While Duterte’s Secretary
of State has made clear that a visit to Russia would not affect the
Philippine-US alliance, the Russian ambassador in Manila has
warned against third-party intervention in Russia’s relationship
with the Philippines. He has also praised Duterte’s independent
foreign policy, promised a new security architecture in Southeast
Asia, and declared that Russia would have no human rights-related
strings attached in its dealings with Duterte. The statements all
had anti-US or Western connotations, despite the ambassador not
specifically mentioning any adversary.
The evolving relationship between Russia and the Philippines
reflects Russia’s interest in gaining military influence in East
Asia and serving as an alternative to the Philippines’ traditional
partnership with the US. In the short term, this relationship will
likely lead to an increase in Russian arms sales and exports to the
Philippines. In the long-term, it may have geopolitical significance
for regional military issues, such as the South China Sea territorial
disputes. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Russia will not tolerate interference from any
third party country in the pursuance of stronger
relationship with the Philippines.”

President Rodrigo Duterte, who is pictured in the adjacent image, is reshaping the
Philippines’ regional military position with his evolving relationship with Russia.
Source: http://www.voanews.com/a/duterte-china-pivot/3569733.html

Source: “Rody visit to Russia to enhance defense cooperation,”
Philstar, 30 November 2016. http://www.philstar.com/
headlines/2016/11/30/1648913/rody-visit-russia-enhance-defensecooperation
President Duterte is scheduled to visit Russia in March or April next
year, Foreign Affairs Secretary Perfecto Yasay Jr. said. Yasay said
Duterte’s visit is not to establish a military alliance with Moscow. He
stressed the Philippines’ military alliance is only with the United States.
Yasay said Duterte’s visit to Russia will focus on defense cooperation
in terms of exchange of information, the fight against terrorism, war
against drugs and enforcement capability.
Russian Ambassador Khovaev also commended the independent
foreign policy being pursued by Duterte. He added Russia will be a
reliable partner and friend of the Philippines. He said Russia will not
tolerate interference from any third party country in the pursuance
of stronger relationship with the Philippines. Khovaev said Russia
has a long-term strategic position in the Asia-Pacific region, which
he described as an “indispensable precondition” in the development
of their country. He said the aim is to establish a “new architecture
of security in the region.” Khovaev said they are ready to supply
military equipment and engage in the transfer of relevant technologies
to any state without “political conditionality.” He added they will
not use potential military supplies to put political pressure on the
sovereign affairs of their partners, just as Russia does not tolerate any
interference on theirs.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/20150609_Grau_RiverineOpsInContempConflict.pdf
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

49

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

India Closer to Extending Nuclear Strike Range
OE Watch Commentary: In December
2016, India successfully concluded
its fourth test of the Agni-V
ballistic missile, which has
a range of over 3,000
miles and is capable
of carrying a nuclear
warhead. As the
accompanying
passages discuss,
having a long-range
nuclear weapon
places India in a
select club of global
powers along with the
US, UK, Russia, China
and France. The passages
also shed light on India’s
perspective on nuclear deterrence
towards China.
As the first article discusses, with the most
recent successful test-fire of Agni-V, India is
“all set to flex some newly honed muscles,
adding to its armoury a long-range intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM).” The
second passage discusses that the Agni-V is
intended to deter China and points out that
the weapon is “capable of striking even the
northernmost parts of China.”
India’s nuclear program is frequently
discussed within the context of Indian tensions
with neighboring Pakistan. However, from
India’s perspective, China is also a potential
and historic adversary. India has made it clear
that this extends to nuclear deterrence. The
Agni-V is a reflection of this perspective.
Considering historic tensions along the
Indian-Chinese border (for example, see OE
Watch for September 2016, “Indian Defense
Ministry Funds Arunachal Pradesh Border
Highway”), the Agni-V development can be
viewed as provocative. However, the Agni-V
is about more than nuclear deterrence. It is
about national status. India views itself as
a powerful rival to China in Asia. While
India remains far behind China in nuclear
capability, simply having a long-range nuclear
weapon places India in a select club of global
powers. The Agni-V is also important to
India because it is domestically developed—
furthering the Indian government’s agenda
of promoting “Make in India,” especially in
science and technology industries. End OE
Watch Commentary (Freese)

Agni Missile Range Comparison.
Source: Wikimedia Commons Michael, with SVG conversion by user Srikar Kashyap, “Agni Missile Range
Comparison,” Wikimedia Commons, 2 August 2012, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Agni_Missile_
Range_comparison.svg. Shared under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license.

Source: “With Agni V success, India adds long-range ICBM to arsenal, becomes 5th nation
in world to have 5,000 km range nuclear missile,” The Financial Express, 15 December
2016, http://www.financialexpress.com/india-news/with-agni-v-success-india-adds-longrange-icbm-to-arsenal-becomes-5th-nation-in-world-to-have-5000-km-range-nuclearmissile/474706/.
… Though India is better placed than Pakistan in terms of military prowess, it lags behind
its other neighbour, China … But, it is now all set to flex some newly honed muscles,
adding to its armoury a long-range inter-continental ballistic missile (ICBM). This puts
India in a select global club. With the fourth successful test-fire of Agni V … India becomes
the sixth country after the US, the UK, Russia, China, and France to have developed a
5,000-km-plus range, nuclear-capable missile. While Agni V still doesn’t put it on a par
with China … the ICBM sure adds to its military capability … The expanded fleet, the hope
is, would bring some balance of power in the neighbourhood and also prove a deterrent
against any ‘first-use’ move by hostile neighbours. Agni V would still have to undergo trials
under the Strategic Forces Command before it is inducted for operations …
Source: Rajat Pandit, “India prepares to test Agni-V nuclear missile that can hit China,” The
Economic Times, 14 December 2016, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/
india-prepares-to-test-agni-v-nuclear-missile-that-can-hit-china/articleshow/55971731.cms.
… But India also conceivably wanted to exercise some strategic restraint while making a
bid to join the 48-country Nuclear Suppliers Group, which China thwarted earlier this year.
India, however, did manage to join the 34-nationa Missile Technology Control Regime …
The impending fourth test of Agni-V, capable of striking even the northernmost parts of
China, is in itself significant. “This will be the final test of the three-stage Agni-V, which
will be tested for its full range, before the Strategic Forces Command (SFC) begins its
user trials,” the source said … Apart from the shorterrange Prithvi and Dhanush missiles,
the SFC has inducted the Agni-I, Agni-II, and Agni-III missiles …. While these missiles
are mainly geared towards Pakistan, the Agni-IV and Agni-V are specifically meant for
deterrence against China …
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

50

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Statistics on Afghan Special Operation Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Afghanistan’s
special forces units in the Defense and
Interior Ministries have been considered
fairly capable of carrying out various
types of operations. The accompanying
excerpted articles show however, that there
are conflicting reports on the impact of their
recent operations.
The first article from Tolo News features
passages from a speech that the Afghan
Interior Minister gave to the Special Forces
of the Afghan National Police (ANP). The
minister discusses statistics of the number
of operations carried out and the number of
insurgents killed or arrested by ANP special
forces units in the last nine months, noting
that there were many high-profile ones. He
refers to two operations where the special
forces “managed to avoid harm to others
through your courage, professionalism and
skills.” The piece notes that the minister
voiced concern about “a lack of modern
weapons for police, suggesting that more
needed to be done in this respect.”
On the other hand, the second article from
Tolo News reports that “Operation Shafaq
2” is under scrutiny by Afghan Members of
Parliament due to the minimal gains made.
“Operation Shafaq 2” began in late 2016 to
clear a number of districts in Afghanistan
from Taliban control, but based on this
article and other reports, the operation has
“not achieved anything so far.” The unit
mentioned in the article—the 215 Maiwand
Military Corps—is part of the Ministry
of Defense, and appears to be taking a
larger role in the operation. A member of
parliament called on the government to
expand the operation. It will be important to
watch if or how additional units are utilized.
There have been reports by sources
outside of Afghanistan that special forces
units at the national or provincial level,
and even units within the Ministry of
Defense, have had to fill in for conventional
units in roles that do match their skillset.
Reports point out that instead of conducting
reconnaissance or detaining high-level
targets, these units have been forced
into tasks like providing security at road
checkpoints when conventional units
fled. This could be one of the reasons
why “Operation Shafaq 2” is not going as
planned. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“The interior minister did however voice concern over what he
called a lack of modern weapons for police, suggesting that more
needed to be done in this respect.”

Afghan National Army soldiers with the 4th Brigade, 215th Maiwand Corps conduct firing drills during
reception, staging, onward movement and integration training at Camp Shorabak in Helmand province,
Afghanistan, Oct. 2, 2012.
Source: (DoD photo courtesy U.S. Marine Corps/Released) https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:121002-MZZ999-002_%288050305158%29.jpg

Source: Ashrafi, Nabila. “Special Forces Kill 1,551 Insurgents in Nine Months: MoI,” Tolo
News, 28 December 2016. http://www.tolonews.com/afghanistan/special-forces-kill-1551insurgents-nine-months-moi
The Ministry of Interior (MoI) on Wednesday said that Afghan National Police (ANP) special
forces have killed at least 1,551 insurgents over the past nine months, including 400 key
insurgent commanders. The MoI statistics reveal that special forces carried out 1,482 special
operations during this period with many operations targeting high profile insurgents. “The
incident which happened in Shar-e-Naw of Kabul (September) and the incident on the house
of MP Mir Wali (this month), you (special forces) managed to avoid harm to others through
your courage, professionalism and skills,” said (Interior Minister) Taj Mohammad Jahed…
The interior minister did however voice concern over what he called a lack of modern
weapons for police, suggesting that more needed to be done in this respect…Although
statistics about fatalities among police special forces are not clear, officials have confirmed
that two officers were killed during the American University of Afghanistan attack in August.
Source: Joyenda, Mirabed. “MPs Label Operation Shafaq 2 As Merely Symbolic,” Tolo
News, 16 December 2016. http://www.tolonews.com/afghanistan/mps-label-operation-shafaq2-merely-symbolic
A number of MPs have said despite Operation Shafaq 2 being in its second month, many
cities, where the operation is underway, are still overrun by insurgents…“The operation has
not achieved anything so far…We will soon call on government to expand the operation,” said
Obaidullah Barekzai, an MP… Security departments in the province however said they will
eliminate Taliban by next spring. “You will see that by next spring, we will retake control of
the regions that have been fallen to Taliban,” said Wali Mohammad Ahmadzai, commander of
215 Maiwand Military Corps.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

51

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

How Does Georgia Prioritize its Air Force?
OE Watch Commentary: Georgia’s
Armed Forces often look to the 2008 RussianGeorgian War to identify what reforms are
needed to become a more effective force. The
accompanying passage from a Georgian source
shows how that war continues to influence
the way reforms are discussed; and raises the
question of whether the Georgian Air Force
could be effective in a future conflict.
The author of the article, a well-known
military analyst, references a Georgian aircraft
strike on the first day of the war and the effect
this had on Russian Ground Forces for several
days. The author writes that even though
this was just a single aircraft strike, it made
the Russians think that every aircraft that
appeared in the skies in the subsequent days
was a Georgian one, resulting in the Russians
“firing enthusiastically” at their own aircraft.
The author does not take into consideration
the coordination and communication problems
with the Russian Air Force and Ground Forces,
which contributed to Russians downing their
own aircraft, but the air strike had an impact
nonetheless, particularly a boost to the morale
of Georgian Armed Forces and the public in
the early phase of the war.
The author also looks at the Russian
weapons systems that the Georgian forces
would face in a potential conflict. He claims
that the aircraft in the current inventory could
combat these, but only if maintained. He notes
that the Mi-24 attack helicopters are likely to
be phased out of service and that the Su-25s
could soon follow. The author acknowledges
that Russian air defense systems in Abkhazia
or South Ossetia would quickly bring down
Georgian aircraft early in any conflict, yet he
advocates maintaining them because of a lack
of artillery with an effective range to combat
other Russian weapon systems.
It has been well documented that the
Georgian government is putting a high priority
on air defense. In June 2015, the Georgian
Ministry of Defense signed an agreement
with ThalesRaytheonSystems to upgrade its
air defense systems. This is in addition to
the purchase of Israeli surface-to-air missile
systems. Meanwhile, the condition of Georgia’s
Air Force does not receive as much attention
in the media as air defense or personnel issues,
and if this article is any indication, it might be
becoming less of a priority. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“...considering the supposed strength of the Russian air defense
systems in the occupied Ts’khinvali region (South Ossetia) and
Abkhazia, they will shoot down our attack planes during their very
first flights.”
Source: Aladashvili, Irakli. “ქართული საბრძოლო ავიაცია მომავლის გარეშე?
(Does the Georgian Air Force have a future?),” Kviris Palitra, 7 November 2016.
http://www.kvirispalitra.ge/military/32252-qarthuli-sabrdzolo-aviacia-momavlis-gareshe.
html

Does the Georgian Air Force Have a Future?
When the people of Georgia recall the horrors of the August 2008 war, the sound of jet
engines of the Russian bombers and attack aircraft and the thumping of exploding bombs
come to mind…Although there was just a single air strike carried out by four Georgian
attack aircraft near Java at the dawn of 8 August, the Russian aggressors thought that
every attack aircraft that appeared in the skies in the subsequent days was a Georgian
one and they were firing enthusiastically at Russian aircraft…
…the Georgian Army has 12 Su-25 attack aircraft of various modifications…This is
not exactly an insignificant combat potential since, given the right tactics for their use,
they can inflict great harm on the adversary…This is only possible, however, when both
the planes and the pilots are ready for combat…The military budget is not enough for
repairing and especially for buying combat aircraft. This is the position of the official
structures. Some of them even insist that, considering the supposed strength of the
Russian air defense systems in the occupied Ts’khinvali region (South Ossetia) and
Abkhazia, they will shoot down our attack planes during their very first flights
The fact of the matter is that the Lar-160 multiple launch rocket systems (MLRS) is
the Georgian Army’s “longest stick.” The range of their unguided missiles is under 45
kilometers. This means that we will not even have a theoretical capability of suppressing
through counter-battery fire
the adversary’s long-range
artillery, such as the Smerch
(MLRS) which can strike
at 70-90 kilometers, not
to mention the Tochka-U
missiles, which can fly over
a distance of 120
kilometers…The Mi24 attack helicopters
and Su-25 attack
planes were the only
means of combat
which Georgia could
have used, at least
theoretically, to reach
the Smerch and Tochka
systems… The Mi-24s’
require major overhaul and,
unfortunately, may ultimately bid
farewell to the Georgian Army. The
Georgian Air Force emblem.
turn of the Su-25s’ is apparently coming
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Georgian_Air_Force_emblem.svg
now…
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

52

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Who Provides Security at Gwadar Port?
OE Watch Commentary: One of the
most high-profile projects of the ChinaPakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) is the
development of Pakistan’s Gwadar Port,
located strategically at the head of the
Arabian Sea. The accompanying articles
from Chinese and Pakistani sources report
on recent events involving the development
of the port, and China’s role in providing
security there. This is worth watching
because if Gwadar continues to develop,
China’s presence at this Pakistani port
will afford it a presence in the Persian
Gulf while also strategically encircling
India. Furthermore, it will allow access to
the seas for China’s landlocked Xinjiang
province and to the energy rich Caspian
region (see map).
The first article from Xinhua reports
that the first shipment of cargo arrived at
the Gwadar port overland from Kashgar,
Xinjiang Province, China. China took
over management of the port within the
past few years and as the Xinhua article
mentions, the ship that received the cargo
is the COSCO Wellington, a part of the
China Ocean Shipping Company’s fleet.
It is not mentioned how much cargo
will continue to be transported from the
Xinjiang Province to Gwadar, but China
and Pakistan are presenting the first convoy
of goods as a success.
The article from the Pakistan-based
Dawn reports on the joint naval exercise
between Pakistan and China near Gwadar
Port and points out that it is the fourth in a
series of exercises. The exercise took place
at the same time that the cargo arrived
and was loaded onto the ship. The article
notes that two Chinese ships participated
in the exercise, the Changxingdao (a naval
auxiliary ship) and the Handan (a Type 54A
frigate) though it does not mention what
ships or aircraft from Pakistan took part.
It points out that the exercise was aimed at
promoting maritime security and stability
in the region with a focus on the CPEC.
This raises the question, will Pakistan and
China provide security at this port jointly?
The Pakistani Navy provides security in its
territorial waters, while China manages the
port. It is unclear what role Pakistan has
in the security of it; and China has a lot to
gain by expanding its role there. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Though the two navies have held joint exercises three times
before, the fourth one, which
includes harbour and sea
phases, is significant
because it is aimed
at promoting
maritime
security and
stability in the
region with
focus on the
China-Pakistan
Economic
Corridor
(CPEC)…”

KI
PA

Gwadar
Port

ST

AN

CHINA

INDIA

Source: “CPEC’s concept of ‘one corridor with multiple passages’ realized: Chinese envoy,”
Xinhua, 14 November 2016. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-11/14/c_135826305.
htm
Chinese Ambassador to Pakistan Sun Weidong said here [in China] Sunday that the concept
of “one corridor with multiple passages” under the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor
(CPEC) has been realized as the first bilateral joint trade convoy reached Gwadar port from
China’s Kashgar…with the loading of the last container onto the COSCO Wellington cargo
vessel, Gwadar port also marked its first export of a large number of containers to overseas
destinations, showing that the port has restored the designed handling capacity…
Source: Hasan, Shazia. “Navies of Pakistan, China begin their fourth joint exercise,” Dawn,
18 November 2016. http://www.dawn.com/news/1297067/navies-of-pakistan-china-begintheir-fourth-joint-exercise

Navies of Pakistan, China begin their fourth joint exercise
The Pakistan Navy (PN) and the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Navy of China began their
fourth joint exercise on Thursday. The exercise will continue till Nov 21. Though the two
navies have held joint exercises three times before, the fourth one, which includes harbour
and sea phases, is significant because it is aimed at promoting maritime security and stability
in the region with focus on the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC)…
Commodore Mirza Foad Amin Baig, Commander 18th Destroyer Squadron, told the media
that… the drill was aimed at enhancing security in the strategic region which included port
areas and the sea where ships would sail out… For taking part in the exercise Chinese naval
ships Changxingdao and Handan had reached Karachi on Wednesday…”The sea phase of
the exercise afterwards will be conducted in the open sea. It will cover a wide spectrum of
maritime and naval operations involving ships, helicopters, maritime patrol aircraft, joint
boarding operations by special forces, air defence exercises, communication drills and
several joint manoeuvres by the ships of both navies, “ he added…
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

53

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

The Russian-Armenian Joint Military Force
OE Watch Commentary: In 2016, Armenia’s
security cooperation with Russia grew significantly
with the signing of a joint air defense agreement
and Armenia’s acquisition of a variant of the
Russian Iskander missile system. On 30 November,
the two countries also agreed to create a joint
defense force. The accompanying excerpted articles
from Russian, Armenian and Azeri sources report
on this development and the impact it could have on
security in the Caucasus.
The articles from Russian Kommersant and
Armenian Hayots Ashkhar provide a general
overview of the agreement, including the units
that will make up the defense force. They note that
the force will include the 102nd Russian Military
Base in Gyumri and Armenia’s 4th Army (Group)
based in the Vayots Dzor Province. The Armenian
article also states that the joint force will receive
additional weapons and that the country’s border
with Azerbaijan’s Nakhichevan exclave (opposite
Vayots Dzor) will be closed.
The article from Azerbaijani Haqqin shows
Azerbaijan’s strong reaction to this, especially
over what this could mean for Nagorno-Karabakh.
The article blames Russia for the agreement
and criticizes Armenia for its internal issues.
Particularly worth noting is a statement about
Russia’s readiness to combat any destabilization
effort in Armenia. The joint force agreement
stipulates that Russia would defend Armenia
against an external threat and would take
operational command during any incident.
The joint force agreement might help Armenia
against external threats and impact Azerbaijan via
Nagorno-Karabakh. However, the Haqqin article
also points out destabilizing incidents within
Armenia, predicting that a revolution will soon
take place in Armenia. This is most likely based
on a large 2015 protest over a rise in the price of
electricity and an incident in July 2016 when over
two dozen armed men took over a police station
and held several hostages.
Ultimately, the agreement on a joint force
represents another step in closer security
cooperation between Russia and Armenia. While
there is a strong negative reaction from Azerbaijan,
so far, the government of Azerbaijan has not taken
any significant action. This may change in 2017,
however. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The Armenian fourth army and the Russian 102nd
military base will be replenished with the most up-to-date
weaponry.”
Source: “Россия и Армения подписали соглашение об объединенной
группировке войск (Russia and Armenia signed an agreement on a united defense
group),” Kommersant, 30 November 2016. http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3157229

Russia and Armenia signed an agreement on a united defense group
The Russian and Armenian Defense Ministers Sergey Shoigu and Vigen Sargsyan
signed an agreement on a united force of the two countries…Sargsyan gave an
assessment of the agreement of the force…He called it an international agreement
of a legal basis for the participation of the Gyumri military base in the sphere of
defense…In June Armenia approved an agreement with Russia on a united air
defense system in the Caucasus…
Source: “Hay-Rrusakan Miats’yal Khmbavorumy: P’vokhum e uzheri yndhanur
hashvekshirry (The Russian-Armenian joint military group: Changes the overall
balance of forces),” Hayots Ashkhar, 1 December 2016. http://www.armworld.am/
detail.php?paperid=5451&pageid=165283&lang=
…The Armenian fourth army and the Russian 102nd military base will be
replenished with the most up-to-date weaponry, which is already on its way to our
country. It means that the Armenian-Turkish border line spreading from Gyumri to
Vayots Dzor (Province) and the Armenia-Naxcivan border line will be locked and
will be opened only from the north in case of need…
Source: “Почему Путин отправляет танки в Армению (Why Putin is sending
tanks to Armenia),” Haqqin, 30 November 2016. http://haqqin.az/news/86226
…A number of pro-government actors and a majority of political analysts,
independent and opposition, have all agreed that the military alliance is a clear
threat to Azerbaijan…the creation of a joint Russian-Armenian military force is
a rejection of the peace settlement of the Karabakh problem…Many interpret the
Kremlin’s actions as a blatant support for the aggressor, especially since it was
preceeded by an agreement on a united air defense system of Armenia and Russia…
Moscow’s position is established in a statement by the Deputy Defense Minister
Anatoly Antonov, who considers Armenia as a key partner in the South Caucasus.
The sides have been successfully cooperating in bilateral means and through
international organizations, particularly the CSTO [Collective Security Treaty
Organization] …
The foundation of the Russian group in the Caucasus is the 102nd Russian military
base located in Gyumri, 126 kilometers north of Yerevan…[It] is part of the united
air defense system of the CIS [Commonwealth of Independent States] countries,
and it has anti-aircraft missile system S-300V and MiG-29…the creation of the
joint force is a very thin hint of the Kremlin’s preparedness to brutally suppress any
attempt of destabilization in Armenia…Armenia is the weakest in a series of alliedsatellites of Russia. She is ripe for a revolution…The Kremlin has decided to protect
both Sargsyan and its national interests in the South Caucasus…Armenia is in the
CSTO – the military organization of the Kremlin…Nazarbayev and Lukashenko
are the main opponents of the involvement of the CSTO in internal conflicts. Also,
decisions in this organization are made by consensus…

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

54

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Security Assistance to Central Asia in 2017
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passages from Uzbek
and Tajik sources discuss security
assistance to Uzbekistan and Tajikistan
in the form of weapons, militarytechnical support and help with border
security. The articles shed light on the
security priorities of Uzbekistan and
Tajikistan; in addition to what China
and Russia are willing to provide.
As the first passage from
Uzbekistan-based Anhor discusses,
on 29 November, the Uzbek and
Russian Defense Ministers signed
an agreement for bilateral militarytechnical cooperation in 2017. Security
cooperation between the two countries
had been in place for a number of
years under the late Uzbek President
Islam Karimov; so this represents an
expansion of that cooperation under
the new Uzbek President, Shavkat
Mirziyoyev.
Tajikistan is also expanding
military cooperation with Russia. As
the second accompanying passage
from the Tajikistan-based Asia-Plus
reports, the two countries have agreed
on deliveries of Russian aircraft
to Tajikistan in 2017. These will
include fixed-wing attack aircraft
and helicopters. At the moment,
the Air Force of Tajikistan does not
have combat aircraft (except for the
Russian Mi-24 attack and transport
helicopter) so deliveries of fixed-wing
attack aircraft would be a significant
advancement for Tajikistan. This
cooperation is in addition to Russian
security assistance to Tajikistan’s
Border Guards.
Tajikistan is also receiving
assistance from China on border
security. On 1 October, China and
Tajikistan agreed that China would
fund and construct three command
posts, five border posts with towers
and one training center on the TajikAfghan border, to support the Tajik
Border Guards. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“According to the agreement, China will allocate funds and carry out
construction of three command posts, five border posts with towers and
one training center [for Tajikistan].”

The Russian Mi-24 attack and transport helicopter is the only combat aircraft currently in Tajikistan’s inventory.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Mil_Mi-24#/media/File:Czech_Air_Force_Mi-24_Hind_hovering_over_
Radom-Sadkow_AFB_during_AS_2009.JPG

Source: “Узбекистан и Россия едины в борьбе с терроризмом (Uzbekistan and Russia
are united in the fight against terrorism),” Anhor, 30 November 2016. http://anhor.uz/news/
uzbekistan-i-rossiya-edini-v-borybe-s-terrorizmom
“The situation at the border of Uzbekistan is alarming and difficult and forces a rethinking
of the importance of cooperation with the CSTO (Collective Security Treaty Organization) and
the SCO (Shanghai Cooperation Organization) for maintaining security in the region. This was
said by Russian Defense Minister, Sergey Shoigu, at discussions with the Defense Minister of
Uzbekistan, Colonel-General Qabul Berdiyev…The Russian Defense Minister called for closer
work in security in Afghanistan as part of the Tashkent Pact and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization…After the completion of the negotiations the Ministers of Defense of Russia and
Uzbekistan signed an agreement on the development of military-technical cooperation and a plan
of bilateral cooperation between defense ministries for 2017…
Source: “Таджикистан получит от России первые боевые самолеты в 2017 году (Tajikistan
will receive the first combat aircraft from Russia in 2017),” Asia-Plus, 30 November 2016. http://
news.tj/ru/news/tajikistan/security/20161130/tadzhikistan-poluchit-ot-rossii-pervie-boeviesamoleti-v-2017-godu
In 2017 Russia will start delivering a large number of aircraft to Tajikistan, including fixed-wing
and helicopters, said Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu with Tajikistan Defense Minister
Lieutenant-General Sherali Mirzo…The ministers signed a plan of cooperation for 2017…At the
moment, the Air Force of Tajikistan does not have combat aircraft…four Mi-24 and 11 Mi-8/Mi17TM helicopters are serviceable.
Source: Yuldashev, Avaz. “Китай построит на таджикско-афганской границе 10 погранзастав
(China is constructing 10 border posts on the Tajik-Afghan border),” Asia-Plus, 14 November
2016. http://news.tj/ru/news/tajikistan/security/20161114/kitai-postroit-na-tadzhiksko-afganskoigranitse-14-obektov
…“The agreement of the construction of border posts was signed in Dushanbe on 1 October.
According to the agreement, China will allocate funds and carry out construction of three
command posts, five border posts with towers and one training center [on the Tajik-Afghan
border],” – said a source in the lower house of Tajikistan’s Parliament…the Chinese pledged
to bring their own engineers for the construction…At the beginning of this year China started
construction on the “Gulhan” border post in Shurobad (District) and completed it in six
months…
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

55

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Rohingya Refugees in India Raise
Regional Terrorism Concerns
OE Watch Commentary: In recent months, hundreds of thousands
of Rohingyas from Myanmar have fled to Bangladesh to escape the
operations of the Myanmarese army and civilian militias against their
communities. While this has received some international attention, the
Rohingyas that have fled to India have not. However, India has also
begun to feel the impact of the exodus of Rohingyas from Myanmar.
As the excerpted article from the Hindustan Times discusses, Rohingya
refugees are increasing in number as far as Jammu and Kashmir in India’s
far northwest and, according to the passage, are viewed as “a ticking
timebomb” by security officials. The passage highlights the security
concerns of Indian security officials while the local (mostly Hindu)
population is concerned about the demographic changes that may result
from more Rohingya refugees in Jammu.
The article discusses that about 13,400 Rohingya migrants are living
in camps in Jammu. However, security forces see this population as “a
potential threat in the militancy-hit state close to a hostile neighbour.” The
piece notes that the insecurity grew after one of two foreign militants killed
in a shootout in south Kashmir last October turned out to be a native of
Myanmar. It was then that Indian security forces began to see Rohingyas
as a potential recruitment source for Kashmiri militants, especially those
Rohingyas who have found refuge in Jammu. Rohingyas are an almost
unanimously Muslim ethnic group and could, according to this view, be
lured into fighting with Islamist Kashmiri militants seeking separation
from India. Moreover, given the Rohingyas’ poor economic situation they
could be especially prone to militancy as an alternative to struggling to
make wages in an already poor part of India.
The concern about the Rohingyas extends to demographics. Some in
the Hindu majority in Jammu fear Muslims in the state government have
sponsored the estimated 5,000-15,000 Rohingya refugees to migrate from
Myanmar to Jammu in the last few years to increase the Muslim population
of the State. They point to other regions, such as Assam or West Bengal,
where a growing Muslim demographic has coincided with increased
inter-communal fighting, and suggest that Jammu will similarly see intercommunal fighting. Thus far, Jammu—unlike its neighbor Kashmir—has
remained relatively peaceful. The leader of the Hindu nationalist party in
Jammu has called for the Rohingyas to be thrown out of the state.1
On a broader scale, the Rohingya refugee crisis is also affecting the
nations of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), such as
Thailand and Malaysia, which are also receiving thousands of Rohingyas
fleeing Myanmar by land or sea. ASEAN’s former secretary-general,
Thailand’s Surin Pitsuwan, has suggested that the stories of the repression
of Rohingyas in Myanmar are inspiring jihadists throughout the region.
Indonesian Islamists, for example, have been arrested while planning to
bomb the Myanmar embassy and Buddhist temples in Jakarta in retaliation
for Myanmar’s treatment of the Rohingya.
The Rohingya refugee situation in South and Southeast Asia, like the
Syrian refugee situation in Europe, is quickly becoming more than just a
humanitarian issue. It is both a security challenge for the region’s security
officials and a potentially explosive demographic-cultural challenge for
local populations. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
1.

“Rohingya refugees a security threat in Jammu and Kashmir: Vishva Hindu Parishad,”
Daily News and Analysis, 5 December 2016. http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-rohingya-refugees-a-security-threat-in-jammu-and-kashmir-vhp-2279874

Map showing Myanmar, Bangladesh and India (especially Jammu and
Kashmir in northwest India).
Source: http://www.worldhindunews.com/2016/05/04/53458/ancient-hindutemple-reopens-after-27-years-in-kashmir/

Source: “Persecuted in Myanmar, Rohingya Muslims find
new home in Jammu,” Hindustan Times, 4 December 2016.
http://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/persecuted-inmyanmar-rohingya-muslims-find-new-home-in-jammu/storyNOv2VcEw2PyNW4Y28E1w7M.html
The Rohingyas, a stateless ethnic group loathed by many of
Myanmar’s Buddhist majority, were forced to leave their homes
since a bloody crackdown by the army in their home state of
Rakhine. Many came to India, with nothing but the clothes they
were wearing and with horrifying stories of rape, torture and
murder. Several Rohingya families — the majority with United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) cards and
some without papers — have found Jammu a safe haven.
Fellow migrant Maulana Shafiq, 37, runs a madarsa, or
Islamic school, for Rohingya children in Narwal Bala, where
a sizeable number of these stateless people live. He said
about 3 million of the 4 million Rohingyas in Myanmar fled
to Bangladesh, India, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia and Thailand
to escape the persecution. Those left behind put up with
inhumane, concentration camp-style restrictions.
Chief minister Mehbooba Mufti told the state assembly this
June that about 13,400 Myanmarese and Bangladeshi migrants
are living in camps in Jammu. However, security forces see this
Rohingya population as a potential threat in the militancy-hit
state close to a hostile neighbour. The insecurity grew after
one of the two foreign militants killed in a shootout in south
Kashmir last October turned out to be a native of Myanmar. A
military official called [the Rohingyas] a ticking time bomb.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

56

CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS

Top

Al-Qaeda Calls on Central Asian Militants
to Return to Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: When the Syrian war erupted in 2011,
Central Asian militants gradually abandoned the Afghanistan theatre
and traveled to Syria. There they set up groups, such as the Uzbek-led
Tawhid wal Jihad Brigade (TJB) and Imam Bukhari Brigade (IBB),
which have been closely aligned with al-Qaeda’s coalition of rebels in
northwestern Syria. The Afghanistan-based predecessor of the TJB
and IBB—the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU)—however,
remained in Afghanistan and Pakistan, pledging allegiance to ISIS
in 2015. In response, the Taliban killed the IMU military leader but
spared its leading mufti (Muslim legal ruler) Abu Zar Azzam. Now
it appears that al-Qaeda has “rehabilitated” him and is using him to
call on jihadists to return to Central Asia. The accompanying passage
from an interview with Abu Zar contains important messages for
militants, which, if effective, could lead to a potential influx of Central
Asian militants from Syria back to Afghanistan.

“Staying away from jihad itself is treason.

[Jihadists] can go to places such as Central
Africa, East and West Turkistan, and Burma,
where there is no treason and jihad can be
waged.”

The Arabic and Uighur-language interview was published on the
website of the Turkistan Islamic Party (TIP). In it, Abu Zar advises
jihadists to leave ISIS and tells them that God will forgive them if
they do. He also explains that Muslims who truly want to establish a
Caliphate would not be as unethical and immoral as ISIS. He also says
that jihad is an obligation and that jihadists can still travel to Central
Asia, Burma or Africa to fight if they avoid Syria.
Abu Zar notably has issued two other videos with IBB, whose
transcripts were republished by al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
(AQAP). Both IBB and TIP have begun urging Central Asian fighters
to use Syria as a training ground and return to Afghanistan. The
IBB has recently also set up a “Khorasan Branch” in Afghanistan
(“Khorasan” is an ancient term for Afghanistan and Central Asia).
The case of Abu Zar is fairly similar to what al-Qaeda is doing in
other regions of the world. With ISIS losing territory in Syria, Iraq
and Libya, al-Qaeda is encouraging ISIS members to abandon ISIS,
join al-Qaeda and accept al-Qaeda’s longer-term Caliphate project.
Therefore, al-Qaeda is engaging in “rehabilitation” programs for
ex-ISIS fighters in Yemen, Algeria and, as the Abu Zar case shows,
in Afghanistan. The rehabilitation of Abu Zar will likely be a sign to
Central Asian militants not only in al-Qaeda allies, such as TJB, IBB
and TIP but also with ISIS in Syria that they are all welcome to return
to Afghanistan and continue their fighting closer to home. Moreover,
with Russian and Syria airstrikes pounding TJB, IBB and TIP in
Aleppo and, to a lesser extent, ISIS in Raqqa, a number of fighters
appear to prefer to leave Syria for Afghanistan sooner rather than later.
Afghanistan’s army is already facing a growing Taliban insurgency,
while international forces are being diverted to other theaters from
Syria to Africa. The potential influx of Central Asians from Syria
back to Afghanistan will test Afghan forces in the coming years.
This is especially the case in Kunduz in northern Afghanistan, which
borders Central Asia and where Central Asian militants can especially
support the Taliban to recruit and operate among Afghanistan’s ethnic
Uzbek population. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

The leader of the Imam Bukhari Brigade in Syria has begun encouraging
fighters to avoid Syria and instead fight in Afghanistan, where the Taliban will
welcome them into its ranks.
Source: http://www.rferl.org/a/uzbekistan-al-qaeda-group-syria-jannatoshliqari/27349840.htmlRadom-Sadkow_AFB_during_AS_2009.JPG

Source: “Conversation With Mufti Abu Zar Azzam, Part
Two,” Islom Awazi, 4 November 2016. https://www.blogger.
com/blogin.g?blogspotURL=http://islam-awazi.blogspot.
com/2016/11/blog-post.html (the link has been removed)
If [jihadists] emigrated [to Syria] planning to wage jihad to
liberate and defend Muslims they should abandon Daesh’s ranks,
and they should not treat Muslims as unbelievers or consider
Muslims’ blood and money permissible. They should follow the
teachings of true respected senior jihadi religious scholars.
True Muslims who want to establish a Caliphate cannot be so
unethical and immoral [like Daesh]. God will forgive your past
sins and grant you victory and glory. If they want to wage jihad,
there are uncorrupted groups with the right ideology and they
can come and join them. Allegiance given to ISIL is not legitimate
according to Islamic law. Their ideology is wrong, their way is
wrong, and their actions are wrong, therefore, they must leave
[Daesh’s] ranks and put their efforts toward liberating the
Muslims from the oppression of infidels. Staying away from jihad
itself is treason. People can still go to places such as Central
Africa, East and West Turkistan, and Burma, where there is no
treason and jihad can be waged.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Efforts to Counter Mini-UAV Threat
OE Watch Commentary: Most
Russian military theorists assess that
the future of modern warfare will
increasingly involve the use of UAVs
and other types of unmanned vehicles.
In order to combat this threat, the
Russians are pursuing several different
lines of effort. For large UAVs (Global
Hawk, etc.), antiaircraft missiles are
envisaged, but not so for smaller
UAV systems. The accompanying
articles discuss Russian efforts to field
electronic warfare systems to disrupt the
operation of mini-UAVs, a threat that
Russia is very concerned about.
As the passages discuss, Russia
has developed a system called the
“Repellent,” which will independently
detect and neutralize reconnaissance
drones by jamming their command and
control channels. It will also disable
their command and control stations by
leaving them without navigation and
telemetry. Thus, as the second passage
notes, the system will effectively turn
mini-UAVs into “a useless piece of
inert iron and plastic.” Although these
mini-UAVs may not function as weapon
platforms, they can provide targeting
data to more lethal systems. And, since
these mini-UAVs are difficult to detect
and destroy (due to their size), electronic
warfare appears to be the best option for
disabling these systems, by interfering
with their command and control
systems. These counter UAV assets are
not small man-portable systems, but
instead are vehicle mounted, on large
three axle trucks.
Major General Leonov, Air Defense
Chief of the Russian Ground Forces has
stated that electronic warfare assets are
better suited for the task of defeating
UAVs; as opposed to air defense assets.
However, Russia has continued to
develop and field missile-gun systems
such as the 2K22M/M1 Tungusta (SA19 Grison) and the 96K6 Pantsir-S1
(SA-22 Greyhound). This may be due
Leonov’s belief that it is unwise to use
expensive missiles to destroy relatively
cheap UAVs, such as a Predator UAV.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The ‘Repellent’ system...
will independently
detect and neutralize
reconnaissance drones by
jamming their command
and control channels...”

Major General Alexander
Leonov, Air Defense Chief of
the Russian Ground Forces.
Source: http://mil.ru/files/
files/pvo100/images/
c0903ea7-180a-47c0-8426bb9eaea1818f__ruksostav-9-f.
jpg

Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “Mobile Radio Countermeasures System Will Open Recon Drone
Hunting Season,” Izvestiya Online, 29 December 2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/653954

Mobile Radio Countermeasures System Will Open Recon Drone Hunting
Season
The Russian army will be acquiring a unique mobile system that destroys or jams miniaturized
unmanned air vehicles no larger than a few dozen centimeters and weighing just a few
kilograms. The “Repellent” system, which has been developed by the Electronic Warfare
Scientific and Technical Center, will independently detect and neutralize reconnaissance
drones by jamming their command and control channels with powerful barrage or directional
jamming, as well as disabling their command and control stations by leaving them without
navigation and telemetry. In the process the unique electronic warfare system provides cover
not just for fixed-site installations (military bases, airfields, military equipment parks) but also
for troops on the battlefield.
Thanks to its unique ultrasensitive electronic reconnaissance station Repellent can detect
miniature air targets from their command and control signals at a distance in excess of 35
kilometers. For close-in operation the system is equipped with an ultrapowerful optical system
capable of examining miniature drones day and night in bad weather. Repellent is a fairly large
article weighing more than 20 tons…
“Work on the system has now come to an end. It has undergone the full cycle of mandatory
tests, including under Defense Ministry auspices, and has fully corroborated the characteristics
incorporated at the development stage,” Izvestiya has been told by Aleksandr Sarkisyan,
general director of the Electronic Warfare Scientific and Technical Center. “The issue of the
Repellent’s entry into service is under consideration. Subsequently we are planning to build a
portable knock-down version of the system adapted to be carried in pieces by several people
and suitable for rapid deployment in places where large numbers of people congregate.”…
The system is based on a MAZ-6317 three-axle truck on which a mobile command and control
station and a long telescopic mast are mounted. The heart of the system — the electronic
reconnaissance and jamming station along with a 360-degree panoramic surveillance camera
— is mounted in the upper section of the mast…

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian Efforts to Counter Mini-UAV Threat
Source: Dmitriy Grigoryev, “Effective System for Combating Swarms of Strike Drones Developed in Russia,” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 29
October 2016. https://rg.ru/2016/10/29/v-rossii-sozdali-effektivnuiu-sistemu-borby-so-staiami-udarnyh-dronov.html

Effective System for Combating Swarms of Strike Drones Developed in Russia
An effective weapon against swarms of mini strike drones capable of disabling an air defense system has been developed in Russia. TASS
has been informed of this by a representative of the United Instrument Manufacturing Corporation (UIMC, which is part of the Rostekh State
Corporation).
“To combat massed raids by robotic systems, a weapon is needed that will act on the drones on an intrinsically new level. And such a
weapon has already been developed in Russia; it does not destroy the drones physically or jam them, but reliably disables their built-in radio
electronic systems, turning the drone into a useless piece of inert iron and plastic,” the agency’s interlocutor said.
The source clarified that ordinary air defense systems and electronic warfare complexes are powerless against such “robotic aerial
predators,” but the intrinsically new weapon developed by Russian specialists will simply not allow the swarm of robots to reach its place of
destination…As Rossiyskaya Gazeta has already reported, in addition to a weapon against robot swarms, Russia is also developing a stateof-the-art, custom-built electronic warfare system, the Shipovnik AERO, which will be able not only to hack the built-in computers of enemy
drones, but also to take the flying vehicles under full control.
In the words of the specialists of the UIMC, where the unique electronic warfare system is being developed, the hacking of the built-in
computer of a UAV of a known model by the Shipovnik takes one second. And if the drone’s model is unknown, it passes into the electronic
warfare system’s control within a few minutes.

Institutional Army Adaptations for Changing Force Structure
OE Watch Commentary: The “New Look” or “Serdyukov” reforms conducted
from 2008-2012 have been described in Russia as the greatest Russian military
reforms in the last 100 years.
The Russian Federation is now making some more changes to its force structure,
some of which entail reintroducing some units that were previously cut. These
changes are requiring the institutional army to make some adaptations as well.
The accompanying passages from Izvestiya discuss these changes and adaptations.
With the “New Look” reforms, the regimental/divisional structure used in the
imperial and Soviet eras was abandoned in favor of smaller, more mobile brigades.
A related, and quiet controversial reform, was the abolishment of the “skeleton
system.” This system involved partially manned maneuver divisions with small
cadres of officers and warrant officers who maintained the division’s equipment,
while waiting for mass mobilization. The transition to units of permanent
readiness was controversial because it also involved cutting the cadre positions
that maintained the skeleton units. As the first passage discusses, the Russian
Armed Forces cut the number of officer billets from 335,000 to 150,000. Before
the reform, many of the 335,000 positions were unfilled, but after the reform
there were more officers in the ranks than positions to fill. The piece notes that
many officers were discharged from active service, or were forced to serve in
NCO positions. (In the Russian system, pay and benefits are based upon rank and
the position served, with the latter being weighed more heavily in compensation
calculations.)
The Russian Federation has recently started reintroducing a few divisions
back into the force structure, and has even established a Tank Army. These
changes, which require substantially more personnel, are evidently requiring
the institutional army to make some adaptations. As explained in the second
accompanying Izvestiya article, The Moscow Higher Military Command School
and the Kazan Higher Military Command School will now train more motorized
rifle and tank platoon (respectively) to man Russia’s changing force structure. End
OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“…According to military officials,
staffing of the Armed Forces personnel
stands at 93 percent, or 930,000. Of
these, 384,000 are soldiers and sergeants
on contract, 270,000 are conscripts, and
225,000 are officers.”
Source: Dmitry Litovkin, “Troops Will No Longer
Have Officer-Sergeants,” Izvestiya Online, 29
December 2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/654626

Troops Will No Longer Have OfficerSergeants
The Defense Ministry has finally got rid of all the
so-called officer-sergeants — officers appointed to
the posts of sergeant…In the course of the military
reform of 2008-12, the former leadership of the
military department adopted a decision to massively
reduce officer positions. In one year (2009 through
2010), their number decreased from 335,000 to
150,000. As a result, some junior officers, mostly
graduates of military academies, were invited to
either take a discharge into the reserve or to occupy
vacant sergeant positions —squad leaders, deputy
platoon leaders, and combat vehicle commanders.
There were unique instances when officers became
ordinary riflemen or machine gun operators. The
ranks warrant officer ranks were also
(continued)
abolished.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Institutional Army Adaptations for
Changing Force Structure
At the peak of Anatoliy Serdyukov’s reforms there were about 10,000
people with the status of “officer-sergeants.” With the change of leadership
of the Ministry of Defense their number has steadily decreased, and now
the Ministry of Defense has to reassign less than 1,000 servicemen from
the sergeant and master sergeant posts. “As of now the situation is fully
stabilized,” Izvestiya was told by Deputy Defense Minister Nikolay Pankov.
“The remaining officers will be reassigned before the end of the year. There
are plans for building the armed forces and, linked to this, the staffing of
officer positions. This guarantees that each graduate of a military academy
will be appointed to a position appropriate to his rank and skills.”
…According to military officials, staffing of the Armed Forces personnel
stands at 93 percent, or 930,000. Of these, 384,000 are soldiers and
sergeants on contract, 270,000 are conscripts, and 225,000 are officers.
There is a shortage of at least 50,000 people. This figure includes soldiers
and sergeants on contract, the number of which in 2017 should be 425,000.

“…most important is that a need
for trained command cadres arose
sharply for the Defense Ministry
with the beginning of activation
of tank armies and motorized rifle
divisions in the Armed Forces
structure this year.”
— Viktor Murakhovskiy,
editor-in-chief of the
journal “Homeland
Arsenal”

Kazan Higher Military Command School emblem.
Source: http://www.vedomstva-uniforma.ru/mo/mo_narznaki.html

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “Defense Ministry Required More Tank and Infantry
Commanders,” Izvestiya Online, 21 December 2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/653222

Defense Ministry Required More Tank and Infantry Commanders
The military department will increase graduation of officers who are tank and
motorized rifle platoon leaders. For this the status of independent higher military
educational institution was returned to two of the oldest military schools — Moscow
Higher Military Command School and the Kazan Higher Military Command School.
The decision will permit training 15-20 percent more young lieutenants and making
prompt changes to academic disciplines involving mastery of the newest Armata,
Kurganets, and Bumerang fighting vehicles…Previously cut positions of instructors,
including for the humanities and technical disciplines, as well as new scientific
subunits will appear in the vuz’s…
According to Viktor Murakhovskiy, editor-in-chief of the journal “Homeland
Arsenal”, veteran of the tank troops and Kazan graduate, there are two important
points in the decision that was made. The first is that in the new status commandants
of the academies will not have to coordinate questions of organization of the
academic process and fulfillment of academic programs with the commandant of the
Ground Forces Academy. The second involves the appearance of large new units —
tank armies and motorized rifle divisions — in the Army structure.
“The academies have specific training programs and possibility of a flexible
approach to this process,” Murakhovskiy told Izvestiya. “The schools not only train
cadets who are future motorized rifle and tank platoon leaders, but also conduct
additional training of [enlisted] specialists… They conduct training in officer
advanced training courses, organize of training conferences, and train civilian
officials in wartime command and control. This is why they need to organize the
training process independently. But most important is that a need for trained
command cadres arose sharply for the Defense Ministry with the beginning of
activation of tank armies and motorized rifle divisions in the Armed Forces structure
this year.”

Viktor Murakhovskiy, editor-in-chief of the journal
“Homeland Arsenal”.
Source: http://radiovesti.ru/pics/b/279/31.jpg

Since 1 December 2016 1st Guards Tank Army was newly activated, consisting of
Kantemirovka Tank and Taman Motorized Rifle divisions in the Western, Central,
and Southern military districts. Two motorized rifle divisions appeared with in
Belgorodsk, Voronezh and Smolensk oblasts [provinces]. The 90th Vitebsk-Novgorod
Tank Division was reconstituted in the Southern Urals…
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Increasing the Punch and Reach of the T-14 Armata
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying articles
concerning the T-14 tank and its associated Armata
chassis shed light on the Russian view of the future of
armored warfare. The T-14/Armata system incorporates
many new technologies, but the most interesting is the
concept of using one chassis for over two dozen different
vehicles, including a tank. This one-chassis-fits-all
approach likely requires that the T-14 (47 tons) weigh
less than an independently developed system, but the
cost and logistics savings appear to trump this concern.
The Russians consider the T-14 to be a “medium tank,” a
lighter class than such tanks as the M1A2 Abrams.
The Svobodnaya Pressa article discusses the 125mm
and 152mm gun options that may be mounted on the
T-14. If a 152mm canon is implemented, Russia would
field the largest caliber tank cannon ever produced.
The idea of such a large caliber tank cannon may seem
odd to the West, but not so much so for the Russians.
Russian artillery units are often used in direct fire
roles, especially in urban environments, so the Russians
already have experience with the use of 152mm shells in
this manner. In addition, Russia has long used 125mm
automatic loaders in its tanks, and due to the 2S35
Koalitsiya-SV self-propelled howitzer, Russia now has
experience with a 152mm automatic loading system.
The use of 152mm gun on a tank has been widely
discussed in Russia, and provides several advantages. A
152mm gun can fire a heavier projectile that has greater
range, and is more powerful in terms of explosive and
kinetic energy. It also allows the firing of a larger barrel
launched antitank guided missile (ATGM), which most
modern Russian tanks and infantry fighting vehicles
(BMPs) can fire.
The passage from Izvestiya discusses Russian plans
to affix a tethered UAV to the T-14 tank. Due to the
T-14’s main gun having a range of up to 8km, but only
a sighting capability of up to 5km, the advantages of
the T-14 are not fully realized. A tethered drone would
provide a field of view of up to 10km, and would allow
the tank to sit in covered positions while surveying
the battlefield. This increased ISR capability would
especially be useful if the 152mm canon is implemented
on the Armata, as it would allow the full use of the
canon’s reach. This line of development is in sync with
other Russian developments to provide improved and
decentralized C4ISR assets. Although the article does
not mention it, these UAVs are also likely intended to be
networked together to augment the “netcentric” warfare
concept that the Russian Armed Forces are pursuing.
In sum, Russia appears to be serious about pursuing
more powerful cannons for its tanks and supporting
ISR assets to take fullest advantage of these increased
capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“...equipping armored vehicles with external surveillance
systems, which are capable of surveying the terrain albeit
at a distance of 10 kilometers, provides the Armata with an
indisputable advantage over any existing enemies.”

The T-14 Armata.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:9may2015Moscow-01.jpg

Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “The Armata Penetrates One and a Half Meters of
Armor,” Svobodnaya Pressa Online, 24 November 2016. http://svpressa.ru/
war21/article/161227/
Uralvagonzavod General Director Oleg Siyenko reported to Interfax that tests
of the weapons of the Armata family of armored vehicles will begin in the near
future…Two variants of the tank’s main gun, which is installed in the combat
module, are stipulated. The module is located in the unmanned turret, and the
entire crew is accommodated in an armored capsule, which is installed in the
armored vehicle’s hull. This substantially increases both the tank’s survivability
and the protection of the crew.
The first configuration variant – is the use of a 125-millimeter gun. As soon as
it became known that Uralvagonzavod is developing a new tank, the experts
concurred that it will be armed with the latest modification of the 2A46M-5
gun…the 2A82. They somewhat strengthened the gun for the Armata, having
increased the length of the tube by one meter. The new modification obtained
the designation 2A82-1A.
The second variant of the T-14 tank’s armament assumes the use of a 152 mm
gun as the main weapon. Actually, this is already not a tank but a howitzer
caliber. The Koalitsiya-SV self-propelled artillery mounts are equipped with
precisely those guns. Incidentally, right now they are using the T-90 as the
platform but they will transfer the howitzer to the Armata in the foreseeable
future…Projectiles of the full artillery spectrum can be part of the basic load
of ammunition: shaped-charge fragmentation, high-explosive fragmentation,
thermobaric, the Krasnopol family of correctible projectiles, which were
developed for their employment in a artillery systems. There is also a capability
to fire the antitank guided missiles, which are used in the Kornet antitank
missile complex.

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Increasing the Punch and
Reach of the T-14 Armata
Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “They Will Equip the
Armata with a Reconnaissance Drone,” Izvestiya
Online, 18 November 2016. http://izvestia.ru/
news/645502
They will equip the combat vehicles of the
Armata family with reconnaissance unmanned
aerial vehicles, which will scan the battlefield
for tens of kilometers around, while helping to
ascertain the situation and guide weapons and
missiles to the target. In the process, the drone,
which was developed by Moscow Aviation
Institute (MAI), is capable of being in the air
for an unlimited time because it does not have
onboard batteries and receives electricity from
the combat vehicle via a flexible cable. The
“Pterodactyl” is a light unmanned aerial vehicle
with a skin made of composite materials, which
will be connected to the combat vehicle using a
flexible cable. The UAV will be able to circle in
a radius of 50-100 meters around the combat
vehicle and climb to an altitude of several dozen
meters. The vehicle will be equipped with radar
and a thermal imaging device…
In Zheltonozhko’s opinion, equipping armored
vehicles with external surveillance systems, which
are capable of surveying the terrain albeit at a
distance of 10 kilometers, provides the Armata
with an indisputable advantage over any existing
enemies.

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of
the Lone Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of lowlevel guerrilla combat as told by the survivors. They cover
fighting from the cities of Grozny and Argun to the villages
of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and finally the hills, river valleys
and mountains that make up so much of Chechnya. Dodge
Billingsley, the primary author was embedded with Chechen
guerrilla forces after the first war, so he knows the country,
the culture, the key actors and the conflict. Yet, as a Western
outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and objectivity.
Fangs of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is
becoming modern and future war.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/E-Pubs/Epubs/Fangs-of-the-Lone-Wolf.pdf

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Urban Warfare and Big Armor
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying article from Svobodnaya
Pressa discusses Russian thoughts on
urban warfare from recent experiences
in Ukraine and Syria. In general, current
Russian thinking, along with many other
countries, is that urban warfare will become
increasingly common. Where Russia differs
with the West on this issue is the role of
big armor (tanks) in these conflicts. Unlike
the West, Russia believes tanks are key for
the conduct of urban warfare. Instead of
relying on infantry and special operations
forces to conduct urban operations (Western
approach), Russia is pursuing a combined
arms approach where tanks are featured
prominently. In order to support this
endeavor, the Russian Armed Forces are
making modifications to equipment and
tactics so a combined arms approach can
thrive in an urban environment. These
modifications include developing: smaller
combined arms units (company tactical
groups); tactics and equipment for the use of
tube and MLRS artillery in direct fire roles;
thermobarics, better C4ISR capabilities,
and, as the article discusses, major tank
modifications.
The accompanying article from
Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses one such novel
modification: the possibility of fielding a
Tank Support Combat Vehicle (BMPT) on an
Armata chassis. Although the BMPT does
have uses on the conventional battlefield, the
concept for the vehicle was developed from
Russia’s debacle in the First Chechen War,
where armored columns were destroyed on
streets of Grozny by personnel in buildings
with antitank weapons. The BMPTs relation
to urban warfare is that the Russians do
see the tank as having an important role
in urban warfare, but these tanks will
need some capability to destroy personnel
armed with increasingly lethal hand-held
anti-tank guided missiles (ATGM), which
are becoming more common (in urban and
conventional environments). The BMPT,
like several other Russian combat vehicles,
has a turret that automatically slews in the
direction of lasers and other devices used to
site ATGMs. The BMPTs are intended to
support accompanying tanks by destroying
ATGMs and their operators before they can
fire. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Tank Support Combat Vehicle.
Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin (CC-BY-SA-3.0), via Wikimedia Commons
https://www.russellphillipsbooks.co.uk/bmpt-2-terminator-tank-support-fighting-vehicle/

Source: Sergey Ishchenko, “Assault Tanks Will Support the Armata,” Svobodnaya Pressa
Online, 15 December 2016. http://svpressa.ru/war21/article/162629/
Besides everything else, the war in Syria is also an invaluable laboratory for military
personnel and weapon designers, which permits them to arrive at important conclusions for
the future. Therefore, the course of the battles in the Middle East are being intently analyzes
throughout the world. The study of the experience of the street engagements in Syria (and
also previously – in Chechnya) has rekindled in our country the idea of the development of an
assault tank…
In the words of Uralvagonzavod Deputy Director for Special Equipment Vyacheslav
Khalitov, that important observation became the impetus for it: “If you carefully analyze
the latest military conflicts in the world, it will turn out that combat operations are being
conducted primarily in the cities, no one in our days fights on open terrain because this is
essentially instantaneous destruction.” And what does a tank need in order to successfully
defeat the enemy in a dense urban development? Enhanced protection and increased
firepower. Well, they followed this path in Nizhniy Tagil. As a result, they rolled out a T-72
tank of a very unusual appearance, with a bulldozer bucket in front, which is capable
of helping to negotiate various types of debris and barricades on destroyed streets and,
simultaneously, to increase the defense of the combat vehicle in the frontal projection.
They covered the machinegun turret with side screens so that the tank commander would
be less at risk while firing at windows, doorways and basements, in which enemy grenade
launcher operators could be hidden.
And they had already hung side screens with reactive armor, supplemental armor, and
counter-shaped charge screens on the T-72 assault tank. And they installed the modernized
2A46M 125-millimeter gun, an upgraded automatic loader for firing missiles, and a more
effective fire control system with a Sosna gunner’s multichannel sight.It is thought that these
innovations will help to substantially increase the T-72’s mechanical, by the way, already
outstanding survivability, in a street engagement, which Syrian tank crewmen have already
demonstrated more than once during the course of the just victoriously concluded multimonth battle for Aleppo and in the engagements in the Donbass…

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Urban Warfare and Big Armor
“If you carefully analyze
the latest military conflicts
in the world, it will turn out
that combat operations are
being conducted primarily
in the cities, no one in our
days fights on open terrain
because this is essentially
instantaneous destruction.”
— Uralvagonzavod Deputy
Director for Special Equipment,
Vyacheslav Khalitov

Source: Anton Valagin, “Terminator on Armata Base Will Be Armed with Two Guns,”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 23 November 2016. https://rg.ru/2016/11/23/reg-urfo/terminatorna-baze-armaty-vooruzhat-dvumia-pushkami.html
The Terminator-3 fighting support vehicle on a heavy tracked Armata platform will be
armed with two rapid-fire 57-mm cannon, Defence.ru wrote, citing tank expert Aleksey
Khlopotov. In addition to the pairs of powerful weapons, Terminator will be given advanced
third-generation antitank missiles. The homing antitank guided missile works on the “fire and
forget” principle…
The unmanned combat module with 57-mm cannon was developed in the Nizhniy Novgorod
Burevestnik research Institute. Stabilized in two planes, the gun produces up to 120 rounds
per minute using high-explosive, armor-piercing, and guided projectiles. It has a maximum
range of 12 kilometers. Due to its large elevation angle the gun can also attack air targets.
The concept of the Terminator fire support vehicle involves operations in tank units to
destroy enemy units that threaten tanks. Terminator weapons makes it possible to hit heavy
armored vehicles, infantry fighting vehicles, pillboxes, bunkers and other highly protected
targets while on the move. The Terminators are produced at Uralvagonzavod.

Kremlin Election Influence?
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpts from the Russian president’s year-end
press conference in late December 2016 capture
the essence of the Kremlin’s response regarding
allegations of Russian meddling in the recent
US election. During this widely publicized (and
nearly four-hour long) assembly, President Putin
answered questions from four different reporters
regarding charges that Russia had influenced
the election results. In his first response, Putin
suggested that the losses of the Democratic Party
(President, Congress, Senate) stem not from
Russian meddling but rather from this party’s
lost support among the “broad popular masses”
within America. Putin claimed that since the
Democrats lost “on all fronts… [they are] looking
for scapegoats on whom to lay the blame.”
In his response to a question regarding
accusations of state-sponsored hacking, Putin
disavowed any connection with those who
“breached email accounts of the US Democratic
Party leadership.” The Russian leader pointed out
that the hackers did not “manipulate the data”
but rather “demonstrated how public opinion had
been manipulated within the Democratic Party,
against one candidate rather than the other.”
Putin also stressed that “instead of apologizing
to the voters… they started yelling about who
was behind the attacks.” The third question
regarding possible Russian influence in the
American democratic process
(continued)

“They are losing on all fronts and looking for scapegoats
on whom to lay the blame.”

Source: “Vladimir Putin’s annual news conference,” Kremlin.ru, 23 December 2016.
http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/53573
Vladimir Putin: …The current US Administration and leaders of the Democratic
Party are trying to blame all their failures on outside factors…. We know that not only
did the Democratic Party lose the presidential election, but also the Senate, where
the Republicans have the majority, and Congress, where the Republicans are also in
control. Did we, or I also do that?... It seems to me there is a gap between the elite’s
vision of what is good and bad and that of what in earlier times we would have called
the broad popular masses…. They are losing on all fronts and looking for scapegoats
on whom to lay the blame. I think that this is an affront to their own dignity. It is
important to know how to lose gracefully….
…First, about the interference. I already responded to one of your fellow journalists
from the United States. The defeated party always tries to blame somebody on the
outside. They should be looking for these problems closer to home.
…Everybody keeps forgetting the most important point. For example, some hackers
breached email accounts of the US Democratic Party leadership. Some hackers did
that. But, as the President-elect rightly noted, does anyone know who those hackers
were? Maybe they came from another country, not Russia…. But is this important?
I think the most important thing is the information that the hackers revealed to the
public. Did they compile or manipulate the data? No, they did not. What is the best
proof that the hackers uncovered truthful information? The proof is that the hackers
demonstrated how public opinion had been manipulated within the Democratic Party,
against one candidate rather than the other… Instead of apologizing to the voters and
saying, “Forgive us, our bad, we will never do this again,” they started yelling about
who was behind the attacks. Is that important?
…As for the subject of democracy, yes, there are problems. This is something we
have long been saying, but our American partners always dismissed it. The problem
lies above all in the United States’ archaic electoral system. The two-stage election
(not through direct secret ballot) of ...the electors electing the
(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Kremlin Election Influence?
dealt with Putin’s assertion that “the problem lies above all in the United States’ archaic electoral
system.” Putin suggested that such a system allows “people in particular states keep hold of their
privileges,” and even though Russian authorities have pointed out these weaknesses in the past,
“our American partners always dismissed [these concerns]. Finally, Putin pointed out that the
winning candidate “considered it appropriate to normalize Russian-American relations.”
In the Kremlin’s prominent narrative, the US has attempted to expand its geo-political
influence by sparking democratic revolutions across the globe. President Putin had previously
accused former Secretary of State Clinton with helping to spark large public protests in Moscow
in late 2011, when Putin decided to run for his third term as president. Given this background,
Putin’s comments indicate some satisfaction with not only the outcome of the election, but also
the allegations of Russian meddling. This is because they give him a rare opportunity to criticize
the US election system and suggest that US officials should be looking “closer to home” rather
than blaming Russia for their “problems.” Thus, despite adamant rejection of any Kremlin
meddling in the American election, the allegations afford Russia the chance to suggest that US
democratic officials must now take the same medicine which they prescribe for others. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

Russian MiGs for Serbia
OE Watch Commentary: NATO’s
bombing of Serbian targets in and around
Kosovo in 1999 has become a central theme
in the Kremlin’s current narrative. In their
rendition, the US and NATO not only took
advantage of Russian weakness to punish one
of the Kremlin’s closest traditional allies, but
also unilaterally forced Serbia to relinquish its
control over Kosovo. Russian leaders continue
to hearken back to this perceived humiliation
to strengthen their relationship with the
Serbian government and to justify their more
assertive foreign policy.
The first two accompanying excerpts
describe a recent deal whereby Russia will
provide the Serbian military with advanced
weaponry either gratis or at reduced prices.
According to the first excerpt from a Russian
source, during a meeting in late December
between Serbian Prime Minister Vučić
and Russian Defense Minister Shoigu, the
Serbian government agreed to purchase six
MiG-29 aircraft at a reduced price. The deal
also included 30 T-72S tanks and 30 BRDM2 armored transport carriers at apparently
no cost. There were additional negotiations
regarding the purchase of Russian advanced
air defense systems, but nothing was
finalized. Not surprisingly, this Russian
article makes specific reference to the events
of 1999 as a possible pretext for this weapons
transfer. Having experienced
(continued)

president... And then it is organized in
such a way that some of the states retain
preferences. You would have to ask the
American lawmakers why the system is
as it is. Perhaps it was done deliberately
so as to let people in particular states
keep hold of their privileges. This is the
American people’s own affair, however,
and not our business.
…the newly elected US President
needs the opportunity to put his team
together…. Issues that concern putting
our relations back on track. During
his election campaign, Mr. Trump
said that he considered it appropriate
to normalize Russian-American
relations….

Source: Eugene Krutikov, “Военную авиацию Сербии спасет Россия (Russia will
Save Serbian Military Aviation),” Vzlglyad, 22 December 2016. http://www.vz.ru/
politics/2016/12/22/850787.html
During a brief visit to Moscow, where Prime Minister of Serbia Vučić held talks with
Russian Defense Minister Shoigu, it was decided to transfer to Serbia six earlier models
of MiG-29 aircraft [officials] from the Ministry of Defense reserves …. Belgrade will not
pay for the aircraft themselves, but rather for their repairs and modernization, which will
cost the Serbs about 50 million dollars…. In addition to the MiGs, Russia will give Serbia
30 T-72S tanks and 30 BRDM-2. Vucic emphasized that the supply of such weaponry to
Serbia had not been seen for the past 25-30 years…. They also discussed the possible sale
of modern air defense… specifically about the Buk, Buk-2 and the Tunguska systems….
It’s within a certain context Serbia perceives the possible delivery of Russian air defense
systems, in particular the “Buk”. Air Force and air defense assets [are] now commonly
perceived as a single, integrated complex, and the Serbs, after NATO’s aggression, which
relied mainly on air strikes to defeat the Serbs, understand this more than anyone else in
Europe….
Source: “Briselu smetaju ‘migovi (MiGs Disturb Brussels),” Vecernje Novosti Online, 24
December 2016. http://www.novosti.rs/vesti/naslovna/politika/aktuelno.289.html:641295Briselu-smetaju-migovi
The procurement of six MiG29s will no doubt strengthen the defense of Serbian skies
and somewhat cloud our relations with the EU. Our diplomatic sources from Brussels say
that the EU does not look on kindly on the deal of the century for the Serbian Air force,
concerned that the political line between Serbia and Russia will strengthen on the wings
of the Russian aircraft….
…However, it has been pointed out several times in conclusions from the European
Council that Serbia must harmonize its foreign and security policies with the EU by the
end of the accession process….
…Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic, who is also the foreign minister, says that
Serbia remains committed to pursuing the talks with the EU as well as developing friendly
relations with leading actors on the international stage: “Serbia’s actions are neither a
challenge nor a threat to anyone.”

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Russian MiGs for Serbia
direct “NATO aggression,” the Serbian government “understands
more than anyone else in Europe” the importance of maintaining
robust air defense and air force assets.
The second excerpt comes from a Serbian source, and posits
that “the procurement of six MiG29s will no doubt strengthen the
defense of Serbian skies and somewhat cloud our relations with
the EU.” As an aspirant to join the EU, “Serbia must harmonize its
foreign and security policies with the EU by the end of the accession
process,” yet the leadership in Belgrade maintains that it has a free
hand in “developing friendly relations with leading actors on the
international stage.” Despite claims of military neutrality, Serbia
continues to develop strong military ties to Russia.
The third excerpt, also from a Serbian source, helps to explain
how Serbian neutrality may indicate a closer alliance with Russia.
This article describes a recent Russian initiative called the “B4
plan,” which would create “an alliance of militarily neutral and
sovereign countries that would comprise Serbia, Montenegro,
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Macedonia.” Rather than aspiring to join
NATO, which according to the article, “could spark serious conflicts
in the region,” these countries should form a neutral alliance which
would “safeguard peace in the region.” The high-level Russian
official quoted in this article leaves no doubt as to what is meant
by neutrality- “a strong Serbia, together with Russia, is a powerful
guarantor of security.” Providing advanced weaponry to the Serbian
military and encouraging other Balkan countries to remain outside
of NATO will fortify Russia’s influence in the region. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: N. Ginic and M. Dobromirovic, “Putin Not Abandoning
Serbia, B-H, Montenegro, Macedonia,” Informer, 28 December
2016. http://www.informer.rs/vesti/politika/110567/PUTINSRBIJU-BiH-CRNU-GORU-MAKEDONIJU-Ovo-detalji-ruskogplana-Balkan
Russian President Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin strongly
advocates the formation of a Balkan Four, an alliance of militarily
neutral and sovereign countries that would comprise Serbia,
Montenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Macedonia!
This was confirmed in Belgrade yesterday by Sergey Zheleznyak,
the Russian leader’s closest associate. Zheleznyak, whose official
title is deputy secretary general of Putin’s United Russia Party,
said that Moscow is convinced that only the implementation of the
B4 plan could secure long-term peace and security in the Balkans
and in Europe as a whole.
The Russian official also stressed that the West is forcing
Montenegro to join NATO, which could spark serious conflicts in
the region! According to Zheleznyak, Serbia is the best example of
a country that protects its sovereignty and interests in a consistent
and principled way.
“I salute the efforts for forming a Balkan alliance of militarily
neutral countries, which is of importance for the security of all of
the Balkans and all of Europe. This is the main way to safeguard
peace in the region. We will do all in our power to help Serbia to
preserve its sovereignty. A strong Serbia, together with Russia, is a
powerful guarantor of security….

MiG-29.
Source: Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Nuke Trains and China
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian
leadership continues to strengthen and modernize
its strategic nuclear forces. In early November,
Russia successfully tested a rail-based missile
delivery system. The accompanying passage
from a Russian source discusses this system,
while the excerpt from a Chinese source provides
a Chinese perspective on it.
As the first accompanying passage from the
pro-Kremlin source Gazeta.ru discusses, “the
first pop-up tests of the [new] intercontinental
ballistic missile (MBR) for the advanced
Barguzin railroad combat complex (BZhRK)
were successful,” with flight testing for the
system scheduled to “begin in 2017.” It notes
that the advanced “nuclear train” will restore
the ground triad of the Strategic Missile Troops
(RSVN) of the Soviet era, augmenting the silobased and mobile ground-based intercontinental
ballistic missile systems that are in the
inventory. A similar system was developed
and fielded during the late Soviet period, but
was decommissioned as part of nuclear arms
reductions.
The second excerpt from China Military
Online describes the successful pop-up test
and provides a Chinese view the Kremlin’s
rationale behind the development of this new
rail-based missile delivery system. This article
claims that “reviving the Barguzin BZhRK was
a decision made by President Putin,” to ensure
that Russia “keeps a general equilibrium with
the US in strategic nuclear forces.” This new
system will restore Russia’s triad of land-based
ground strategic missile troops, “namely silo
launch, mobile launch on the road and trainbased launch.” The article goes on to assert that
“the missile train program is also a countermove
in response to America’s global missile defense
system and C-PGS (prompt global strike)
program.” The article concludes by stating that
“the Russian military plans to form five Barguzin
strategic missile regiments, each including
one missile train and six missiles,” and that
such a system will help to “effectively counter
America’s military superiority.”
Today Russia and China share very good
relations, to include a robust level of joint
military cooperation. However, if history is
any indicator, the development of Russia’s new
rail-based missile delivery system will add an
extra element of complexity for Chinese military
planners. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The missile train program ... a countermove in response to
America’s global missile defense system and C-PGS (prompt
global strike) program….”
Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “Ядерные ракеты на запасном пути (Nuclear Missiles
on the Reserve Tracks),” Gazeta.ru, 22 November 2016. https://www.gazeta.ru/
army/2016/11/22/10358843.shtml
The missile launcher for the Barguzin railroad combat complex [BZhRK] has
been tested in Russia. The advanced “nuclear train” will restore the ground triad
of the RSVN [Strategic Missile Troops] of the Soviet era, augmenting the silo-based
and mobile ground-based intercontinental ballistic missile systems that are in the
inventory...
Quoting a defense industry source, Interfaks reported on Tuesday that the first popup [broskovyy] tests of the intercontinental ballistic missile (MBR) for the advanced
Barguzin railroad combat complex (BZhRK) were successful. “The first pop-up tests
were conducted at the Plesetsk Cosmodrome two weeks ago. They were judged fully
successful, which opens the door for beginning of flight design testing,” said the
source, as quoted by the news agency. In his words, the flight design testing of the
ICBM for the Barguzin will most likely begin in 2017….
Source: “Why Does Russia Revive ‘Nuclear Train’ Program?” China Military Online,
5 December 2016. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/view/2016-12/05/content_7392916.
htm
Research and development of the missile-carrying train for Russia’s future Barguzin
“combat railway missile complex” (BZhRK), also referred as the “nuclear train” for
its transportation and launch of strategic nuclear missiles, is in smooth progress,
according to Russian media reports.
The Barguzin complex’s intercontinental ballistic missile had a successful Pop-up
launch test recently, and further flight design testing may begin in 2017…. Why does
Russia revive the BZhRK program, which once posed a serious threat to the US, so
many years after the Cold War? Because it wants to maintain strategic deterrence
against the US.
First of all, Russia is developing new strategic missiles to preserve its national
security and maintain the position as a nuclear power….Therefore, Russia has been
trying hard to keep up the nuclear arsenal it inherits from the Soviet Union despite
its economic fluctuations, and strives to keep a general equilibrium with the US in
strategic nuclear forces… According to Karakayev, reviving the Barguzin BZhRK was
a decision made by President Putin.
Second, reviving the Barguzin program will help Russia ensure the flexible
deployment and launch of its land-based strategic missiles….Karakayev said after the
new-generation missile train is commissioned, Russia’s land-based strategic missile
troops will resume the three launching approaches that were adopted by the former
Soviet Union, namely silo launch, mobile launch on the road and train-based launch,
which will largely expand the troops’ maneuvering scope and enhance its surprise
attack….
…The missile train program is also a countermove in response to America’s global
missile defense system and C-PGS (prompt global strike) program….
The Russian military plans to form five Barguzin strategic missile regiments, each
including one missile train and six missiles. The Russian media held that once
the Barguzin is put into service, it will become another “ace in the hole” that can
significantly enhance the overall strength of the Russian strategic missile troops and
effectively counter America’s military superiority.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

67

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Improved Chemical Weapons Defense
OE Watch Commentary: The ongoing
conflict in Syria has shown that, despite their
prohibition, chemical weapons remain a genuine
threat. The accompanying passages discuss
the Russian military’s assessments regarding
the potential use of such weapons in Syria,
and Russia’s advances in developing defensive
measures against them.
The first excerpt from the Russian news
agency Interfax points out that, “the Russian
military have provided evidence that Syrian
opposition fighters have used chemical weapons
in Aleppo Province.” The article goes on to
suggest that the chemical agents may have
been “produced in an improvised way,” or
possibly “delivered from third countries.” The
piece notes that the Russian Defense Ministry
is working to identify possible channels of
delivery of chemical agents to Syria.
Regardless of the source of these weapons, the
Russian military continues to make advances in
developing defensive measures against Nuclear,
Biological and Chemical (NBC) threats. The
second passage from Izvestiya Online discusses
the development of special gear and equipment
for Russia’s Chemical Defense Troops. The
excerpt describes an “ultra-protected outfit”
which will provide “protection against the
effects of toxic chemical agents, radioactive
dust, and bacteriological weapons,” and is
“intended for repeated re-use.” The Russian
military has assessed that the use of chemical
weapons on the modern battlefield remains
likely and that defense measures are necessary.
End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The Russian Radiation,
Chemical, and Biological
Defense (RKhBZ) troops
...will receive unique personal
gear and equipment that
will provide practically
total protection against the
effects of toxic chemical
agents, radioactive dust, and
bacteriological weapons.”

Russian soldier decontaminating equipment.
Source: mil.ru

Source: “Russia Defense Ministry finds evidence of chemical weapons use in Syria,”
Interfax, 26 November 2016. http://www.interfax.ru/world/538739
The Russian military have provided evidence that Syrian opposition fighters have used
chemical weapons in Aleppo Province…
“The analysis confirmed the presence in the samples of Yperite chemical agent, most
likely produced in an improvised way, which confirms that the fighters have wellestablished facilities for the production of chemical weapons,” the Defense Ministry said.
“It is possible that Yperite and other toxic chemicals were delivered from the third
countries. The Russian Defense Ministry is working to identify possible channels of
delivery of chemical agents to Syria,” the Defense Ministry said….
Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “Войска химзащиты получат новейшую экипировку
(The Chemical Defense Troops Will Receive the Latest Personal Gear and Equipment),”
Izvestiya Online, 21 November 2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/646082
The Russian Radiation, Chemical, and Biological Defense (RKhBZ) troops and “military
MChS” [Ministry for Affairs of Civil Defense, Emergency Situations, and Elimination of
Natural Disasters] regiments (which are being formed for clearing up the consequences
of natural disasters and manmade catastrophes at Defense Ministry facilities) will receive
unique personal gear and equipment that will provide practically total protection against
the effects of toxic chemical agents, radioactive dust, and bacteriological weapons. The
suit, designed by the Kazan Chemical Research Institute (KKhNII), will enable specialists
to remain for hours within a zone of WMD use or manmade catastrophes, and also to
work safely with highly toxic materials….
…A specialist clad in the latest ultra-protected outfit, is able to operate for up to
10 hours in a cloud of gaseous chlorine or ammonia, and to endure the effects of
concentrated sulfuric, hydrochloric, or hydrofluoric acid for up to eight hours. The suit
also allows the wearer to work for up to three hours with heptyl and amyl….
The Kazan Chemical Research Institute’s new development is intended for repeated reuse: Following decontamination — the removal of toxic substances from the protective
personal gear using water or chemical reagents — it can be used again.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

68

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Strengthening Russian-Chinese Military Ties
OE Watch Commentary: As the relationship has
cooled between Russia and the West, the Kremlin
has turned its focus elsewhere. One particular
direction has been toward China, where today, the
two countries share a determination to create a
multi-polar global security order. In late November
2016, Russian Defense Minister Shoygu visited
his counterparts in Beijing, where the two sides
discussed current threats, military trade and joint
training activities. The accompanying passages
from Russian and Chinese sources show that, if
Shoygu’s recent visit to Beijing is any indication, the
bonds between the Russian and Chinese military
continue to grow stronger.
The first excerpt from the government newspaper
Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses Shoygu’s visit
and quotes Shoygu who referred to a “strategic
partnership between the Russian Federation and
the PRC,” and that “Moscow and Beijing are
setting an example of a balanced and responsible
approach to the resolution of topical international
problems.” Military trade remains robust, with the
excerpt claiming that it “has reached the volume of
about $3 billion per annum.” According to Deputy
Defense Minister Anatoliy Antonov, this bilateral
cooperation is not directed against any specific state,
but rather “facilitates the consolidation of peace and
stability on the Eurasian continent and beyond.” The
article concludes by suggesting that the Chinese
defense officials were equally enthusiastic regarding
their closer military cooperation with Russia and
that several events in “the 2017 Army Games will
be held on Chinese territory for the first time.”
The second excerpt is from the official China
Military Online news site and was apparently
published to coincide with Defense Minister
Shoygu’s visit. Not surprisingly, the article reflects
the predominant Kremlin view toward NATO and
events in Europe since the end of the Cold War.
The author repeats the typical Kremlin refrain that
even though “Russia took the western world as its
‘true friend’ and changed its military strategy to
“purely defensive…NATO [has] never relaxed the
containment on Russia” and remains determined
to “weaken Russia.” It goes on to assert that
“NATO has taken a series of targeted measures
to hit Russia’s overall national strength such as
suppressing the oil and gas price and launching
[sic] financial sanction.” Russia’s aggression against
Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine (Crimea) in 2014 are
portrayed as defensive measures against “every time
NATO suppressed it too much.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Moscow and Beijing are setting an example of a
balanced and responsible approach to the resolution of
topical international problems.”

General Shoygu meets Xu Qiliang, deputy chairman of the PRC
Central Military Council, 23 Nov 2016.
Source: www.mil.ru

Source: Ivan Petrov, “Оценили угрозы: Сергей Шойгу провел переговоры
в Пекине (They Assessed Threats: Sergey Shoygu Holds Talks in Beijing),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 24 November 2016. https://rg.ru/2016/11/23/chastarmejskih-igr-2017-projdut-na-territorii-kitaia.html
On Wednesday [23 November], Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu paid an official
visit to the capital of the Chinese People’s Republic [PRC]…. The morning began
with Army General Shoygu’s meeting with Xu Qiliang, deputy chairman of the PRC
Central Military Council….
Shoygu declared “right out of the gate” that the military cooperation between
Moscow and Beijing facilitates the consolidation of peace and stability on the
Eurasian continent and beyond.
In addition, in the Russian minister’s words, the military-technical cooperation
between the two countries expands with every passing year…. in terms of the
volume of the various contracts that are being implemented has reached the volume
of about $3 billion per annum.
The defense minister expressed confidence that today’s talks will serve to further
strengthen the strategic partnership between the Russian Federation and the
PRC. “Moscow and Beijing are setting an example of a balanced and responsible
approach to the resolution of topical international problems,” he noted.
Later, journalists were told about certain topics of the talks between the two
military ministers by Deputy Defense Minister Anatoliy Antonov.… In Antonov’s
words, during the talks Shoygu noted that the close bilateral military cooperation
between Russia and China is not aimed against other states and carries no threat
to them, but facilitates the consolidation of peace and stability on the Eurasian
continent and beyond.
In addition, Sergey Shoygu said that several events of the 2017 Army Games will be
held on Chinese territory for the first time.

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

69

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Strengthening Russian-Chinese Military Ties
Source: Chen Yongyi, “NATO’s Attempt to Weaken Russia a Systematic Project,” China Military Online, 25 November 2016. http://english.
chinamil.com.cn/view/2016-11/25/content_7377446.htm
Since the end of the Cold War, the Warsaw Treaty Organization dissolved immediately, but NATO continued to monitor and contain Russia.
NATO and Russia had their “honeymoon”, when NATO held up high the “carrot” in hopes of softening and subduing the “polar bear”, and
Russia took the western world as its “true friend” and changed its military strategy to “purely defensive” in hopes of being accepted by the
west and striving for rejuvenation.
However, NATO never relaxed the containment on Russia and their conflicts never ceased after the “honeymoon” was over. In light of
NATO’s interests and Russia’s strength, it’s likely that their bittersweet relationship will continue and NATO’s attempt to weaken Russia will
be a long and systematic project….
Economically speaking, NATO has taken a series of targeted measures to hit Russia’s overall national strength such as suppressing the oil
and gas price and launching financial sanction. The U.S. and Europe used the economic crisis to bring down the oil and gas price and kept it
on a low level for a long time….
…At first it had false hopes on NATO, but when NATO expanded eastward to its front yard and its core interests were constantly hurt, Russia
began to take countermoves in both hard and soft approaches. On one hand, it avoided any direct and head-on conflict with NATO, and used
every opportunity to enhance dialogue and cooperation with it….
Every time NATO suppressed it too much, Russia fought back with even more powerful measures, which was demonstrated by the “Five Days
of War” between it and Georgia in 2008 and the military operation against Crimea in 2014….

Ongoing Ukrainian Military Reform
OE Watch Commentary: The past three years have
been a crucible for those serving in the Ukrainian
military. After suffering from more than two decades
of underfunding and neglect, Ukrainian military
and security services were caught off-guard and
ill-prepared to respond to Russia’s swift annexation
of Crimea and armed support for separatists in the
Donbas region. To reform, rebuild and modernize the
Ukrainian military, while simultaneously engaged in
the ongoing conflict in southeast Ukraine, would be
challenging enough. However, combining these tasks
with severe economic problems and political instability
have made them next to impossible. Still, progress
has been made. The accompanying excerpt from
the Ukrainian military newspaper, Narodna Armiya
[People’s Army] describes an interview the Chief of
the Ukrainian General Staff, Viktor Muzhenko, who
reviews some of these accomplishments.
Muzhenko begins by recounting the status of the
Ukrainian armed forces when the conflict began in
early 2014, and simply states “they could not carry out
their tasks.” Since then, he claims that considerable
progress has been made and the “restoration of
combat readiness continues.” A key component of this
renewal has been the creation of the “Joint Operative
HQ, the Command of the High Mobility Airborne
Troops and the Command of the Special Operations
Forces.” Restoring the country’s military industry
has been another important reform
(continued)

“At the moment our army is one of the most combat-ready
armies in Europe.”

Source: “НАШЕ ВІЙСЬКО НИНІ ОДНЕ З НАЙБІЛЬШ БОЄЗДАТНИХ
У ЄВРОПІ (Our army is currently one of the most combat-ready armies in
Europe),” Narodna Armiya, 1 December 2016. http://na.mil.gov.ua/files/pdf/5476(01-12-2016).pdf (pp 6-7)
[Narodna Armiya] What is your opinion about the real state of our army at
the beginning of the Russian Federation’s military aggression? Taking into
account the level of combat readiness of our army in 2014 (it is known that many
military units could not even leave their permanent bases due to the state of their
hardware), at what cost did you manage to stop the aggressor?
[Muzhenko] Throughout 2008-13, the real demands of the Armed Forces were
met by just 50-60 per cent. Therefore, we were not ready for Russian aggression
in terms of either quantity and quality of the Armed Forces… The personnel were
not ready for combat in terms of their combat skills and from the psychological
point of view. They could not carry out their tasks….
[Narodna Armiya] When did you personally feel that our army has moved to a
new level of readiness to carry out tasks?
[Muzhenko] What one may describe as transition to a new level is a really
long and exhausting process…. During the localization of the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, the Ukrainian Armed Forces’ ability to counteract a hybrid war
increased dramatically. Over this period of time, sufficient groups of troops have
been formed in dangerous areas. The restoration of combat readiness continues.
Reserves of military units and personnel are being formed. The number of
the Armed Forces’ personnel has substantially increased. We have begun and
continued to reform the General Staff and commands of the
(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

70

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Ongoing Ukrainian Military Reform
element, and today Ukrainian arms manufacturers can
“provide the Ukrainian Armed Forces with advanced
types of armaments and military hardware.” Ukraine
is moving toward a professional military force and
during the period “2014-16, contracts have been signed
with almost 90,000 servicemen, and 64,000 of them,
including 7,000 officers, signed contracts this year.”
The scale and intensity of training has also improved,
where today, battalion and brigade-level exercises
are conducted much more frequently. Muzhenko
concludes by asserting that although the Ukrainian
military “must further boost [its] capabilities…at the
moment our army is one of the most combat-ready
armies in Europe.”
The Ukrainian military has indeed come a long
way over the past three years. From a state of neglect
and disrepair, it has transformed itself into a battlehardened and experienced fighting force. However,
this military still confronts serious challenges and it
remains unclear whether this transformation, when
combined with political and economic uncertainty,
will be sufficient to defend the integrity and
sovereignty of the Ukrainian state. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Robots on Ice
OE Watch Commentary: Changing tires,
breaking track and doing field maintenance
in subzero temperatures is tough. Larger
jobs are usually tougher. Russian robotics
may ease the job of the Arctic soldier. The
accompanying passage from Izvestiya
discusses the newly tested “R-300 robot”—
a state of the art compact all-terrain vehicle
on rubber tracks, fitted with a special
manipulator/crane. The robot is capable of
“conducting rescue operations, repairing
pipeline system and communication
lines, and deactivating munitions even
at temperatures of -50 Celsius° [-58°
Fahrenheit].”
Extreme cold is hard on fuel and
batteries, although winter blends of diesel
and gasoline help. Some gasoline blends
remain fluid at -60° Fahrenheit. As the
piece notes, the R-300 is gasoline powered
and supposedly up to the challenge.
Nevertheless, the demands on the robot’s
time will mean that the soldier will still have
to try to pick up lug nuts with his mittens.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

branches. The Joint Operative HQ, the Command of the High Mobility Airborne
Troops and the Command of the Special Operations Forces of the Ukrainian
Armed Forces have been set up….
[Narodna Armiya] How many modernized and new pieces of armor have been
supplied to the army over the last two years?...
[Muzhenko] At the moment, the domestic defense industrial complex has a
sufficient production potential, resources and production facilities to manufacture
and provide the Ukrainian Armed Forces with advanced types of armaments and
military hardware…
[Narodna Armiya] The problem of the staffing of combat units, in particular those
deployed to the ATO area, has been raised repeatedly. Has this problem been
resolved by the contract servicemen who joined the army this year?...
[Muzhenko] First I shall recall that there is a mixed type of staffing in the
Ukrainian Armed Forces at the moment. We have both conscripts and contract
servicemen. The conscripts make up just 10 per cent…There are substantial
positive changes in the contract service, too. For example, over 2014-16 contracts
have been signed with almost 90,000 servicemen, and 64,000 of them, including
7,000 officers, signed contracts this year….
…At the moment our army is one of the most combat-ready armies in Europe. The
Ukrainian Armed Forces have reached a new professional level both in terms of
readiness of personnel, units and subunits and in logistics. We must further boost
our capabilities.

“Engineering units of the Russian Federation Railroad Troops
and regiments from the “military Emergencies Ministry” will be
equipped with a unique robotic system. The R-300 robot created
by the Intekhros machine-building holding company is capable
of conducting rescue operations, repairing pipeline system
and communication lines, and deactivating munitions even at
temperatures of -50 Celsius° [-58° Fahrenheit].”
Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “Арктический робот поможет военным ломать и строить
(Arctic robot will help the military to break and build),” Izvestiya Online, 29 November
2016. http://izvestia.ru/news/647680
The state-of-the-art product is a compact all-terrain vehicle on rubber tracks, fitted with a
special manipulator/crane. The upper part of the “mechanical hand,” which is just as mobile
as the human version, is fitted with a set of attachments. The unique mobility of the R-300
manipulator allows the system to perform precision work in confined spaces, for example in
access hatches.
“The R-300 robot has now already passed the factory tests and confirmed its
specifications,” states Pavel Chernousov, spokesman for the Interkhros machine-building
holding company. “At the moment we are in negotiations with the Ministry of Defense. We
agreed on further collaboration and next year we plan to start supplying our products to the
military.”
The latest tanks and armored vehicles will be equipped with aviation fire control consoles
According to Chernousov, a smaller version of the robot is already being
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

(continued)
71

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Robots on Ice
purchased by the technical emergency center of Russia’s Ministry of Atomic Energy. Also one robot, on which the tracks were replaced by
railroad wheel-sets, were handed over to the Moscow metro.
The name of the R-300 robot means that the system’s manipulator can be fitted with up to 300 different attachments. For deactivation work on
explosive ordnance, the R-300 is equipped with a special grip with sensors that control the degree of compression, enabling the robot to lift a
munition without crushing it. For earthwork operations, the system is equipped with an excavator bucket and drill, for demolition work it can
have a hydraulic hammer and concrete-breaker, while for loading operations the R-300 works with a hook suspension and grip.
The system’s manipulator system is able to lift loads weighing up to three tons, with an extendable six-meter arm. The robot is quite compact.
It is a little more than 2.5 meters in length and 2 meters wide and weighs no more than 4.5 tons. To prevent the system overturning when
moving heavy loads, the body is fitted with four support arms that firmly fix the product to the ground.
The heart of the R-300 is a compact gasoline engine. It is easy to operate and adapted for work at low temperatures. The batteries of electric
motors rapidly discharge in such conditions and when standing for long periods the equipment can fail when covered in frost.
“Arctic conditions are very unfavorable, not only for human health but also for the infrastructure of those areas. Already at a temperature of
-40° Celsius [coincidently -40° Fahrenheit] metal becomes quite brittle, which substantially increases the probability of accidents” according
to military expert Oleg Zheltonozhko. “Repair and rescue work in the Arctic climate can be a real challenge for military engineers. The use
of robotic tools such as the R-300, in such circumstances, may have several advantages. The robot is several times physically stronger than a
human being and some operations that are performed by an entire subunit can be carried out by a single specialist.”
According to the expert, unlike a human being the robot can be in the cold almost indefinitely, allowing its operators to fix faults for several
hours, working in shifts and without the threat of frostbite.

Spetsnaz to Syria as Military Police and Airfield Security
OE Watch Commentary: The
Russians are reinforcing air base
security in Syria with Chechen
Military Police. These aren’t just
any military police, but “Vostok”
and “Zapad”, two premier
spetsnaz battle-hardened units.
As the accompanying passage
from Izvestiya discusses, these
military units were established
in 2003, have extensive combat
experience, and are staffed
mostly by service personnel of
Chechen ethnicity. Hence, their
informal name of “Chechen
spetsnaz.” Approximately
20% of Russia’s population
has an Islamic heritage, so the
inclusion of two predominately
Chechen forces may prove
an advantage in dealing with
the Syrians and maintaining
Russian popular support of that
effort. Furthermore, as the piece
points out, since Chechens—
like the majority of people in
Syria—are Sunni Muslims,
this “should make it easier for
them to interact with the local
population.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Service personnel from the Russian Defense Ministry’s two specialpurpose battalions, Vostok [East] and Zapad [West], stationed in the
Chechen Republic, will be leaving for Syria to guard Humaymim air base.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Nikolay Surkov, “Чеченский спецназ будет охранять авиабазу
Хмеймим (Chechen Spetsnaz to Guard Humaymim Air Base),” Izvestia Online, 8 December 2016.
http://izvestia.ru/news/650206

Chechen Spetsnaz to Guard Humaymim Air Base
Established in 2003, these military units were staffed predominantly by service personnel of Chechen
ethnicity. Hence, their informal name of “Chechen spetsnaz.” Vostok and Zapad troops fought
terrorists in Chechnya, took part in the August 2008 conflict with Georgia, and protected Russian mine
clearance specialists in Lebanon in 2006. Spetsnaz troops from the two special-purpose battalions,
which have extensive combat experience, will provide strong protection to the Russian air group
against attacks by fighters from ISIL.
Vostok and Zapad were reorganized into military police battalions in late November and prepared for
dispatch to Syria. By the end of December, both military units will complete their deployment and start
guarding Russian military facilities in the Arab republic.
Leonid Isayev, an orientalist and senior lecturer at the Higher School of Economics, stated that
Chechens, like the majority of people in Syria, are Sunni Muslims, which should make it easier for
them to interact with the local population. However, even more important is the Chechens’ reputation,
which will make anyone think twice before getting involved with them.
“The modern view of the Chechens was formed by the media in the 1990s,” the orientalist said.
“Arabs have little knowledge of Russian geography, but almost all of them are aware of Chechnya and
the wars fought there. Chechens have a reputation as fearless and unforgiving fighters, which has been
strengthened considerably during the current war in Syria. An entire Chechen volunteer battalion is
fighting on [Syrian President Bashar] al-Asad’s side.”
Formed in 2003, the Vostok and Zapad battalions joined the 42nd Guards Motorized
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

(continued)
72

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Continued: Spetsnaz to Syria as Military Police and
Airfield Security
Rifle Division. The spetsnaz troops were involved in destroying militant camps and bases in the mountainous part of the Chechen Republic
and conducting search operations. In 2006, a protection unit was formed from service personnel of the special-purpose battalions to
protect soldiers and officers from a composite engineering battalion. In Lebanon, Russian military engineers restored bridges and other
infrastructure destroyed by Israeli aircraft during the Second Lebanon War.
“In August 2008, the Vostok battalion acted as both an assault and reconnaissance unit,” Anton Lavrov, one of the authors of the books
The Syrian Frontier and The Tanks of August about the conflict in Syria and the war with Georgia, told Izvestiya. “First, the spetsnaz troops
mopped up Georgian positions between Ts’khinvali and Java. Then they were involved in fighting in the capital of South Ossetia and later, as
part of a group, in the offensive on the Georgian city of Gori. Vostok fighters, together with service personnel from special-purpose brigades,
reconnoitered Georgian positions and operated at roadblocks.”
Once the 42nd Guards Division was disbanded, Vostok became part of the 8th Mountain Rifle Brigade, stationed in the village of Borzoy in
the Chechen Republic, while Zapad service personnel joined the ranks of the 18th Motorized Rifle Brigade, based in the village of Shali.
“Although for the man on the street, Vostok and Zapad are ‘Chechen battalions,’ in reality they have become ordinary special-purpose
battalions in which, in addition to Chechens, military personnel from almost all parts of Russia serve,” Anton Lavrov said. “The battalions
have extensive combat experience of assault operations in urban and mountainous areas. These are precisely the skills needed at present
to guarantee the safety of Russian military sites in Syria. Humaymim air base is in Al Ladhiqiyah province, which has fairly difficult
mountainous terrain, while the [naval] base at Tartus is located in a heavily urbanized area.”

Northern Fleet Arctic Defense Involves 90,000 Personnel
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s Northern Fleet
Joint Strategic Command plays an important role in
ensuring the military security of the Arctic region. As
the accompanying passage from RIA Novosti discusses,
this command’s zone of responsibility embraces the
territory of four components of the Russian Federation
(Murmanskaya and Arkhangel’skaya Oblasts, the Republic
of Komi, Nenetskiy Autonomous Okrug). The piece
features comments by Admiral Ivan Vasilyev, former
Deputy Commander of the Russian Navy, who discusses
the structure and mission of this command. Vasilyev notes
that it includes four combined formations, 17 formations,
and a complement of military units under operational fleet
command. The force grouping totals around 90,000 men.
90,000 personnel is a lot of people, especially when
compared to Alaska Command. And this 90,000 does
not include the Far East Military District Motorized
Rifle Division being constituted on the Russian side of
the Aleutian Island chain and other forces of the Russian
Pacific Fleet and Eastern Military District. Still, the area
that the Northern Fleet is responsible for is immense
and tough to patrol and control. Further, Northern Fleet
sailors have been heavily involved in the Russian effort in
Syria. Of interest, there has been some debate whether the
Northern Fleet was a key component of the Joint Strategic
Command (OSK) or was actually the OSK, to which all the
Arctic military units were subordinate. Admiral Vasilyev
states that the Northern Fleet is the OSK to which all the
forces in the Arctic grouping belong. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

Source: “Admiral Vasilyev: The Northern Fleet’s Arctic infrastructure
looks like a lunar colony,” RIA Novosti, 10 November 2016. http://arctic.ru/
infrastructure/20161110/488745.html
“Following prolonged stagnation and decline caused by what in our opinion
was the catastrophic reduction and curtailment of entire combined formations
such as the submarine flotilla, today the squadrons and operational groupings
that operated on a permanent basis in far-flung areas of the seas and oceans
long ago progressed past the recovery point, as they say.”
“Today the Northern Fleet is performance-capable, combat-ready, and is
rehearsing missions for the systematic performance of combat duty in far-flung
areas of the world’s oceans where the presence of our flag, forces, and assets is
essential to act as a deterrent factor precluding adventures that are portrayed
as planting ‘the most just democratic principles.’ What they do in fact constitute
we have seen for ourselves in Yugoslavia, Libya, Iraq, and Syria,”.
The Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command, whose zone of responsibility
embraces the territory of four components of the Russian Federation
(Murmanskaya and Arkhangel’skaya Oblasts, the Republic of Komi, Nenetskiy
Autonomous Okrug), plays a most important role in ensuring the military
security of the Arctic region. It consists of four combined formations, 17
formations, and a complement of military units under operational fleet
command. The force grouping totals around 90,000 men.
In 2016, over 25 combatant ships and support craft of the Northern Fleet put
to sea on combat patrols. A detachment of Northern Fleet ships sailed to four
Arctic archipelagoes, hydrographic survey vessels conducted research in the
Arctic Ocean. A Northern Fleet surface strike group led by the carrier capable
heavy cruiser Admiral Kuznetsov and the heavy nuclear-powered guided
missile cruiser Peter the Great is currently continuing an extended voyage in
the Mediterranean. Northern Fleet strategic submarine missile cruisers and
nuclear attack submarines are conducting combat patrols.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

73

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Airborne Acquires Truck Robot
OE Watch Commentary: Since the dawn of
warfare, militaries have grappled with the dilemma of
how to balance the combat portions of their army with
supplies. With innovations in war such as airborne
units, this problem has evolved. Russia is now trying
to address this problem by acquiring a new technology
called the “MARS,” or mobile automated robotic
system. The accompanying passage from Izvestiya
discusses this important new system.
The MARS is a truck with artificial intelligence
(AI) that is capable of delivering troops to and from
the battlefield, as well as much needed supplies. While
supplies are crucial to the success of any military
operation, they present even more of a challenge to an
airborne or special forces unit. These units are often
required to move and strike as quickly as possible
and sometimes apart from a regular force, requiring
them to carry large quantities of specialty equipment
themselves. The MARS is able to utilize its AI system
and be set into different modes. Soldiers can set it to
“track” mode, which moves the system from point
to point, or a “follow me” mode, wherein the system
follows a certain soldier wearing specific gear, all the
while plotting the best possible route. This enables
soldiers on the ground to focus on the task at hand and
outsource the crucial task of supplies.
The system is envisioned to “swiftly and silently
deliver ordnance to the battlefield and evacuate
wounded warriors.” The MARS seeks to be an
effective answer to the age-old conundrum of how to
outfit soldiers on the ground with all their necessary
equipment without bogging them down under all that
weight. End OE Watch Commentary (McConnell)

“The Russian Airborne Troops will be acquiring a truck
robot with artificial intelligence capable even under heavy
fire of swiftly and silently delivering ordnance to the
battlefield and of evacuating wounded warriors.”
Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “Десантники получат беспилотный грузовик для
действий на поле боя (Russian Airborne Acquires Unmanned Truck),” Izvestiya
Online, 16 September 2016, http://izvestia.ru/news/632507
“The Russian Airborne Troops will be acquiring a truck robot with artificial
intelligence capable even under heavy fire of swiftly and silently delivering
ordnance to the battlefield and of evacuating wounded warriors.
...
This equipment is called a mule. When a special forces’ detachment operates apart
from its forces, it needs a large quantity of various equipment and accessories,
which it earlier had to carry on its person. Now this task is performed by robots,”
Leonid Karyakin said. “Since the on-board systems of such vehicles are equipped
with computers with survey, navigation, route-plotting, and communication systems
and various terrain-scanning sensors, they additionally help the warriors with
navigation and reconnaissance.’”
Russian paratroopers conducting an airborne operation.
Source: https://rostechnologiesblog.wordpress.
com/2013/09/17/russian-paratroopers-to-participate-ininteraction-2013/

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

74

RUSSIA, UKRAINE

Top

Russian Defense Minister Summarizes 2016
Successes and Problems
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 December, Russian
Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu gave a speech to
the Russian Defense Ministry Collegium, in which
he discussed a number of issues. The accompanying
passages taken from that speech, as published on the
website of the Kremlin, provide insight into the Russian
military’s perceived threats, successes in 2016, and
priorities for 2017.
First, he discussed threats to the nation, which he
listed as NATO battalions, reconnaissance flights, and
military exercises; and the US missile defense system
in Europe, along with its program to upgrade nuclear
bombs and storage facilities. Second, he highlighted the
numerous improvements to all facets of Russia’s Armed
Forces, from the services to medical and housing issues.
Third, he covered budgetary issues, Russian successes
in Syria in 2016, and Russian military exercises. Finally,
he listed priority issues for the nation to resolve in
2017, which include continuing to build up the combat
capabilities of the Armed Forces, and to reinforce
the force groupings in the western, southwestern
and Arctic strategic areas. He also noted the goal to
“achieve the level of 60 percent or more of the Armed
Forces’ equipment consisting of modern weapons and
materiel in permanent-readiness units.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Thomas)

Russian Naval Might
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
passages from an article in Military Thought, the
main military periodical of the Russian Defense
Ministry, shed light on Russian views of its
own military-naval might. The authors see the
struggle between countries as they attempt to
access and develop the natural resources of the
seas as a major source of instability for Russia.
The struggle is due to the emergence of new
threats, to include states and coalitions seeking
domination of the high seas, the deployment
of foreign naval groupings with nuclear and
nonnuclear high-precision weaponry, and, most
important of all, the deployment of strategic
antimissile defense systems that disrupt the
established alignment of forces in the nuclearmissile sphere. They claim that Russia’s naval
presence prevents military conflicts through
strategic deterrence and helps maintain strategic
stability and an equal strategic partnership. In
order to thwart projected threats such as the US’s
Prompt Global Strike system, Russia must have
adequate offensive and defensive forces that can
achieve deterrence in peacetime and preemption
in wartime, according to the authors. End OE
Watch Commentary (Thomas)

Source: “Расширенное заседание коллегии Министерства обороны (Expanded
meeting of the Defence Ministry),” Kremlin.ru, 22 December 2016. http://kremlin.
ru/events/president/transcripts/53571
In 2017, the Defense Ministry will need to resolve a number of priority issues.
First, to continue to build up the combat capabilities of the Armed Forces, to take
measures to reinforce the force groupings in the western, southwestern and Arctic
strategic areas. It will also be necessary to ensure timely placement and strict
compliance with the state defense order in 2017, and to achieve the level of 60
percent or more of the Armed Forces’ equipment consisting of modern weapons
and materiel in permanent-readiness units.
With regard to strategic nuclear forces, we will need to put three missile
regiments equipped with modern missile systems on combat duty, as well as enter
five modernized strategic aviation complexes into service.
With regard to the general purpose forces, we will need to deploy two brigade
sets of Iskander-M missile systems in the ground forces and rearm three divisions
of the army air defense with Tor-M2 air defense missile systems. Also, we need to
ensure the supply of 905 latest tanks and armored combat vehicles.
To deploy 170 new and modernized aircraft in the Aerospace Forces and Navy.
To rearm four SAM regiments with the S-400 anti-aircraft missile system. To
deploy eight surface ships and nine combat boats in the effective Navy forces. To
supply four Bal and Bastion rocket complexes to the coastal troops; to ensure the
acceptance into service and placing on alert three radars with high operational
readiness in Yeniseisk, Orsk, and Barnaul; to launch the second unified space
system spacecraft; and to continue to improve the Armed Forces basing system.

Source: O. V. Alyoshin, A. N. Popov, and V. V. Puchnin, “The Military-Naval Might of
Russia in Today’s Geopolitical Conditions,” Military Thought, No. 7 2016, pp. 12-17.
The current military-political situation in the world is forecasted as unstable and is
characterizes as follows: an increase in global competition; growing tension in various
areas of interstate and interregional interaction; rivalry of world power centers and key
subjects of the world community; unstable political and economic processes, taking place
on global and regional levels during a general complication of international relations; an
increasing struggle for natural resources in the Arctic Ocean zone; and the activation of
transnational terrorist groups.
At the moment, the navies of the world’s leading states are capable of changing the
course and outcome of armed struggle by their actions from the sea even at continental
theaters of operations, and can influence the result of the war as such.
This is borne out by the active realization of the prompt global strike concept by the U.S.
armed forces, which is a new challenge to Russia and constitutes the main threat to its
military security in the 21st century.
The U.S. navy groupings can simultaneously launch up to 3,000 long-range cruise
missiles against the RF territory, and by 2025, the number will have risen to 6,000.
In countering the global strike a prominent place is held by the navy, the most efficient
politics instrument in the Russian Federation in the area of strategic nuclear and
nonnuclear deterrence. This is so because the navy is universal; because it has naval
strategic nuclear forces (NSNF) and general-purpose naval forces (GPNF); because it
can display its might in virtually any area of the high seas; because the navy task forces
groupings can speedily achieve operational deployment into the area of conflict situations
and stand by on high alert among other things, to attack the critically important groundbased facilities of the adversary, without violating, until a certain moment, its national
sovereignty.
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

75

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

Top

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

How ISIS Adapts: ISIS Responses to Airstrikes
I. Introduction
Many articles have explored the offensive and defensive tactics
of ISIS in urban settings; which include a mix of terror, guerilla and
conventional warfare. But how has ISIS been able to withstand and
adapt to the airstrikes by the West and coalition forces since August
2014, both in Syria and Iraq? Despite the fact that coalition efforts
have halted the advance of ISIS and degraded its capabilities, the group
still holds vast territory. Coalition airstrikes have forced ISIS to adapt
to a less permissive environment. ISIS is a learning organization and
adapts to developments, seeking to address their shortfalls and gaps
against the air campaign.
ISIS has responded by going to ground in urban areas, and creating a new reality on the ground. ISIS fighters are now able to conceal
themselves in the terrain and among the people of the cities they occupy.1 The group has also responded by hardened defenses (trenches,
tunnels, human shields); and expanding its fronts globally—to include
terrorist attacks—to maintain an offensive momentum, even in the
face of defeats. Kurdish sources, who have either fought ISIS firsthand
in Syria or Iraq; and Turkish military experts who follow the group
closely due to its proximity to Turkey and its spillover effects, provide
local insight into ISIS’s adaptive responses.

II. Defining the ISIS War Machine: Insurgency, Terrorist
or Something Else?
Since it captured the world’s attention by capturing Mosul, Iraq’s
second-largest city in June 2014, the group has focused on state-building while continuing to stage terrorist acts in Europe to weaken support of coalition airstrikes. This state building and governing factor
distinguishes ISIS from other groups: It is not just, or even mainly,
a terrorist organization. It has an interest in governing territory and
people. As Yale University’s Andrew March and Mara Revkin lay out
in detail in an article in Foreign Affairs in April 2015, the group focused its energy on developing fairly elaborate institutional structures
in the territories it controlled within Iraq and Syria.2 It has conducted
a sophisticated information operations campaign sending the message
that the group is strong, has money, weapons, territory, institutions
and provides social services. This makes ISIS more of a semi-state
than an insurgency attempting to challenge the legitimacy of the Iraqi
government. As such, the group has carried out a methodical and
multi-staged strategy of capture, expansion and consolidation.
According to Turkish military experts, ISIS operates as squadrons
(80-100 fighters) and battalions (200-300 fighters) within a motorized
and mobile war machine. It uses both terrorist tactics like hand-made
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), suicide attacks, and hit-and-run
attacks; and conventional tactics at the squadron and battalion levels.
Thus ISIS is defined as a semi-military, semi-political structure which
aims to transform its military victories into a long-standing permanent political structure. It gains these military victories by conducting
urban warfare and selecting seizing territorial targets. ISIS has some
30,000 fighters in Syria. About a third of these are trained and experienced fighters. About a third are also thought to be foreign. In addition, ISIS also includes Baath and Sunni tribe members and organized
crime networks.
Metin Gürcan, an experienced Turkish military expert claims that
ISIS successfully implements the ‘clear-hold-build’ tactic.3 He claims
that ISIS is “applying in Iraq and Syria, the US’s famous, ‘FM 3-24
Countering Insurgencies (2006)” noting that, in the areas it takes over,
ISIS first challenges and eliminates the political authority; then estab-

SPECIAL
ESSAY

lishes small ‘city states’ in the towns and cities it controls.4 Finally it
combines these small city states within a network. Most analyses on
Iraq use the Iraqi state as the level of analysis, but ISIS forms its fighting strategy based on towns and cities. Gürcan notes that this gives
ISIS a huge strategic advantage.
In terms of weapons, ISIS has significant military capabilities, mainly captured from the Syrians and Iraqis, including T-55, T-72, and
M-1 tanks; a variety of MANPADs and ATGMs; artillery; ZU-23-2
antiaircraft guns; and Grad multiple rocket launchers. It is also able to
purchase weapons and ammunition.5 Senior political scientist David
Johnson argues in his RAND publication entitled, “The Challenges
of the ‘Now’ and Their Implications for the US Army”, this ability to
purchase weapons makes them the type of group to watch for the US
Army:
“A non-state irregular force can transform into a hybrid force if a
state provides it with advanced weaponry. Such groups are important
because they represent the type of adversary that US ground forces are
likely to face in the future... Such groups employ a strategy focused on
causing large numbers of casualties over an extended period- one that
Western nations will find most difficult to counter. Such forces often
adopt tactics designed to avoid air and sensor advantages, as ISIS has
done by concentrating in cities to hide among the population.”6

III. How has ISIS Adapted?
III a. Fluidity
Turkish military analysts note that ISIS has responded to airstrikes
by using a command structure that is very fluid and changes almost
daily and by ensuring that all of its units are mobile and very scattered. ISIS does not have a permanent military base, operation center,
depot or military unit. Thus, in conducting airstrikes, the Coalition
has to target not a permanent military facility; but moving vehicles
and temporary housing units. Furthermore, ISIS issues brief orders
to its commanders in the field, telling them only ‘what will be done’
but leaving the ‘how’ to them, entrusting the field commanders with a
great amount authority and flexibility.7
A Kurdish Peshmerga (Iraqi Kurdish military forces) commander
from the Kurdish region of Syria, Omar Othman Ibrahim, who fought
ISIS in northeastern Syria says, “...ISIS never settles a front for us to
fight or to attack. They don’t have any lines where they set up weapons. It doesn’t feel like fighting a battle. They never fight on foot and
are always in vehicles, so very quick.”8
Another aspect of their ‘fluidity’ is their lack of uniforms. In March
2016, two former Marine Corps officers visited the front outside
Kirkuk where the Peshmerga face fighters of ISIS. In their observations they note, “uniforms” were not uniform and while the most
common pattern was the old US “woodland” pattern, some wore the
German spotted pattern. They note, “No one wore any rank insignia;
the rank structure was informal and leaders were known personally.”9
Witnesses and tribal sources in ISIS-controlled areas also note a
drop in the number of military checkpoints to avoid being targeted by
air raids. Following the airstrikes, militants have also stopped using
conspicuous convoys of armored vehicles and instead travel on motorcycles, bicycles and camouflaged cars if necessary. This gives ISIS militants light mobility, enabling them to withdraw and regroup quicker
than regular army troops.10 In addition, they don’t go around in units
anymore. The number of bases in Diyala are reported to have gone up
from 2 to 20, with 3-4 people staying in each one.11

(continued)

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

76

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

Top

By Karen Kaya

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: How ISIS Adapts: ISIS Responses to Airstrikes
According to tribal leaders in the south of Kirkuk, ISIS elements
leave their largest bases whenever they suspect an impending air
attack. On their way out, they landmine the roads and empty their
headquarters.12 In order to create confusion, militants also hang their
flags on civilian houses after evicting the occupants.13
Turkish sources note that, following the airstrikes, the group has
imposed some new media rules, restricting what they post and reveal
about themselves. News restrictions include a ban on the taking of pictures and filming with cameras and mobile phones during the battles.
A memo, published by the ‘General Committee of the Islamic State’,
has been circulating on twitter under the hash tag ‘media secrecy campaign.’ The directive states that filming will be restricted to certified
‘media personnel’ in charge of ‘documenting and filming the battles’
and warns that offenders will be prosecuted.”14
There is also a significant decrease in militants’ use of their cell
phones. A policeman in Tikrit says that militants often change their
cell numbers, and turn their cell phones off when they are not using
them.15
ISIS battlefield performance in Ramadi in May 2015 provides a
good example of all of these adaptive responses coupled with the
group’s utilization of different types of military hardware. On 17 May
2015, ISIS captured the city of Ramadi by deploying its fighters into
the city in small groups of two or three instead of large groups. For operational security purposes it silenced its social media and minimized
the usage of cell phones. It converted available ammunition and explosives into mega bombs to increase its battlefield effectiveness. It used
bulldozers to destroy Iraqi security forces’ defensive lines of concrete
walls turning them into VBIEDs once the walls had been breached.
The tactics and explosives that ISIS used in Ramadi evolved into more
powerful and effective tools. Iraqi Prime Minister al-Abadi stated that
the effect of explosives was like a small nuclear bomb.16

III b. Fortifying Terrain with Hardened Defenses:
Trenches, Tunnels, Human Shields:
ISIS fortifies the terrain it holds with hardened defenses to counter
opposing forces’ attacks against the areas it holds and to restrain the
mobility of civilians in the terrain it controls. This includes the use of
trenches, tunnels, human shields and even drapes.
Soon after ISIS took control of Sinjar in August 2014, Coalition
airstrikes began to attack its positions. ISIS responded to this by
building a network of tunnels that connected houses. These tunnels
provided protection for fighters and served as a means of subterranean
command and control. The sandbagged tunnels, about the height of a
person, contained ammunition, prescription drugs, blankets, electrical
wires leading to fans and lights, and other supplies. In total there were
at least 30-40 tunnels.17 These allowed ISIS to maintain command and
control and protect its forces from the effects of the air attacks.18
A Kurdish fighter who fought against ISIS in Kobani (in northwestern Syria) says, “[There] we learned urban warfare...Tunnels,
barricades, roadside bombs and booby traps—we learned them all at
Kobani.” He also notes that ISIS was “using screens and drapes against
snipers and aerial reconnaissance and passages between houses and
backyards for safe movement.” The drapes blocked the sight of the enemy snipers and facilitated movement of people and Kobani fighters.
He noted ISIS’s techniques of preparing explosives and booby-traps,
especially of those concealed in the trenches.”19
With the Coalition’s air strikes, ISIS is no longer able to move freely
in open spaces. One side effect of this is that ISIS has moved into the
civilian population in the towns. This strategy of retreating into the

SPECIAL
ESSAY

population is the most difficult factor in fighting ISIS right now. This
stratagem caused the postponement of the operation to take back
Mosul in February-April 2015.20 ISIS militants are now thought to
be hiding in mosques and using locals as human shields because they
know that these are less likely to be targeted.”21 In addition, some
militants are reported to have dug two-person trenches in the yards of
civilians.22
ISIS has also been placing snipers in critical locations to defend
its strongholds and to stage attacks within its new terrain in Iraq and
Syria. Observations from Turkish, Kurdish, and English language open
sources reveal evidence that the number of snipers ISIS has been using
has increased in response to the airstrikes.23 In January 2015, ISIS
released photographs claiming that it had established a sniper battalion.24 ISIS’s use of sniper teams was evident in November 2015, during
the US-led coalition air attacks as part of an offensive to take Sinjar
back from the group. Most ISIS fighters left the city under the heavy
bombardment, leaving behind small sniper teams. ISIS snipers, having
been in the city for months, had the advantage of knowledge of the
terrain, prepared positions, tunnels, underground shelters and the element of surprise.25 (Kurdish forces on the ground eventually expelled
ISIS militants from Sinjar.)

III c. Distraction / Protraction / Maintaining Offensive
Momentum:
ISIS has been utilizing diversionary tactics when it comes under
attack by staging new attacks in a different area to avoid high casualties in the original location. Thus they may retreat from one area, but
capture another one which allows them to maintain their offensive
momentum even in the face of retreat.
Following the attacks in Kobani, which squeezed ISIS into a corner,
the group changed tactics and directed its attention towards the Sinjar
region in Northern Iraq. Once airstrikes targeted them in Iraq, the
group quickly redirected its attention back to Kobani in Syria.26
Another strategy that ISIS is following to avoid being squeezed into
a corner in Iraq and Syria is expanding/diversifying its fronts globally. It is trying to spread out in such a way that it cannot be contained;
thus trying to expand into Yemen, Libya, the Sinai Peninsula and
Afghanistan.27
With recent developments on the ground in Iraq and Syria, ISIS is
trying to open up new fronts outside of Iraq and Syria, in places like
Libya and Afghanistan. Some ISIS militants from the Middle East
were now being shifted to Libya.28 ISIS also has strong allies in Africa.
Boko Haram, the notorious Nigerian insurgency, declared allegiance
to ISIS in 2015.29
The airstrikes, which have caused ISIS to lose some of its territory,
also appear to have prompted the group to turn to terrorist operations
in order to maximize effects at a lower cost.30 While ISIS has been
using terror tactics since the beginning, it appears that losing ground
in Syria and Iraq has led it to pursue more mass casualty attacks outside its controlled areas. As the group has been squeezed in Iraq and
Syria, we have seen them stage attacks in Brussels, Istanbul, Germany,
Switzerland and Paris, signaling their intentions to conduct terror
operations globally.

Conclusion
Following significant combat gains for two years, ISIS is on the defensive in Iraq and Syria. In 2015, ISIS lost 14% of the territory it con-

(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

77

SPECIAL ESSAY #1

By Karen Kaya

Top

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: How ISIS Adapts: ISIS Responses to Airstrikes
trolled. It lost another 8% in the first three months of 2016, according
to a study from IHS Jane’s 360.31 If ISIS continues to lose territory at
the same pace, some believe that 2017 could be its last year.
Under these conditions, will ISIS focus on Iraq and Syria, or on
expanding globally? Turkish sources claim that there are increasing
fissures within ISIS on this issue. Some in ISIS advocate spreading the
struggle globally to overcome the pressures that ISIS is facing in Iraq
and Syria; while others prefer the approach of standing firm in Iraq
and Syria. As the group comes under heavier pressure in Iraq and Syria, this debate is bound to widen. The ISIS attack in Istanbul on New
Years 2016; in addition to recent attacks in Europe, could be interpreted as a move towards expanding the struggle globally, to spill clashes

SPECIAL
ESSAY

over into Turkey and beyond to Europe.32 There is also the threat that
ISIS militants might try to sneak into Europe and the US as refugees.
ISIS knows its enemies’ capabilities and vulnerabilities and they
are adapting. So how will ISIS be degraded and ultimately defeated?
According to David Johnson of RAND, the biggest challenge for the
West will be to educate a generation of soldiers who have known no
adversary other than insurgents in Iraq and Afghanistan.33
Whether 2017 is ISIS’s final year or not, these types of groups which
combine terror, guerilla and conventional tactics, along with such adaptation techniques will present challenges for the armies of the future.
Their adaptation tactics will continue to raise challenges regarding the
elimination of such groups by airstrikes alone. 

Notes
1.

2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

David Johnson, “Means Matter: Competent Ground Forces and the Fight
Against ISIL,” Warontherocks.com, 19 March 2015, http://warontherocks.
com/2015/03/means-matter-competent-ground-forces-and-the-fight-againstisil/
Andrew F. March and Mara Revkin, “Caliphate of Law: ISIS’s Ground Rules”
Foreign Affairs, 15 April 2015, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
syria/2015-04-15/caliphate-law
Metin Gürcan, “IŞİD’le yaklaşan savaşı anlama kılavuzu (A guide to
understanding the imminent war with ISIS),” t24.com, 13 November 2015,
http://t24.com.tr/yazarlar/metin-gurcan/isidle-yaklasan-savasi-anlamakilavuzu,13214
Ibid.
David E. Johnson, “The Challenges of the ‘Now’ and Their Implications for the
U.S. Army,” RAND Corporation Publication, 2016, http://www.rand.org/pubs/
perspectives/PE184.html
Ibid.
Since the 19th Century, the German Army employed auftragstaktik that gave
the mission, means and deadline to the subordinate commander and left the
“how” to that commander. This worked well at the tactical level and in World
War II, the Germans were usually better at the tactical level than similar
units in the Red Army or British and American armies. Fortunately, the war
against Germany was resolved at the operational level. It is interesting that
ISIS has given its commanders this much authority and flexibility. It either
demonstrates major trust in subordinate commanders or the difficulty of
controlling a widely-dispersed force fighting under hostile skies.
Sam Jones and Erica Soloman, “Defeating ISIS likely to take years, warn
military analysts,” Financial Times, 20 August 2014, http://www.ft.com/intl/
cms/s/0/9e453b4c-2881-11e4-8bda-00144feabdc0.html
Mark Cancian and Matthew Cancian, “A Visit to the Frontlines of the Battle
Against ISIL,” Warontherocks.com, 13 April 2016, http://warontherocks.
com/2016/04/a-visit-to-the-frontlines-of-the-battle-against-isil/
Reda El Mawy, “Islamic State ‘adapting to US-led air strikes’,” BBC.com, 30
September 2014, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-29423776
“IŞİD’den yeni taktik! Tank yerine bisiklet! (New tactic from ISIS! Bicycle
instead of tank!),” Milliyet.com.tr, 26 September 2014, http://www.milliyet.
com.tr/isid-den-yeni-taktik-tank-yerine/dunya/detay/1946397/default.htm
“IŞİD’den yeni taktik! Tank yerine bisiklet! (New tactic from ISIS! Bicycle
instead of tank!),” Milliyet.com.tr, 26 September 2014, http://www.milliyet.
com.tr/isid-den-yeni-taktik-tank-yerine/dunya/detay/1946397/default.htm
Ibid.
Reda El Mawy, “Islamic State ‘adapting to US-led air strikes’,” BBC.com, 30
September 2014, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-29423776
Ibid.
Margaret Coker, “How Islamic State’s Win in Ramadi Reveals New Weapons,
Tactical Sophistication and Prowess,” The Wall Street Journal, 25 May 2015,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/islamic-states-gains-reveal-new-prowess-onbattlefield-1432592298
“Battle for Sinjar, Iraq,” Threat Action Report, TRADOC G-2 ACE Threats
Integration, April 2016, https://info.publicintelligence.net/USArmyBattleforSinjar.pdf
Ibid.

19. Mahmut Bozarslan, “With spread of IS-like tactics, urban warfare in Turkey
grows bloodier,” Al Monitor.com, 7 March 2016, http://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2016/03/turkey-syria-pkk-isis-kobani-tactics-used-insoutheast.html
20. Metin Gürcan, “IŞİD’le yaklaşan savaşı anlama kılavuzu (A guide to
understanding the imminent war with ISIS),” t24.com, 13 November 2015,
http://t24.com.tr/yazarlar/metin-gurcan/isidle-yaklasan-savasi-anlamakilavuzu,13214
21. “ISIS in Syria using mosques as shelters, civilians as shields- Russian Defense
Ministry,” RT.com, 7 October 2015, https://www.rt.com/news/317803-russiasyria-airstrikes-antonov/
22. “IŞİD’den yeni taktik! Tank yerine bisiklet! (New tactic from ISIS! Bicycle
instead of tank!),” Milliyet.com.tr, 26 September 2014, http://www.milliyet.
com.tr/isid-den-yeni-taktik-tank-yerine/dunya/detay/1946397/default.htm
23. Hawar Berwani, “Sniper Kills, Injures 2 IPs in Diyala - Iraqi News.” Iraq News,
the Latest Iraq News. 09 July 2014, http://www.iraqinews.com/iraq-war/
sniper-kills-injures-ips-in-diyala; “Diyala’da çatışmalar Sürüyor.” Yenisafak,
23 August 2014 http://www.yenisafak.com.tr/dunya/diyalada-catismalarsuruyor-679256
24. Verkaik, Robert. “Islamic State Sniper: ISIS Sets up Sharp-shooter Battalion
Inspired by Infamous Iraqi Killer Who Took out 40 Americans in Baghdad.”
Mail Online. Associated Newspapers, 28 January 2015 http://www.dailymail.
co.uk/news/article-2928652/Iraqi-Sniper-ISIS-posts-pictures-sniper-battalioninspired-Chris-Kyle-s-notorious-insurgent-rival-Juba-killed-40-AmericansBaghdad.html
25. “Battle for Sinjar, Iraq,” Threat Action Report, TRADOC G-2 ACE Threats
Integration, April 2016, https://info.publicintelligence.net/USArmyBattleforSinjar.pdf
26. “IŞİD yine taktik değiştirdi (ISIS changed tactics again),” Milliyet.com.tr, 21
October 2014, http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yine-taktik-degistirdi/dunya/
detay/1957792/default.htm
27. Metin Gürcan, “IŞİD’le yaklaşan savaşı anlama kılavuzu (A guide to
understanding the imminent war with ISIS),” t24.com, 13 November 2015,
http://t24.com.tr/yazarlar/metin-gurcan/isidle-yaklasan-savasi-anlamakilavuzu,13214
28. “IŞİD’den yeni saldırı taktiği (New attack tactic from ISIS),” Milliyet.com.tr,
10 February 2016, http://www.milliyet.com.tr/isid-den-yeni-saldiri-taktigi/
dunya/detay/2192286/default.htm
29. “ISIS eyes expansion from African foothold,” Sidar Global Advisors Special
Report, 18 March 2016.
30. Shadi Hamid, “Is There a Method to ISIS’s Madness?” The Atlantic,
23 November 2015, http://www.theatlantic.com/international/
archive/2015/11/isis-rational-actor-paris-attacks/417312/
31. Columb Strack, “Islamic State loses 22 per cent of territory,” IHS Janes 360,
http://www.janes.com/article/58831/islamic-state-loses-22-per-cent-ofterritory
32. Ibid.
33. David E. Johnson, “The Challenges of the ‘Now’ and Their Implications for the
U.S. Army,” RAND Corporation Publication, 2016, http://www.rand.org/pubs/
perspectives/PE184.html

OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

78

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Chinese Defense Contracts in Argentina
China and Argentina are not new allies, as the Asian giant has
looked to its South American trading partner to fuel domestic demand
for agricultural goods and natural resources since 2004. However, 20
new agreements signed in February 2015 bolstered overall relations to
a “comprehensive strategic partnership,” as cited by representatives in
both China and Argentina.1 These agreements are far-reaching and
encompass trade, investment, agriculture, technology, and defense. Of
particular interest in the region and abroad are the defense components of the agreements, as they extend
beyond the scope of previous cooperation between China and any other Latin
American country to date. Furthermore,
the defense agreements encompass each
branch of Argentina’s military, as they
aim to modernize the countries aging
defense systems. What is not yet clear
about these agreements is whether the
new Maurico Macri administration
(elected in November 2015) will honor
them or instead look to other nations to
modernize Argentina’s military force.

Air
If one thing is certain, it is that the
December 2015 decommissioning of
Argentina’s Dassault Mirage fighters
left a hole in Air Force capabilities, but
there are hopes that China may be able
to solve this problem. A joint working
group is currently looking at the feasibility of Argentina acquiring as many
as 20 FC-1 or J-10 aircraft from China’s
Chengdu Aircraft Corporation.2 Hypothetically, this deal stands to benefit both
parties, as it would provide China with a
feasible export market for its new fighter jet. Furthermore, Argentina’s
delicate financial situation would benefit from favorable finance terms
offered by China. If Argentina is able, it is likely to choose the J-10,
despite its higher price tag, as it would most effectively counter British
Typhoon aircraft stationed on the Falkland Islands. Simultaneously,
Argentina is also contemplating how it will handle the decommissioning of its A4-AR Fightinghawk in 2018 but has not yet mentioned if
China will be involved in the replacement of this aircraft.
On a strategic level, any deals regarding Argentinian acquisition of
new fighter jets are troublesome to the British as they fear equipment
of this caliber could open a theoretical window of opportunity to
strike the Falkland Islands before Britain’s new carrier fleet becomes
operational in 2020. This concern was reiterated by British Defense
Minister Michael Fallon in May 2015, when he stated that “Argentina
still poses a very live threat to the British-ruled Falkland Islands” as it
has always claimed sovereignty over them despite the fact that Britain
has ruled there for nearly two centuries.3 In an attempt to mitigate
this potential immediate threat, Britain plans to increase troop presence and provide additional aerial support to the 150 British soldiers
currently stationed in the Falkland Islands. However, this may not be
necessary as Macri vows that he plans to take a less aggressive stance
than former President Cristina Kirchner did on the Falkland Islands,
but did state that Argentina will retain its claims to them. Shortly after
Macri made this statement, the UK announced military exercises
involving the planned launching of Rapier missiles off the Falkland

SPECIAL
ESSAY

Islands in late October 2016. In the note presented by the deputy foreign minister, Carlos Foradori, to Ambassador Mark Kent in October,
Argentina asked Britain to call off the “illegitimate” exercises and stated that “the behavior of the United Kingdom contradicts the principle
of the peaceful settlement of controversies supported unanimously by
countries in the region”.4 In any case, the planned military exercises
will likely expedite Argentina’s decision to acquire additional military
equipment even if it is just for show of force.

Navy/Army
Argentina has been looking to update
its naval fleet for over a decade and is currently considering the purchase of China
Shipbuilding Industry Corporation’s
P18 export corvette (5 total), following
failed deals in recent years with countries
including Spain, Germany, and Brazil.
In a controversial move, the Argentinian
government reported that, if acquired, it
will call the vessel the “Malvinas” class
after the Argentine name for the Falkland
Islands which as stated in the previous
section, is still a point of contention between the two nations.
What is unique about the naval deal
proposed by the Chinese is that 3 of the 5
P18s would be coproduced in Argentina
which is very appealing as Argentina is
looking to compete with military equipment producers in the region such as
Brazil. If agreed upon, estimated completion time for this project is late 2017.
Other items to be acquired as part of the
proposed naval deal include icebreakers,
tugboats, and offshore patrol vessels. The
Chinese have also proposed potential deals for ground forces, which
involve Argentina in the coproduction of 110 8x8 VNI amphibious
armored personnel carriers.

Space Cooperation
In addition to updating Argentina’s defense force, China built a Satellite Launch and Tracking Control General (CLTC) in the Neuquén
province of Argentina, which represents the first of its kind outside of
the Chinese borders. This project was fiercely contested by opposition
politicians in the Argentine Congress, as they claim the space station
could eventually be utilized to employ space sensors for early-warning
and missile defense operations. Argentinian international analyst Felipe de la Balze echoed similar concerns when he stated that the base
“may be used for military purposes which could implicate our country
in a future military conflict between the US and China.”5
In response to these claims, Chinese Ambassador to Argentina
Yang Wanming indicated that the station is “a peaceful and technological project to explore outer space and has nothing to do with a
military project.” Still, concerns remain as the CLTC responds directly to the General Armament Department and the Central Military
Commission of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army. Furthermore,
Argentinian news source Clarin reported that the agreement is not
completely transparent, as at least two of the attachments are secret
and known only to China’s CLTC and Argentina’s
(continued)
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

79

SPECIAL ESSAY #2

Top

By Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the US government.

Continued: Chinese Defense Contracts in Argentina
National Space Activities Commission.6 Macri has since responded to
these claims by stating that CLTC will not be sanctioned for any type
of military use.
What becomes evident after reading proposed defense deals between China and Argentina is that years of work have gone into them,
but the November 2015 win by center-right President Mauricio Macri may leave some of them hanging in the wind. Regarding military
strength, Macri must take into account that Argentina is in desperate
need of upgrading its current defense systems, and China is already
committed to providing this support in exchange for commodity-backed loans. However, what has become evident since he took office is that he wants to keep his options open and has submitted quotes
for the purchase of military equipment to countries such as the United
States, France, Russia, Brazil, Israel and Korea to name a few.

SPECIAL
ESSAY

From a defense perspective, the purchase of modern defense equipment is imperative as it will revive Argentina’s aging military which is
likely why Macri is weighing his options and not completely committing to China. These same deals would be a big win for China, as they
look to expand military influence in Latin America while securing
valuable sources of natural resources and exports needed to support
its growing population base. In closing, only time will tell which deals
Macri will honor, but from what has been seen thus far, he wants to
re-build relations with countries such as the United States and Britain while simultaneously working with China as he realizes the Asian
giant would be a powerful ally to lose. What this means for the purchase of defense equipment is that multiple vendors will be considered
before final decisions are made sometime in late 2017. 

Notes
1.

2.

3.

“Con la compra de armamento, Cristina refuerza su opción militar por China”
(Cristina Reinforces Chinese Military Options with the Purchase of Weapons).
Urgente 24. Accessed from http://www.urgente24.com/236140-con-lacompra-de-armamento-cristina-refuerza-su-opcion-militar-por-china
“China sigue interesada en vender aviones de combate a la Argentina” (China
Still Interested in Selling Combat Aircraft to Argentina). Clarin. Accessed from
http://www.clarin.com/politica/China-Argentina-Gran_Bretana-aviones_de_
combate-J-10_0_1359464504.html
“Londres reforzará las Islas Malvinas por temor a una invasión argentina con
apoyo ruso, asegura la prensa británica” (London to Reinforce Security on
Malvinas Islands in Fear of Possible Argentinean Invasion). Infobae. Accessed
from http://www.infobae.com/2015/03/23/1717777-londres-reforzara-lasislas-malvinas-temor-una-invasion-argentina-apoyo-ruso-asegura-la-prensabritanica

4.

5.

6.

Argentina protesta por los ejercicio militares británicos en Malvinas (Argentina
Protests UK Military Exercises in Malvinas).” El Heraldo. Accessed from http://
www.heraldo.es/noticias/internacional/2016/10/14/argentina-protesta-porlos-ejercicio-militares-britanicos-malvinas-1112801-306.html
“Preocupa el eventual uso militar de un área espacial de China en el Sur”
(Worries Regarding Military Use of Chinese Space Station in Argentina). La
Nacion. Accessed from http://www.lanacion.com.ar/1725382-preocupa-eleventual-uso-militar-de-una-estacion-china-en-neuquen
“Preocupa a EE.UU. y a Europa la base espacial de China en Neuquén” (United
States and Europe Worried About Chinese Space Station in Neuquen). La
Nacion, 17 March 2015. http://www.lanacion.com.ar/1776764-preocupa-aeeuu-y-a-europa-la-base-espacial-de-china-en-neuquen

OEWATCH
Check out back issues
of FMSO’s Operational
Environment Watch dating
back to 2011. They provide
translated selections and
analysis from a diverse
range of foreign articles
and other media that our
analysts believe give military
and security experts an
added dimension to their
critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.

http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/oewpastissues.html
OE Watch | Jan - Feb 2017

80

