community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 7
Issue #9
October 2017

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

NORTH

KOREA

A VIEW FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
5
7
8
9

10
12
13
15

Egypt’s Rising Profile in Syria
New Military Facilities in Syrian Regime Strongholds
Iran: Ex-IRGC Leader Targets UAE
Iran Claims to be Among World’s Top Radar Producers
Iran: Comprehensive Legal System for Internet and
Cyberspace
Iran Reveals UAV Base with a Display of Drones and
Missiles
A Nuanced Look at Turkish-Iranian Relations
Turkey Opens Military Training Base in Somalia
Yemeni-Manufactured Anti-Materiel Guns

AFRICA
16
17
18
19
20

Trends in African Conflict
The Risk to Africa from Chinese Investment
Lesotho: Drought and Gender-Based Violence
Lesotho: Standby Force Moves to Avert Further Instability
Zimbabwe: Immunity for Accused Killers

LATIN AMERICA
21
22
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Colombia: Land of Peace?
ELN Peace Accord
Latin Americans and Catalonian Independence
FARC’s New Name
Authorities Seize First-Ever Electric Submarine in Colombia
The Future of Venezuela’s Leadership
Political Crisis in Venezuela: “Another Turn of the Screw”
The Italian Mafia’s Operations in the Dominican Republic
Honduran Government to Enhance Border Security
Brazil’s Controversial New Anti-Terrorism Law
Gangs and Social Media
China Becomes New Leader in Cuban Trade

ASIA-PACIFIC
32
33
34
35
37
38
39

The PLA at 90: On the Road to Becoming a World-Class
Military?
China and India Resolve Border Dispute
The BRICS Meeting and the Xiamen Declaration
China: Military Applications of Advances in Robotics
Hong Kong’s Counter-Terrorism Efforts
Radicalization Trends in Indonesia
The Kra Canal: A Global Megaproject?

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
40
41
43

Are Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan Resolving their Border
Issues?
Chinese Intentions for Sri Lanka’s Hambantota Port
Israel’s Investigation Into a UAV Strike on the Armenian
Army

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
44
46
48
50
51
52
54
55
57
58
60
61
62
63

Russia’s ‘Tsirkon’ Hypersonic Cruise Missile
The Naval Infantry’s New ‘Over-The-Horizon’ Bumerang BTR
Naval Infantry Increasing Amphibious Warfare Capabilities
Russia’s Reconnaissance Strike and Fire Systems Integrated into
Airborne Forces
Aerospace Troops’ Warrant Officer Academy Now Awarding
Bachelor Degrees
Pipeline Troops
Cold Weather Cranking is so Last Century
BMPT “Terminator-3” Joining Russian Armed Forces
Strengthening Russian-Serbian Military Relations
The Syrian Model for Libya?
New and Improved Red Star
Joint Belarus-Russia Search for Unrecovered Defenders
Russia’s International Military Relations
Russia’s Shoigu Impresses Niger with Syria Experience

DPRK
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
72

A Chinese Scholar’s Perspective on the North Korea Crisis
China: US Presence is a Bigger Threat than North Korea
China Must Play Balancing Act on North Korea
How Would Russia Respond to War on the Korean Peninsula?
Russia and North Korea: The Enemy of My Enemy
The North Korea-Russia Joint Declaration of Friendship
Nuclear Dagger: Japanese Views on North Korea
North Korea: The View from Egypt

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 7 | Issue 9

October | 2017

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Karen Kaya
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Zach Kelsay
		
Asia-Pacific

Stephen Armitage
Dennis J. Blasko
Fen Chen
Kaitlyn Johnson
David Hunter-Chester
Cindy Hurst
Elsa Kania
Spenser Shanks
Jacob Zenn

		
Central Asia, Caucasus

Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Jacob Zenn

ON THE COVER: Rendition of undated photo of North Korean leader
Kim Jong Un witnessing a missile launch.
Source: Own Work based on image released by North Korea’s Korean Central News Agency (KCNA). kcna.kp, Public
Domain.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt’s Rising Profile in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Until recently, Egypt
was not an active player in the Syrian crisis. This
appears to be changing, with Egypt’s successful
brokering of a de-escalation deal and cease-fire
agreement between rebel militias and the regime
in July and August, with the support of Russia.
The accompanying passages from various Middle
Eastern sources discuss Egypt’s rising profile in
Syria from different regional perspectives. While
Israel and many of the Gulf countries are happy
to see a more active Egypt in Syria, Turkey is not
so keen on a new player in an area where it had
hoped to be one of the main peace brokers. Russia
appears to be the main driving force behind this
development.
The first passage from Israeli daily Haaretz
discusses Egypt’s success in the two recent ceasefire deals, and claims that Egypt’s presence in
Syria is a positive development for Israel. The
author notes that “any country engaged in blocking
Iran’s influence in Syria serves Israel’s interests.”
This is especially true when that country is Egypt,
which he points out is “Israel’s partner in the war
on terror in Sinai and an ally (together with Saudi
Arabia and Jordan) with whom it sees eye to eye
about both the Iranian threat and the danger of
Syria disintegrating into cantons.”
The second passage from an article by a wellknown Turkish security analyst, references
Russian Izvestiya and claims that Egyptian
soldiers are now in Syria. He argues that
Egypt’s arrival in Syria has to do with the Qatar
crisis along with “a project to end the Muslim
Brotherhood everywhere and to encircle Turkey.”
The third passage, written by an Egyptian
journalist for Al Monitor, discusses Russia’s
interest in “pushing” Egypt into this role. He
claims that “Moscow believes Egypt’s relations
with both parties to the Syrian conflict may
qualify it to sponsor future agreements that
may end the long-running conflict.” He points
out that Egypt is a platform for negotiations and
a messenger between the parties in the Syrian
conflict.
The fourth passage from Gulf News, notes
that the UAE and Russia are supporting Saudi
and Egyptian efforts to reach peace in Syria. It
also notes that a UAE official criticized Iran and
Turkey’s practices “that attempt to harm [the]
integrity and sovereignty of Syria.” (continued)

Source: Zvi Bar’el, “In Blow to Iran, Egypt Becomes Surprise New Player in Syria,”
Haaretz.com, 21 August 2017. http://www.haaretz.com/middle-east-news/
syria/1.808039
A new and surprising player has recently entered the Syrian arena and has already
contributed to establishing local cease-fires: Egypt received Saudi and Russian
“permission” to conduct negotiations between the rebel militias and the regime, both in
Ghouta al-Sharqiya (east of Damascus) and the northern neighborhoods in the city of
Homs. In both cases, it managed to get a cease-fire deal signed – in the former on July
22, in the latter in early August.
Both areas are part of the de-escalation zones on which Russia, Turkey and Iran
agreed in May, in consultation with the United States. But this is the first time Egypt
has played an active role in diplomatic negotiations between the warring parties that
produced positive results...
From Israel’s standpoint, Egypt’s involvement is important. Any country engaged in
blocking Iran’s influence in Syria serves Israel’s interests. But that’s especially true
when said country is Egypt, which is Israel’s partner in the war on terror in Sinai and
an ally (together with Saudi Arabia and Jordan) with whom it sees eye to eye about
both the Iranian threat and the danger of Syria disintegrating into cantons...
But it would be going too far, at least at this stage, to predict that Iran’s role in Syria
will wane due to Egypt’s involvement. The Syrian regime owes its very survival to Iran
and Russia. Even under a diplomatic agreement, these countries will continue to serve
as Syria’s strategic depth.
Source: Mete Yarar, “Suriye’de bir Mısır askeri eksikti (Egyptian soldiers were the only
ones missing in Syria),” Karar.com, 31 August 2017. http://www.karar.com/yazarlar/
mete-yarar/suriyede-bir-misir-askeri-eksikti-4823
A Russian military diplomatic source who spoke to Izvestiya said the following in
response to a question about Egyptian soldiers in Syria: “Of course this is true.
Everyone understands that being included in the Syria crisis will allow influence on
how things in this country [Syria] and in the region will evolve. There is nothing to be
surprised about.”...
I think Egypt’s arrival onto the Syrian [scene] has to do with the tension that the Gulf
countries, including Egypt, have [with Qatar]. It is part of a project to end the Muslim
Brotherhood everywhere and to encircle Turkey. The strongest evidence of this is the
fact that they just entered the Syrian civil war after staying away for five years.
Source: Amr Eltohamy, “The Limits of Egypt’s Role in the Syria Crisis,” Al Monitor.
com, 9 August 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/08/egyptsponsors-truce-deal-syria-homs-eastern-ghouta-role.html
He [Tarek Fahmi, a professor of political science at the American University in
Cairo] told Al-Monitor, “Egypt hosted the negotiations as a result of the clear Russian
endeavor to boost the Egyptian role in the Syrian crisis. Russia will push Egypt to fill
the vacant position of impartial mediator in the Syrian crisis by hosting and organizing
more negotiations and agreements relating to the Syrian crisis in the coming period.”...
Egypt seems to be nothing more than a platform for negotiations and a messenger
between the parties to the Syrian conflict. In the meantime, Russia seems to be
encouraging Egypt to keep playing this role. Moscow believes Egypt’s relations with
both parties to the Syrian conflict may qualify it to sponsor future agreements that may
end the long-running conflict.

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Egypt’s Rising Profile in Syria
Since coming to office, Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi has
expressed support for Bashar al-Assad’s regime and its army. This
was in contrast to his predecessor, Mohammed Morsi, who had cut
Egypt’s relations with Syria. Sisi’s position favoring Assad to stay in
power was officially confirmed on 7 October 2016, when Egypt voted
in favor of a Russian draft resolution on Syria at the UN Security
Council. At the time, this had angered Saudi Arabia. However, since
the Qatar crisis, and Egypt’s position on the side of the Gulf countries
against Qatar, it appears that the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Russia
and Israel’s positions are converging on Syria. However, the author of
the Haaretz piece claims that it would be “going too far” to say that
Egypt’s involvement in Syria may reduce Iran’s role in the country.
(Also see: “Syria, Egypt, Libya: A New Russia Dominated Axis?” OE
Watch, May 2017). End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: “UAE, Russia throw weight behind Saudi, Egyptian efforts
to reach peace in Syria,” Gulf News, 29 August 2017. http://
gulfnews.com/news/mena/syria/uae-russia-throw-weight-behindsaudi-egyptian-efforts-to-reach-peace-in-syria-1.2082174
The UAE and Russia on Tuesday reiterated their firm stance
towards a political solution to the crisis in Syria, throwing full
weight behind efforts by Saudi Arabia and Egypt in this regard...
[Shaikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, UAE Minister of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation] criticised Iran and Turkey’s
practices that “attempt to harm [the] integrity and sovereignty of
Syria.”

“A new and surprising player has recently entered the Syrian arena and has already contributed
to establishing local cease-fires: Egypt received Saudi and Russian ‘permission’ to conduct
negotiations between the rebel militias and the regime, both in Ghouta al-Sharqiya (east of
Damascus) and the northern neighborhoods in the city of Homs. In both cases, it managed to
get a cease-fire deal signed .... this is the first time Egypt has played an active role in diplomatic
negotiations between the warring parties that produced positive results.”

Russian President Vladimir Putin with President of Egypt Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, 4 September 2017.
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/55521, CC BY SA 4.0.

OE Watch | October 2017

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
New Military Facilities in Syrian Regime Strongholds
OE Watch Commentary: The Syrian facility which,
according to media reports was struck by Israeli missiles
in early September, first came to public attention in a
mid-July investigative report by the Syrian opposition
news website Zaman al-Wasl. The investigative report,
parts of which are excerpted alongside this commentary,
was based on satellite imagery and intelligence passed
on by an alleged insider. It details two separate facilities.
The first, located in Wadi Jihanam (“Hell Valley”), is
allegedly under construction and is to be used for domestic
production of the “M600” short-range guided missiles,
which are Syrian versions of the Iranian Fateh-110 missile.
The site is linked to the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Center (SSRC), a government organization
involved in the development of the Syrian military’s
advanced weapons systems. In mid-August, Israeli and
international media also reported on the existence of this
facility.
The accompanying passage from the Zaman al-Wasl
report also discusses a second facility, located in an
area known as “Shaykh Ghadhban.” According to the
passage, this facility was originally located in Aleppo but
was transferred in 2013 for security reasons. The newly
located facility was refurbished with Iranian help and
began operating in early 2017, according to the report,
producing 220-mm and 302-mm rockets before it was hit
by Israel. According to the second accompanying passage,
the strikes have rendered the rocket production facility
inoperable for at least six months.
In late August Zaman al-Wasl reported on a third
facility in the area, this one a Russian military facility
within a Syrian Air Defense base. According to the third
accompanying passage, the Russian military has deployed
advanced weaponry to this strategic hilltop location,
including S-400 air defense systems, Yakhont (P-800
Oniks) anti-ship and Iskander (9K720) short-range ballistic
missile systems, and Krasukha-4 EW radar-jamming
equipment.
These three facilities are relatively close to one another,
clustered in the triangle between the cities of Hama,
Tartous and Lattakia, as can be seen in the accompanying
map. This Alawite-majority mountainous area is favorable
physical and human terrain for the Syrian regime, which
is why sensitive military production facilities were moved
here from other parts of Syria. The relocation and reviving
of these facilities at a time when the Syrian war appears to
be cooling down locally but heating up regionally highlight
the strategic importance of Syria’s domestic missile
production program. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

Source:
‫ كشف ال ّلغز‬.. ‫صواريخ وادي جهنّم‬
“Wadi Jihanam Missiles… Uncovering the Mystery,” Zaman al-Wasl, 25 July
2017. https://www.zamanalwsl.net/news/article/80408
Work began on the center in 2016. According to intelligence obtained by Zaman
al-Wasl it is a research center that is to be opened in late 2017. The available
information states that the center is a factory for production and development
of long-range and ballistic M600 missiles (the secret name used by the research
center for Iranian Fateh-110 missiles), whose domestic names are “Maysaloon”
and “Tishreen.” The facility lies around 15 kilometers east of Banyas, in a
dry riverbed area known as “Wadi Jihanam”… Around 25 kilometers to the
southeast, Zaman al-Wasl discovered details on another facility, located around
5.5 kilometers northeast of Masyaf, in an area called “Shaykh Ghadhban,” at
the location of former “Project 111,” which failed. In late 2016 the regime began
easing the production for the “4,000 Center” and producing mid-range missiles
(220 and 302 mm), which had been transferred from New Aleppo (Halab alJadida) to this site. Iran helped replace damaged machinery that the regime
was unable to transfer, and according to reports production resumed in early
2017. The Wadi Jihanam and Shaykh Ghadhban file is one that goes beyond the
local conflict into the realm of regional and international danger. Long-range
missiles and new research centers are complicated issues that involve strategies
and conflicts ranging from Iran to Moscow to Washington, with Israel not far
behind.
Source:
‫الطائرات اإلسرائيلية كانت مكشوفة لشبكتي الرادار السوري والروسي وهذه نتائ الغارات على‬..‫مصادر‬
‫الشيخ غضبان‬
“Source: Israeli Jets Were Visible to Syrian and Russian Radars and These are
the Results of the Strikes on ‘Shaykh Ghadban’,” Zaman al-Wasl, 11 September
2017. https://www.zamanalwsl.net/news/article/81431/
The source told Zaman al-Wasl that the strikes destroyed a large part of the
center after being directly targeted by Israeli jets using GBU-28 bunker busting
bombs, which can penetrate as deep as 35 meters below ground. The Israeli
strikes came after Russian military leaders announced the establishment of
an air defense radar system to protect Syrian airspace by joining the Russian
and Syrian air defense systems. An anonymous source from within the Syrian
regime army said that the Israeli strikes targeted the actual production lines,
denying rumors that claimed the target was the command center of the 4th
Sector. The area that was destroyed, Zaman al-Wasl discovered, was the new
area that has mostly Iranian-produced lines and equipment, after the factory
was moved from New Aleppo to Shaykh Ghadhban. He said that the area that
was destroyed is in the actual production area of Shaykh Ghadhban, located
in the northwest sector and under the command of Missile Production Branch
350. The anonymous source noted that the warhead storage area was destroyed
as well as the casing area. The production and fuse storage sectors were also
damaged, and the sector where the finished missiles were stored was also
destroyed, according to the source. The source added that the Assad regime will
be unable to resume production for 6 months at the site, while it is rebuilt and
replacement machinery is provided for that which was destroyed. The factory
was used to produce 220mm and 302mm rockets, of which Hizbullah has
obtained a fair amount.

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: New Military Facilities in Syrian Regime
Strongholds
“Long-range missiles and new research centers are complicated issues that involve strategies and conflicts
ranging from Iran to Moscow to Washington, with Israel not far behind.”
Source:
‫الكشف عن قاعدة روسية سرية وخطيرة في مناطق مواالة نظام األسد‬
“The Discovery of ‘Secret and Dangerous’ Russian Base in Areas Loyal to Assad Regime,” Zaman al-Wasl, 25 August 2017. https://www.
zamanalwsl.net/news/article/81113/
A reliable source said that the Russians began work early this year on a base that includes some of Russia’s newest and most deadly
weapons, nearly a year after it was established (late 2016) in the Masyaf area in rural Hama, near the Syrian coast. The source told Zaman
al-Wasl that the base is on a hill called “Dhaher Rama Ahmed” and which is over 1,300 feet above sea level. This is a military zone that
overlooks the coast and the sea, part of the “29th S-200 Air Defense Regiment”… Most important, according to the source, is the firepower
amassed by the Russians here, making it the largest strike force in Syria aside from the Hmaymim Airbase. The base includes the new S-400
battery, which is the most important air defense system available globally. It also includes, according to the source, Iskander surface-tosurface missiles, which is the newest such Russian missile. It also includes Yakhont anti-ship missiles, which can also be used as surface
missiles… The base also includes the most modern radar and electronic warfare vehicles in Russian possession, through which they can jam
signals and eavesdrop over a large area, including the advanced Krasukha-4 equipment.

Three New Military Facilities in Syrian Regime Strongholds.

Source: Author’s map based on https://www.openstreetmap.org/, CC BY-SA 2.0 (https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright).

OE Watch | October 2017

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Ex-IRGC Leader Targets UAE
OE Watch Commentary: For decades after the
Islamic Revolution, the United Arab Emirates (UAE)
retained cordial relations with the Islamic Republic of
Iran. While the Emirati leadership has always been
oriented to the United States and the moderate Arab
bloc, its extensive economic ties made it reluctant to
be an active participant in efforts to constrain Iran. In
effect, Tehran and Abu Dhabi were in a stand-off: If
Iran sponsored terrorism inside the UAE, Abu Dhabi
could seize hundreds of millions if not billions of
dollars in investments which Iran maintained in the
various emirates. If, on the other hand, the United Arab
Emirates took a more aggressive stance toward the
Islamic Republic, Iran might undermine the stability
and security which allowed the UAE to prosper.
In recent years, however, Emirati authorities have
Abu Dhabi’s skyline.
Source: Raganesh, Wikimedia Commons, goo.gl/9Z7gkh, public domain.
grown increasingly concerned about Iranian behavior in
their neighborhood. The Emirati government opposes
The United Arab Emirates…will collapse even without
both direct Iranian involvement in the Syrian civil war
missiles.
and Iran’s efforts to seize advantage from sectarian unrest
inside Bahrain to smuggle weaponry to illicit groups in that Arab nation. The Emirati military
has become an active participant with Saudi Arabia in efforts to roll back the Houthi take-over
Source: @ir_rezaee (Twitter), 2 September
of Yemen. Indeed, in Yemen if not in Syria, the Emirates now finds itself in a proxy war with the
2017. https://twitter.com/ir_rezaee/
status/903994427194175489
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). Simply put, the old understanding between the two
neighbors across the Persian Gulf is crumbling.
“The United Arab Emirates is a paper
tower.
It will collapse even without
It is in this context, that the 2 September 2017 tweet by Mohsen Rezaei (and the Iranian press
missiles.”
coverage of it excerpted here from a reformist outlet) is interesting. Western diplomats make

“

much of Iranian officials’ tweets. For example, when President Hassan Rouhani tweeted Rosh
Hashanah (Jewish New Year) greetings in 2013, many commentators interpreted it as a sign
of moderation. Likewise, few diplomats or analysts raised doubts about Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei’s tweets outlining Iran’s nuclear negotiation redlines. Rezaei is one of the Islamic
Republic’s most significant political figures. In 1981, he became the IRGC’s youngest chief
commander, a post he held until 1997. He subsequently became secretary of the Expediency and
Discernment Council, a position to which he was appointed by the Supreme Leader and a post
he still holds. He has twice stood for presidential election.
Rezaei tweeted: “The United Arab Emirates is a paper tower. It will collapse even without
missiles.” The spark for Rezaei’s remarks appears to have been an August meeting between
Emirati Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan and his Russian counterpart
Sergei Lavrov in which Bin Zayed reportedly accused Iran of acting like a colonial power in the
Arab world, a reference to Iranian boots-on-the-ground in Syria.

”

Source: Mohsen Rezaei: Emirat Burj-e
Kaghez ast; Bidun Mushak ham Faru
Mirezad (The United Arab Emirates is a
paper tower. It will collapse even without
missiles),” Aftab News, 3 September 2017.
https://goo.gl/RMQwac
“Mohsen Rezaei, secretary of the
Expediency Council, in his twitter post
reacted sharply to recent reports by the
authorities of the United Arab Emirates
against Islamic Iran. He said in his twitter
post: “The United Arab Emirates is a
paper tower. It will collapse even without
missiles.”

Rezaei’s threat appears to suggest that at least some in Iran’s hierarchy will consider efforts to
destabilize the UAE. This may reflect both growing Iranian boldness brought by momentum in
recent years and the sense among Iran’s leadership that the lifting of sanctions and alternatives for Iranian investment (and laundering) beyond
the UAE diminishes the importance of Abu Dhabi and Dubai. If that belief gains the upper hand in Tehran, or even just within the IRGC, it
may foreshadow the expansion of Iranian destabilization efforts beyond Bahrain, Yemen, and eastern Saudi Arabia, to the UAE as well.

Still, with the Emirati military punching above its weight regionally and with the Emirati intelligence service on the upper top end of the
regional spectrum, the Emirates will not take such interference lying down. Rezaei and his fellow travelers among Iran’s leadership may find
themselves guilty of wishful thinking if they believe it will be easy to destabilize the Emirates and what its model of development has come to
represent in the broader region. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

OE Watch | October 2017

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Claims to be Among World’s Top Radar Producers
OE Watch Commentary:
Iranian leaders increasingly take
public pride in Iran’s indigenous
military industry. Whether
discussing Iran’s formidable
unmanned aerial vehicle program,
its ballistic missiles, or its shipbuilding, Iranian generals often
argue that Iranian military
production can compete with
top-tier military powers across
the globe. The excerpted article
from an Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps-affiliated news site
is just the latest example. General
Farzad Esmaili, the head of Iran’s
Khatam al-Anbia Air Defense
Base, a service distinct from the
broader air force and in charge
of Iran’s internal air defense, is
The Kavosh radar (apparently an upgraded AN/MQP-50), part of the Mersad air defense system.
bragging about the technological
Source: Iranian Ministry of Defense, goo.gl/z5KNhJ, public domain.
achievements Iran has made in
radar technologies, claiming that Iran is “among the world’s top six
[Our] radars…can feel the enemy’s breath.
countries in the world in radar technology.”
Source: “Iran; Jozu Shesh Keshavarz bartar Donya dar Sakht
This is not the first time Esmaili has made broad claims about
Radar (Iran among World’s Top Six Radar Manufacturers),”
Iran’s radar prowess. In September 2016, Esmaili touched upon
MashreghNews.com, 2 September 2017. https://goo.gl/5AfNA5
similar themes when he announced the operationalization of the
According to Mashregh [News], General Farzad Esmaili,
‘Nazir’ radar system. At the time, Esmaili claimed that the Nazir
commander of Khatam al-Anbiya Air Defense Headquarters, said
could detect radar-evading targets and was immune to many
in a speech, “Due to the authority of the air defense in securing the
electronic warfare methods. He specifically said that Iran’s radar
country’s sky, the UN’s International Civil Aviation Organization
system could detect U2 spy planes, MQ-1 Predators, and RQ-4
found in June 2015 that the Iranian skies were the safest in the
Global Hawks. The fact that he singled out detection of these
region…” The commander of the Air Defense Headquarters, noting
aircraft and drones suggests that Iran still continues to see US
that the presence of unauthorized aircraft in [our] airspace.... said,
aircraft as its greatest challenge to the security of Iranian air space.
“Today, with the exception of domestic flights, the armed forces of
our country, military and emergency helicopters, there are about
While Iran has claimed to have integrated the Nazir radar and
1,700 flights daily in our skies.”
the Bavar-373, Iran’s domestically produced knock-off of the

“

Russian S-300 surface-to-air missile defense system, it is unclear
whether Iran has integrated the S-300 itself more broadly or other
deliveries it has received in the wake of the signing of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and the lifting of sanctions.
Esmaili’s new announcement suggests that Iran has improved
the integration of its radar and command-and-control rather than
unveiled entirely new systems. According to Iranian press reports
about the new air defense systems deployed around Iran, the
Basir is designed to transmit and display radar information to the
command-and-control network; the Sami is a portable system that
can be mounted on unmanned aerial vehicles to collect signaling,
radar, and navigation information; Sama detects and identifies
aerial objects for air traffic control; and Samet-1 coordinates datacollection among air defense sites. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

”

Establishing this security is fulfilled by an integrated defense
network and with the efforts of the staff of this headquarters of the
camp which occur around the clock. General Esmaili explained that
the “edge of technology” is a proven term, and said, “Today, we are
among the world’s top six countries in the world in radar technology
thanks to our youth’s efforts in air defense, defense industries, and
at universities, and we have been able to build smart missiles and
advanced radars and use them for aerial defense and, in this way,
we take the initiative to make the edge of technology in the world our
edge of technology.” “We are threatened in 360 degrees because of
the military bases of trans-regional states, and we are fully aware of
our ability to triple our defense systems.”
The Air Defense Headquarters commander described Sama, Basir,
Sami, Samet and Orouj as some of the most advanced air defense
systems deployed around the country, and said, “We have succeeded
in the production of radars in this context that can feel the enemy’s
breath.”
OE Watch | October 2017

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Comprehensive Legal System for
Internet and Cyberspace
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian government
has long sought to control the flow and consumption
of information, especially given the social engineering
component to the ideology at the heart of the Islamic
Republic. Simply put, the Iranian leadership believes that
control of the information and news available to the public
will facilitate the regime’s goal to transform society by
removing alternative social and political models in the
public conscience. It is in this context that the growth of
the internet and social media have challenged the Iranian
government. The ability of Iranians to utilize virtual private
networks (VPNs) to sidestep censorship or encrypted social
media platforms to communicate and organize undercuts the
perception of security among its top leaders.
In order to combat such new media independence,
the Iranian government is seeking to implement a
comprehensive media strategy that combines existing press
regulations with new laws to govern new media. Recent
efforts to require social media services to locate servers
inside Iran appear to be part of this strategy. A website
run by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
and dedicated to cyber issues called Gerdab.ir has now
published the broader outlines of the strategy, a portion of
which is excerpted here.
Of note is the justification that the government controls
media because it is the government’s role to define the
parameters of acceptable culture. In addition, the desire for
a common law to govern social media reflects the notion
that the reactive, patchwork approach to the phenomenon
employed by the regime to date no longer serves regime
interests.
Also important, the outline of the new legal framework
appears to promote the Supreme Council of Cyberspace—
appointed by the Supreme Leader—to the detriment of
the Passive Defense Organization, the subdivision of the
IRGC which traditionally oversaw Iranian cyber defense.
This does not mean a disempowerment of that organization
in terms of operations, but rather a diminishment of its
influence in shaping policy. Indeed, the call for far greater
internal monitoring likely means further empowerment and
resourcing of the Passive Defense Organization.
Lastly, the proposal suggests that the Islamic Republic
seeks to revive the idea of a national intranet, cut-off from
the wider world. This proposal was popular in Iran a decade
ago but was, at the time, not workable. It now appears,
however, that the Islamic Republic might seek to use new
technologies and new regulations such as the requirement
that services base their equipment inside Iran in order to try
again. That Iranian authorities can build upon lessons from
similar Chinese, Cuban, and Vietnamese attempts make
Iran’s forthcoming attempt to unplug itself from the rest of
the world more serious than in the past. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“It is essential to regulate the media and…cyberspace.”

Persian Language Keyboard.

Source: Blondinrikard Fröberg, goo.gl/LWAc3f, CCA-SA 3.O.

Source: “Nezam-e Haquqi Jameah’ Internetva Feza’ye Mojazi Keshavarz
(Comprehensive Legal System for the Country’s Internet and Cyberspace),”
Gerdab.ir, 22 August 2017. https://goo.gl/1LTZKw
Due to the importance of the media in the culture of societies, it is essential to
regulate the media and especially the media platform, such as cyber space, in a
legal manner. Because a direct link exists between the cultural system of society
and its legal system, it is essential to have a single legal perspective on the issue
of mass media. Based on this, it is possible to say that the legal system for the
internet and cyberspace should not be duplicated…
As previously mentioned, to end discrimination is the goal and necessity
of a comprehensive mass media law. It is essential that, in addition to the
simultaneous attention to the differences between various types of media and the
need for common rules between similar cases. Therefore, in a comprehensive
legal system of the Internet and cyberspace, it is necessary that there be a
correlation between the differences in the characteristics of different elements
and the maximization of similar legal treatments and rule in the same subjects.
In this case, for example, we don’t want to see that access to one external social
network is restricted, while another social network with similar characteristics is
not restricted only due to the lack of clarity on legal criteria…
Some suggestions for the use of a comprehensive mass media law for our
country as part of the comprehensive legal framework for the Internet and
cyberspace are as follows:
•
Determine the legal mechanism for creating and promoting a national
information network (national intranet): with technical and cultural policies
implemented by the Supreme Council of Cyberspace for the national intranet.
But the legal mechanism and relevant rules and regulations should also redefine
crime and punishment given the new cyber-cultural conditions in the country.
•
Serious implementation of regulations and approvals of upstream
institutions for the establishment, operation and supervision of internal and
external social networks….
•
Revision of the process and mechanism for monitoring and controlling
the content of cyberspace and filtering for the message sender and intelligent
monitoring as a prerequisite for the future.
OE Watch | October 2017

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Reveals UAV Base with a Display of Drones
and Missiles
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 September, Iran aired a video through its state
media, The Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB), showing one of the
country’s UAV bases. While this appeared to be a propaganda video making some
rather grandiose claims, such as “Our forces are ready at 3,700 bases of attack,” the
video did show off a lot of Iranian UAV capability.
During the unveiling of one of the bases, the Commander of the Iranian Air Defense
Force, Brigadier General Farzad Esmaili said, as a warning to Iran’s enemies, that
Iran’s airspace will be protected by UAVs. Esmaili explained that under his command,
Iran’s Air Defense Force constructed special hangars in undisclosed locations
throughout the country for their drones. While he would not provide information
of their whereabouts, the accompanying article indicates that airstrips were built in
desert and mountainous regions of the country.
The particular base Esmaili was reporting from is called “Khatam al-Anbia,” which
translates to “Last Prophet.” In the video, Esmaili states that the hangars store a
number of radars and missiles in addition to their many drones. He explains that some
of the drones are designed to carry missiles while others are meant for reconnaissance
purposes. Although Iran’s drone program dates back to the 1980s, the article notes
that Iran’s extensive buildup of its drone program is less than seven years old and
their capabilities have launched the country to elite status. In the accompanying video
from PressTV, Esmaili states that while other countries rely on financial potential to
build their defense forces, Iran is using the talent of its youth to further develop its
UAV program under the auspices of the Iran’s Air Defense Force. The articles provide
no further details regarding the specifications of Iran’s drones or their use. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bunker and Keshavarz)

Source: “Amir [beedar] Aseman-e Iran dar [ashiane
oghab] (Head of Iran’s Airspace Division Oversees
Drone Hangar),” EghtesadNews, 3 September 2017.
https://goo.gl/pmCmno
[Commander of the Iranian Air Defense Force,
Brigadier General Farzad Esmaili:] “Iran will also
be prepared on the front lines to defend against its
enemies. Our forces are ready at 3,700 bases of
attack.”
...“Iran has a base in the mountains, on the ground,
and on sea.”
Source: “Iran Unveils Drone Base with Warning to
Enemies,” PressTV, 4 September 2017. http://www.
presstv.ir/Detail/2017/09/04/533965/Iran-KhatamalAnbiya-Air-Defense-Base
[Commander of the Iranian Air Defense Force,
Brigadier General Farzad Esmaili:] “...while other
countries rely on financial potential to build their
defense forces, Iran is using the talent of its youth to
further develop its UAV program under the auspices
of the Iran’s Air Defense Force...”

“Roonamahee az ashiane oghab ha gharargahe parafande Khatam al-Anbia (Unveiling of Khatam al-Anbia’s Defense base).”
Source: IRIB News, http://www.iribnews.ir/fa/news/1792644/‫ییامنور‬-‫زا‬-‫هنایشآ‬-‫باقع‬-‫یاه‬-‫هاگرارق‬-‫دنفادپ‬-‫متاخ‬-‫ ءایبنالا‬, Public Domain.

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran Reveals UAV Base with a Display
of Drones and Missiles
“Our forces are ready at 3,700 bases of attack.”
- Commander of the Iranian Air Defense Force, Brigadier General Farzad Esmaili

“Roonamahee az ashiane oghab ha gharargahe parafande Khatam al-Anbia (Unveiling of Khatam al-Anbia’s Defense base).”
Source (UPPER IMAGE): IRIB News, http://www.iribnews.ir/fa/news/1792644/‫ییامنور‬-‫زا‬-‫هنایشآ‬-‫باقع‬-‫یاه‬-‫هاگرارق‬-‫دنفادپ‬-‫متاخ‬-‫ ءایبنالا‬, Public Domain.
Source (LOWER IMAGE): IRIB News, http://www.iribnews.ir/fa/news/1792644/‫ییامنور‬-‫زا‬-‫هنایشآ‬-‫باقع‬-‫یاه‬-‫هاگرارق‬-‫دنفادپ‬-‫متاخ‬-‫ ءایبنالا‬, Public Domain.

OE Watch | October 2017

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
A Nuanced Look at Turkish-Iranian Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Much has been written about the highlevel Iranian military delegation visit to Turkey in August 2017, which
many claimed was a historic event representing a turning point in
Turkish-Iranian relations. While the visit was certainly important,
Turkish expert Galip Dalay offers a more nuanced view in his column
in the Turkish daily Karar, in a series of articles analyzing TurkishIranian relations. In his articles, highlights of which are excerpted
here, Dalay considers the various factors impacting Turkish-Iranian
relations at this juncture. He claims that even though Turkey and
Iranian interests
to be converging, a closer look reveals that
they are not, arguing that the future of their relations look bleak.
Galip Dalay is a Turkish scholar, writer and senior associate fellow
on Turkey and Kurdish Affairs at the Al Jazeera Centre for Studies and
research director at the Al Sharq Forum, an independent international
network. Dalay identifies three key areas where Turkey and Iran’s
interests appear to be converging but discusses how they are actually
not: Kurdish geopolitics, Iraq, and Syria. On the issue of Kurdish
geopolitics, he argues that while Turkey and Iran have both voiced
their opposition to the independence referendum by the Kurdistan
Regional Government (KRG), a closer look reveals that their priorities
are different. Dalay argues that while the main threat for Iran is the
KRG’s independence initiatives, Turkey prioritizes reversing the gains
of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and what it claims to
be the PKK’s Syrian affiliate, the Democratic Union Party (PYD).
On the issue of Iraq, he points out that while both countries support
the territorial integrity and central government of that country, their
interests are quite different. He notes that there is an increasing “Shiaization” that is taking place in Iraq, which he claims will only continue
in Iraq after the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has been
defeated. He claims that this will “further marginalize Sunnis, push
Kurds even farther away from the center, and provoke radicalism.” He
points out that these are not in Turkey’s interests.
On the issue of Syria, Dalay claims that the argument that IranTurkey-Russia are converging on Syria misses the critical point that
Turkey made a dramatic change in its Syria policy. Turkey “had to
abandon its agenda of regime change, reduce its goals in Syria and
start a new process with Iran and Russia.” He argues that this does
not mean that the interests of these actors in Syria are aligned. For
example, he notes that Iran’s goal of eliminating the opposition and
confirming the legitimacy of the Assad regime is in stark contrast to
Turkey’s interests. He notes, that if Turkey accepts these goals, “it
would lose the most important bargaining chips it has regarding Syria...
and its influence in post-crisis Syria would be extremely limited.”
Dalay also discusses two “unknown” factors, which he claims will
impact relations: The way the Gulf crisis will develop; and the future
of US-Turkey relations, which he claims is tied to the future of US
relations with Syrian Kurdish groups. The main, perhaps only real
commonality between Turkey and Iran, he notes, is that both sides
believe that they are at risk of being the victims of the outcome in a
post-crisis Syria, rather than the architects, like they had hoped. In
addition, both actors oppose the re-drawing of borders in the region;
and both are opposed to the region being re-designed by outside actors.
In the final analysis, he claims that Iran has a stronger hand because
it has a vision for Iraq and Syria while Turkey only has red-lines. End
OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“... Iran has a vision or thesis for both countries
[Iraq and Syria], while Turkey has red-lines for
those countries.”
Source: Galip Dalay, “Türkiye-Iran ilişkilerinin geleceği (The
future of Turkey-Iran relations),” Karar.com, 7 September 2017.
http://www.karar.com/yazarlar/galip-dalay/turkiye-iran-iliskileriningelecegi-4869
“An issue that concerns both Iran and Turkey in the post-ISIS
era in Iraq and Syria has to do with the developments in regional
Kurdish geopolitics. OK but when Turkey and Iran talk about
regional Kurds, which groups are they referring to? For Iran, the
threat from the regional Kurdish geopolitics comes mainly from
Barzani’s Kurdish Regional Government and Iraqi Kurds’ search
for independence.... On the other hand, for Turkey, the main threat
emanates from the PKK-PYD... In the developing relations, Iran
prioritizes the prevention of Iraqi Kurds’ independence efforts;
while Turkey prioritizes the reversal of the PKK-PYD gains.”...
“In principle, both Turkey and Iran support the territorial integrity
of Iraq and the strengthening of the central government. But this
strengthening is taking place along with a “Shia-ization” policy.
This is a policy that Iran supports and is put in place by groups
close to Iran... All signs point to an increase in this policy in a postISIS Iraq.... [But] this process will further marginalize Sunnis, push
Kurds even farther away from the center, and provoke radicalism.
And it is unclear how these will help Turkey.”...
“Many things have been written about how Turkish-IranianRussian interests in Syria are converging. However, this diagnosis
misses a point: These positions did not converge by each actor
revising their old policies. While Iran and Russia have stuck to
their main Syria policy...Turkey made a dramatic change in its
former Syria policy and came closer to Russia and Iran. Turkey
had to abandon its agenda of regime change, reduce its goals in
Syria and start a new process with Iran and Russia. But this does
not mean that the interests of these actors in Syria are aligned.
Iran has not abandoned its goal of eliminating the opposition and
confirming the legitimacy of the Assad regime....[However] if Turkey
accepts the elimination of the opposition and the legitimacy of the
Assad regime, it would lose the most important bargaining chips it
has regarding Syria. And its influence in post-crisis Syria would be
extremely limited.”...
“ The picture that has emerged in the last few years shows us that
Iran has a vision or thesis for both countries [Iraq and Syria], while
Turkey has red-lines for those countries.”
Source: Galip Dalay, “Türkiye-Iran ilişkilerinin değişen mahiyeti
(The changing nature of Turkey-Iran relations),” Karar.com, 21
August 2017. http://www.karar.com/yazarlar/galip-dalay/turkiyeiran-iliskilerinin-degisen-mahiyeti-4742
“Turkey and Iran both think that they are at risk of being the victims
of the order that emerges in a post-crisis Syria, rather than its
architects.”

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

12

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: A Nuanced Look at Turkish-Iranian Relations
“Turkey and Iran both think that they are at risk of being the victims of the order that emerges in a postcrisis Syria, rather than its architects.”
Source: Galip Dalay, “Tahran’da Ortadoğu’yu konuşmak... (Discussing the Middle East in Tehran),” Karar.com, 27 July 2017. http://www.
karar.com/yazarlar/galip-dalay/tahranda-ortadoguyu-konusmak-4548
“In the new era, the two basic values that Iran and Turkey are likely to share are as follows: First, both actors oppose new borders in the
region. We saw this in the way both actors reacted to the independence referendum decision of Iraqi Kurdistan. Both actors are opposing
the independence initiative of the Kurdistan Regional Government more vehemently than the Iraqi central government.... Second, both Iran
and Turkey are opposed to the re-design of the region by outside actors. As we saw in the Qatar crisis most recently, both actors think that
the regional order put in place by external actors will leave them outside [of that order] and disregard their interests. This belief pushed both
actors to take the same position in the Qatar crisis....”

Turkey Opens Military Training Base in Somalia
OE Watch Commentary: In late August, Turkey opened its largest military base overseas, in Mogadishu, Somalia, as a training camp for
the Somali military. The ‘Somali Turkish Mission Force’ of approximately 200 Turkish military personnel was deployed to Somalia to improve
the Somali Armed Forces’ structure, training, education, military infrastructure and logistical systems. The accompanying passages from the
Turkish and international press discuss this development. The base comes one year after Turkey opened its largest embassy overseas, also in
Mogadishu, and is likely to boost Turkey’s soft power in Africa.
As the passages note, the base had been under construction for the last two years. It has the capacity to train 1,500 troops at a time, and cost
about $50 million. It hosts three military schools, dorms and depots over an area of 400 hectares. This is Turkey’s second overseas military
installation, the first one being its base in Qatar, which opened in 2016. However, this is different than the one in Qatar, in that it is envisioned
purely as a training camp. As Turkey’s Ambassador to Somalia says in the first accompanying passage, this is part of Turkey’s comprehensive
policy in Somalia, which supports the rebuilding of the state and the country’s security institutions. He says, “... we thought of how we could
help rebuild the Somali armed forces. We decided the best way for this was to train [them]...” As the final passage notes, a special insignia was
designed for the Turkish unit. The insignia, which says “Somali Turkish Mission Force” and is decorated with the Turkish and Somali flags
along with the image of an eagle, has the inscription “African Eagle” underneath it.
Turkey has recently garnered international attention for its comprehensive development assistance to support peace and reconciliation in
Somalia. After some of the last members of the al-Shabaab terrorist group were chased out of Mogadishu in August 2011, Ankara dispatched
to the city around 500 development and aid workers, and since then has given the country close to a billion dollars worth of aid. In the same
month, then-Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan (now President) made history by becoming the first non-African leader to enter the city limits of
Mogadishu since the country collapsed after the fall of the Siad Barre regime in 1991. Turkish Airways subsequently became the first major
commercial carrier to fly into Mogadishu since then. In May 2010, Turkey hosted the UN Somali summit in Istanbul, where Turkey promised
development aid and military assistance to Somalia, in the form of providing training to Somali soldiers. The military training base is the
culmination of this promise. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The ‘Somali Turkish Mission Force’ has started its mission at the military training base built in
Somalia’s capital Mogadishu, and which is described as the largest Turkish military base outside of
Turkey.”
Source: “Türkiye Somali’de Askeri Tesis mi Açıyor? Büyükelçi “Olgan Bekar” Yanıtlıyor! (Is Turkey Opening a Military Facility in
Somalia? Ambassador Olgan Bekar Answers!),” CNNTurk, 7 June 2017. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qfGHmUIvGys
[Turkish ambassador to Somalia, Olgan Bekar:] “In Somali, the state is rebuilding itself, because after 1991, the state was completely
destroyed... Security institutions are necessary for this...You need security forces for this... As part of our comprehensive policy in Somalia, we
support the rebuilding of security institutions. In this framework, we have a set of bilateral agreements that organize our military relationship
with Somalia... Under these agreements, we thought of how we could help rebuild the Somali army. We decided the best way for this was to train
the Somali armed forces... Our training camp will be operational in early September.”

OE Watch | October 2017

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkey Opens Military Training Base in
Somalia

The embassy of Turkey in Mogadishu.

Source: By Welimo28 (Own work) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AThe_new_embassy_of_Turkey_in_Mogadishu.jpeg, CC BY SA 4.0.

Source: “Turkish military base in Somalia: Risks and opportunities,” Arab News, 17 August 2017. http://www.arabnews.com/node/1145846/
middle-east
“Construction began in March 2015. At the cost of some $50 million, the base will host three military schools, dormitories and depots over
an area of 400 hectares.
For training exercises with up to 10,000 Somali soldiers in early September, some 200 Turkish soldiers will be deployed at the base, which
will be able to train more than 1,500 troops at a time.
... It is not clear whether Turkish troops will be involved in combat missions against the militant group Al-Shabaab, which controls most of
south-central Somalia.
Turkey has been very active in Somalia since 2011, helping the country strengthen its public institutions and alleviate a severe famine...
Hasan Ozturk, an Africa expert from the Istanbul-based think tank BILGESAM, said...“For years, Turkey has been providing military
training to officers of many African Union (AU) countries, including Somalia. It became very costly to host and train them each time in
Turkey,” Ozturk told Arab News.
“Such training will also help Turkey’s broader international trade priorities, as the training will involve anti-piracy efforts, to which Turkey
has contributed in the past.”
Ibrahim Nassir, an Africa expert at the Ankara Center for Crisis and Policy Studies, said the camp will boost Turkey’s soft power in the
region and enhance its status as an essential player in regional security.
Source: “Türk birliğine özel arma: ‘Afrika Kartalı’ (Special insignia for the Turkish unit: ‘African Eagle’),” Savunma ve Teknoloji.com
(Defense and Technology), 11 September 2017. http://savunmaveteknoloji.com/turk-birligine-ozel-arma-afrika-kartali/
The Turkish military unit has started its mission at the military training base built in Somalia’s capital Mogadishu and which is described as
the largest Turkish military base outside of Turkey. A special insignia was designed for the Turkish unit, which started its duty on 22 August
2017. The insignia, which says “Somali Turkish Mission Force” and is decorated with the Turkish and Somali flags along with an eagle
image, has the inscription “African Eagle” underneath it.
The Somali Turkish Mission Force (STGK), has been deployed to Somalia to improve the Somali Armed Forces’ structure, training,
education, military infrastructure and logistical systems.
OE Watch | October 2017

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Yemeni-Manufactured Anti-Materiel Guns
OE Watch Commentary: Since seizing control of the Yemeni
capital Sana’a and much of former North Yemen in 2014, the coalition
led by Yemen’s Huthi Movement (aka Ansar Allah) has emphasized
its indigenous military production capabilities. Its “Department
of Military Industry” frequently publishes videos showcasing its
latest creations, which are usually reverse-engineered replicas and/
or modified versions of existing weapons systems and equipment.
Its most notable products to date include modified SCUDs, a series
of artillery rockets, and small UAVs. In late August, Yemen’s craftproduction military industry added anti-materiel rifles to its list of
products.
The latest Yemeni creation consists of seven medium and heavy
caliber guns and one sniper rifle. The accompanying passage, taken
from the official Yemeni news agency Saba, describes each in some
detail. A video showcasing the weapons was aired on the Huthilinked al-Masirah news channel. The video depicts a rudimentary
production process, on a small-scale and using improvised or
salvaged parts. The guns appear to be derived from existing
weapons, including Soviet-era heavy machine guns, the US-made
Barrett M82 rifle and M167 Vulcan anti-aircraft gun cannons.
Production capacity and weapon performance are unclear and
likely to be inflated in public pronouncements, making it hard to
gauge how this new line of guns might impact the Yemeni battlefield.
The announcement is important insofar as it reflects military
production priorities, which are presumably driven by battlefield
needs and available means of production. Ballistic missiles, artillery
rockets and surveillance UAVs have all become fundamental features
of the Yemeni conflict, used by the Huthis and their allies to grind
down Saudi and allied forces. If the new line of heavy rifles is
produced in sufficient numbers and works as advertised, we can
expect an uptick in the number and lethality of attacks by Huthiallied forces on Saudi outposts along the mountainous areas of their
shared border. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“The Military Production Department in the
Yemeni Defense Ministry announced the existence
of a unit for producing and developing a variety
of sniper rifles exclusively with Yemeni labor and
know-how…”

Yemeni “War Media” Promotional Video on Domestically Produced Rifles.
Source: Yemeni “War Media” video (YouTube Screenshot), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PcJDY_DnchI, Public Domain.

Source:
‫دائرة التصنيع العسكري تكشف عن وحدة تصنيع القناصات محلية الصنع‬
A“Military Production Department Unveils Domestic Production
Sniper Rifle Unit,” Saba News, 23 August 2017. http://www.
sabanews.net/ar/news472601.htm
The Military Production Department in the Yemeni Defense Ministry
announced the existence of a unit for producing and developing a
variety of sniper rifles exclusively with Yemeni labor and know-how…
1.
Qassem Sniper Rifle, 20 mm caliber anti-armor with a range
of 5,000 meters, also used for low-flying air defense, weighing 25
kilograms, electrical power, 2,320 mms in length.
2.
Khatef Sniper Rifle, 12.7 mm caliber tactical anti-materiel and
anti-personnel with a range of 2,500 meters, weighing no more than 14
kilograms, mechanical power, 1,600 mms in length making it mobile
and easy to conceal, usable in a variety of environments.
3.
Ashtar Sniper Rifle, 14 mm caliber individual use tactical
anti-armor with a range of 3,000 meters, can be used for low-flying air
defense, weighing no more than 28 kilograms, mechanical power, no
longer than 2,120 mms.
4.
Hasem Sniper Rifle, 20 mm caliber anti-armor with range
of 2,500 meters, can be used for low-flying air defense, weighing 28
kilograms, electrical power, no longer than 2,240 mms.
5.
Dhu al-Fiqar 2 Sniper Rifle, 23 mm caliber anti-armor and
concrete fortifications, one of the main achievements in military
production given the need for such equipment, with range of 4,000
meters, can be used for low-flying air defense, weighing 62 kilograms,
mechanical power, length 2,470 mms.
6.
Sarmad Sniper Rifle, 50 mm caliber individual use anti-armor,
fortifications, and anti-materiel, with range of 1,250 meters, weight of
13 kilograms, mechanical power and length of 1,700 mms. This is one
of the most important multi-use tactical sniper rifles, can be used in
various environments, can have additional uses like correction and use
multi-use ammunition.
7.
Dhu al-Fiqar 1 Sniper Rifle, 23 mm caliber anti-armor,
with range of 2,000 meters, weighing no more than 25 kilograms,
mechanical power and length of 2,460 mms, has various tactical uses
in the battlefield, can be used against armored vehicles, convoys and to
strike fortifications.

Dhu al-Fiqar 1 Rifle.

8.
Sarem Sniper Rifle, 8 mm caliber anti-personnel, with range of
1,600 meters, lightweight and easy to transport and conceal, weighing
4 kilograms, mechanical power, length no more than 1,490 mms.

Source: Ansar Allah Website, http://www.ansarollah.com/archives/107669 , Public Domain.

OE Watch | October 2017

15

AFRICA
Trends in African Conflict
OE Watch Commentary: The “African Futures:
Key Trends to 2035” policy brief published by the
South African Institute for Security Studies is filled
with economic, demographic, political, and conflict
trends, all based on careful analyses of historical
data. The accompanying passages from the report
highlight some of the noteworthy trends.
As the report relates, while some aspects of
conflict have remained relatively stable in recent
years, such as the location of fighting generally
being in four areas (North Africa, the Sahel and
West Africa, the Horn, and the Great Lakes region);
other characteristics have changed, such as the
percentage each type of conflict contributes to the
total. As an example, in 2016 the most common
types of conflict, in descending order, were riots
and protests, violence against civilians, battles,
and a category called ‘remote violence’ which
encompasses the use of improvised explosive
IEDs, such as the ones being searched for by these two AMISOM soldiers in Somalia, are
devices (IEDs). During that year riots and protests
increasingly common in Africa.
comprised 40% of the total African conflict events, an
Source: AMISOM Flickr Feed, https://goo.gl/7b5HeT, Public Domain.
increase of 10% over 2015. Although riots and protests
showed that increase in 2016, the two categories of ‘battles between armed groups’ and ‘remote
Analysts argue that the
violence’ still accounted for the majority of conflict events that year. Indeed the rise in the use of
increasing levels of criminal
IEDs across Africa has been pronounced. From 2010 to 2011, it nearly doubled and continued to
violence in Southern Africa,
steadily increase since then.

“

The groups involved in conflicts are also changing. While rebel groups and state forces have
traditionally been the most common actors, increasingly conflicts are dominated by political and
communal militias as well as unidentified but armed groups.
Africa, like much of the rest of the world, has also been the victim of terrorist attacks. These
jumped from 3,842 in 2013 to 13,333 in 2014; but then dropped to 10,469 in 2015, a decrease that
can perhaps be attributed in part to counterterrorism efforts.

West Africa, North Africa
and the Sahel are expected to
cause more deaths than armed
conflict in the next five to 15
years and beyond.”

Perhaps most striking in this report is the prediction that while politically motivated violence will continue to be a part of the African
landscape, in the next five to 15 years criminal activity will surpass armed conflicts as a cause of death on the continent. This might come as a
surprise for those who mainly follow the news from large international news outlets where the murder of one or two people at a time during a
criminal act, unless the victims and/or assailants were famous, generally does not make the headlines. However, while generally underreported in
large international papers and their corresponding websites, local African papers frequently provide a steady stream of such reports.
Since the majority of sub-Saharan nations suffer from low levels of state capacity, the report predicts that violence and conflict are likely to
continue into the future. However, while the authors say the international community will play a role in African security, particularly through
the provision of peacekeepers, it is uncertain to what extent the international community is willing to intervene in what might be Africa’s most
pressing security problem: the rise of criminal violence. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Jakkie Cilliers, Julia Schunemann, Zachary Donnenfeld, Ciara Aucoin, and Alex Porter, “African Futures: Key Trends to 2035,”
Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 1 September 2017. https://issafrica.org/research/policy-brief/african-futures-key-trends-to-2035
In Africa, levels of high-fatality violence are now generally comparable to those of half a century ago and are significantly lower than during
the post-Cold War period. However, the continent is witnessing an increase in the number of violent incidents largely driven by riots and
protests.
The actors and groups involved in conflicts are also changing. Rebel groups and state forces are historically the most common actors, but
increasingly, political and communal militias and unidentified armed groups dominate.
Politically motivated violence, however, is only part of Africa’s future. Analysts argue that the increasing levels of violence in Southern
Africa, West Africa, North Africa and the Sahel are expected to cause more deaths than armed conflict in the next five to 15 years and beyond.

OE Watch | October 2017

16

AFRICA
The Risk to Africa from Chinese Investment
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese president Xi Jinping calls it the “project of the century,” and at an estimated cost of $5 trillion, the
One Belt One Road (OBOR) initiative which will build new roads, railways, and pipelines across 60 countries in Asia, Europe and Africa is
certainly ambitious. However, as the accompanying article relates, there are lingering questions regarding potential downsides to this enormous
undertaking. In other words, is it good for Africa?
It is generally acknowledged that the continent would benefit from increased transportation infrastructure. But a cost benefit analysis of
OBOR, which aims to supply a significant chunk of those needed roads, bridges, and trains, might show more cost than benefit, especially when
looking at the long-term picture. One of the biggest concerns is the amount of debt African countries will acquire. Projects such as the Standard
Gauge Railway in Kenya and the Addis Ababa-Djibouti Railway required host countries to undertake billions of dollars of loans, mostly
from Chinese state banks. OBOR will likely have the same requirements. This means that if there is a drop in commodity prices, African
governments may find themselves struggling to service the enormous and growing debts.
Another significant concern harkens back to colonial era days; that the infrastructure being built will mostly be used to shuttle resources
out of the continent without creating true opportunities for economic growth on the continent, basically an exploitation of resources. Equally
concerning is what those train cars will be returning with after they have delivered their coal, rare earth minerals, and other resources to China:
inexpensive Chinese goods that could undercut local African manufacturing.
One view of this massive influx of Chinese capital is that while investment is badly needed in
Africa, the continent’s infrastructure deficit reflects broader economic and societal problems. As
an example, a history of mismanagement of funds as well as outright corruption by some African
governments often left little money for road construction. Having China at least partially fund
transportation projects does not address the underlying problems as to why some African countries
are unable to fully fund the projects themselves.

Source: “Why China’s audacious
building plans could be a major strain on
African economies,” The Conversation
(South Africa), 5 September 2017.
https://theconversation.com/whychinas-audacious-building-planscould-be-a-major-strain-on-africaneconomies-81115

As the accompanying article relates, underperforming infrastructure projects, falling commodity
prices, and massive debt levels are a recipe for disaster. Complicating the situation are China’s own
economic problems. In this context, the article warns, “If the OBOR gamble fails, China could take
Africa down with it.” End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“If the OBOR (One Belt One Road initiative) gamble fails, China could
take Africa down with it.”

First proposed in 2013, OBOR is the
latest in a line of projects designed
to increase China’s economic reach.
Though its scale is unprecedented,
OBOR’s basic objective is the
geographical expansion of Chinese
capitalism.
The initiative is part of a massive
restructuring of the Chinese economy
as the country seeks to move from a
“newly-industrialized” economy to a
“ fully-developed” one.
[Many African states] will be wary
of an infrastructure heavy agenda
resulting in a return to a colonial-style
situation in which transport links are
simply created to shuttle resources out
of the host country, without creating
opportunities for growth.
OBOR investments will bring much
needed capital to the continent, yet they
must be carefully supervised. Under
performing infrastructure projects,
slumping commodity prices, and rising
debt levels are a recipe for crisis. The
situation will be further complicated
by China’s own uncertain economic
prospects. If the OBOR gamble fails,
China could take Africa down with it.

Do the benefits outweigh the risks by having Chinese financing for projects such as the Mombasa-Nairobi standard gauge railway?
Source: Mwangi Kirubi, https://www.flickr.com/photos/mwangee/34181402040/ , CC BY-NC 2.0.

OE Watch | October 2017

17

AFRICA
Lesotho: Drought and Gender-Based Violence
OE Watch Commentary: In 2015-2016, an El Ninorelated drought devastated the tiny country of Lesotho’s
farms and fields, resulting in massive crop failures and loss
of livestock. However, as the author of the accompanying
article points out, less noticeable amidst this period of acute
food insecurity was the tremendous increase in violence
against women, girls, and other vulnerable groups that
was also occurring. While correlation does not always
mean causation, it does appear in this instance as rainfall
decreased, gender-based violence (GBV) increased,
suggesting a link between the two, with that link being herd
boys.
The study looking at the drought and GBV was conducted
by the United Nations Populations Fund during November
and December 2016, with the results only recently released.
Heading the list of GBV perpetrators were herd boys,
shepherds who themselves were victims of the drought
as they were often forced to leave school in search
of food. In turn, however, the herd boys created new
victims as they raped, robbed, and physically assaulted
women and girls.

African campaigns targeting violence against women are used to help change behaviors.
SWAA is the Society for Women and AIDS in Africa.
Source: Hadley Paul Garland, https://goo.gl/cVjCCj, CC BY-SA 2.0.

“Less obvious, however, was the drought’s underlying

effects on Lesotho’s society, with women, girls and other
vulnerable groups more susceptible to gender-based
violence (GBV) during the period.”

The drought increased the vulnerability of females because
they were often targeted while they were obtaining food
parcels, “fulfilling their traditional role as family caregivers
and providers of household food and water.” GBV was also
reported in households and fields, on public transportation, and for those in the urban environment, factory workplaces. Distribution points for
antiretrovirals (ARVs) held a particular interest for herd and other young boys, for after accosting the females they would take the medications
and make a street drug known as nyaope, though it should be noted that medical publications generally attribute nyaope’s effects to its heroin
content and not the ARVs . Whether the ARVs potentiate a high or not, they are perceived to do so and thus become a valuable commodity
worth stealing, and females taking it home make ready targets.
On rare occasions men suffered from GBV during the drought, but the vast majority of victims were women and adolescent girls. The females
described the forms of GBV they encountered as including physical (reported by 27.5 percent), sexual (22.8 percent), emotional (20.6 percent),
socioeconomic (22.9 percent), and harmful traditional practices (seven percent).
Against this backdrop of abusive treatment of women and girls, the article offers some glimmers of hope that it can start to be ameliorated.
These include community activism, new policies, better implementation of the referral system for GBV, and participation by all those involved –
law enforcement agencies, the judiciary, NGO’s, social workers, and others – to bring about change. However, as the article describes, negative
social norms and harmful traditional practices persist in Lesotho that perpetuate gender inequality and promote GBV. Therefore, probably the
most important measure of all will be education. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Pascalinah Kabi “Study highlights drought and GBV link,” Lesotho Times, 8 September 2017. http://www.lestimes.com/studyhighlights-drought-and-gbv-link/
Less obvious, however, was the drought’s underlying effects on Lesotho’s society, with women, girls and other vulnerable groups more
susceptible to gender-based violence (GBV) during the period.
“The herd boys were reported to rob, rape and physically assault women and young girls to and from social service points. Herd boys were
also considered to be survivors in the sense that during the drought, they were forced to abandon school to work for food. This was reported
more in rural than in urban areas.”
The report also states that the drought increased women and girls’ vulnerability to GBV as they strived to fulfill their traditionally-ascribed
roles as care givers and providers of household food and water.
“For example, some of the men we trained during the trainings on male engagement for GBV prevention said some songs that are sung
during initiations ...are derogatory to women and promote GBV. There is need for change.”
OE Watch | October 2017

18

AFRICA
Lesotho: Standby Force Moves to Avert Further Instability
OE Watch Commentary: The mountain kingdom of Lesotho, entirely surrounded
by South Africa, has long struggled with bouts of political instability that included
coups and attempted coups. In early September, following the assassination of
Lesotho Defense Force (LDF) Commander Lieutenant-General Khoantle Motšomotšo,
the South African Development Community (SADC) deployed a standby force
comprised of troops from South Africa, Angola and Mozambique into the tiny enclave.
As the accompanying article relates, the SADC’s objectives are threefold: prevent
additional instability, head off any coup attempts by disgruntled soldiers, and provide
security during the implementation of SADC-mandated reforms.
Lesotho’s Foreign Affairs and International Relations Minister Lesego Makgothi
stated implementation of the reforms would take about three to six months, during
which time the regional bloc’s standby force would provide security. The reforms
will encompass the military, governance, public service, media, and the judiciary and
legislative sectors. They aim to strengthen democracy and bring lasting stability to
the country of about two million.
The SADC has long striven to strengthen Lesotho’s shaky democracy. The
assassination of Lieutenant-General Khoantle Motšomotšo drove it to do more than
just offer arms-length encouragement for stability. As the article details, there was
speculation propagated on social media that, had the assassins (Col. Hashatsi and
Brig. Sechele) not also been killed during the shootout surrounding the assassination,
they would have launched a coup. That speculation was initially fuelled by a letter
purportedly found on one of the assassins, expressing an intention to form an interim
government. Whether or not the speculation was true, the SADC was not going to
take any chances. It almost immediately deployed a standby force to Lesotho to
ensure stability.
Fears of a coup had been brewing before the assassination. In particular Col.
Hashatsi’s withdrawal from the Zimbabwe National Army Senior Commanders’
course in June raised warning flags. However, any plans he and Brig. Sechele may
have had for a new government ended in a hail of bullets from Lieutenant-General
Motšomotšo’s bodyguards. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The Southern African Development

Community (SADC) has deployed a
standby force from South Africa, Angola
and Mozambique into Lesotho, as the
regional bloc moves to avert another
bout of instability prompted by this
week’s assassination of Lesotho Defence
Force (LDF) commander, LieutenantGeneral Khoantle Motšomotšo...”
Source: “SADC sends standby force,” Lesotho Times,
7 September 2017. http://www.lestimes.com/sadcsends-standby-force/
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) has deployed a standby force from South
Africa, Angola and Mozambique into Lesotho, as
the regional bloc moves to avert another bout of
instability prompted by this week’s assassination
of Lesotho Defence Force (LDF) commander,
Lieutenant-General Khoantle Motšomotšo.
However the ministers would not reveal the size of
the standby force nor details of its material strength.
This time around, SADC is not taking any chances,
with the standby force having been deployed amid
speculation that Brig Sechele and Col Hashatsi had
planned to stage a coup if they had survived after
killing Lt-Gen Motšomotšo.

The Southern African Development Community, concerned about a further erosion of stability in Lesotho (shown here in red), deployed a standby force to the tiny enclave.
Source: Mandavi/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Atlas_of_Lesotho#/media/File:LocationLesotho.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | October 2017

19

AFRICA
Zimbabwe: Immunity for Accused Killers
OE Watch Commentary: In midAugust, Zimbabwe’s nonagenarian
president Robert Mugabe declared that
locals accused of killing white farmers
during the country’s controversial land
reform program launched in 2000,
would be immune from prosecution.
As the accompanying article relates,
Mugabe made this statement during
celebrations of Heroes Day at a
national shrine. He claimed that
the killings occurred because the
farmers had resisted the governmentsanctioned program.

“President Robert Mugabe yesterday declared that all locals accused of
killing white former commercial farmers since the launch of the fast trackland reform programme in 2000 were immune to prosecution.”

The article claims at least 12
white former farmers were killed
- though other sources put this
number much higher - by activists
from Zanu-PF (Zimbabwe’s ruling
party since independence in 1980)
and war veterans. The violent farm
grabs resulted in travel sanctions
by Western countries angered by
the disregard for both human and
property rights.
During the same Heroes Day
celebration speech, Mugabe urged
newly resettled farmers to stop
leasing their land to white farmers.
Zimbabwe’s president Robert Mugabe has declared immunity for those who killed white farmers during the country’s
land reform program.
He went on to essentially say the newly
Source: Gregg Carlstrom, https://goo.gl/owKc2E, CC BY-NC 2.0.
resettled farmers were not sufficiently
considering who they were dealing with in these transactions.
Perhaps Mugabe’s most interesting statement after the immunity declaration was that his government never intended to drive out all the
whites, claiming they left on their own accord. However, what neither Mugabe nor the accompanying article mentioned was that the expulsion
of the white farmers turned the country from a net exporter of food to a net importer. The economy crumbled, with hyperinflation so extreme
there were $100 trillion banknotes – that is “trillion” with a “t” – until the currency was finally abandoned.
International governments and businesses are calling on Zimbabwe to compensate the white farmers for their economic losses, as an
important precursor before significant foreign loans or investments can be provided. So far Mugabe has refused, and his latest offering
- immunity for those who killed white farmers – does nothing to settle the nerves of the investors Zimbabwe needs. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Paidamoyo Muzulu, “No prosecutions for white farmers’ killers,” Newsday (Zimbabwe), 15 August 2017. https://www.newsday.
co.zw/2017/08/15/no-prosecutions-white-farmers-killers/
President Robert Mugabe yesterday declared that all locals accused of killing white former commercial farmers since the launch of the fast
track-land reform programme in 2000 were immune to prosecution.
“Yes, we have those who were killed when they resisted. We will never prosecute those who killed them. I ask: Why we should arrest them?”
he said.
At the time, Mugabe told delegates at the Zanu PF annual conference that: “No judicial decision will stand in the way we have adopted to
acquire the land. After all, the land is ours by birth. It’s ours by rights. It’s ours also by struggle.”

OE Watch | October 2017

20

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia: Land of Peace?
OE Watch Commentary: Many Colombian
…The FARC ends up with a political wing and an armed wing…
observers do not think their country has
entered a period of peace or post-conflict,
but rather that it has leaped into a period
of grave danger during which the violent
left gains and concentrates more and
more power that it is sure to abuse.
The first source references an effort by
the national government to formalize
property ownership, with priority going
to areas where the conflict has been the
worst, that is, in rural zones that have
suffered the most organized violence. By
and large these areas are also contraband
corridors and smuggling routes, most
of which were controlled by the FARC.
Many observers fear that the government
has committed to, or even conspired
to formalize ownership of significant
portions of that land, by assigning the
formalized rights to leaders of the FARC
or to rural populations entirely controlled
Aburrá Valley Metropolitan Police at an Urban Market.
by them. As such, they fear that, under
Source: Mercados Campesinos Policía Metropolitana Valle de Aburrá Campesino Markets, Metropolitan Police of the Aburrá Valley, https://www.flickr.com/photos/policiacolombia/25932075845/in/
photostream/. CC BY SA 2.0.
the government-FARC accords, the same
rural areas will continue to be controlled by the FARC. That control, as alluded in the second and third references, is exercised by officially
licensed guard forces and political activists, as well as by drug gangs and enforcement militias which, while not officially recognized, will
be officially overlooked. The broad impunity given to the FARC, in other words, is being formalized, bureaucratized and legitimized. This
observer has seen no evidence that the majority of Colombians like what is happening. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

”

“

“…land holdings in zones that were affected by the armed conflict in Colombia will be formalized…”
Source: “Tierras afectadas por conflicto tendrán escrituras
en seis años (In six years, land affected by the conflict will
have formal documentation),” El Colombiano, 17 July
2017. http://www.elcolombiano.com/colombia/acuerdosde-gobierno-y-farc/tierras-afectadas-por-conflicto-tendranescrituras-en-seis-anos-BN6924399
“This Monday, High Counselor for the post conflict
assured that land holdings in zones that were affected
by the armed conflict in Colombia will be formalized
completely in six years…the multipurpose cadaster will
provide real property information in order to contribute
to judicial security and the ownership rights of a piece
of real property…The process, the bureaucrat explained,
intends to arrive this year to 200 counties….In Colombia
there are 4,1 million rural plots, of which only 21% have a
property title.”

Source: Rafael Uribe Uribe, “Alerta Colombia: Metamorfosis de las Farc (Be
Alert Colombia: Metamorphosis of the FARC),” La Crónica, 9 September 2017.
http://rafaeluribe.blogspot.fr/2017/09/cronica-689.html
“They have already capacitated the first group of 1200 guards. A second
group follows….They have a political wing divided in five fronts thusly: Voices
of Peace, Democratic Pole, Patriotic March, Green Party and the Progressives.
Territorial Control is exercised strengthening the Campesino Reserve Zones
and they will launch a presidential candidate from each party….The FARC
ends up with a political wing and an armed wing accepted by the State, plus the
dissidents (26 fronts?). Each commander has ample capacity to recruit minors,
manage narcotrafficking and broaden their personal bases for an eventual use
of arms, again….The FARC has a third wing of urban militia as follows: A first
group of Popular Militiamen charged with producing intelligence, teaching
and political indoctrination. 2. A second group of Bolivarian Militiamen or
‘triggermen’ who will confront whoever opposes the political project of the
FARC…”

Source: Rafael Uribe Uribe, “¿Estamos en post-conflicto, post-acuerdo o post-engaño? (Are we in post-conflict, post-accord or post-fraud?),”
La Crónica, 29 August 2017. http://rafaeluribe.blogspot.com.co/2017/08/cronica-688.html
“Highly trustworthy sources tell me that 96% of the coca exported to the United States comes from the FARC and that the great majority of
the Bacrim [criminal gangs] such as the Clan Usuga, the Gulf Clan, the Black Eagles, the Urabeños, the Rastrojos, and others that supposedly
were dissidents of demobilized paramilitaries, today operate as franchises of the FARC.”
OE Watch | October 2017

21

LATIN AMERICA
ELN Peace Accord
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying source, the National Liberation Army (Ejército Nacional de Liberación, ELN)
has reached a bilateral cease-fire agreement with the administration of Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos. The ELN is the second most
formidable Colombian guerrilla force after the FARC; is listed as an international terrorist organization by the US Government; and, according
to the source, has continued its attacks against Colombia’s oil infrastructure and police stations across the country.

Flag of the ELN.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_ELN.svg, Public Domain.

It is not widely known what concessions were made to the guerrilla
in the negotiations, which were described by the President as “intense.”
President Santos did not mention any referendum or public ratification
or approval of the agreement, and we should not expect him to. The
Colombian electorate had voted against the power-sharing agreement he
reached with the FARC, and so it seems extremely unlikely that President
Santos will present this agreement to the Colombian public. He only
mentioned that Pope Francis would be pleased that a peace agreement was
being reached. It will not go unnoticed by critics of the agreement that the
negotiations were held in Quito, the capital of Ecuador, where the ruling
political party, PAIS Alliance, is part of the regional Bolivarian block
that includes the United Socialist Party of Venezuela, the Communist
Party of Cuba and the Colombian FARC. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“In spite of the rapprochement with the government…it [ELN] continued its attacks…”

Source: “El gobierno de Santos y la guerrilla del Eln acuerdan cese bilateral del fuego (The Santos administration and the ELN guerrilla
agree to a bilateral cease fire),” El Universo and AP, 4 September 2017. http://www.eluniverso.com/noticias/2017/09/04/nota/6365509/juanmanuel-santos-anuncia-cese-bilateral-fuego-eln/
“The bilateral cease fire is to take effect this coming October 1st…‘We are going to sign in Quito, after intense negotiations that ended this
morning, a cease fire and hostilities agreement’…in search of an eventual peace agreement. The ELN initiated negotiations in February
with delegates from the Santos administration in the capital of Ecuador. In spite of the rapprochement with the government…it continued its
attacks…”

Latin Americans and Catalonian Independence
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passage is a note from Spain on
the issue of Catalonian independence. The author, Néstor Laso, is a ColombianSpaniard lawyer and a representative of the political party associated with former
Colombian President Álvaro Uribe. He offers a series of reasons why Latin
Americans, whether immigrants or travelers, would prefer a unified Spain. One
of his reasons, perhaps the reason he wanted to frame, is that many Venezuelans
in Spain are self- or forced exiles from the regimes of Hugo Chávez or Nicolás
Maduro. The Venezuelan regime has been an avid supporter of the separatist
parties in Catalonia. Laso notes that the vast majority of these Venezuelans would
much prefer that the political parties pushing Catalonian separation not rise to
power to do to Catalonia what they have done to Venezuela. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

The blue estelada, a version of the independist flag of
Catalonia or the Catalan Countries.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Estelada_blava.svg, CC BY SA 2.5.

“…nobody knows better than Latin-Americans, especially our Venezuelan brothers…”
Source: Néstor Laso, “Latinoamericanos en España: SÍ a una España unida (Latin-Americans in Spain: Yes to a United Spain),” OK Diario,
6 September 2017. https://okdiario.com/opinion/2017/09/06/latinoamericanos-espana-si-espana-unida-1294671
“If the example to be followed is that idyllic Catalonia is the Venezuela of Maduro, only country that has supported this unreasoned
secessionism, it is one more motive to remain distant from this senseless adventure. Well, nobody knows better than Latin-Americans,
especially our Venezuelan brothers resident in Spain, who are familiar with the dictatorial methods of the Chavist government, which so
much admires the ERC and the CUP. [Political parties, ERC is the Republican Left of Catalonia, Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya; and
the CUP is the Popular Unity Candidacy, Candidatura d’Unitat Popular]”
OE Watch | October 2017

22

LATIN AMERICA
FARC’s New Name
OE Watch Commentary: Last month we reported that the
FARC-EP would keep its initials, but change their meaning to
Broad Front of Colombian Reconciliation -- Hope of the People.
The FARC has since had its political organizing convention and
indeed voted to keep the initials FARC, but drop the EP. Now,
FARC officially stands for Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común (Alternative Revolutionary Force of the Majority). It has
also been translated as Common Alternative Revolutionary Force,
and according to the explanations given by the organization’s
leaders (as reported by the first reference) the word común is to
evoke community or communion. Regardless, they also claim
that “it is fundamental to maintain the idea of revolution.” In
addition to the adjusted meaning of FARC, the organization
adopted a stylized red rose with a tilted red star as its new logo.
The rose appears in other socialist party emblems, notably the
socialist parties of France and Spain. According to the second
accompanying source, the party leadership wanted to present
a symbol of peace, but also highlight the connection of the
new party with its past and its Marxist-Leninist revolutionary
ideology. The third source is representative of many viewpoints
not sanguine about the new political party, its name, symbols,
intentions or prospective methods. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…fundamental is to maintain the idea of
revolution…”

“…We are going to continue the conflict…”
Source: “Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común, nuevo nombre
de las FARC (Alternative Revolutionary Force of the Comune),” El
País, 1 September 2017. https://elpais.com/internacional/2017/08/31/
colombia/1504216451_908943.html
“The FARC will continue calling itself FARC, but without weapons….
It decided this Thursday to launch itself as a political party as The
Alternative Revolutionary Force for the Majority.…the C in the initials is
going to represent the concept of the Común (majority?), that is to say, of
communion and community. In any case, fundamental is to maintain the
idea of revolution”…The symbol chosen is a red rose reminiscent of the
rose of the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE), with a red five-point
star at the center.”
Source: María Fernanda Arbeláez M., “¿Cometieron las Farc un error al
mantener siglas en su nuevo partido? (Did the FARC make a mistake by
keeping the same initials for its new party?),” El Tiempo, 2 September
2017. http://www.eltiempo.com/politica/partidos-politicos/significadodel-logo-y-el-nombre-del-partido-politico-de-las-farc-126066
“‘In the case of the acronym, a grave error was committed because of
the issue of the marvelous opportunity the group has, now ex-insurgent,
to renovate…
…keep the name FARC is not the best politically and if indeed ‘the
initials have a remembrance factor among the electors, the greater is
going to be a factor of rejection’…
Márquez [one of the guerrilla leaders] said that …it symbolizes our
historic past that cannot be un-drawn. We are going to continue the
conflict, but on other terrain, by way of legal politics.”
Source: José Alvear Sanín, “La irresistible estrategia de ‘la paz’ (The
irresistible strategy of ‘peace’),” El Mundo and Álvaro Uribe Vélez
website, 10 September 2017. http://www.elmundo.com/noticia/Lairresistible-estrategia-dela-paz-/359393
“In Colombia communism advances through the combination of all
forms of struggle: The ELN is active in the countryside, the FARC are
mated with the President and a series of fifth column journalists who
dominate the ‘high courts’, public administration, the mass media and
public education….So, how is it possible that the new party Alternative
Revolutionary Force of Commun(ism) aspires to gain power by the
electoral path, but still not lose the occasion to proclaim itself Marxist
and Leninist?...The seductress ‘peace’ is communism’s most ancient and
effective political and media strategy, created by Lenin, who always
valued her.”

FARC new logo.

Source: FARC Website, http://www.farc-ep.co/, Public Domain.

OE Watch | October 2017

23

LATIN AMERICA
Authorities Seize First-Ever Electric Submarine in
Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: Authorities in Latin America face a
constant and ever-evolving battle with drug trafficking organizations
(DTOs) that garner multi-billion dollar profits from smuggling. DTOs
utilize these profits to purchase impunity because they are able to
“buy off” law enforcement and government personnel in exchange for
multi-faceted favors and protections. Another benefit that comes with
a never-ending cash flow is the ability to buy state of the art weapons
and to build highly advanced trafficking vessels that are used to move
maritime shipments from South America to the north.
What is unique about these vessels is their evolution over the
past decade from simple go-fast vessels to electric submarines.
In July 2017, Colombian authorities seized the first-ever electric
powered submarine in the Choco department of Colombia. The first
Narco submarine seized in Ecuador 2010-07-02.
Source: DEA via via wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Narco_submarine_seized_in_Ecuador_2010-07-02_1.jpg, Public Domain.
accompanying passage discusses additional details about this vessel,
including how it is “equipped with more than 100 batteries to move two motors making it... more difficult for authorities to detect.”
One of the first vessels built to transport maritime cocaine shipments was the go-fast; an open hull (made of fiberglass) vessel that measures
between 30-40ft. As the second accompanying excerpt discusses, when these were first introduced, they drew significant attention because of
the speed at which they could travel and the difficulty in detecting them. Years later, cartels delved further into perfecting the original go-fast by
making them nearly semi-submersible and faster than the original versions. As the third excerpt describes, they also switched to fully fiberglass
vessels making them lighter, faster and more difficult to detect. These vessels also used less gasoline, which meant a better and more efficient
vessel.
The go-fast represented the first highly successful investment made by cartels to move their product more efficiently via maritime routes. It
also led DTOs to perfect another maritime vessel; the fully submersible submarine. This idea has been around since the 90s, but until recently,
versions used were relatively rudimentary. However, this is not the case today and unless they are found by authorities before launching, they
are nearly impossible to detect. Another interesting fact about submarines is that just as go-fast vessels, cartels have modified models that work
into more efficient versions. As such, DTOs have proven themselves to be truly adept in evolving and adapting. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“...this submarine was equipped with more than 100 batteries to move
two motors making it even more difficult for authorities to detect.”

Source: “Hallan en Colombia primer submarino eléctrico para transportar cocaína (Colombian Authorities Discover First-Ever Electric
Submarine in Colombia),” Vanguardia, 27 July 2017. http://www.vanguardia.com/colombia/404912-hallan-en-colombia-primer-submarinoelectrico-para-transportar-cocaina
On July 27,2017, Colombian soldiers seized the first ever electric submarine in the Choco Department of Colombia. Unlike previously seized
gasoline-propelled devices, this submarine was equipped with more than 100 batteries to move two motors making it even more difficult for
authorities to detect. A naval spokesperson further indicated that it is the first time a device of this nature has been constructed in a river and
that it likely took between five and six months to build and cost more than $4.5 million.
Source: “Narcos cambian aviones por lanchas rápidas (Narcos Change Aircraft for Go-Fast Vessels),” La Prensa, 11 November 2005. http://
www.laprensa.com.ni/2005/11/11/nacionales/973719-narcos-cambian-aviones-por-lanchas-rpidas
Go-fast vessels are known for their speed and can travel up to 80 kilometers per hour in calm waters. They are generally painted blue on the
inside to blend in with the ocean. Another factor that makes them difficult to detect is their low profile to the water. Furthermore, if the crew
members of a go-fast notice maritime or aerial patrols, they simply turn off their motors and cover the entire vessel with a blue tarp which has
proved to be very successful because even at a very close distance, they are nearly undetectable.
Source: “El Picuda: Un go-fast rompeolas de maravilla que desafía la detección de radar (The Picuda: A Wave-Breaking Go-Fast Wonder
that Defies Radar Detection),” Dialogo, 14 September 2015. https://dialogo-americas.com/es/articles/el-picuda-un-go-fast-rompeolas-demaravilla-que-desafia-la-deteccion-de-radar
Colombian traffickers are known to refurbish Eduardoño type offshore fishing boats into go-fast boats, but over the years, have made significant
changes to the original go-fast. First, newer versions are constructed completely out of fiberglass, whereas only the hulls of traditional go-fast
boats are made of this material. The use of fiberglass is important for several reasons, but mainly because it is difficult for radars to detect.
Second, the newer versions are lighter, faster, and more spacious than the typical refurbished go-fast boat. For example, when comparing the
time it takes for a refurbished go-fast and a Picuda to make the same trip, the Picuda is two times faster, meaning it can complete a one-hour gofast boat trip in 30 minutes. Finally, newer versions consume less gas meaning that logistical refueling stops are not necessary in some cases.
OE Watch | October 2017

24

LATIN AMERICA
The Future of Venezuela’s Leadership
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passage from
a respected Argentinian news source reports on discussions
carried out in Havana regarding the future of Venezuela’s
President Nicolás Maduro. That any change of the Venezuelan
executive would be brokered in Havana is consonant with
many regional opinions holding that Maduro is not at the
apex of political control in Venezuela. Control resides in the
political parties, especially in Cuba. The Vatican, Russia
and China apparently have some potential influence on the
decision-making of the Cubans. The source also makes
clear that the opposition in Venezuela is not in a position
to force a change in the country’s top tier management. In
fact, the ‘opposition’ referred to by the author is the ‘chavist’
opposition, that is, socialist factions (mostly pro-Cuban) who
are dissatisfied with the management decisions of Nicolás
Pope Francis with Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, by Casa Rosada
Maduro, but not dissatisfied with the economic and political
(Argentina Presidency of the Nation) .
Source:via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pope_Francis_with_Cristina_Fernandez_de_Kirchner_4.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.
philosophy or the international relationships established by
former President Hugo Chávez. As for the actual ideological
opposition inside Venezuela, the author doesn’t give it any weight at all. Interestingly, the Pope is said to have strongly recommended,
among other things, that the current constitution of Venezuela be respected, a constitution that clearly failed to deter dictatorial take-over
by the United Socialist Party of Venezuela and the Communist Party of Cuba. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“...the opposition is playing with a clear incapacity to negotiate a solution...”

Source: “¡EXPLOSIVO! Las gestiones secretas en Cuba para reemplazar a Maduro (Explosive! The secret proposals in Cuba to replace
Maduro),” DolarToday and Clarin, 4 September 2017. https://dolartoday.com/explosivo-las-gestiones-secretas-en-cuba-para-reemplazarmaduro/
“…the Vatican Secretary of State, Pietro Parolin, when he was in Moscow a few days ago, asked for Putin’s help for a way out of the
Venezuela crisis…. Sources consider that Castro would be in favor of acceding to a Vatican proposal [of replacing Maduro], but would bump
into the harder-line sectors of his party. And, above all, the military advisors he sent to Venezuela…. In any case, diplomacy with Havana
takes on renewed significance if the Venezuelan side manages to lace up a government of national unity with the chavist dissidents. The
probability of that is evaluated to be low now considering that the opposition is playing with a clear incapacity to negotiate a solution.”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | October 2017

25

LATIN AMERICA
Political Crisis in Venezuela: “Another Turn of the Screw”
OE Watch Commentary: It seems by
all accounts that the overall Venezuelan
economy continues to deteriorate, emigrant
refugee flows continue, infrastructure
continues to deteriorate, financial balances
are disappearing, and human privation is
deepening. As the authors of the select
media below would have us understand,
the current political crisis in Venezuela has
ended with the silencing of the opposition.
The accompanying references are a sample
of indicators, but the real evidence is in
what is not being reported, in what is
no longer happening. There are no more
impressive street demonstrations, and no
From left to right: Evo Morales (Bolivia), Nicolás Maduro (Venezuela) and Rafael Correa (Ecuador).
more legislative pronunciations from an
Source Social Movements Supporting President Evo Morales and to the Ecuadoran Foreign Ministry, via Wikipedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Movimientos_sociales_respaldan_al_Presidente_Evo_Morales_(9214307766).jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.
opposition legislature that no longer exists.
The legislature newly installed by the regime
In what represents another turn of the screw
to replace the National Assembly is rapidly advancing the country along
in the suffocating of Venezuelans’ liberties, the
totalitarian lines, including purges and censorship. Members of what used
to be the opposition are apparently welcoming invitations from foreign
Constituent Assembly -- an illegal and illegitimate
countries to take them in. It seems they have lost hope at this point
organ -- has decided to open an ‘historic judicial
and are advising friends to implement their plans ‘B’ in order to escape
persecution. Meanwhile, as the fourth reference suggests, the regime is not
process for ‘treason against the fatherland’
without friends. There are plenty of chiefs of state ready to show solidarity
against leaders of the opposition and other
in Caracas or in international forums. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)
dissidents.

“

”

Source: “Estalinismo en Venezuela (Stalinism in Venezuela),” El País, 31 August 2017. https://elpais.com/elpais/2017/08/30/
opinion/1504115924_511511.html
“In what represents another turn of the screw in the suffocating of Venezuelans’ liberties, the Constituent Assembly -- an illegal and
illegitimate organ -- has decided to open an ‘historic judicial process for ‘treason against the fatherland’ against leaders of the opposition
and other dissidents.”
Source: “¡CONTROL SOCIAL ABSOLUTO! Asamblea Nacional Cubana intenta legalizar censura en Internet (Absolute Social Control!
Cuban National Assembly moves to legalize the censoring of the Internet),” DolarToday and Ipysvenezuela, 4 September 2017. https://
dolartoday.com/control-social-absoluto-asamblea-nacional-cubana-intenta-legalizar-censura-en-internet/
“The legislative bill for the Law against Hate Crimes discussed by the Constituent Legislative Assembly puts at risk the principles of
neutrality plurality, liberty and Access to the net…“Article 6. Prohibition of messages of intolerance and hate. All propaganda in favor of
war and all apologies for national, racial, religious or political hate or hate of any other nature that constitutes incitation of discrimination,
hostility, intolerance or violence is prohibited.”
Source: “¡IMPORTANTE! Canadá ofrece a venezolanos visa ‘express entry’ para emigrar legalmente (Important! Canada is offering
Venezuelans an ‘express entry’ visa to emigrate legally),” DolarToday, 1 September 2017. https://dolartoday.com/importante-canada-ofrecevenezolanos-visa-express-entry-para-emigrar-legalmente/
“If you are among the candidates with the highest scores you will receive a migration invitation with which you can apply for permanent
residence in Canada. The point system evaluates aspects such as: your abilities, education, languages, experiences and other factors.”
Source: “Evo Morales viajará este fin de semana a Venezuela ‘para defender la revolución bolivariana’ (Evo Morales will travel this weekend
to Venezuela ‘to defend the bolivarian revolution’),” RunRunEs and EFE, 12 September 2017. http://runrun.es/nacional/324864/evo-moralesviajara-este-fin-de-semana-a-venezuela-para-defender-la-revolucion-bolivariana.html
“At the end of August, the Venezuelan executive announced that between the 15th and the 17th of September a ‘solidarity’ summit would be
held with the Caribbean country over the sanctions imposed by the United States on functionaries of the Maduro government….Morales,
who is an ally of the Venezuelan leader, has criticized the sanctions…Sunday night he will travel to New York to participate in the General
Assembly of the United Nations…”
OE Watch | October 2017

26

LATIN AMERICA
The Italian Mafia’s Operations in the Dominican Republic
OE Watch Commentary: The Italian mafia,
commonly known as La Ndrangheta, has steadily
increased its presence in the Dominican Republic
since 2007. The Caribbean island is strategically
located in an area that the mafia uses as a waypoint
for cocaine shipments moving from South America
to Europe. While the Italian mafia’s presence is not
a highly reported topic in the Dominican Republic,
reports such as the accompanying ones corroborate
their presence in the country. La Ndrangheta’s
growth in the Dominican Republic represents one
piece of the groups’ larger strategic effort to expand
its footprint in the European cocaine trade.
The first accompanying passage discusses the
arrests of several La Ndrangheta operatives in the
Dominican Republic in recent years. The passage
also notes that La Ndrangheta has been purchasing
land along the southeast Dominican coast since
2007. This is significant because the southeast coast
serves as a principal receiving zone for fishing
vessels, merchant vessels and go-fast boats carrying
large-scale loads of cocaine into the country from
South America.

The Dominican Republic’s topography.

Source: By Alexrk2 - Own work, SRTM3, ETOPO1, VMAP0, http://www.one.gob.do, http://lib.utexas.edu/maps/dominican_republic.html, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=9430145, CC BY-SA 3.0.

The Italian mafia’s operations in the Dominican Republic are starting to
get noticed by other countries as well. Brazilian open sources reported that
Vincenso Macri, a key leader within the organization, actively utilized the
Dominican Republic as a staging zone to move cocaine until his arrest by
Brazilian authorities in June 2017. Within Europe, Italian police also corroborate
that La Ndrangheta utilizes production countries in South America (Peru,
Colombia), transit countries in the Caribbean (Dominican Republic, Haiti and
many others), and receiving countries in Europe (Spain) to procure, transit, and
deliver cocaine shipments into Europe. As the second accompanying passage
discusses, this information was reported following an operation carried out in
January 2017, in which many of the individuals detained were La Ndrangheta
operatives. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“A joint operation conducted by Italian and
Spanish police resulted in the dismantling of
a criminal network dedicated to trafficking
cocaine that spanned from South America
via the Dominican Republic and into Spain.
Dozens of individuals were arrested in
conjunction with this operation, but it was
noted that a large number were part of La
Ndrangheta.”

Source: “Republica Dominicana en mapa de la mafia italiana (Dominican Republic on the Map of the Italian Mafia),” El Dia, 12 June 17.
http://eldia.com.do/republica-dominicana-en-mapa-de-la-mafia-italiana/
In recent years, Dominican authorities have arrested dozens of La Ndrangheta members within the country to include: Nicola Pignatelli,
Raul Conforti, and Domenico Magnoli. These arrests indicate the growth of La Ndrangheta in the Dominican Republic and also in Latin
America. Another sign that La Ndrangheta is attempting to expand its operational base in the Dominican Republic is the purchase of
extensive plots of real estate in the SE sector of the island.
Source: “Desmantelan red mafiosa de Italia, Colombia, Perú, República Dominicana y España (Italian Authorities Dismantle Mafia
Ring that Operated in Colombia, Peru, the Dominican Republic and Spain),” Actualidad, 10 January 2017. http://acento.com.do/2017/
actualidad/8417678-desmantelan-red-mafiosa-italia-colombia-peru-republica-dominicana-espana/
A joint operation conducted by Italian and Spanish police resulted in the dismantling of a criminal network dedicated to trafficking cocaine
that spanned from South America via the Dominican Republic and into Spain. Dozens of individuals were arrested in conjunction with this
operation, but it was noted that a large number were part of La Ndrangheta.

OE Watch | October 2017

27

LATIN AMERICA
Honduran Government to Enhance Border Security
OE Watch Commentary: Central America has long been a bridge that
connects production countries in South America to consumer nations in the north.
This connection has led to the formation of several different types of criminal
organizations and criminal activity in Central America, but of all those affected
by this bridge; one country seems to receive significantly more traffic than others:
Honduras.
Sandwiched between Nicaragua to the south and Guatemala to the north,
Honduras has the dubious distinction of being known as the original “banana
republic,” a term coined by American writer William Sydney Porter. But
while Porter used the phrase to describe a country in debt to unscrupulous fruit
corporations, the Honduras of today is indebted to much more ruthless drug
trafficking organizations that use the country for both transit and production
purposes. This is because government-led counter-trafficking operations in
Colombia and Mexico have squeezed cartels straight into Central America.
However, Honduras in particular has been hit extremely hard by these shifts
because of three key drug trafficking areas frequently used by traffickers: Colon,
Olancho, and Gracias de Dios, where there is little state control. For example,
Gracias de Dios is popular because it serves as a virtual safe haven for cartels due
to the fact it is located in a remote and difficult to access area of the country. As
the first accompanying passage discusses, these are the regions where cocaineladen planes from the South land on clandestine landing strips or access the coast
via maritime routes with unbridled impunity.
The second passage from the Colombian news source El Heraldo discusses
some of the steps that Honduras is taking to fight back against the serious
security threats posed by this illicit trafficking activity. The passage reports
that the country has invested record breaking amounts of money to train and
provide improved equipment to the National Police and the Public Ministry. The
government is also sending record numbers of police and soldiers to areas of
remote access such as Colon, Olancho, and Gracias de Dios.

“The Honduran Armed Forces and the
Nicaraguan Army are coordinating their
efforts in the fight against drug trafficking,
organized crime, and human smuggling
along their shared 900km border.”

Map of Honduras showing major cities.

Source: CIA World Factbook via wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Honduras-CIA_WFB_Map.png,
Public Domain.

Honduras is also partnering up with neighboring countries to fight regional
security threats. It is working with Nicaragua in particular, a nation which, until very recently, had severed virtually all military/police ties
with other nations in the region. The third accompanying passage discusses that military forces in both nations are cooperating and sharing
intelligence, reinforcing the notion shared by military leaders in Central/South America and the Caribbean that drug trafficking is a shared
problem which can only be defeated by utilizing shared capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)
Source: “Las rutas terrestres del narcotráfico en Honduras (Land Drug Routes in Honduras),” Once Noticias, 03 March 2017. http://www.
oncenoticias.hn/las-rutas-terrestres-del-narcotrafico-honduras/

Key drug routes in Honduras are located in the Colon, Gracias a Dios and Olancho provinces. These three regions are popular because
they are ideal for receiving drug shipments via aerial and/or maritime routes from South America. Furthermore, there is little state control in
the aforementioned departments as they lack infrastructure needed by police and military to maintain a steady presence there.
Source: “Honduras reporta avances en la lucha contra el narcotráfico (Honduras Reports Advances in the Fight Against Narcotrafficking),” El
Heraldo, 02 March 2017. http://www.elheraldo.hn/pais/1049382-466/honduras-reporta-avances-en-lucha-contra-el-narcotr%C3%A1fico
El Heraldo reported that the Honduran government has taken several measures to curtail drug trafficking and dismantle networks linked
to the illicit traffic of drugs to include the extradition of high profile traffickers. The Honduran government also reported an unprecedented
investment in the National Police over the past two years which has included augmenting the capacity of the country’s police academies
in order to recruit and train 3,000 new police officers. Some of these same officers will be assigned to areas of remote access in order to
augment security in areas where drug trafficking activity is carried out will near complete impunity.
Source: “Ejércitos de Nicaragua y Honduras consolidan cooperación (Nicaragua and Honduras Armies Consolidate Cooperation),” Prensa
Latina, 12 June 2017. http://www.prensa-latina.cu/index.php?o=rn&id=92836&SEO=ejercitos-de-nicaragua-y-honduras-consolidan-cooperacion
The Honduran Armed Forces and the Nicaraguan Army are coordinating their efforts in the fight against drug trafficking, organized crime, and
human smuggling along their shared 900km border. During a recent meeting in Tegucigalpa, Major General Francisco Álvarez Urbina, chairman
of the Honduran Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Army General Julio César Avilés Castillo, commander of the Nicaraguan Army, signed an agreement to
continue operation Morazán-Sandino which focuses precisely on combatting the aforementioned issues along the countries’ shared border.
OE Watch | October 2017

28

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil’s Controversial New Anti-Terrorism Law
OE Watch Commentary: After months of using social media to
praise the violence perpetrated by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS), Brazilian ISIS sympathizer Leonid El Kadre de Melo said it
was time to act. “I want to be clear,” he wrote in a message recovered
by Brazilian authorities on the eve of the Rio 2016 Olympics. “My
intention is to put together a real and concrete group” to launch
attacks. And while de Melo’s defenders portrayed the message as
social media bravado, it worried Brazilian officials that the Games
could have been a potential target for terrorists. In response, they
detained De Melo and 12 other men in July 2016 during a high-profile
sweep under a new anti-terrorism law. This new anti-terrorism
law is significant because it greatly widens the scope of what is
considered terrorism in Latin America’s largest nation. As the first
accompanying passage discusses, it expands the definition of terrorist
“as someone who promotes, constitutes, integrates or provides
support, directly or indirectly, to a terrorist organization.” On 4 May
2017, this law was used to sentence De Melo and seven other men to
prison terms ranging from 6-16 years.
When Congress passed the new anti-terrorism law in 2016, Brazilian
authorities were under enormous pressure to show they could handle
security risks during the Games, particularly amid a series of “lonewolf” attacks in Europe and the United States by radicalized young
men claiming allegiance to ISIS. However, as the second excerpt
notes, these men never had any actual contact with the group.
However, the first — and so far the only — use of the law has
been controversial in Brazil, since it is a nation that has never been
the target of a known militant radical Islamic terror attack. Most
Brazilians think that Brazil is geographically located in a region
where terrorist attacks are extremely rare. A more visceral worry
for many is the possible misuse of anti-terror laws in a country and
region that has suffered oppressive dictatorships. Human rights
groups in particular warn that overly broad language in the law could
provide tools to suppress free speech. As the third passage points
out, politicians might use the anti-terrorism law to try and criminalize
marches and street protests. Despite these concerns, there is no
immediate plan to amend or repeal the new law. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“The law considers a terrorist as someone who
‘promotes, constitutes, integrates or provides
support, directly or indirectly, to a terrorist
organization.’ It was the first time someone in Brazil
was arrested under the premise of support to the
Islamic State.”
Source: “Justiça condena oito réus com base na lei antiterrorismo
(Justice Sentenced to Jail Eight Suspects Based on the Anti-Terrorism
Law),” Gazeta Online, 04 May 2017. http://www.gazetaonline.com.
br/noticias/brasil/2017/05/justica-condena-oito-reus-com-base-na-leiantiterrorismo-1014051504.html
All eight suspects were arrested by Brazilian Federal Police during
Operation Hashtag under the new anti-terrorism law, approved
by former Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff in March, 2016. The
law considers a terrorist as someone who “promotes, constitutes,
integrates or provides support, directly or indirectly, to a terrorist
organization.” It was the first time someone in Brazil was arrested
under the premise of support to the Islamic State
Source: “A lei antiterrorismo (The Anti-Terrorism Law),” O Estados
de S. Paulo, 03 November 2015. http://opiniao.estadao.com.br/
noticias/geral,a-lei-antiterrorismo,10000001041
Brazilian justice minister, Alexandre de Moraes, described the
Olympic cell as “absolutely amateur.” The men had never met.
Instead, they messaged and boasted over Telegram and WhatsApp,
cheering the Orlando nightclub massacre and the rampage in Nice.
They pledged allegiance to ISIS — but had no real ties to the terror
group. The suspects didn’t actually get very far in their scheming.
They had not selected a specific target at the Games, and talked
about getting lessons in how to shoot and in martial arts. None
had stockpiled explosives or weapons, though at least one member
of the cell had attempted to buy an AK-47 from an illegal seller in
Paraguay. Authorities, who’d been monitoring the chatter for months
considered this a “preparatory act.”

Source: “Projeto que tramita em silêncio na Câmara pode criminalizar manifestações (Project Being Discussed In the Brazilian Lower House
Might Criminalize Street Protests),” GGN, 06 June 2017. http://jornalggn.com.br/tag/blogs/lei-antiterrorismo
“The already controversial anti-terrorism law in Brazil might now target marches and street protests. Congressmen are analyzing, in
silence, a bill that classifies terrorist acts as “the practice by one or more individuals of acts foreseen in this bill by ideological, political,
social or criminal motivation.”

OE Watch | October 2017

29

LATIN AMERICA
Gangs and Social Media
OE Watch Commentary:
Gangs in Central America
such as the MS-13 and the
Barrio 18 are known for their
recruitment and extortion
activities in El Salvador,
Honduras, and Guatemala.
Until recently, these activities
were conducted in person
or through cell phone
calls. However, as the first
excerpt discusses, gangs are
gravitating to social media
platforms for criminal and
communication purposes.
This can be attributed to the
rapid and widespread use of
social media platforms such
as Facebook, Whatsapp and
Snapchat, amongst others.

Mara Salvatrucha Graffiti.

Source: By Walking the Tracks (Flickr: Mara Salvatrucha) via Wikimedia Commons https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mara_Salvatrucha_Graffiti.jpg, [CC BY-SA 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)].

“Gang members are no longer hiding in dark street alleys. They are taking to
”

In terms of recruitment,
gangs use Facebook to
social media to recruit and to send messages to rival gang members.
post pictures of themselves
Source: “Cuando las pandillas se vuelven virales: asi usan las redes sociales
and their possessions (primarily cars, homes, and weapons).
para reclutar, atacar y delinquir (When Gangs go Viral: The Use of Social
These images are intended to attract new recruits by creating
Networks to Recruit, Threaten, and Carry Out Criminal Activities),”
the illusion that gang life is associated with money and power.
Univision, 27 June 2017. http://www.univision.com/los-angeles/kmex/
Gangs also use Facebook to send threats to rival gangs, which
noticias/actividad-de-pandillas/cuando-las-pandillas-se-vuelven-virales-asithey used to do by graffiti messages. As the second passage
usan-las-redes-sociales-para-reclutar-atacar-y-delinquir
notes, graffiti messages would be spray painted by these groups
For gangs and for billions of individuals around the world, social
in public places such as walls, bridges and public property. The
networks such as Facebook, Whatsapp and Snapchat play an important
cyber messages posted on Facebook contain the same messages
role in day to day activities as they facilitate real time communication with
as those that would be spray painted, but, the cyber option is
anyone who has access to Internet no matter where they are in the world.
much more effective because the Internet allows gangs to reach
At the same time, social media platforms are useful tools for gangs in the
a much larger audience without using resources or putting
sense that they are utilized for criminal activities to include recruitment,
anyone at risk. Moreover, the messages are sent in seconds
extortion, and intimidation. In this sense, social networks have taken foot
and are quickly accessible to gang members located in any
soldiers off the streets onto the worldwide web...
geographic location.
Police in multiple countries use social media sites to monitor criminal
activity, and in some cases, are able to access private chat rooms. And
Authorities are well aware of the social media phenomenon
although this method garners valuable information, it is not considered as
and, as the first excerpt discusses, police and investigators
solid evidence to prosecute crimes.
in many countries now use these sites and cell phone apps to
track the movements of gang members and to gain information
about them via access to group chats and posts. Unfortunately,
information obtained from social media platforms is
inadmissible as evidence for prosecution in many countries
given it is difficult to prove who is writing messages or posting
incriminating photos and videos. In the coming years, social
media will likely continue to play an important role in gang
operations given that cyber communication is now a mainstay
for day-to-day operations. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

Source: “Pandillas utilizan Facebook para reclutar jóvenes en El Salvador
(Gangs Use Facebook as a Recruitment Tool in El Salvador),” El Heraldo,
25 July 2017. http://www.elheraldo.hn/mundo/1092953-466/pandillasutilizan-facebook-para-reclutar-j%C3%B3venes-en-el-salvador
Gang members are no longer hiding in dark street alleys. They are taking
to social media to recruit and to send messages to rival gang members.
One of the most popular intimidation tactics used by gangs involves posting
videos of violent acts perpetrated by one gang against another on Youtube.
In many instances, these videos go viral and are quickly viewed by gang
members and the general public in seconds.
OE Watch | October 2017

30

LATIN AMERICA
China Becomes New Leader in Cuban Trade
OE Watch Commentary: As the first accompanying passage notes, according
to Cuba’s National Statistics Office, in August 2017, China replaced Venezuela
as Cuba’s largest trading partner. The passage discusses that Cuban trade with
China includes “tour buses and passenger cars… as well as industrial equipment.”
The Chinese have also found Cuba to be an attractive tourist destination, with
“the number of visitors… logging double-digit growth in recent years, topping
40,000 last year.”
The second excerpt from a Cuban source points out that despite the recent
ascent of China, “Venezuela continues as our first economic partner.” The article
suggests that the falling price of oil, combined with the recent instability in
the Maduro Government, have caused the rapid deterioration of trade between
Cuba and Venezuela. The excerpt explains that this decline is due “to terrorist
subversion and a cruel internal economic war and imperial powers” in Venezuela,
leading to failed fuel shipments between the two in 2016 and in 2017. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kelsay)

“China has overtaken Venezuela to become Cuba’s largest
trading partner.”

Photo of former Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez with the
caption ‘El major amigo de Cuba’ [the best friend of Cuba].
Source: Photo by Author.

Source: “China Overtakes Venezuela As Cuba’s Largest Trading Partner,” Tokyo Nikkei Asian Review, 17 August 2017. https://asia.nikkei.
com/Politics-Economy/Economy/China-overtakes-Venezuela-as-Cuba-s-largest-trading-partner
Supported by exports of cars and electric equipment, China has overtaken Venezuela to become Cuba’s largest trading partner, according
to Cuba’s National Statistics Office. Venezuela -- which has close political connections with the island nation and supplies it with crude oil -has long been Cuba’s biggest trading partner, but a decline in the supply and prices of crude caused it to cede the top spot to China…
According to Cuba’s statistics office, the country’s trading value with China in 2016 remained almost unchanged from the previous year at
$2.58 billion, while the figure for Venezuela dropped 47% on the year to $2.22 billion….
…Many of the tour buses and passenger cars in Cuba, as well as industrial equipment at plants there, are from China. Also, the number of
visitors from the Asian country has been logging double-digit growth in recent years, topping 40,000 last year. While Cuba receives more
visitors from Europe and the U.S. than from China, no other Asian country sends as many tourists there.
Source: Rene Tamayo, “China: primer socio en el intercambio comercial de mercancías (China: first partner in trade exchange of goods),”
Juventud Rebelde Online, 15 August 2017. http://www.juventudrebelde.cu/cuba/2017-08-15/china-primer-socio-en-el-intercambiocomercial-de-mercancias/
…Venezuela continues as our first economic partner, especially for the provision of highly qualified professional services…. As is well known, the
main export products of the South American-Caribbean country to the West Indies are the hydrocarbons, which began to suffer from the second
half of 2014 a sharp drop in prices, a situation that still stands today when compared with the high oil prices achieved between 2011 and 2014.
In unison, and because of internal situations in the sister country, subjected to terrorist subversion and a cruel internal economic war and
imperial powers, shipments of fuel to our country declined in 2016 and in 2017….

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | October 2017

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
The PLA at 90: On the Road to Becoming a
World-Class Military?
by Dennis J. Blasko, Elsa Kania, Stephen Armitage
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 11, dated 17 August 2017, Edited for OE
Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/the-pla-at-90-on-the-road-to-becoming-a-world-class-military/

OE Watch Commentary: China recently
celebrated the 90th anniversary of the founding of
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) with a parade
and military exercises at the Zhurihe Training Base
in Inner Mongolia. The event provided important
indications of the PLA’s approach to operations and
the first-ever demonstration of an actual military
operation during a parade. The celebration thus
reflected the PLA’s progress toward becoming
a “world-class military” and confidence despite
remaining challenges related to the ongoing, historic
reforms. Shortly after the parade, Xi Jinping
announced: “The PLA has basically completed
mechanization and is moving rapidly toward ‘strong’
informationized armed forces,” achieving the 2020
goal of its “three-step development strategy.”
The parade itself was centered around the display
of the PLA’s joint force units responsible for actual
operations, known as “operations groups” and other
support groups. In modern combat, the PLA seeks
to integrate the capabilities of these various groups
in joint “systems of systems operations”. Each group
was composed of a series of “formations” or aerial
formations/echelon, which were comprised of units
from one or more service or the People’s Armed
Police (PAP). The formations associated with each
operations group revealed the types of weapons
and equipment that will be employed in future joint
campaigns.

Formations and Equipment on Display During the PLA’s 90th Anniversary Parade.
Source: Image by Jamestown Foundation, https://jamestown.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/81MilitaryParade.png.

Source: “China Focus: “Be ready to win wars,” China’s Xi orders reshaped PLA,” PLA
Daily, 2 August 2017. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/view/2017-08/02/content_7699926.htm

The parade also marked a historic moment for
PLA Army Aviation: the first time the PLA has
[Xi Jinping:] “The PLA has basically completed mechanization and is moving rapidly
ever executed tactical procedures during a parade,
toward ‘strong’ informationized armed forces...”
marking the “public debut” of an Army airborne
assault unit. The demonstration was conducted by
an air assault brigade from the 83rd Group Army, supported by elements of two other Army Aviation units. The air assault simulated the
integration of reconnaissance, attack, and transport helicopters with infantry to deliver soldiers to a distant location on a battlefield.
The parade also showcased the information operations group, a joint-force wartime construct that would bring together the various,
disparate elements responsible for cyber, electronic, and psychological warfare into an operational command at strategic, campaign, and
tactical levels. The strategic strike group showcased the newly-elevated PLA Rocket Force (PLARF), which is considered the “core force”
for China’s strategic deterrence, displaying some of the PLA’s most advanced missiles. The DF-26, an intermediate-range ballistic missile
with a maximum range of 4,000 kilometers, was highlighted as having combined nuclear and conventional capabilities. The DF-21D
medium-range anti-ship ballistic missile, which has a range of 1,750–2,000 kilometers, would have particular utility against maritime
targets and thus is popularly known as the “carrier-killer” missile. The parade concluded with the first parade appearance of the DF-31AG,
a modified version of the road-mobile DF-31A intercontinental ballistic missile.
The parade demonstrated an important development in the PLA’s pursuit of developing improved joint operations capabilities by
incorporating the key components necessary for combat operations, supported by information support, electronic warfare, logistics
support, and other non-combat units. The air-assault demonstration, the integration of the SSF through the information operations group,
and the prominent display of the PLA’s latest and most advanced missiles are clear signs of the PLA’s developing operational capabilities
and evolving force structure. End OE Watch Commentary (Blasko, Kania, Armitage)
OE Watch | October 2017

32

ASIA-PACIFIC
China and India Resolve Border Dispute
OE Watch Commentary: Between June
and September, China and India engaged
in several non-lethal skirmishes at the triborder junction of Bhutan, India and China.
These forced restrictions on the movement
of Indian pilgrims in the border region;
and India to come to Bhutan’s defense over
Chinese claims on its territorial sovereignty.
On 25 August, the excerpted article on the
Chinese language website dwnews.com,
an acronym for multi-dimensional news,
discussed a Chinese perspective on India’s
internationalization of the Sino-Indian
border dispute.
According to the article, India should not
let small friction on the border undermine
the bigger matter of bilateral cooperation.
This was in reference to an article on an
Indian radio website that stated that Indian
Prime Minister Nahendra Modi would not
attend the 9th BRICS Summit in Xiamen,
China on 3-5 September as a boycott of
China because of the border dispute.

Nathu La Pass - Indian Army Dancing with Civilians.

Source: Indrajit Das, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ANathu_La_Pass_-_Indian_Army_Dancing_with_Civilians.jpg, (CC BY-SA 3.0).

“Although the confrontation between China and India in the Donglong
area lasted for a long time, the two countries essentially maintained
restraint, and the problem basically remained as a border dispute
between the two countries.”

The article emphasized that the border
dispute with India has existed for several
decades but it has always been managed
between the two countries alone. Modi’s boycott, according to the article, would end up hurting India because it would reduce multilateral
cooperation between BRICS countries. The article also quoted a Chinese expert who said it would be irresponsible for India to elevate a
bilateral confrontation to the multilateral level.

The article suggested that if Modi did not attend the Summit it would also have a negative effect on the border dispute because it would be a
symbolic event and would affect the atmosphere during the BRICS Summit. This would make China lose face and could lead China to escalate
tensions in the border region after the Summit.
Ultimately, China and India came to a resolution over the border dispute in the days before the BRICS Summit and Modi did attend.
Nonetheless, the article is significant because it shows that, similar to the South China Sea, China prefers bilateral talks rather than multilateral
diplomacy when dealing with border disputes with neighboring countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
Source: “中印边界对峙已到最后关头 (The Sino-Indian border confrontation has reached the final moment),” dwnews.com, 22 August 2017.
http://news.dwnews.com/china/news/2017-08-25/60008966.html
China and India’s confrontation in the Donglong area has lasted more than two months, and the two sides did not relent. But this anxious
situation may change after a week. The BRICS Summit will be held in Xiamen, Fujian Province, China from September 3 to 5, 2017. This will
undoubtedly become an important window for observing the confrontation between China and India. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi
will miss the Summit and will be a symbolic event in the confrontation between China and India.
An Indian radio website in New Delhi published on August 16 an article that said that India may boycott the Summit. Assuming that Modi is
absent, then the Sino-Indian mountain pass border issue will be internationalized. Although the confrontation between China and India in the
Donglong area has lasted for a long time, the two countries essentially maintained restraint, and the problem remained as a border dispute
between the two countries.
Modi’s absence from the Summit will undoubtedly expand the issue into international affairs and even affect the multilateral cooperation
between BRICS countries. There is no benefit to India. If Modi does not appear in China, what kind of collision China and India will have is
very worthy of attention.

OE Watch | October 2017

33

ASIA-PACIFIC
The BRICS Meeting and the Xiamen Declaration
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 September, the ninth
BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa)
Summit was held in China, with President Xi Jinping
chairing the summit. In the Xiamen Declaration issued at
the end of the summit, China made a significant departure
from norm, and condemned certain terrorist groups.
Some of the groups named were particularly surprising,
given China’s traditional reluctance to support India’s past
diplomatic efforts against Pakistani-based groups.
China has historically been reserved in naming terrorist
organizations outside of its own borders in official policy.
Against the backdrop of a tense military standoff, now
popularly referred to as the “Doklam standoff,” China and
India, along with the rest of the BRICS reached a landmark
agreement on security and economic cooperation: The
Xiamen Declaration.
9th BRICS Family photo, 9th BRICS Summit, Xiamen International Conference Center in China.
As the accompanying passage shows, the Xiamen
Source: GovernmentZA Flickr, https://goo.gl/7zTFj4 (CC BY-ND 2.0).
Declaration condemned the violence committed by
Source: “Full text of BRICS Leaders Xiamen Declaration,”
“Taliban, ISIL/DAISH, Al-Qaida and its affiliates including Eastern
China Daily, 5 September 2017. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
Turkistan Islamic Movement, Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the
world/2017brics/2017-09/05/content_31575979.htm
Haqqani network, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammad, TTP and
We, in this regard, express concern on the security situation
Hizb ut-Tahrir.” The condemnations of LeT and Jaish-e-Mohammed are
in the region and violence caused by the Taliban, ISIL/DAISH,
particularly significant because their base of operations are primarily
Al-Qaida and its affiliates including Eastern Turkistan Islamic
in Pakistan, a major security partner of China—and because China has
Movement, Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the Haqqani
fought Indian efforts in the past to seek sanctions against at least one of
the groups (Jaish). The two groups are ardently anti-Indian, with specific network, Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammad, TTP and Hizb
ut-Tahrir.
concern to the Indian administration of Jammu and Kashmir. Both
groups have perpetrated multiple high-profile attacks in recent years,
Source: “习近平在厦门会见中外记者 (Xi Jinping Meets with
most notably the 2008 Mumbai Mumbai attacks by LeT and the 2001
Chinese and Foreign Journalists in Xiamen),” Xinhua Daily
attacks on the Indian Parliament.
Telegraph, 5 September 2017. http://news.xinhuanet.com/
mrdx/2017-09/06/c_136587752.htm
Xi Jinping’s press conference on 5 September 2017 did not make

specific mention of the newly-named terror targets, but he did emphasize
the new agreement’s commitment to moving forward on a wide variety
of issues, including national security cooperation. The hope, according to
the Chinese leader, would be “a second golden decade,” a reference to the
increasing economic and political role that the cooperating nations have
come to play in global politics over the past ten years. While the effects
of the agreement are not immediately clear, China and India have moved
closer diplomatically on the issue of counter-terrorism, specifically in
India’s frequent adversary (and China’s frequent partner), Pakistan. End
OE Watch Commentary (Shanks)

“We, in this regard, express concern on the security
situation in the region and violence caused by the
Taliban, ISIL/DAISH, Al-Qaida and its affiliates including
Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, the Haqqani network, Lashkar-e-Taiba,
Jaish-e-Mohammad, TTP and Hizb ut-Tahrir.”

Xi Jinping pointed out, yesterday, the meeting of leaders of the
BRICS countries successfully concluded. The meeting adopted
the “BRICS Leaders Xiamen Declaration,” reaffirming the
open and inclusive, win-win cooperating spirit of the BRICS, a
comprehensive summary of the ten years of successful experience
in cooperation, to strengthen the BRICS partner relations,
deepen pragmatic cooperation in various fields in planning
a new blueprint. The leaders of the five countries believe that
the BRICS countries should: deepen their communication and
coordination on significant issues, safeguard the fundamental
norms of international relations, collaborate to answer every
kind of global challenge, and accelerate reforms to manage the
global economy; strengthen macro policy to harmonize a joint
development strategy, and deepen national security cooperation
to promote a strategy of mutual trust; shall normalize cultural
and classic exchange activities; forming a mechanism to deepen
the understanding and friendship between the five countries and
their people; and to advance with the times, by strengthening the
construction of financial mechanisms for the field of cooperation
as a solid guarantee.
OE Watch | October 2017

34

ASIA-PACIFIC
China: Military Applications of Advances in Robotics
OE Watch Commentary: Studies in
neuroscience have achieved many breakthroughs
in recent years. One of these entails the use
of neural transmission in robotic research and
applications. In August, during the World Robot
Conference in Beijing, the Brain Computer
Interface (BCI) group of Tsing Hua University
(nicknamed Tomic 4rK7 group) showcased
their research that streamlines the hands-free
communication between humans and computers.
Although most reports of the new technology
focus on the civil aspect of its implementation
and hailed it as the new hope for ASL patients,
the accompanying passage from Sina China
points out its potential impact on the future of
military operations.

“Its implementation during military combat will be revolutionary.
When used in combat aircraft ... [it] will eliminate the manual
operation time gap between locking a target and firing a weapon.”

As the passage discusses, the system works
when the operator wears the appropriate
device and looks at the virtual keyboard on
the computer. The system then detects the
stimulation and translates it into a sentence
that the operator intends to type. According
to the passage, this will “eliminate the manual
operation time gap between locking a target and
A cap holds electrodes in place while recording an EEG.
Source: By Chris Hope (http://www.flickr.com/photos/tim_uk/8135755109/) [CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.
firing a weapon” when used in combat aircrafts.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AEEG_Recording_Cap.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.
In addition, operators of man-portable airdefense systems will be able to hit their target accurately “simply by continuously looking at it.” It will also “simplify the operation of drones”
and “free drone operators from bulky conventional drone operating platforms.” The passage suggests that this cutting edge technology will
have revolutionary implications for combat. End OE Watch Commentary (Chen)
Source: “中国又诞生一项黑技术 用意念控制武器或不再是幻想 (China has developed another dark technology, it may no longer
be a fantasy to control weapons with the mind),” Sina Military, 31 August 2017. http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/jssd/2017-08-31/docifykqmrv5815174.shtml
The party who completes the Observe-Orient-Decide-Act (OODA) cycle sooner will likely win in combat. However, manual operation of
modern weapons significantly delays soldiers’ actions. With Tsing Hua University’s latest technology, mind operation will probably overcome
that obstacle.
This news was released first by China Popular Computer Weekly. The technology was called “Stead-State Motion Visual Evoked Potentialbased Brain Computer Interface (SSMVEP-BCI) System using Dynamic Window Approach.” Once the operator wears the appropriate device
and looks at the virtual keyboard on the computer, the system can detect the stimulation and translate it into a sentence that the operator
intends to type. Currently, with exceptionally high accuracy and high speed, the system has successfully enabled hands-free instant messaging
correspondence using WebChat application.
Its implementation during military combat will be revolutionary. When used in combat aircrafts, it is more lightweight than the HelmetMounted Display System (HMDS), and will eliminate the manual operation time gap between locking a target and firing a weapon. While
used along with man-portable air-defense systems like the FIM-92 stinger, the operator doesn’t have to worry about distractions from decoy
flare or smoke shell any more, and [can] hit the target accurately by simply continuously looking at it. Moreover, it can significantly simplify
the operation of drones, and free drone operators from bulky conventional drone operating platforms.

OE Watch | October 2017

35

MAD SCIENTIST

MAD SCIENTIST INITIATIVE
CALL FOR IDEAS
SOLDIER 2050
DUE 1 DECEMBER 2017

About Us
•

Mad Scientist is a U.S.
Army Training and
Doctrine Command
(TRADOC) Community of
Action that continually
explores the future of
armed conflict through
collaborative partnerships.

•

This Community shapes
the Army’s view of future
multi-domain operations
& perspectives on the
future Operational
Environment (OE).

•

Mad Scientist helps the
Army continuously learn,
anticipate, innovate, and
engage broadly for more
creative problem solving.

Warfare is a human endeavor. Humanity’s next evolutionary leap, its coevolution with Artificial Intelligence (AI) and becoming part of the network, will
change the character of war. Convergences in nano, neuro, information, and
quantum technologies will further drive this change.
HOW DO I CONTRIBUTE
We want your ideas! The Mad Scientist Initiative uses storytelling and crowdsourcing
to imagine potential futures. Choose your creative methods:
(1) Researched Topics (see topics of interest)
(2) “A Soldier’s Letter from the Frontline”
You can share your ideas by submitting papers, artwork, videos, and games.
These questions are writing prompts and should not limit your imagination and
creativity:
Prompt 1: How does the convergence of bio, quantum, neuro, nano, and information
change warfare?
Prompt 2: How will the Soldier of 2050 interact with their equipment, fellow Soldiers,
and autonomous capabilities?
Prompt 3: Soldiers’ letters have been a window into warfare for hundreds of years.
How do Soldiers describe their units, equipment, and war to their loved ones in 2050?

Why Contribute?

BEST IDEAS
- Publication in a military or academic journal
- Invited to speak at a Mad Scientist Conference
- Mad Scientist SWAG

Connects you to a vibrant
group of innovators.
Provides opportunity to
attend and present at future
Mad Scientist events.
Offers a vehicle for you to
influence how the future Army
will fight.
Improves your future
readiness.

GUIDELINES
- Submissions must be unclassified, unpublished, and cleared by your public affairs
office and operations security managers (USG & as applicable).
- Research papers: max 5000 words/12 point font.
- “A Soldier’s Letter from the Frontline” – max 2000 words/12 point font; video
length max 5 minutes.

Get Connected

TOPICS OF INTEREST
- Human Co-Evolution with AI
- Hyper Connected Military Formations
- Robotics & Autonomous Systems
- Character of War

- Convergence with Bio, Neuro, Nano, and Quantum
- Leaders & Artificial Intelligence
- Man-Machine Interface
- Moral/Ethical Dilemmas in Future Warfare

Send Submissions to: allison.d.winer.civ@mail.mil

@ArmyMadSci
Join us on APAN

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradocg2/mad-scientist/

OE Watch | October 2017

36

ASIA-PACIFIC
Hong Kong’s Counter-Terrorism Efforts
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 August, the
excerpted article from Hong Kong’s The Standard
described a counter-terrorism drill that Hong Kong
police conducted at a stadium in the city, ahead of an
Ariana Grande concert scheduled for 21 September.
This came in the wake of a suicide bombing by a
young male in the UK who travelled to Libya and
returned to Manchester to carry out a suicide bombing
at an Ariana Grande concert in May 2017, killing 23
people, mostly young girls.
The drill in Hong Kong involved 200 police
officers who had to respond to actors setting off a
make-believe bomb while another group of actors
came into the stadium with daggers to stab people.
According to the article, the police and elite counterterrorism personnel in the drill were successful in
shooting down and forcing the attackers to surrender.
They then successfully evacuated the spectators
and provided medical care to the injured. The bomb
disposal unit also safely detonated the explosives in
an attacker’s suicide vest. The police announced that
the test demonstrated good coordination between
different units in the police force and government
departments.
Although the article indicates there is no specific
suicide terrorism threat in Hong Kong, China has
suffered several mass stabbing terrorist attacks in
public places, such as train stations, in recent years.
In addition, the Indonesia-based Institute for Policy
Analysis and Conflict published the excerpted
report in July 2017, suggesting that migrant workers
in Hong Kong were susceptible to radicalization,
especially women. The report identified 50
Indonesian extremists among a population of
150,000 Indonesians in Hong Kong.
Considering the recent suicide bombing at the
Ariana Grande concert in the UK, the incidents
of terrorism in mainland China, and the alleged
extremists operating in Hong Kong, the Hong Kong
police are both preparing their counter-terrorism
forces for new situations while also assuring the
city’s residents that public events, such as concerts,
are safe to attend. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

Hong Kong Stadium.

Source: Iflwlou拍攝, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hong_Kong_Stadium.JPG, CC BY-SA 3.0.

Source: “Cops prepare for Ariana Grande gig,” The Standard, 25 August 2017. http://
www.thestandard.com.hk/breaking-news.php?id=95779&sid=6
Hong Kong police conducted a counter-terrorism drill today, ahead of American teen
singer Ariana Grande’s performance in Hong Kong next month. A suicide bombing at
Grande’s concert in Manchester in May killed 22 people and injured dozens and the
deadly attack put the security arrangements at Asia World-Expo for the September 21
gig under the spotlight.
The exercise involving around 200 police officers at Hong Kong Stadium saw a
“bomb” being set off during the concert and “terrorists” attacking the audience with
choppers. One “attacker” was shot down seconds after elite counter-terrorism officers
arrived and two others made to surrender. The training involved safe evacuation of the
audience and providing help to the “injured” by paramedics. The bomb disposal unit
was also called in to detonate a suicide vest worn by an attacker.
Senior superintendent John Tse from the police public relations branch said the
drill aimed to test the coordination within different units in the force and with other
government departments.
Source: “The Radicalisation of Indonesian Women Workers in Hong Kong,” Institute
for Policy Analysis and Conflict, 26 July 2017. http://www.understandingconflict.org/
en/conflict/read/62/The-Radicalisation-of-Indonesian-Women-Workers-in-Hong-Kong
The Radicalisation of Indonesian Women Workers in Hong Kong, the latest report
from the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict (IPAC), looks at how a tiny cell of some
50 extremist domestic workers has developed within the 153,000-strong Indonesian
community in Hong Kong.

“The exercise involving around 200 police officers at Hong Kong Stadium saw a ‘bomb’ being set off
during the concert and ‘terrorists’ attacking the audience with choppers.”

OE Watch | October 2017

37

ASIA-PACIFIC
Radicalization Trends in Indonesia
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 August, the
Indonesian language website Merdeka featured
an article which discussed radicalization trends in
Indonesia. The article noted three important trends,
as identified by the head of the National Agency
for Combating Terrorism (BNPT), Commissioner
General Suhardi Alius.

“Today there is no one place in the cities of Indonesia that is
completely immune from radicalism or terrorism.”

First, women increasingly want to become suicide
bombers. Second, religious students as young as
five years old have refused to enter public places
such as malls because their teachers tell them malls
are places for infidels only. Third, older religious
students often intimidate their peers with threats to
make them conform to the behavior of extremists.
One example of this comes from the now imprisoned
mastermind of the Bali bombings in 2002, Ali
Imron, who told his interrogators that he could
convince someone to become a suicide bomber in
only two hours.
The two main characteristics of extremists,
according to Alius are intolerance and exclusivity.
He also discussed that extremists come in four
types: the core or masterminds, the militants,
the supporters (financially, for example) and
sympathizers. Recruitment occurs through kinship
ties, friends, people in the same groups, clubs or
religious institutions and, most recently, through
people connected on social media. The latter
method—social media—is especially important
for the head of BNPT because Indonesia now has
139 million social media users, most of whom are
youths. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Grave containing remains of Bali bombing victims.

Source: Robert Smith, Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AGrave_containing_remains_of_Bali_bombing_
victims.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: “Kepala BNPT: Tidak ada satu tempat di Indonesia steril dari terorisme (Head
of BNPT: There is no one place in Indonesia sterile from terrorism),” Merdeka.com, 22
August 2017. https://www.merdeka.com/peristiwa/kepala-bnpt-tidak-ada-satu-tempatdi-indonesia-steril-dari-terorisme.html
Creating a base in Southeast Asia from Poso to the Philippines, ISIS is increasingly
expanding its radical ideology in different regions. Today there is no one place in the
cities of Indonesia that is completely immune from radicalism or terrorism.
The Head of the National Agency for Combating Terrorism (BNPT), Commissioner
General Suhardi Alius, said that the spread of radicalism comes from different groups.
He told the story of Bekasi and Bandung where there is a phenomenon of women
who want to blow themselves up. In East Java, students were also found to intimidate
students to follow certain religious streams with threats. There was also a five-year-old
child who did not want to enter the mall because he learned that it was infidel behavior
from the doctrine of his teachers.
From the observations of the head of BNPT, those who become radicalized have a
number of specific characteristics, namely intolerance and exclusivity.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of
an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and
relying solely on brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations
Forces (SOF) who were the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in
Crimea. This book will attempt to split the difference between these radically different
ideas by shedding some light on what exactly the Russian Ground Forces consist of, how
they are structured, how they fight, and how they are modernizing.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | October 2017

38

ASIA-PACIFIC
The Kra Canal: A Global Megaproject?
OE Watch Commentary: The idea of building a canal through the Kra Isthmus
in Thailand was suggested as far back as 1677 and has been discussed many times
since then, with nothing ever materializing. As the accompanying article discusses,
most recently, European business leaders in Thailand joined some influential
members of the Chinese government in Bangkok to urge Thailand’s leadership to
allow construction of the strategic canal to move forward.
As the passage notes, the canal “would bypass the narrow... Strait of Malacca, the
world’s busiest trade route which links China, Japan and other East Asian nations
with the oil fields of the Middle East and major markets in Europe, Africa and India”
It also points out that ships passing between the Indian and Pacific Oceans would
save at least three days’ sailing time, or about 750 miles. Furthermore, “it would
provide an alternative to a strait through which a record 84,000 vessels passed last
year -- a figure that is rapidly approaching optimal capacity.”
Rolf-Dieter Daniel, president of the European Association for Business and
Commerce, the umbrella group of European chambers of commerce in Thailand,
presented some thought-provoking arguments in favor of building the canal.
However, Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-Ocha is seemingly still not interested. The
article cites Prayuth as saying last year, “I won’t do it now because I have a pile of
urgent work to finish.” Also, according to the article, the project lacks unanimous
public support due to some of the potential security implications of the waterway,
“which would divide most of the overwhelmingly Buddhist country from three
insurgency-plagued and largely Muslim southern provinces.”

Map of selected project variants of the Thai Canal.

Source: Maximilian Dörrbecker (Chumwa), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AThai_Canal_map-de.
jpg, Public domain.

Despite the lack of support, China seems eager to back the project. As the passage
points out, supporters are hoping that the canal can be funded through China’s multibillion-dollar Belt and Road Initiative and 21st Century
Maritime Silk Road infrastructure projects. The question is, how much pressure and support is Beijing willing to put forth and how much will
it take for Thailand to finally agree to this highly strategic project? End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“[A canal] would provide an alternative to a strait through which a record 84,000 vessels passed last
year -- a figure that is rapidly approaching optimal capacity.”
Source: “European Business Joins China in Pushing $28bn Thai Canal,” Nikkei Asian Review, 11 September 2017. https://asia.nikkei.com/
Politics-Economy/International-Relations/European-business-joins-China-in-pushing-28bn-Thai-Canal
…the Kra Canal would slice through the Malay peninsula some 800km south of Bangkok and about 200km north of Thailand’s border with
Malaysia, linking the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea at roughly the same latitude as the resort island of Phuket. Supporters say it
could be completed within five years.
The canal would bypass the narrow, piracy-prone and strategically sensitive Strait of Malacca, the world’s busiest trade route, which
links China, Japan and other East Asian nations with the oil fields of the Middle East and major markets in Europe, Africa and India. The
distance saved for ships passing between the Indian and Pacific Oceans would be at least 1,200km, or up to three days’ sailing time. Equally
significant, it would provide an alternative to a strait through which a record 84,000 vessels passed last year -- a figure that is rapidly
approaching optimal capacity.
Supporters are hoping that the 135km long canal can be funded in large part through China’s multibillion-dollar Belt and Road Initiative and
21st Century Maritime Silk Road infrastructure projects. Speakers from China at the conference certainly encouraged that view.
Zhou Dawei, a professor from Peking University, which has surveyed the proposed route, compared the Kra Canal with global megaprojects
such as the Three Gorges Dam in China and the Channel Tunnel linking Britain and France. “If we are lucky enough, we expect that in the
near future, the Thai Canal will also appear on this amazing list,” he said.
However, there is no sign yet that Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-Ocha is listening. For him, it has all seemed too grand a plan. “Those who
want to initiate the Kra Canal have to push forward the project in the next government,” Prayuth said January last year. “I won’t do it now
because I have a pile of urgent work to finish.”
Public support for the canal is also far from unanimous, with proponents and opponents arguing about the security implications of the
waterway, which would divide most of the overwhelmingly Buddhist country from three insurgency-plagued and largely Muslim southern
provinces. A canal could also fuel tensions within ASEAN because it would bypass and take business from regional shipping hubs such as
Singapore.
OE Watch | October 2017

39

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Are Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan Resolving their
Border Issues?
OE Watch Commentary: The
government of Kyrgyzstan has been
working to demarcate its borders with
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan over the
past several years after a string of
violent incidents, though with mixed
results. The accompanying excerpted
article reports on a recent agreement
signed during a visit by the Uzbek
President to Kyrgyzstan, to demarcate
a large portion of their border. The
article points out some aspects of
the agreement that help gauge how
effective it might be. In addition, the
article points out that this was “the
first visit of an Uzbek president to
Kyrgyzstan in 17 years.” This also
marks another example of
Uzbek President Mirziyoyev
working to improve ties
with neighboring states in his first year
in office following the death of Islam
Karimov, who had strained relationships
with every government in the region.

Almazbek Atambayev, President of Kyrgyzstan.

Source: kremlin.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AAlmazbek_Atambayev_(2017-06-20)_01.jpg, CC BY 4.0.

“One of the members of the Kyrgyz delegation, asking not to be named,
confirmed that the treaty does not affect 35 of the disputed areas where
conflicts have often been occurring.”

As the article mentions, the two presidents agreed on demarcating “80 percent of the border,” but also notes that “the treaty was prepared in
a very short amount of time and it remains unclear which disputed sections of the border are reported.” This comes alongside a statement from
an unofficial Kyrgyz government source that “the treaty does not affect 35 of the disputed areas where conflicts have often been occurring.”
Lastly, the statement from an instructor at the Diplomatic Academy of Kyrgyzstan’s Ministry of Affairs provides the best insight into the
impact of the agreement. He states that “only the parts of the border on which no conflict arose will be demarcated” and that “Mirziyoyev’s
visit is not to resolve border disputes, but to build a railway from Uzbekistan to China through the southern regions of Kyrgyzstan.”
The proposed rail line would run through Kyrgyzstan, but not include any stops along the route. Kyrgyzstan’s President Atambayev
publically disapproved of this and offered an alternative route that would include stops in the northern regions of Kyrgyzstan. Nevertheless,
he did agree to the border demarcations with Uzbekistan that appear to have paved the way for the Uzbek-Chinese rail line. It is possible that
this initial agreement could lead to a future meeting to address the border areas that have been the source of conflicts, but the article shows that
for now, the recently demarcated areas of the Kyrgyz-Uzbek border will have a minimal impact on resolving border disputes. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)
Source: “Договор, о котором знать не положено. Узбекистан и Киргизия предпочли решать вопрос о границе втайне от всех (The
treaty about which nothing is known. Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan preferred to resolve the issue of the border secretly from everyone),”
Fergana, 5 September 2017. http://www.fergananews.com/articles/9539
On 5 September the President of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev arrived in Bishkek for the signing of an agreement on the Kyrgyz-Uzbek
border. A number of experts, and especially representatives of the leaders on both sides, consider the first visit of an Uzbek president to
Kyrgyzstan in 17 years as a sign of warming bilateral relations. On the agenda – the delimitation and demarcation of 80 percent of the
border…the treaty was prepared in a very short amount of time and it remains unclear which disputed sections of the border are reported…
…of the 60 disputed sections of the border, the Sokh, Barak and Shakhimardan enclaves, the Andijan reservoir, the section along the Gavasai
River and the mountain Ungar-Tepa (in Kyrgyz, Ungar-Too) became disputes that reached armed confrontation…One of the members of the
Kyrgyz delegation, asking not to be named, confirmed that the treaty does not affect 35 of the disputed areas where conflicts have often been
occurring…Zhapar Birimkulov, an instructor at the Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kyrgyzstan, stresses that only
the parts of the border on which no conflict arose will be demarcated. The real goal of Mirziyoyev’s visit is not to resolve border disputes, but
to build a railway from Uzbekistan to China through the southern regions of Kyrgyzstan…
OE Watch | October 2017

40

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Chinese Intentions for Sri Lanka’s Hambantota Port
OE Watch Commentary: News
reports of Chinese investments in
South Asia often focus on the ChinaPakistan Economic Corridor, which
have totaled over $40 billion and
include significant infrastructure
development and China’s use
of Pakistan’s Gwadar Port. The
accompanying excerpted articles from
Sri Lankan and Indian sources report
on a recent lease agreement that the
government of Sri Lanka made with
China over the use of the Hambantota
Port. The articles provide insight into
important aspects of the agreement
and regional concerns about what
China might ultimately hope to get
out of it.
Hambantota Harbor Sri Lanka.
The article from the Sri Lankan
Source: Dinesh De Alwis, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AHambantota_Harbour_Sri_Lanka.JPG, CC BY-SA 4.0.
Daily Mirror, a privately owned
English language newspaper, notes that it is a “99-year agreement,” and points out that the agreement was a “re-drafting of the original
Concession Agreement to reduce the Chinese stake from 80% to 70%” and that the changes took place because of “formidable behind-thescenes pressure exercised by India.” The author also notes that “security aspects could be handled by Sri Lanka, including the granting of
permission for port visits by military vessels” and this was a significant point of contention by some Sri Lankans against their government
in recent months, in addition to leasing the port to China to pay off debts. China invested hundreds of millions of dollars to develop the port
prior to the lease agreement and the port has not been as financially successful as expected.

The article from the online version of India’s Live Mint, an English language daily newspaper, also discusses the recent lease agreement
with a focus on the impact for China’s naval presence in the region. It notes India’s concerns regarding “China’s expanding naval presence
in South Asia represent[ing] a deliberate violation of India’s strategic redlines.” The article mentions that “Colombo has ensured that the
[Hambantota] port will not be used for military purposes,” but that “the Hambantota International Port Services’ right to control warship
movements may result in a clash of authority with CMPort [China Merchants Port Holdings Co. Ltd.].” The author references an instance a
few years ago, when a Chinese submarine should have docked at a Sri Lankan state facility, but wound up at the “Colombo South Container
Terminal, a facility built, controlled and run by CMPort.” While it is unknown if or when the Chinese Navy would use the Hambantota Port,
the articles demonstrate continued Chinese investments in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
Source: Kurukulasuriya, Lasanda. “Chinese money in Hambantota: Small change in the juggernaut of Belt and Road,” Daily Mirror, 14 August
2017. http://www.dailymirror.lk/article/Chinese-money-in-Hambantota-Small-change-in-the-juggernaut-of-Belt-and-Road-134590.html
The government’s manner of communicating details of the Hambantota port deal to the public has been less than forthright, and lacking in
transparency, considering public apprehensions over the fallout of the project. In an attempt to get around the opposition to a big time giveaway of control over a national asset – a strategically located deep water port – there seem to have been attempts to pull the wool over people’s
eyes…
...under the unprecedented 99-year agreement…The re-drafting of the original Concession Agreement to reduce the Chinese stake from 80% to
70% etc. was parleyed by the government to sound like a move made with a view to protecting independence and sovereignty. However, had the
government been honest it would have admitted to formidable behind-the-scenes pressure exercised by India to bring about these changes. This
would particularly relate to the amendments ensuring that security aspects could be handled by Sri Lanka, including the granting of permission
for port visits by military vessels... India’s worries extend far beyond Sri Lanka and Hambantota. The investment in Hambantota, at $US 1.12
billion, and Colombo Port City at $US 1.4 billion, would seem like small change in comparison to China’s infrastructure investments in other
parts of South Asia…According to a recent report in India Today, China has pledged US$60 billion since 2013 to Pakistan (including $US 46
billion in the China-Pakistan-Economic Corridor, or CPEC)…

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

41

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Continued: Chinese Intentions for Sri Lanka’s
Hambantota Port
“Indian commentators recall the docking of a Chinese submarine at Colombo in 2014. The PLAN
submarine should have berthed at an SLPA berth, in accordance with Sri Lankan regulation that stipulates
foreign military vessels be accommodated at state-owned facilities.”
Source: Singh, Abhijit. “Sri Lanka’s Hambantota gambit,” Live Mint, 5 September 2017. http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/
qKTtTf3S4UwaFrSnD3KDJJ/Sri-Lankas-Hambantota-gambit.html
…Sri Lanka also recognized regional concerns that Chinese control of Hambantota would result in its greater use by the People’s Liberation
Army Navy (PLAN). In particular, Colombo empathized with a growing sense in New Delhi that China’s expanding naval presence in South
Asia represented a deliberate violation of India’s strategic redlines. Sri Lankan leaders say the new deal corrects all that was wrong with the
2016 agreement…Colombo has ensured that the port will not be used for military purposes…Colombo says the agreement gives it full control
over security matters, as also the right to inspect ships entering the port…
As per existing port management norms, the company that controls operations takes decisions on how ships must enter and leave harbour.
At Hambantota, the Hambantota International Port Services’ right to control warship movements may result in a clash of authority with
CMPort (China Merchants Port Holdings Co. Ltd.), the majority stakeholder. The Chinese are likely to have anticipated these problems and
inserted clarifying clauses in the agreement that recognize CMPort’s final authority in case of a disagreement with HIPS. But the relevant
sections haven’t been made public. Indeed, the Sri Lankan government’s inability to place the agreement in parliament for discussions does
lead to the suspicion that only select portions of the pact have been revealed.
…Indian commentators recall the docking of a Chinese submarine at Colombo in 2014. The PLAN submarine should have berthed at an
SLPA berth, in accordance with Sri Lankan regulation that stipulates foreign military vessels be accommodated at state-owned facilities. But
the submarine came alongside the deep-water Colombo South Container Terminal, a facility built, controlled and run by CMPort…
…The Sri Lankan government’s de facto moratorium on the docking of Chinese warships and submarines at Hambantota, though well
intended, is unlikely to endure in the long run. China is bound to exploit deliberate ambiguities in the agreement to utilize Sri Lankan
ports for military replenishment purposes…India will be wary about the agreement at Hambantota—not just in relation to the division of
ownership, but also regarding the prospect that China’s possible acquisition of berthing rights at Hambantota could lead to the setting up of
the PLA’s first dual-use civilian-cum-military facility in South Asia.

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | October 2017

42

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Israel’s Investigation Into a UAV Strike on the
Armenian Army
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Azerbaijan has been
purchasing significant amounts of Israeli weapons and equipment over the
past several years. However, as the accompanying excerpted news articles
report, a recent incident involving an Israeli company could limit future
purchases for Azerbaijan in addition to Israeli relations in the region.
The article from the independent Armenian news website Lragir reports
on an Israeli Ministry of Defense investigation into an Israeli company
called Aeronautics Defense Systems. The allegation is that, in early July,
representatives from the company had traveled to Azerbaijan “to finalize
a contract to supply the kamikaze unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)” to
Azerbaijan. During this visit, they demonstrated the capabilities of its
Orbiter 1K UAV by using it against an Armenian target, upon a request
by the Azerbaijani military. The article notes that initially “two Israeli
operators outright refused to send the UAV to Nagorno-Karabakh”
and that “the command of the two UAVs (then) went to the managers
themselves.” As a result of the strike, “two (Armenian) soldiers received
light shrapnel wounds.”
The article from Haqqin, a news website with reported ties to the
government of Azerbaijan, reported on the incident referencing the
Israeli newspaper Maariv, which originally broke the story. While the
article repeats many of the same things as other articles, it states that “the
Azerbaijani military requested that the capabilities of the new equipment
be demonstrated during an operation against the Armenian Army, and
were refused,” and thus “the attempt to use the UAVs did not cause any
casualties.”
The article from the English language version of the Israeli newspaper
Haaretz reports that “Aeronautics vehemently denied the claim, and said
that only the purchaser operates the device, and the company “never
carries out demonstrations on live targets, as is true in this case as well.”
The article also reports on the Israeli Ministry of Defense’s decision to
suspend some of the export licenses of Aeronautics Defense Systems
while an investigation into the incident takes place. It is worth noting
that the Israeli “Defense Ministry had frozen the marketing and export
licenses of its Orbiter 1k,” but that “the rest of the company’s activity was
not restricted by the ministry, nor was its overall activity in Azerbaijan.”
While other Israeli defense firms might be cautious when doing business
in Azerbaijan in the future, overall sales of weapons and equipment to
Azerbaijan from Israel is likely to continue. At the same time, the Israeli
government is trying to maintain good relations with Armenia and the
outcome of its investigation into Aeronautics Defense Systems could be an
important measurement of that. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Employees of the Tel-Aviv based company
might have taken part in an attack on Armenian
positions in Nagorno-Karabakh upon the request
by Azerbaijan’s military.”
Source: Krivosheev, Kirill. “По израильско-армянским
отношениям ударил беспилотник – Коммерсантъ (An
unmanned aerial vehicle struck Israeli-Armenian relations –
Kommersant),” Lragir, 24 August 2017. http://www.lragir.am/
index/rus/0/politics/view/57647
The Ministry of Defense of Israel is conducting an investigation
into the company Aeronautics Defense Systems…employees of
the Tel-Aviv based company might have taken part in an attack
on Armenian positions in Nagorno-Karabakh upon the request
by Azerbaijan’s military. The company strongly denies all
accusations, but it has long been known about its cooperation
with Baku…The goal was to finalize a contract to supply the
kamikaze unmanned aerial vehicle Orbiter 1K. They can carry
a two kilogram explosive, which is activated when colliding with
a target…the two Israeli operators outright refused to send the
UAV to Nagorno-Karabakh…The managers of the Israeli company
warned the operators that they could lose an important contract
because of them, but they still did not comply. Then the command
of the two UAVs went to the managers themselves…Armenian
media, referring to their own sources, verified the date when
the incident likely occurred as July 7…Two (Armenian) soldiers
received light shrapnel wounds…
Source: “Скандал: Израильские операторы отказались
направить беспилотники на Армению (Scandal: Israeli
operators refused to deploy unmanned aerial vehicles to
Armenia),” Haqqin, 13 August 2017. https://haqqin.az/
news/107834
…according to an article in the newspaper Maariv…the incident
took place more than a month ago, when a delegation from
Aeronautics Defense Systems arrived in Baku for discussions of
a new contract for unmanned aerial vehicles…The article says
that the Azerbaijani military requested that the capabilities of the
new equipment be demonstrated during an operation against the
Armenian Army, and were refused…As a result, the attempt to use
the UAVs did not cause any casualties…

Source: Cohen, Gili. “Israeli Firm Loses Kamikaze-drone Export License After Complaint It Carried Out Live Demo on Armenian Army,”
Haaretz, 31 August 2017. http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.809635
Israel’s Defense Ministry has frozen some of the licenses of Aeronautics, preventing the firm from exporting its drones to Azerbaijan…On
Monday night Aeronautics informed the stock market that the Defense Ministry had frozen the marketing and export licenses of its Orbiter 1k…
According to Aeronautics, the contract for supplying the kamikazi drone, an armed unmanned aircraft, totals $20 million for the next two years.
…Aeronautics vehemently denied the claim, and said that only the purchaser operates the device, and the company “never carries out
demonstrations on live targets, as is true in this case as well.”…The rest of the company’s activity was not restricted by the ministry, nor was
its overall activity in Azerbaijan. Details that have reached Haaretz in recent weeks indicate that on the day of the incident that is now being
examined by the Defense Ministry, there was an attack by a suicide drone on the Armenian army. In the official journal of the Armenian army a
senior army official discussed the attack, adding that two soldiers were slightly wounded in the incident…
OE Watch | October 2017

43

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s ‘Tsirkon’ Hypersonic Cruise Missile
OE Watch Commentary: The first reports of the 3M22 Tsirkon (SS-N-33)
supersonic anti-ship missile started surfacing in the Russian media in 2011,
including a report that a development team for the project had been established
in one of the manufacturer’s directorates. The manufacturer, the Science
and Production Association (NPO), already had significant experience with
hypersonic weapon development, as it is also developing a hypersonic ICBM
warhead (Project 4202) that will reportedly be mounted on Russia’s new heavy
ICBM, the RS-28 Sarmat (SS-X-30 SATAN 2).
The Tsirkon is likely based on the joint Russian-Indian BrahMos missile,
and the BrahMos based on the Russian 3M55 Onyx (SS-N-26 Strobile). These
missiles have similar two stage propulsion systems that involve a solid-fuel
first stage, and a liquid-fueled ramjet for the second stage. In testing, the
Tsirkon has reportedly reached Mach 8, but the likely maximum velocity
is approximately Mach 5-6 in combat situations (2000 m/s). The Tsirkon
has an estimated range of 500-640 miles, and will likely carry a warhead
of 550-650 lbs. Russia has boasted that the Tsirkon’s combination of high
speed, and ability to conduct high speed ‘corkscrew’ maneuvers makes it
almost impossible to stop with existing missile defense systems. In addition,
its small radar signature (0.001 square meters) would permit only the most
powerful of ship-based radars to detect Tsirkon at a range of only 55-75 miles.
If Russia does successfully field the Tsirkon, as reported in the
accompanying article from Rossiyskaya Gazeta, they will have to
overcome several technological challenges resulting from the extreme
speeds and temperatures that the missile will experience. At hypersonic
speeds, air resistance becomes a major problem, as it is similar to the
sliding of sandpaper along the missile body. The result of this friction is
high temperatures that can cause large variations in the missile frame’s
temperature, with some parts reaching several thousand degrees. For the
Tsirkon to be successful, it must not only survive high speeds and heat, but
also be able to navigate towards, and eventually find, or ‘seek’ its target.
These guidance control systems must be hearty enough to survive flight,
but also advanced enough to function in an electromagnetic jamming
environment. At the same time, they must be able to conduct final maneuvers
to avoid antimissile defenses while en route to their targets. (The Tsirkon
reportedly also has a radar seeker, which activates shortly before impact.
This seeker must be able to distinguish between legitimate targets and
decoys.)

“I will not hide the fact that we also intend
to obtain a number of products in about 20202022 – primarily aviation weapons that will
operate at hypersonic speeds...”
-Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov
Source: Dmitriy Girgoryev, “В Минобороны назвали сроки
получения гиперзвуковых ракет (Defense Ministry Names
Date for Getting Hypersonic Missiles),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta
Online, 19 July 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/07/19/v-minoboronynazvali-sroki-polucheniia-giperzvukovyh-raket.html
The Russian Defense Ministry is reckoning on getting
hypersonic weapons in 2020-2022. TASS reports this, citing
the words of Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov. “We
are assessing the scientific and technical groundwork in this
sphere and cannot see that we have fallen badly behind. We
are at roughly the same level as the leading countries that
are working in this sphere. I will not hide the fact that we also
intend to obtain a number of products in about 2020-2022 –
primarily aviation weapons that will operate at hypersonic
speeds,”…
Yuriy Borisov elaborated, saying that active work in this
sphere is now being done in the United Aircraft Corporation
and other structures of the defense industry complex…In
addition to aviation weapons operating at hypersonic speeds
(at least six times the speed of sound), similar developments
are under way for the Russian Navy and Strategic Rocket
Forces (RVSN). In January this year Rossiyskaya Gazeta
reported that the Science and Production Association of
Machine Building at Reutov is developing the Tsirkon future
hypersonic cruise missile for the Russian Navy and supersonic
combat equipment for intercontinental ballistic missiles.
The first tests of the Tsirkon were already conducted in
April this year, and in them the missiles exceeded the speed
of sound by a factor of eight times…It is worth adding that
in May this year Academician Vasiliy Fomin, director of the
Khristianovich Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics
of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
reported that at the present time the results of the work on
creating hypersonic weapons are better in Russia than in the
United States.

Although the Russian military does, arguably, fall behind the US and
Western militaries in many aspects, according to the accompanying article
from Svobodnaya Pressa, missile technologies is one area where Russia
believes it is well ahead of the West, to the point that Russians purport that
the West desires “to bind Russia’s hands and feet” to hinder Russian missile
developments. This statement is typical of comments in the Russian media
that the true purpose of US and Western diplomatic pressure and economic sanctions is not to punish or deter Russia for activities relating
to Ukraine, but to hinder research and development (R&D), and the fielding of Russian military technologies. (continued)

“Thus, we can say that work on the creation of Russian and U.S. hypersonic weapons is at different stages.
Here [in Russia, we are at the stage of] thorough testing before adoption. There [in the U.S.] they still have
only research. Experts believe that the US is proceeding with at least a seven-year lag. That is also why
talks are proposed on the need to clip Russia’s wings at least by bureaucratic mechanisms...”

(continued)

OE Watch | October 2017

44

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russia’s ‘Tsirkon’ Hypersonic Cruise
Missile
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Битва за гиперзвук: Россия на годы обогнала Запад Конкуренты так отстали, что предлагают хотя бы
своим дипломатам затормозить нас (Battle for Hypersonics: Russia Years Ahead of the West: Rivals Are So Far behind That They Are Even
Asking Their Diplomats to Restrain Us),” Svobodnaya Pressa Online, 31 July 2017. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/177993/
RIA Novosti has reported on an extremely interesting speech by British Navy representative Paul Burke at a symposium of the
USSTRATCOM in Nebraska. He said that the British military is closely watching the successes achieved by Russia in the creation of
hypersonic weapons. And he had to admit that the scientists and engineers of foggy Albion cannot even somehow get close to the achievements
of their Russian colleagues. There followed a stunning conclusion: any hypersonic weapons should, it appears, “be guided by international
norms and rules.” That is, since nothing is working out for us, it is necessary to bind Russia’s hands and feet. Of course, unilaterally, not by
trying to push a decision through the UN Security Council, where Moscow has a veto, but through the organization’s General Assembly…
How do things stand with Russia? The 3М22 Tsirkon sea-based maneuverable cruise missile is already in the testing phase. It will arm the
heavy nuclear missile cruisers Petr Velikiy and Admiral Nakhimov. The estimated flight range is from 500 km to 1,000 km. The missile has
already been boosted up to speeds of Mach 8. Adoption is expected at the end of this decade or early in the next decade. There is evidence
that work is under way to create an airborne modification of the Tsirkon. In any event, in the course of the Russian- Indian project to create
the BrahMos hypersonic missile it will presumably be made for both surface ships and aircraft…
Thus, we can say that work on the creation of Russian and U.S. hypersonic weapons is at different stages. Here [in Russia, we are at the stage
of] thorough testing before adoption. There [in the U.S.] they still have only research. Experts believe that the U.S. is proceeding with at least
a seven-year lag. That is also why talks are proposed on the need to clip Russia’s wings at least by bureaucratic mechanisms.
Perhaps the most interesting feature of the Tsirkon is how it will be
deployed. The Tsirkon can be launched from the 3S-14 universal vertical
launchers that also launches the 3M55 Onyx (SS-N-26 Strobile) anti-ship
missile, the 3M-54 Kalibr (SS-N-27 Sizzler) anti-ship missile, and the 3M-14
Kalibr (SS-N-30A) land-attack cruise missile. This means that most current
Russian submarines, cruisers, destroyers, frigates, and even corvettes will
be capable of firing any of these three missiles. It is also likely the Tsirkon
may be fielded in air-launched variety as well. This practice is an example
of Russia’s current line of effort for modularity and interoperability. Newer
Russian ship (Gepard class, Buyan class, Karakurt class, etc.) and submarine
(Yasen class) construction has shied away from single-purpose missions in
favor of being able to do antisubmarine, antiship, and land-attack missions.
Gepard-3.9 frigate on project 11661 frigate base.
Undoubtedly, this shift is due to economic necessities that require a much
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/IMDS-2011/i-MLcmHFR/A, CC BY 4.0.
smaller Navy than Soviet times when specialization was practical. Russia
has not only switched to multirole vessels to get the most out of every defense dollar, but has also enforced interoperability with certain Ground
Forces and Aerospace Troops elements. For instance, the Ground Forces’ Tor-M2 and Aerospace Troops’ Pantsir-S1 air defense systems are
mounted on naval vessels.

Modular missile system Club-U.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/IMDS-2011/i-hTWKDZG/X2, CC BY 4.0.

The notably land-centric Russian General Staff has long made efforts
for cross domain fires in terms of air, land and sea. For example, most new
Russian antitank guided missiles (including barrel-launched) have a limited
capability to hit low and slow flying aircraft; coastal defense missiles can
strike targets on land; SRBMs (Iskander) have warheads with seekers that
can target ships; and short-range air defense systems (Buk-M3) can hit targets
on land. Small automated turrets (Arbalet-DM) are being fielded that are
designed to destroy small UAVs, as well as fulfilling their main purposes
of ISR and engaging ground targets; future strategic air defense systems
(S-500/A-235 Nudol) can destroy low-earth orbit satellites. Russia has long
viewed these limited secondary capabilities as essential for maintaining
resiliency. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

OE Watch | October 2017

45

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Naval Infantry’s New ‘Over-The-Horizon’
Bumerang BTR
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Naval Infantry is
considered an elite force in the Russian Armed Forces, falling
somewhere in the hierarchy of Russian military elites between the
Russian Airborne Troops (VDV) on the higher end of the spectrum
and the GRU Spetsnaz on the lower end. Since the collapse of the
Soviet Union, they have reportedly been quite effective during the
Chechen campaigns, Russia’s counter-piracy operations off the
Somali coast, the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, Russia’s annexation of
Crimea, the Syrian campaign, and in current operations in Eastern
Ukraine. Russia is currently increasing naval infantry capabilities
at all levels to include equipment, landing vessels and naval support.
Russia has also recently upgraded naval infantry regiments in the
Pacific Fleet and Northern Fleets into full naval infantry brigades.
The accompanying articles from Sputnik and Izvestiya discuss the
Wheeled IFV BMP-K K-17 VPK-7829 on unified wheeled combat platform Bumerang.
capabilities of a new ‘over-the-horizon’ Bumerang BTR to be used
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/9th-May-military-vehicles/i-ffWzcQ2/XL, CC BY 4.0.
by the Naval Infantry. As the articles note, “the Navy expects the
machine to be capable of independently overcoming not only small water obstacles, but have over-the-horizon landing and assault capability.”
Russia has been experimenting with three new chassis, the heavy-tracked Armata chassis, the Kurganets-25 medium-tracked chassis, and the
Bumerang wheeled chassis. These chassis are designed to be modular and interoperable, so these vehicles may accept the same turret, despite
the turrets and chassis being designed by different manufacturers. According to the articles, a further modified Bumerang chassis is intended
to serve as the future chassis for the Russian Naval Infantry. Unlike most other Russian vehicles, this modified Bumerang will not just be
capable of ‘swimming’ for relatively short durations to cross water obstacles, but will be capable of over-the-horizon amphibious operations by
‘swimming’ over 60 km from a ship to coast. Current procedures involve the Naval Infantry conducting amphibious operations by loading onto
small high-speed landing craft from large ships and deploying to shore. If these modified Bumerangs are adopted and successful, the Naval
Infantry will be able to deploy directly from the bow doors of the large ships.
The accompanying article from RIAFAN, discusses how Russia’s design principles of modularity and interoperability are being implemented
on the AU-220M automated weapon station. If deployed, this weapon station might eventually be found on Naval Infantry Bumerangs.
Currently, unit capabilities are somewhat standardized throughout individual Russian units in the Ground Forces and VDV. (For instance, if a
battalion is equipped with BMP-3s, all BMP-3s will have the same turret with the 2A70 100mm canon.) But if Russia does field the AU-220M
and other specialized turrets in the same units, it could become very difficult to anticipate unit capabilities and combat power for operations
and training purposes. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin and Aleksey Ramm, “«Бумеранг» ударит из-за горизонта (The ‘Bumerang’ Will Strike From Beyond the
Horizon),” Izvestiya Online, 25 August 2017. https://iz.ru/629787/dmitrii-litovkin-aleksei-ramm/bumerang-udarit-iz-za-gorizonta
The unique Russian Bumerang BTR will be able float for tens of kilometers and accurately destroy any targets from the surface of the water.
One will also be able to redeploy the BTR long distances using fast landing craft and disembark military personnel from transport ships onto
an unimproved coast. These requirements have been listed in the Navy’s performance specification. According to the experts, the Bumerang
will become a universal combat platform for the Russian Naval Infantry, which is capable of accomplishing an extensive range of missions. To
land an assault force from the sea, support it with fire, and also conduct an engagement on land…
The vehicle should be able to not only independently ford small water obstacles but also participate in an over-the-horizon amphibious
landing…the Bumerang must be able to conduct fire using all types of weapons of the weapons complex against coastal targets.
The BTR has a forward placed engine. This configuration protects the crew and the landing force from enemy bullets and grenades, and also
provides a more convenient egress from the vehicle through the aft ramp. The vehicle has amphibious capabilities thanks to the hermetically
sealed water-displacing armored hull and the two waterjets that are located in the BTR’s aft section behind the vehicle’s wheels. They provide
the mobility of the 20-ton Bumerang on the water with a maximum speed of no less than 12 kilometers per hour.
Today the Bumerang is one of the most universal combat platforms, which was developed based upon the modular principle. The BTR has
received a forward engine location. That configuration protects the crew and the landing force from enemy bullets and grenades, and also
provides a more convenient egress from the vehicle through the aft ramp. The vehicle has amphibious capabilities thanks to the hermetically
sealed water-displacing armored hull and the two waterjets that are located in the BTR’s aft section behind the vehicle’s wheels. They provide
the mobility of the 20-tonne Bumerang on the water with a maximum speed of no less than 12 kilometers per hour…The K-16 armored
transport vehicle and the K-17 wheeled armored infantry vehicle have already been developed based upon the Bumerang standardized armed
platform,. The completion of the testing of the base version of the Bumerang BTR is anticipated this year.

(continued)

OE Watch | October 2017

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Naval Infantry’s New ‘Over-The-Horizon’
Bumerang BTR
“...the Bumerang will become a universal combat platform for the Russian Naval Infantry, which is capable
of accomplishing an extensive range of missions. To land an assault force from the sea, support it with fire,
and also conduct an engagement on land…”
Source: “Unstoppable: Russia’s New APC Can Swim 60 Kilometers, Fire in Amphibious,” Sputnik Online, 26 August 2017. https://
sputniknews.com/military/201708261056813556-bumerang-amphibious-mode-details/
…The Bumerang is capable of swimming independently for dozens of kilometers and hitting land-based targets from the water using its
complement of onboard weapons. Furthermore, in accordance with the tactical and technical requirements for the vehicle demanded by the
Russian Navy, the Bumerang must be fully compatible with Russia’s latest high-speed hovercraft and landing ships…Military experts expect
the Bumerang to become a universal combat platform, capable of solving a wide range of military tasks. This is line with Russian armored
vehicle makers’ broader doctrine of modular vehicle design, designed with cross-compatibility, interchangeability, and wide configurability in
mind. In the Navy, the Bumerang’s missions will include amphibious troop landing, fire support and ground engagement.
Speaking to Russia’s Izvestia newspaper, Admiral Vladimir Korolev, commander-in-chief of the Russian Navy, confirmed that developers
have been presented with the technical characteristics for Bumerangs to be used by the Naval Infantry. The Navy expects the machine to be
capable of independently overcoming not only small water obstacles, but have over-the-horizon landing and assault capability (i.e. the ability
to swim from over 60 km from the coast). Furthermore, the Bumerang must be able to be deployed aboard Russia’s fleet of landing hovercraft.
“An amphibious version of the Bumerang APC is being tested,” Alexander Krasovitsky, general director of the Military-Industrial Company,
the developer of the vehicle...”The exact form of the vehicle is still being finalized according to the customer’s requirements, so it’s too early to
speak in more detail about its capabilities,” Krasovitsky added…
Ultimately, the Naval Infantry version of the Bumerang is expected to provide the Navy not only with a reliable seaworthy transport, but an
advanced combat platform with superior firepower capabilities over its predecessor…Unlike its BTR-82A predecessor, the Bumerang does
not have fixed weapons, but rather can be fitted with a variety of remote combat modules with weapons whose calibers range from 12.7 mm
to 125 mm. Several configurations include the Kornet anti-tank missile system, with autocannons, heavy and light machine guns and turrets,
and other arrangements available. This universality allows the Bumerang to be adaptable to the needs of any branch of the Russian military,
including the Army, the National Guard and the Naval Infantry. Testing of the base model of the Bumerang is expected to wrap up later this
year.
Source: Ilya Muromskiy, “Убийственная мощь: боевой модуль «Байкал» уничтожит любую цель на земле и в воздухе (Murderous
Firepower: Baykal Weapon Station Will Destroy Any Target on the Ground or in the Air),” RIAFAN Online, 9 August 2017. https://riafan.
ru/908421-ubiistvennaya-moshch-boevoi-modul-baikal-unichtozhit-lyubuyu-cel-na-zemle-i-v-vozduhe
The AU-220M weapon station is an automated gun mount for various combat machines, primarily infantry fighting vehicles (BMPs). From
the outside, the AU-220M looks like a small turret. Installed in its body is a 57-mm rapid-fire gun. The weapon station itself can be mounted on
all emerging and upgraded types of Russian Federation Armed Forces armored fighting vehicles. So that includes the BTR-80, BMP series 1,
2, and 3, PT-76B amphibious tank, and others. In addition, the AU-220M can also be fitted to the latest Armata battle tank and Kurganets-25
and Bumerang armored vehicles, which are armed with remote weapon stations.
The Baykal (its unofficial name) comes with the elements of a fire control system. This includes a combined observation and sighting
system with televisual and thermal-imaging channels. It also has laser range finders and dual-axis stabilizers…the Baykal has an automated
loading system. Inside the turret is an ammunition compartment holding 200 rounds. The AU-220M can fire 53-UOR-281U high-explosive
fragmentation and 53-UBR-281U armor-piercing tracer rounds, or guided projectiles.
…it has enviable firepower performance. For example, it has a firing rate of 120 rounds per minute with a range of up to 12 kilometers, can
rotate 360 degrees, and can elevate its barrel to 74 degrees. The main thing about the AU-220M is the caliber. That, combined with the rate of
fire for this kind of gun, means there is almost no target on the battlefield that the Baykal cannot engage. The exceptions -- heavy tanks and
stationary permanent firing positions… military expert Yuriy Lyamin commented that the Baykal’s main plus is that its 57-mm cannon is wellsuited to engaging not just light armor and an enemy under shelter but also aerial targets such as helicopters. The AU-220M weapon station
itself is unmanned, that is, it is controlled from inside the fighting machine on which it is mounted…
Its drawbacks, in the expert’s opinion, lie in the fact that the AU-220M is an attempt to create an all-purpose cannon. Therefore, for example,
its rate of fire and stock of ammunition will be less than for a 30-mm cannon. Furthermore, its firepower will be less than, say, a 100-mm
cannon. Foreign IFVs nowadays generally have weapon stations with 30 to 40-mm automated cannons. The 57-mm cannon is more powerful
and more versatile but again, this is at the expense of the lower rate of fire and ammunition stock…

OE Watch | October 2017

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Naval Infantry Increasing Amphibious Warfare
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Naval Infantry’s main
offensive mission is amphibious landing operations, where they are
envisioned to secure beachheads to facilitate the arrival of heavier
(Ground Forces) units. Naval Infantry training scenarios typically
involve parachute drops and air assaults from helicopters. The Naval
Infantry’s interest in airborne/air assault operations are due to their
close relationship with the Russian Airborne Troops (VDV). This
relationship dates back to World War II, when certain Naval Infantry
units were commanded by VDV officers. These close ties continue
today: Naval Infantry units have select units on jump status, and
naval infantrymen routinely train at the Ryazan Higher Airborne
Command School (RVVDKU).
The Naval Infantry is tough and well trained and has led the
Russian effort in Syria and was instrumental in the Crimea
takedown. But they have had no recent combat experience with
amphibious assaults, and by Russian accounts, they have lost the
capability to conduct an amphibious operation to support an
operational-level assault.
In order to more effectively conduct amphibious operations,
the Soviets wanted a vessel capable of “over-the-horizon” assault
operations. These Universal Landing Ships (UDKs) would be
capable of transporting a full naval infantry battalion, and act as a
docking station for air-cushioned vehicles and other landing craft.
They would also function as a helicopter carrier for an aviation group
that can land an assault force with heavy equipment, even on shores
that are otherwise inaccessible to most amphibious warfare ships,
which require a suitable shore to deploy ramps upon.
Aside from the obvious tactical advantages of such a vessel,
there was also a less obvious operational or strategic one. A UDK
equipped with an assault force and aviation group is an effective
instrument of deterrence in remote theaters, making it possible to
quickly, easily, and relatively cheaply deploy a complete air, land,
and sea force off a given coastline to intervene in local conflicts
or possibly even prevent them by the force’s mere presence.
Although the UDK was conceived of in Soviet times, there were
few shipyards capable of building large warships (25,000 tons) and
disagreements over the propulsion system and armaments led to
several postponements, and eventual cancellation after the Soviet
Union collapsed.
After several other attempts which were cancelled, the Navy has
now announced that a UDK construction project could start as early
as 2018-2020. If so, the earliest the new UDK could be handed
over is 2021-2023. The accompanying articles from Russia’s TASS
and Izvestiya discuss the details of this project. The articles suggest
that Russia is not only considering increasing large landing ship
capabilities, but is also interested in increasing the number of smaller
ship-to-shore craft that could operate from or in conjuction with
UDKs. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Disembarcation of the sea assault during joint Russian-Belarusian exercises
“Shield of the Union-2015”.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=24858@cmsPhotoGallery,CC 4.0.

Source: “В России началась работа над проектом перспективного
вертолетоносца “Прибой” (Work has Begun on Designing Advanced
Helicopter Carrier ‘Priboy’),” TASS Online, 28 June 2017. http://tass.ru/
armiya-i-opk/4370916
Work on designing the advanced helicopter carrier Priboy has begun.
The shipyards where this type of ships can be build are already known.
TASS learned this from the vice-president of the United Shipbuilding
Corporation (OSK) responsible for military shipbuilding, Igor
Ponomarev.
“The OSK’s enterprises have started preparations for the design stage:
There are already some blueprints, there is an understanding of all the
basic technologies…”
As TASS was told by the general director of the Krylov State Research
Center (KGNTs), Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor Vladimir
Nikitin, the center has developed a conceptual design of a universal
landing ship (UDK), which can be implemented as part of the state
armament program for 2018-2025.
According to him, the new Russian UDK based on the Krylov Center’s
concept is superior to the French Mistral-type ships. “While working on
the design, we applied unconventional technical solutions to optimize the
landing of troops from this ship. They concern both the shape of the hull
and radio-electronic equipment. For example, the propulsion devices
envisaged in our design are different to those on the Mistral and have
other capabilities,” Nikitin said. The UDK Priboy has been created to
reflect the Russian conditions and the operation of such ships by our
Navy...
The advanced UDK Priboy is intended for taking onboard, transporting
by sea, and beach landing troops and equipment as part of an
amphibious operation. In addition, it will be able to function as a troop
transport, place defensive mines and net barriers, as well as sonar buoys
for underwater surveillance systems.

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Naval Infantry Increasing Amphibious
Warfare Capabilities
“The advanced UDK Priboy is intended for taking onboard, transporting by sea, and beach landing troops

and equipment as part of an amphibious operation. In addition, it will be able to function as a troop transport,
place defensive mines and net barriers, as well as sonar buoys for underwater surveillance systems.”
Source: “Головной вертолетоносец “Прибой” будет стоить около 40 млрд рублей (Lead Helicopter Carrier Priboy Will Cost About 40
Billion Rubles),” TASS Online, 30 June 2017. http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/4376951
The lead universal landing ship (UDK) Priboy, one of the two ships which the Navy plans to receive by 2025, will cost about R40bn. It will
take five years to create the ship. TASS learned this from the chief of the future ship construction department at the Krylov State Research
Center, Vladimir Pepelyayev…”We estimate that such a ship will cost about 40 billion rubles [$690 million], taking into account all the stages
of design, construction, and testing,” Pepelyayev said at the International Maritime Defense Show (MVMS) in St. Petersburg.
Speaking about the time that it will take to create the Priboy, the expert noted that “it will take about a year to do a preliminary drawing,
another year and a half to do a detailed design, then the development of design documentation and the construction.” “In total, at least five
years will pass from the start of work on the design to the handover to the fleet,” Pepelyayev said.
He stressed that the technical specifications for the creation of the UDK have not been received yet. “If the decision to build the ship is taken
in the near future, then the Krylov Center, together with the Neva Design Bureau, will be able to complete the work on the preliminary design
by the end of the year, and the bureau will be able to begin designing the UDK,” the department head said.
As the Deputy Commander of the Russian Navy for Armament, Vice Admiral Viktor Bursuk, said earlier, the fleet expects to receive at
least two advanced assault ships of the Priboy type by 2025. According to him, the Navy needs such ships, their design and construction is
envisaged in the new state armaments program for 2018-2025…
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, Aleksey Ramm, Yevgeniy Dmitriyev, “Морякам построят летающие корабли (They Will Build Flying Ships for the
Seamen),” Izvestiya Online, 15 June 2017. http://iz.ru/606128/dmitrii-litovkin-nikolai-surkov-evgenii-dmitriev/moriaki-zakazhut-letaiushchie-korabli
Russia plans to resume the production of Project 12322 Zubr Class air cushion assault landing craft, which do not have equivalents and are
capable of delivering three tanks weighing up to 150 tons or 10 armored transport vehicles and naval infantrymen to an unprepared coast.
The new Zubr landing craft will arrive to replace the Project 21820 Dugon assault landing craft with an air cavity hull, which has a smaller
cargo capacity. The construction of the former, totally Russian Zubr should begin in 2018…
The Project 12322 Zubr ship has a length of 57 meters and a width of 20 meters. The ship’s displacement is 535 tons. The draft is two meters.
High-temperature gas-turbine engines are installed on it. Four fans with a 2.5 meter diameter provide the air cushion for the ship. And three
more variable incidence propellers that are 5.5 meters in diameter propel it. Thanks to them, the ship accelerates to a speed of 70 knots that
is unprecedented for naval vessels (approximately 130 kilometers per hour, and a conventional surface combatant moves no faster than 35
knots).
The ship is capable of disembarking an assault force on 78 percent of the world’s unprepared coasts. Conventional landing ships with
opening bow ramps do this at only 14 percent. One more property of the Zubr – is invisibility for radar sites. This effect is achieved due
to the fact that during movement the ship moves in a gigantic cloud of water spray, which diffuses its outlines on radar screens…Besides
transporting an assault force, the Zubr can carry out the laying of mine barriers and, if necessary, also render fire support to the assault
landing force. Two Grad-M multiple rocket launch systems are installed on the ship…
Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “Моряки получат «левитирующие» катера (Sailors Will Get ‘Levitating’ Boats),” Izvestiya Online, 12 July 2017.
https://iz.ru/616489/dmitrii-litovkin-nikolai-surkov/moriaki-poluchat-levitiruiushchie-katera
The Navy will get project А223 unique “levitating” landing craft. Their task will be the rapid transfer of servicemen and equipment to an
unequipped coast both via open water and through fragmented ice. Unlike their predecessors, project 21820 Dugon landing craft can not only
be loaded on shore but also pick up “cargo” and “passengers” from large amphibious helicopter carriers — such as the Mistral or Lavina class
docking ships.
Izvestiya was told by the Navy main command that project А223 ships are regarded as light landing-craft resources to complement the Navy’s
all-arms forces. The ship is supposed to be used for the transportation of troops from shore to ship and from ship to shore…
The length of the А223 landing craft is about 35 meters, the width is about 7 meters, and draught about one meter. Two water-jet engines are
used to move the boat, allowing loaded boats to reach speeds of about 40 knots. That is more than 70 kilometers per hour…Ships using this
effect are also said to be “levitating.” The A223 amphibious ships score five points for seaworthiness, which allows them to operate in almost any
conditions. Depending on the modification, the ship can take on board up to 150 naval infantrymen, or 1-3 T-90s or 4-7 BTR-82As.
Naval armaments expert Aleksandr Mozgovoy told Izvestiya that the project А223 boat can compete very well with air cushion vessels. “These
boats are designed based on civilian passenger vessels,” the expert explained. “Their main advantage is high speed. The pace of a landing
operation depends on it. In addition, they have a small size. So they are designed for use with Mistral or the Lavina class large landing ships…
OE Watch | October 2017

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s Reconnaissance Strike and Fire Systems
Integrated into Airborne Forces
OE Watch Commentary: The Soviet
Union, and now Russia, has long worked on
the development of the detection and assured
destruction of high-value targets in near-real
time. The Reconnaissance Strike Complex
(RYK) was designed for the coordinated
employment of high-precision, long-range
weapons linked to real-time intelligence
data and precise targeting provided to a
fused intelligence and fire-direction center.
The RYK functioned at operational depths
using surface-to-surface missile systems
and aircraft-delivered “smart” munitions.

“According to Colonel-General Dmitri Serdyukov, Commander of

the VDV (Airborne Forces), reconnaissance and strike subunits will be
merged under a single command. This form of coordination is being
actively pursued in Syria...”

The Reconnaissance Fire Complex
(ROK) was the tactical equivalent. It
linked intelligence data, precise targeting, a
fire-direction center and tactical artillery to
destroy high-value targets in near-real time.
The Soviets were making good progress
in development of both systems before the
Soviet Union collapsed. After a period of
chaos and adjustment, Russia is back on
track and modernizing her armed forces.
Part of that modernization is the fielding of
a functioning and renamed reconnaissance
Russian Airborne Forces (VDV).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, Website, http://mil.ru/files/files/85vdv/images/dd70e1dd-1c49-4e35-8a37-b7d6be78910f__1-16.jpg, CC 4.0
strike system (RYS) and reconnaissance
fire system (ROS). Both systems have now
been successfully deployed and battle tested and are part of Russian Field Artillery and deep-strike capabilities.
As the accompanying passage from TASS discusses, strike and reconnaissance subunits will be merged under a single command. The
merging of reconnaissance assets with strike assets should assist in achieving near-real-time identification and destruction of targets. The
passage also notes that this type of coordination is actively used in Syria, providing an instructive experience for the Russian Airborne
Forces (VDV). The VDV is separate from the Russian Ground Forces, but is closely integrated into the force modernization efforts of
the ground forces. Russian ground forces still maintain the training and capability of conducting massed artillery fires to support groundgaining missions. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: “Ударные и разведподразделения ВДВ объединят под одним командованием (VDV Strike and Reconnaissance subunits will
merge under a Single Command),” TASS, 31 July 2017. http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/4451857
“According to Colonel-General Dmitri Serdyukov, Commander of the VDV (Airborne Forces), reconnaissance and strike subunits will be
merged under a single command. This form of coordination is being actively pursued in Syria.”
“This [Syrian] experience is, of course, instructive. We are actively capitalizing on this experience right now. This is the creation of various
reconnaissance-fire and reconnaissance-strike systems within our subunits. We are talking about the merger of the existing state-of-the-art
reconnaissance and weapons systems under one commander and the effective use of these systems…”
…The Russian defense industrial complex has developed a science and technology reserve, which “permits us to detect targets in real time
today, to determine the coordinates of these targets with a high probability, and to destroy them using various aircraft weapons and also
artillery in the online mode”.
The VDV Commanding General stated that Defense Minister General of the Army Sergey Shoygu and RF Armed Forces Chief of the General
Staff General of the Army Valeriy Gerasimov assign crucial significance to the development and effective employment of these systems in
the Russian Army while taking into account Syrian combat experience. “We need to learn this, this is actually a significant step forward.
Therefore, the last Armed Forces key personnel training assemblies, which were recently conducted, were devoted to this. Both the Defense
Minister and the Chief of the General Staff assigned very critical significance to this at the training assemblies.”
“Both theoretical classes and practical classes were conducted based at Southern Military District formations, and this is being actively
introduced into the troops today,” the commanding general also stated.
OE Watch | October 2017

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Aerospace Troops’ Warrant Officer Academy
Now Awarding Bachelor Degrees
OE Watch Commentary: The lack of a full career life-cycle for
enlisted serviceman was the primary cause for the destruction of the
excellent Red Army NCO corps that emerged from the Great Patriotic War
(World War II). The adoption of a cadre system that envisioned the officer
corps as the primary disciplinarians and sole repository for institutional
knowledge combined with the fact there were few enlisted ranks (no
upward mobility) led to the destruction of the old NCO corps inherited
from the Tsarist era. This also prevented the formation of an effective
contract service system when one was needed due to the technical
demands of the Revolution Military Affairs and general changing nature
of warfare which saw greater value in smaller numbers of highly trained
forces instead of large numbers of relatively unskilled conscripts.
The Russian Federation is still dealing with this problem today. The
Russian Ministry of Defense has identified improvement of contract
service system (professional enlisted serviceman and warrant officers) as
a key line of effort. Russia has stated that it would have 425,000 contract
servicemen by 2017, but has also stated that the primary focus of this effort
will be on the quality, and not quantity of personnel. Towards this end, the
Russian Federation is in the process of tweaking the program for contract
serviceman ascension and developing a system for their professional
development. If successfully implemented, the Russian Federation will
have, for the first time, a multi-tier system for selecting, training, and
employing contract serviceman through a full career life cycle, a very
different system from the one in the West.
As part of this effort, Russia is implementing a new program to raise
the prestige of certain warrant officer positions. As the accompanying
article from Izvestiya discusses, Warrant officers that attend the three
year, ten month course at the Aerospace Forces 183rd Training Center
at Rostov-on-the-Don will now be given bachelor degrees instead of
vocational degrees. Since enlisted professional development is a high
priority for the Russian Federation, and the fact that there is no functional
difference between warrant officers and NCOs in the Russian system, it is
likely other such academies that have similar length programs for warrant
officers and NCOs will also begin to grant bachelor instead of vocational
degrees. Although not mentioned in the article, it is also likely that there
were some academic changes made to the curriculum, and this reform
is not simply an administrative change of simply issuing one document
instead of another. The Russian military education system is accredited by
the Ministry of Education and Science, so these bachelor degrees almost
certainly comply with the Ministry’s requirements, as these standards are
taken by the Russian military seriously. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“The warrant officers’ main problem was their

lack of opportunity of career advancement…Now
the candidate will obtain a higher, not a vocational
education. The incentive will also appear for him to
have outstanding service results and to increase his
educational level. Really, he has a real opportunity to
become an officer.”

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Yevgeniy Dmitriyev, “Прапорщики
станут бакалаврами: Минобороны совершило революцию в
кадровой политике (Warrant Officers Will Become Holders of
Bachelor’s Degrees: The Ministry of Defense Has Accomplished a
Revolution in Cadre Policy),” Izvestiya Online, 11 August 2017. https://
iz.ru/626612/voenno-kosmicheskie-praporshchiki-stanut-bakalavrami
The Ministry of Defense is introducing a new education system
for servicemen-warrant officers. Upon graduation from a special
educational institution, they will receive a higher education and
a bachelor’s degree. Previously candidates studied at special
schools and, upon completion of their studies, obtained only a
vocational education. Indeed, at the present time, the opportunity
to become a holder of a bachelor’s degree is accessible to not all
warrant officers. A higher education is stipulated only for aviation
mechanics for the time being.
Experts say that the lack of opportunity for career advancement
and an inadequately high level of education was the main problem
for warrant officers for many years. One can call the introduction
of the new system a cadre revolution. It will make the warrant
officer positions promising, will stimulate the individual training of
servicemen, and will offer good career progression…A Ministry of
Defense spokesman told Izvestiya that the first military educational
institution for training warrant officers was formed at the end of
last year in Rostov-na-Donu based upon the Aerospace Forces
183rd Training Center. The candidates’ course duration will total
three years and ten months…
They trained warrant officers at special schools in the Russian
Armed Forces until recently. Upon their completion, a serviceman
received a vocational education, and also a diploma with the
special wing float badge…Depending on the position, to which the
candidate was competing, study could have totaled from several
months to two years. By way of illustration, a future company
senior NCO or depot chief completed 9-month courses. And well
the maintenance personnel for aircraft, ships, and submarines
already studied for two years.
“The warrant officers’ main problem was their lack of opportunity
of career advancement,” Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin told
Izvestiya. “They received identical monetary compensation in
practically all positions. And they were only able to count on the
rank of ‘senior warrant officer’ after several years of service. In
order to become officers, warrant officers also needed, just like
ordinary citizens, to study for 4-5 years at a military school. This is
precisely why there were always never enough warrant officers in
the Armed Forces, especially in the positions, which are associated
with complex technical work”…
“The new education system enhances the prestige of military
service and the rank of ‘warrant officer’. This is actually a
revolution in the military department’s cadre policy”, Military
Expert Vladislav Shurygin pointed out. “Now the candidate will
obtain a higher, not a vocational education. The incentive will also
appear for him to have outstanding service results and to increase
his educational level. Really, he has a real opportunity to become
an officer”.

- Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin
OE Watch | October 2017

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Pipeline Troops
OE Watch Commentary: The Pipeline Troops are a special branch of the Russian Armed Forces’ Material
Technical Support Troops. They are intended to deploy and maintain fuel pipelines for the Ground Forces,
Navy, and Aerospace Troops during combat activities. The accompanying articles from Russian Ministry of
Defense and Zvezda TV describe how Material Technical Support Troops in general, and Pipeline Troops in
particular, are supporting current exercises, to include Zapad 2017.
Field pipelines can be constructed easily and quickly (in good conditions), and moved when needed. In
addition, they can transport fuel and water at much lower cost than other means of transportation. The
Pipeline Troops can deploy pipelines in field environments or support fuel distribution from national stores to
military district fuel depots and airfields. In addition to fuel distribution, Pipeline Troops may also provide
water distribution services.
Aside from military operations, the Pipeline Troops may also provide pipe laying and support of strategic
industries, operations in extreme climates, and operations to support natural and man-made disaster relief.
The Pipeline Troops laid more than 150 miles of pipeline to support firefighting efforts to quell peat fires
USSR Pipeline troops emblem
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
in the summer of 2010 that occurred in the Nizhny Novgorod, Vladimir, and Moscow regions. Perhaps the
wiki/File%3AUSSR_Pipeline_troops_emblem.jpg, Public Domain
most recent and high-profile activities of the Pipeline Troops occurred after Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
After Ukraine cut water supplies, a pipeline battalion was deployed to Crimea. The pipeline battalion laid 52 separate pipelines, totaling 300
miles to provide water for the civilian population. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Pipeline Troops.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://mil.ru/images/military/military/photo/060S%281%29.jpg,CC 4.0.

TUM-150V Pipe Laying Machine.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://function.mil.ru/images/military/military/photo/SHI-DSC_9009%5B1%5D.jpg,CC 4.0.

Source: “На суше, на море и в воздухе: эффектные кадры подготовки к учениям «Запад-2017» (On Land, At Sea and In the Air: Effective
Personnel Prepare for Zapad-2017 Exercise),” Zvezda TV Online, 27 August 2017. https://tvzvezda.ru/news/forces/content/201708271154-s9m2.htm
Exercises of logistics troops are occurring this entire week in the Western Military District and in Belarus, as MTO [logistics] troops
rehearse Zapad-2017 strategic maneuvers. The unique operation in logistics support to operations of the Russian group of forces in Syria
involving military transport aviation and the navy is now being studied not only in Russian military academies, but also in the West. In many
respects, this experience served as the basis of the rear services troops’ exercises occurring in the Western Military District and in Belarus all
week. In point of fact, this was the prologue to the Zapad strategic maneuvers…
Over an enormous front of Central Russia and Belarus, from Yaroslavl’ and Severomorsk to Luga and Borisov, those who normally remain
in the shadows of a heroic assault or in the shadows of the naval infantry, the servicemen of units and formations of the material and technical
support troops, are demonstrating their mastery…
The entire scale of the exercise of the logistics troops can be seen amid the great Russian Volga River in the region of Yaroslavl. In the
channel over the pontoon bridge not only is heavy military equipment crossing, but so too is an entire railroad train with hundreds and
hundreds of tons of cargoes…
Every year the logistics units acquire new equipment: robotic systems, Arctic all-terrain vehicles, new field laundry facilities and bakeries.
All of these undergo testing under the most severe conditions. The logistics troops exercise is the main examination on the threshold of
Zapad-2017, the largest scale maneuvers of this year. Russian logisticians have vividly demonstrated that they are ready to support troops
operations on the ground, at sea and in the air.

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Pipeline Troops
“The entire scale of the exercise of the logistics troops can be seen amid the great Russian Volga River
in the region of Yaroslavl. In the channel over the pontoon bridge not only is heavy military equipment
crossing, but so too is an entire railroad train with hundreds and hundreds of tons of cargoes…”
Source: “Специалисты МТО Южного военного округа в ходе учения обеспечат питьевой водой военный городок (Southern Military
District MTO Specialists to Supply Drinking Water to Military Encampment During an Exercise),” Russian Ministry of Defense Online, 25
July 2017. http://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12134541@egNews
The pipe-laying battalion of a Southern Military District logistical support formation stationed in Krasnodarskiy Kray has embarked on the
performance of tasks in laying a main field pipeline (PMTP) to supply drinking water to a military encampment in the context of a tacticalspecial exercise.
The battalion’s specialists have to lay a field pipeline more than 20 kilometers long. The main pipeline will make it possible to supply up to
300 cubic meters of drinking water to supply the needs of the military encampment.
In performing the specialist tasks the Southern Military District service members will make use of PMTP-100 and PMTP-150 main field
pipelines; for pumping water, a PNU-75 mobile pumping station; and for joining pipes, a MST-100 pipe joining machine. In total it is planned
to install more than 3,000 pipes of varying diameters.

Portable Trunk Pipelines (PMP) Characteristics

Year introduced
Length of the set (km)
Throughput capacity (tons per day)
System weight (tons)
Length of one pipe (m)
Weight of one pipe (kg)
Pipe material and grade
Internal pipe diameter (mm)
Pipe wall thickness (mm)
Operating pressure (MPa)
Test pressure (MPa)
Mounting method

PTP100
1956
150
700
1050
6
31.4
Steel
10
98.0
2.0
2.5
3.8

1st Generation
2nd Generation
PTPPMTA- PMTP- PMTP- PMTV150
150
100
150
200
1958
1960
1975
1972
1980
150
150
150
150
150
2000
2000
1200
3000
7000
2470
1250
1100
2500
3650
6
6
6
6
6
78.0
32.0
36.2
80.9
124.0
Steel Aluminum Steel
Steel
Steel
10
AMG-3
16GS
16GS 08F2SF
145.5
144.0
97.6
145.6
212.0
3.25
4.5
2.2
3.2
3.5
2.5
2.5
6.0
6.0
6.0
3.8
3.8
7.0
7.0
7.0
By Hand
By Hand and
Pipe Laying Machine
MST- TUM- TMM100
150V
200
PMP Characteristics.
Source: Table by Chuck Bartles.

OE Watch | October 2017

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Cold Weather Cranking is so Last Century
OE Watch Commentary: Cold weather starts are tough on both engine
and driver. The Russian use of super-condensers promises to make cold starts
easier. As the accompanying passage from Izvestiya discusses, Russian armored
vehicles will be equipped with mobile electrical power plants that “guarantee
an instantaneous and smooth engine start at -50 degrees [Centigrade or -58 °
Fahrenheit].” These power plants may also prove valuable in replacing hydraulic
systems used for weapons stabilization and turret traverse. These functions
often require additional heavy, 10 kilowatt diesel generators. The use of a
super-condenser may permit the replacement of the hydraulics with a magnetic
turret traverse system, which rapidly traverses the gun and may also power the
vehicle’s battle control system prior to starting the main engine. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Russian armored vehicles of the Armata family will
receive mobile electrical power plants. These devices will
be installed between the tank’s batteries and engine. They
guarantee an instantaneous and smooth engine start at
-50 degrees [Centigrade or -58 ° Fahrenheit] and also the
operation of the turret’s traversing mechanisms, weapon
stabilization, and battle control systems. Super-condensers,
which instantaneously build a high volume of electricity
even from a dead battery and power the onboard systems …
until the main engine starts, will provide this capability.”

Source: Dmitrii Litovkin, “Благодаря уникальным
суперконденсаторам российская бронетехника сможет
заводить двигатели с разряженными аккумуляторами при
температуре -50 градусов (They Will Equip the Armata
With Mobile Electrical Generators. Thanks to Unique
Super-Condensers, Russian Armored Vehicles Will Be Able
to Crank Their Engines with Dead Batteries at a Freezing
Temperature of -50 Degrees)”, Izvestiya, 21 August 2017.
https://iz.ru/630015/dmitrii-litovkin/armatu-osnastiatmobilnymi-elektrostantciiami
“Russian armored vehicles of the Armata family will receive
mobile electrical power plants. These devices will be installed
between the tank’s batteries and engine. They guarantee
an instantaneous and smooth engine start at -50 degrees
[Centigrade or -58 ° Fahrenheit] and also the operation of
the turret’s traversing mechanisms, weapon stabilization,
and battle control systems. Super-condensers, which
instantaneously build a high volume of electricity even from a
dead battery and power the onboard systems … until the main
engine starts, will provide this capability.”
The super-condensers were developed and are being
manufactured by the Renova Group of Companies. At the
present time, these devices are being supplied for starting
municipal electric buses and diesel locomotive engines.
Mikhail Lifshits, the director for the development of Renova’s
high-tech assets, stated that the items are being offered to the
military at the present time. The super-condenser is being
studied as organic equipment for modernized Russian tanks,
and also for the armored vehicles of the Armata family.
“We have conducted full-scale tests of the super-condenser
for the cold start of a tank diesel engine. The vehicle stood idle
in the freezing cold for several days. Its batteries completely
lost their capacity. Nevertheless, using the mobile electrical
generator on the super-condenser (its size does not exceed
that of an ordinary attaché case) we were able to start the cold
engine several times in a row. The employment of this device
permits us to vacate half of a tank’s battery compartment for
any other payload.”
Sergey Suvorov, an expert in the armored vehicle design,
stated that the problem of an armored vehicle’s interior volume
is most relevant for designers. Each liter of interior space is
an additional 100 kilograms of hardware. Freeing up interior
space not only reduces the tank’s weight but also permits an
increase in the amount of fuel and ammunition carried….

Tank crews of the Western MD prepare for the all-army stage of the Tank Biathlon contest.
Source: Russian Minsitry of Defense, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=35302@cmsPhotoGallery, CC BY 4.0.

OE Watch | October 2017

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
BMPT “Terminator-3” Joining Russian Armed Forces
OE Watch Commentary: The “Terminator” Tank Support Combat Vehicle (BMPT) has been under development for a while. It was due to
go into production during the late 1980s, but the collapse of the Soviet Union curtailed its development. The hard fighting of the first battle for
Grozny in Chechnya reignited the program, but budgetary constraints limited production. As the accompanying passages from Russian sources
discuss, the BMPT is finally joining the Russian Armed Forces.
As the first passage discusses, the BMPT is “a totally new type of military equipment: the vehicle is neither a tank nor an armored transport
vehicle.” It is designed to protect tanks during urban combat, by quickly detecting and destroying enemy grenade launcher crews, armored
vehicles, and low-flying threats. The passage also notes that the Russians sent several to Syria for combat testing and the results have been
positive. As the passage discusses, the BMPT was developed for conditions where the enemy is armed with light antitank weapons such as
grenade launchers. This makes it valuable in Syria, where guided missiles are the main threat to tanks, given the changing nature of combat.
The second passage points out that the Russian Ministry of Defense has now signed a contract worth 24 billion rubles, for the production of the
“Terminator” based on the new Armata chassis. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Aleksandr Stepanov, “«Терминатор» обкатывают в Сирии: судный день (They Are Conducting Test Runs of the ‘Terminator’ in
Syria,” MK Online, 15 August 2017. http://www.mk.ru/politics/2017/08/15/terminator-obkatyvayut-v-sirii-sudnyy-den.html
The “Terminator” Tank Support Combat Vehicle (BMPT) is a totally new type of military equipment: the vehicle is neither a tank nor an armored
transport vehicle. This vehicle is designed to protect tanks during urban combat, its mission is to quickly detect and destroy enemy grenade
launcher crews, strong points or armored vehicle, and low-flying threats. Despite the favorable reports about the “Terminator, this vehicle has
not yet entered the Russian Army inventory. Terminator-1 is located in Syria where… it is undergoing combat testing….
Russia transferred several “Terminators” to the elite Syrian “Desert Falcons” subunit. They conducted an offensive against a guerrilla enclave
located in Homs Province in July. This was an ideal opportunity to test … the vehicle’s combat employment….
The idea for the development of this vehicle began during the Afghan War. At that time, hidden enemy grenade launcher gunners and anti-tank
guided missile crews proved the most dangerous threat to tanks. Tank crews were not able to react rapidly to the sudden attack of antitank guided
missiles and RPGs and were unable to preempt their attack. Tank machine guns could not rapidly shift from one target to another. Armored
infantry fighting vehicles and armored personnel carriers had inadequate armor to fight alongside the tanks. Military personnel needed an
armored vehicle, which is capable of supporting tanks in an engagement, while protecting the tanks by destroying enemy that pose a threat to
tanks…. The vehicle must be equipped with rapid-fire weapons capable of rapidly shifting from one target to another, staying up forward with the
tanks in the same formation and have armor protection identical to the tanks.
At the end of the 1980s, the Chelyabinsk Tractor Plant Design Bureau was appointed lead on the BMPT development…. Several variants of the
vehicles were manufactured based upon a modified T-72A tank chassis…. Unfortunately, the project was put on the shelf with the arrival of the
1990s. They once again began to be seriously involved with it after the First Chechen Campaign….
So, just what is the “Terminator”? It has coaxial-mounted twin … 30-mm automatic guns with a basic load of 850 rounds, four Shturm-S
antitank guided missile launchers with shaped-charge or thermobaric warheads, a Kord machinegun and two AG-17D 30-mm automatic grenade
launchers installed on a standard T-72 or T-90 tank chassis. The vehicle is capable of negotiating ditches of up to three meters and a wall of 1.5
meters. It can easily “reach” an enemy tank or fortified emplacement at a range of up to 5,000 meters. The “Terminator” is equipped with the
“Ramka” state-of-the-art automated fire control system (SUO), which has greater capabilities for target detection at night and in bad weather at
a range of several kilometers….
Right now the Uralvagonzavod spokesmen state that work is proceeding on the development of the “Terminator-3” based upon the Armata
platform. They plan to install a 57mm ship gun on it with a range of 16 kilometers.
Military Expert Anton Lavrov thinks that the BMPT “Terminator-3” … has good prospects. “The nature of combat has changed and guided
missiles are the main threat to tanks in Syria. From the beginning, the BMPT was developed for conditions where the enemy is armed with
light antitank weapons – grenade launchers…. The “Terminator” based upon the Armata chassis is a much more effective variant, because the
powerful weapons permit it to fire at greater range. That BMPT will be in very great demand.”
Source: Defense Ministry of the Russian Federation, “Uralvagonzavod” sign contracts worth 24 billion rubles,” Interfax, 24 August 2017.
http://www.interfax.com
The Russian Defense Ministry has ordered a new type of armored tank weapon-system, the combat tank support vehicle “Terminator”, from
UralVagonZavod for the first time.
“UralVagonZavod General Director Alexander Potapov is invited to sign state contracts for the production and supply of combat tank support
vehicles, the main combat tanks T-90M, and work on extensive repair and modernization of T-72B, T-80BV and T-90 tanks,” the host of the
contract signing ceremony said at the international military-technical forum ARMY 2017…. Russian Deputy Defense Minister Yury Borisov
signed the documents on behalf of the Russian Defense Ministry. He stated “A new type of armored tank weapons and the newest modification of
the T-90 tank, the T-90M tank are being provided to the Russian army. The total worth of the contracts signed exceeds 24 billion rubles.”

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: BMPT “Terminator-3” Joining Russian
Armed Forces
For further reading on the BMPT, see Lester W. Grau and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics and
Modernization of the Ground Forces, 228-231, https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/fmso-bookshelf;
Lester W. Grau and Charles K. Bartles, “A New System Preserves Armor Dominance of the Future Battlefield: The BMPT Terminator-2,”
Armor, April-June 2015, fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/documents/.../2Bartles-Grau15.pdf;
Lester W. Grau, “Preserving Shock Action: A New Approach to Armored Maneuver Warfare?” Armor, September-October 2006, www.dtic.
mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a456423.pdf.

“Military Expert Anton Lavrov thinks that the BMPT ‘Terminator-3’… has good prospects. ‘The nature
of combat has changed and guided missiles are the main threat to tanks in Syria. From the beginning,
the BMPT was developed for conditions where the enemy is armed with light antitank weapons – grenade
launchers… The ‘Terminator’ based upon the Armata chassis is a much more effective variant, because the
powerful weapons permit it to fire at greater range. That BMPT will be in very great demand.’”

Tank support combat vehicle BMPT.

Source (UPPER IMAGE): VItaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2016-Static-part1/i-fg9R5fs/A, CC BY 4.0.
Source (LOWER IMAGE): VItaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Engineering-Technologies-2012/i-GC4K6f9/A, CC BY 4.0.

OE Watch | October 2017

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Strengthening Russian-Serbian Military Relations
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying excerpts from Serbian sources
illustrate, Serbian-Russian military relations appear to be growing stronger. The
first excerpt examines the reasons why Serbia’s new defense minister Alexander
Vulin, chose Russia as his first foreign trip, suggesting that “such a visit is regarded
as a sign and indicator of the (foreign) political orientation of a country or a
government.” At a press conference after visiting the 2017 International Army
Games hosted by Russia, Vulin promised that “as long as I am the defense minister,
Serbia will not be a member of NATO.”
The second excerpt provides additional details of what Defense Minister Vulin
said during his visit, including his assurance that while he is in the government,
“Serbia will not introduce sanctions to Russia.” He went on to talk about his
personal discussions with Russian Minister of Defense Shoigu, asserting that
“Shoigu sincerely likes Serbia and he is our friend,” particularly with regard to
“Russia’s principled position related to Kosovo-Metohija.” (Russia has yet to
recognize the independence of Kosovo.) To express gratitude to the Soviet war effort
in World War II, Vulin “invited Shoigu to attend the anniversary of the liberation of
Belgrade on 20 October.”

Serbian Defense Minister A. Vulin meets with Russian Defense
Minister, S. Shoigu, 12 August

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12137577@egNews, CC
BY 4.0.

“As long as Vucic is the supreme

commander of the Army and President
of the Republic of Serbia and as long as
I am the defense minister, Serbia will not
be a member of NATO.”

The third excerpt explains the Kremlin perspective on closer ties with Serbia and
provides details on the proposed Russian weapon shipments, stating that “Moscow
seeks a firm alliance with Serbia and to deepen the ties of our two friendly nations
in various areas, primarily through military and technical cooperation.” While no
exact delivery date is listed, according to the excerpt, “six MiG 29s will be delivered
to Serbia before the end of the year. Along with the delivery will also be 30 modernized T-72 vehicles, and 30 modern armored combat vehicles
BRDM-2.” The article also addresses the “possibility of delivery of the S-300” (advanced air defense system) with Defense Minister Shoigu’s
assurance that “if Serbia is interested, we are willing to supply it.” Russia continues to strengthen its military ties with Serbia with both joint
training exercises and promises of advanced weapon deliveries. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Mijat Lakicevic, “Mijat Lakićević: Farsa (A Farce),” Novi Magazin, 16 August 2017. http://www.novimagazin.rs/stav/mijat-lakicevi-farsa
…Whatever one may think about Vulin as a political figure, the first foreign trip of a defense minister is as important as that of a prime
minister -- it is very carefully considered where he should go first and as a rule, such a visit is regarded as a sign and indicator of the
(foreign) political orientation of a country or a government….
…Or perhaps the purpose of the visit is best described by Vulin’s already immortal statement: “As long as Vucic is the supreme commander
of the Army and President of the Republic of Serbia and as long as I am the defense minister, Serbia will not be a member of NATO”?...
Source: Mihailo Jovicevic, “VULINOV POTEZ UPALIO CRVENI ALARM U EU Ministar odbrane sklopio novi pakt sa Rusijom, a evo zašto to
može da bude problem (Vulin’s Action Rings Alarm Bells in EU; Defense Minister’s Deal with Russia Could Become a Problem),” Blic Online, 14
August 2017. http://www.blic.rs/vesti/politika/vulinov-potez-upalio-crveni-alarm-u-eu-ministar-odbrane-sklopio-novi-pakt-sa-rusijom/vfhrm8p
A cordial meeting between Aleksandar Vulin and Sergei Shoigu and solemn pledge by our Defense Minister has rung alarm bells among
ambassadors and proponents of Serbia’s EU integration. Vulin said that as long as he was a minister and Vucic the President, Serbia will not
introduce sanctions to Russia, Blic has learned….
…”Shoigu sincerely likes Serbia and he is our friend. I took the opportunity to thank him again for Russia’s principled position related to
Kosovo-Metohija and to ask him to pursue that policy…. I also invited Shoigu to attend the anniversary of the liberation of Belgrade on 20
October. As long as Vucic is the supreme commander of the Army and the President of Serbia, and as long as I am the Defense Minister,
Serbia will not become a member of NATO nor any military alliance, and we will never impose sanctions on Russia,” said Vulin.
Source: “M. Dakic: RUSKI MINISTAR ODBRANE ŠOJGU OTVORENO PORUČIO BEOGRADU: Rusija hoće vojni savez sa Srbijom! (Russian
Defense Minister Shoigu Openly Signals: Russia Seeks Military Alliance With Serbia!),” Belgrade Informer Online, 14 August 2017. http://www.
informer.rs/vesti/politika/147910/RUSKI-MINISTAR-ODBRANE-SOJGU-OTVORENO-PORUCIO-BEOGRADU-Rusija-hoce-vojni-savez-Srbijom
Moscow seeks a firm alliance with Serbia and to deepen the ties of our two friendly nations in various areas, primarily through military
and technical cooperation. Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu conveyed this message to his Serbian counterpart Aleksandar Vulin, with
whom he met over the weekend in the vicinity of Moscow during International Military Games.
Shoigu and Vulin said that the donation of six MiG 29s will be delivered to Serbia before the end of the year. Along with the delivery will also
be 30 modernized T-72 vehicles, and 30 modern armored combat vehicles BRDM-2.
Minister Shoigu said that Serbia could count on the S-300 missile system that, he said, Russia was ready to deliver to Serbia under nonmarket, preferential terms.
OE Watch | October 2017

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Syrian Model for Libya?
OE Watch Commentary: September marked the second anniversary of Russia’s military involvement in Syria. While the situation in Syria
remains highly complex, there’s no question that Russian military assistance to the Assad regime has helped to expand areas under government
control. Russian military involvement has been portrayed in the Kremlin-sponsored media as an unqualified success. Emblematic of this
optimistic tone, the first excerpt from the popular daily MK Online reports that “Defense Minister, General of the Army, Sergei Shoigu said that
the civil war had ceased in Syria.” Having succeeded in “the separation of the moderate opposition from terrorists and the introduction of deescalation zones,” Russian forces can now “concentrate the main forces…on the fight against international terrorism.”
The second excerpt, also from MK Online, questions whether the Kremlin leadership will adopt a similar stabilization strategy toward the
chaotic situation in Libya. It posits that “Putin…has already cooled somewhat toward Syria and has turned his gaze in the direction of Libya,
hoping to get back Russia’s influence in this country of strategic importance for the Near East and Europe which was lost on account of the
incompetence of Dmitriy Medvedev.” According to the excerpt, Libya descended into “bloody internecine strife” after the “UN Security
Council” passed “a resolution authorizing a foreign military operation in Libya” (when Medvedev was president) which “proved fatal for the
regime of Muammar al-Qadhafi.”
The article suggests that the Kremlin is already lending its support to its preferred candidate in Libya, General Khalifa Haftar, who controls
military forces in the east of the country. The passage includes a quote from a European expert, who claims that the Kremlin leadership has
been impressed by Haftar and “his anti-Islamist inflexibility makes him a reliable player in the fight against terrorism.” The article suggests that
“despite the international embargo on supplies of weapons to Libya,” the Kremlin is prepared “to provide the national army with all it needs
directly or via some third country.” Indeed, the article asserts that already “Chechens are fighting in Haftar’s army.”
Should Haftar, aided by Russian support, be able to stabilize and gain control over Libya, “a completely loyal regime would enable Russia to
gain access to the ports and oilfields.” Russia might also be in better position to follow up on earlier plans “to deploy a naval base in Tripoli and
Benghazi.” As the excerpt points out, the “building of a military outpost on the shore of the Mediterranean (just 700 kilometers from the US
base on Sicily), “could be a fitting response to NATO’s eastward advancement.” Having achieved a modicum of success in Syria, the Kremlin
may adopt a similar strategy to try and stabilize the situation in Libya, thus strengthening its position in the Mediterranean region. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: “Шойгу объявил о прекращении гражданской войны в Сирии (Shoigu announced the end of the civil war in Syria),” MK Online,
23 August 2017. http://www.mk.ru/politics/2017/08/23/shoygu-obyavil-o-prekrashhenii-grazhdanskoy-voyny-v-sirii.html
Russian Defense Minister General of the Army Sergei Shoigu said that the civil war had ceased in Syria, which resulted from the separation
of the moderate opposition from terrorists and the introduction of de-escalation zones…. Shoigu added that it also allowed Russia to
concentrate the main forces not on the struggle inside the country, but on the fight against international terrorism.

Map of Russia and Libya.

Source: By Marmelad (Made from Image:BlankMap-World6, compact.svg), https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libya%E2%80%93Russia_relations#/media/File:Libya_Russia_Locator.svg, [CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)], via Wikimedia Commons .

OE Watch | October 2017

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Syrian Model for Libya?
“Vladimir Putin,… has already cooled somewhat toward Syria and has turned his gaze in the direction of Libya,
hoping to get back Russia’s influence in this country of strategic importance for the Near East and Europe…”
Source: Yelena Yegorova, “Сирийский сценарий в Ливии: возможен ли он для России? (A Syrian Scenario in Libya: Is it Possible for
Russia?),” MK Online, 21 August 2017. http://www.mk.ru/politics/2017/08/21/otkuda-u-russkikh-liviyskaya-grust.html
Storylines from the Syrian desert have ceased to dominate the news on Russian television, and Libyan Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar –
potential candidate for the role of the “new al-Qadhafi” – has paid yet another visit to Moscow. Western experts are certain that this is
no accident: Vladimir Putin, they believe, has already cooled somewhat toward Syria and has turned his gaze in the direction of Libya,
hoping to get back Russia’s influence in this country of strategic importance for the Near East and Europe which was lost on account of the
incompetence of Dmitriy Medvedev….
Vladimir Putin, we know, is prepared to forgive his tandem partner much, only not Libya. People in the know say that on each suitable
occasion he reminds Medvedev of the main mistake of his presidency: in 2011 Russia abstained during a vote in the UN Security Council on a
resolution authorizing a foreign military operation in Libya, and this decision proved fatal for the regime of Muammar al-Qadhafi. After the
leader of the Libyan Jamahiriya was killed, this country became mired in bloody internecine strife, which continues to this day….
… A large part of Libyan territory is now under the control of Haftar’s army. The field marshal managed to gain pronounced superiority
in the fight against ISIL…, dislodging the extremists from Benghazi and other key points of the capital, and also to take control of the
largest oilfields. …Mattia Toaldo, senior Libya research fellow on the European Council for International Relations observes. The Kremlin’s
cooperation with Haftar, he believes, appears perfectly natural – “his anti-Islamist inflexibility makes him a reliable player in the fight against
terrorism.”
…. A completely loyal regime would enable Russia to gain access to the ports and oilfields. In 2008 al-Qadhafi invited the Russian
authorities to deploy a naval base in Tripoli and Benghazi. … But in the present situation the building of a military outpost on the shore of the
Mediterranean (just 700 kilometers from the US base on Sicily) could be a fitting response to NATO’s eastward advancement….
Haftar himself acknowledges that in Moscow he discussed not only political support but also military assistance. “We reached agreement on
what we need. And we received a positive response to our requests,” he said on RT television about the outcome of the meeting in the Ministry
of Defense. He says that despite the international embargo on supplies of weapons to Libya, Russia intends to “craft acceptable solutions
to provide the national army with all it needs directly or via some third country. Russia has a good understanding of this.” The Ministry of
Defense is not commenting on the situation…. In addition, some Russian specialists allegedly helping mine clearing were detected in Libya
recently. This disguise could be concealing military instructors and GRU officers, the French suspect. Chechens are fighting in Haftar’s army
also….

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
CELEBRATING 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | October 2017

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
New and Improved Red Star
OE Watch Commentary: For those following developments
within the Russian military, there has been no more authoritative
source than Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star). Founded shortly after the
Red Army was formed, Krasnaya Zvezda has served as the official
newspaper for both the Soviet military and today’s Russian military.
However, after the collapse of the USSR, the paper’s circulation
declined and its influence waned. Its loss of popularity may have
partially stemmed from other Russian newspapers which began to
offer their own military reporting. The brief excerpt from the business
daily Kommersant describes a recent plan “to relaunch the work of the
Krasnaya Zvezda Newspaper” to revive its popularity.

“…The desire of the military personnel to return
the former reputation to the newspaper has become
the primary grounds for the decision on renovating
Krasnaya Zvezda…”

As the excerpt points out, since this newspaper remains the official
publication of the Ministry of Defense (MoD), it will focus on its
ability to “provide exclusive information about the state of affairs in
the Army and Navy,” and also increase “the number of interviews
with military leaders.” According to the excerpt, the plan has been
developed over “several months,” and “will conclude by October, after
which they will submit it to the ministry leadership for approval.”
Perhaps most importantly, the MoD “plans to increase the salaries
of the publication’s workers and hire new journalists.” There are also
plans to consolidate the “department’s print publications (there are
a total of more than 20 of them) … into a full-fledged print holding
company.”
The article concludes on an optimistic note, pointing out that “the
desire of the military personnel to return the former reputation to
the newspaper has become the primary grounds for the decision
on renovating Krasnaya Zvezda.” Just as the Russian military has
become reformed and modernized over the past decade, so it now
appears that its flagship publication is about to be similarly overhauled
and updated. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Soviet Order of the Red Star.

Source: By Leonid (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8e/
Order-of-the-Red-Star.svg, No copyright; IAW No. 230-FZ of December 18, 2006.

Source: Aleksandra Dzhordzhevich and Ivan Safronov, “Военные выходят на передовицу: Газету Красная звезда готовят к переформатированию
(Military Personnel Are Publishing Front Page Stories: They Are Preparing to Reformat the Krasnaya Zvezda Newspaper),” Kommersant Online, 29
August 2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3396392
Kommersant has learned that the RF Ministry of Defense has set its sights on restarting the Krasnaya Zvezda Newspaper, which has been
published under the Department’s aegis since 1923. According to Kommersant’s information, the Ministry plans to increase the publication’s
readability and to significantly expand its audience: the emphasis will be made on the exclusivity of the content. In the future, this could be a
question of creating a separate holding company, which will merge all of the Department’s print mass media in its base.
Several officers of the department’s central staff reported to Kommersant that the RF Ministry of Defense intends to relaunch the work of
the Krasnaya Zvezda Newspaper. In their words, the development of the concept has been conducted over the course of several months: as
anticipated, this work will conclude by October, after which they will submit it to the ministry leadership for approval. Its primary directions
have already been defined, one of Kommersant’s interlocutors said: the newspaper will provide exclusive information about the state of affairs
in the Army and Navy and the number of interviews with military leaders will also increase.
To do this, they plan to increase the salaries of the publication’s workers and hire new journalists… one of the tasks is to align their
salaries with the market. In the future, according to Kommersant’s information, Krasnaya Zvezda could merge all of the department’s print
publications (there are a total of more than 20 of them, including Boyevaya Vakhta, Voyennyy Zheleznodorozhnik, Strazh Baltiki, Suvorovskiy
Natisk, and so forth)…
Krasnaya Zvezda Newspaper, which is published three times a week at this time, was created by a decision of the RKP(b) [Russian
Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Central Committee Politburo in November 1923 as the central print organ of the USSR People’s Commissariat
of Defense for Military Affairs (in the future, the USSR Ministry of Defense). The RF Military Department became the newspaper’s official
founder already after the collapse of the Union (during the spring of 1992)….
…The desire of the military personnel “ to return the former reputation to the newspaper” has become the primary grounds for the decision
on renovating Krasnaya Zvezda, one of Kommersant’s interlocutors explains…

OE Watch | October 2017

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Joint Belarus-Russia Search for Unrecovered Defenders
OE Watch Commentary: While the preparation and
conduct of the joint Russia-Belarus Zapad 2017 military
exercise captured many of the headlines this past month, the
accompanying excerpt describes a lesser recognized, but
perhaps equally important, joint military activity. Since 2015,
special search teams from Belarus and Russia have been
working together to search, identify, exhume, and document the
remains of “defenders of the Homeland.” The excerpt from a
military newspaper in Belarus highlights the results of a recent
search mission “on the territory of Grodnenskiy Rayon” (in
Belarus) where teams recovered “remains of six servicemen
of the Russian Imperial Army who perished during the years
of the First World War.” Previously the search groups had
“exhumed only the remains of soldiers of the Great Patriotic
War.”
The scale of personnel losses along Russia’s eastern front,
both in World War I and II boggle the imagination, and help to
explain why human remains are still being recovered a century
later. In terms of losses in population percentage, Belarus
suffered the highest casualties of any country during World
Map Russia, Belarus.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Belarus_Russia_Locator_in_Europe.svg CCA-Share Alike 4.0 International .
War II. Nor is it surprising that the Kremlin should place a high
priority on these recovery efforts. As the title of the article suggests (“Traditions of the Search Fraternity Are Being Strengthened”),
Russian-Belarus bonds are reinforced with this type of mission. Moreover, patriotism, particularly defending against a Western threat,
has become the centerpiece of the current Kremlin ideology. Searching, recovering, and honoring those soldiers who defended against
this threat serve as a constant reinforcement of this ideology. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The remains of the fallen defenders of the Homeland will soon be reburied with military honors…”
Source: Aleksandr Sevenko, “Крепнут традиции поискового братства (Traditions of the Search Fraternity Are Being Strengthened),” Vo
Slavu Rodiny, 25 August 2017. https://vsr.mil.by/2017/08/25/krepnut-tradicii-poiskovogo-bratstva/
In accordance with the plan for international military cooperation in military memorial activities, servicemen of the 52nd Separate
Specialized Search Battalion of the Ministry of Defense of the Republic of Belarus and the 90th Separate Special Search Battalion of the
Armed Forces of the Russian Federation have conducted joint field search operations on the territory of Grodnenskiy Rayon. The goals of
the unique commemorative activity of the specialists of the two fraternal countries were to search for unrecorded military graves, to develop
information regarding the deaths of defenders of the Homeland, to improve the methods of field search operations, and to further the civil and
patriotic education of servicemen….
As the Belarusian and Russian servicemen related, this is not the first time that they have labored shoulder to shoulder at search sites. The
beginning of close joint operations was in 2015 at a place that is well-known to the fraternal countrymen, on the grounds of the “Brestsk Hero
Fort” memorial complex. There the searchers discovered and exhumed the remains of more than ten soldiers of the RKKA [Workers’ and
Peasants’ Red Army] and the members of their families who perished in June 1941….
…This year the work of the searchers was also productive. Near the Strel’tsy-1 population center of the Skidel’skiy Village Council the
remains of six servicemen of the Russian Imperial Army who perished during the years of the First World War were found at a previously
unknown burial site. Among the accompanying finds were fragments of uniforms and shoes of lower ranking [soldiers]….
…As reported by the deputy commander for armament of the 90 ospb [Separate Special Search Battalion], Major Kirill Ostapenko, this was
the first time that the servicemen of this military unit participated in search operations at a site associated with events of the First World War.
Previously they exhumed only the remains of soldiers of the Great Patriotic War.
The Russians held the century-old relics with trepidation and respect. The relics were identified by the heraldic signs of the Russian Army:
a headgear insignia, uniform buttons, and soldiers’ belt buckles (one decorated with the double-headed eagle).…. The remains of the fallen
defenders of the Homeland will soon be reburied with military honors….
…Next year the servicemen of the two fraternal countries will again meet for field search operations, but this time it will be on the territory
of Leningradskaya Oblast’ of the Russian Federation, at battle sites dating from the period of the Great Patriotic War.

OE Watch | October 2017

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s International Military Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Strengthening the country’s
armed forces and raising military consciousness among the
wider population have become key platforms under the current
Kremlin administration. The focus on military readiness and
combat power remain central components in restoring Russia’s
great power status. The accompanying excerpts describe the
results of two international military events (ArMI 2017 Army
International Games and the Army 2017 International MilitaryTechnical Forum) hosted recently by the Russian Ministry of
Defense (MoD). Both these events were widely covered in the
Russian media and demonstrate that armed forces readiness and
international military relations remain vibrant despite Western
economic sanctions and attempts to isolate Russia.
The first excerpt describes the results from the ArMI 2017
Army International Games. The scope and breadth of participants
in this competition were impressive. The “games were staged at
22 range facilities [in] Russia, Belarus, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan,
and China and also in the waters of the Sea of Japan and the
Caspian and Black seas from 29 July through 12 August.
Representatives of 28 countries participated.” Not surprisingly,
“Russia came in first, winning 19 events of these contests, China
came second, being the strongest in seven events.” However,
as Russia’s Defense Minister pointed out, all the teams were
“winners because we view one another not through gun sights
but eye to eye.”
Following the Army games competition, the Russian MoD
hosted the Army 2017 International Military-Technical Forum
held outside of Moscow. According to the second excerpt, “over
500,000 people visited” the exhibition, to include “representatives
of 114 foreign countries [and] 65 official military delegations.”
The third excerpt claims that “the total worth of contracts signed
with foreign partners at the…forum is $300 million.” Besides
helping to raise military consciousness among the wider Russian
population, these events provide solid opportunities for Russian
military personnel to train with prospective partners while also
providing an impressive venue for international weapon sales.
End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Map of Russia and Libya.

Source: By Marmelad (Made from Image:BlankMap-World6, compact.svg), https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Libya%E2%80%93Russia_relations#/media/File:Libya_Russia_Locator.svg, [CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)], via Wikimedia Commons .

Logo for Army 2017 Games.

Source: Source: http://armygames2017.mil.ru/armygames_en CC by 4.0

Source: Oleg Vladykin, “Военные могут смотреть друг на друга не
только через прицелы (The Military Can View One Another Not Only
Through Gun Sights),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 13 August 2017.
http://www.ng.ru/week/2017-08-13/7_7050_army.html
The ArMI 2017 army international games culminated last Saturday in
a triumph for the Russian team. Russia came in first, winning 19 events
of these contests, China came second, being the strongest in seven
events, and Kazakhstan gained third place, snatching victory in three
types of competitions.
“For two weeks millions of eyes and hearts rooted for you and took
you to heart – those who were the country’s best -- for you whom the
country sent to the army games for you to display your skill, your
proficiency, and, most important, to represent your country at these
important international contests,” Russian Federation Defense Minister
Sergey Shoigu said at the ArMI 2017 closing ceremony.
But the minister observed that all the participants in the games were
competition winners. “We are winners because we view one another not
through gun sights but eye to eye….”
The ArMI 2017 games were staged at 22 range facilities of Russia,
Belarus, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and China and also in the waters of
the Sea of Japan and the Caspian and Black seas from 29 July through
12 August. Representatives of 28 countries participated….

“We are winners because we view one another not through gun sights but eye to eye…”
Source: “Over 500,000 people visit Army 2017 forum’s venues - Russian Defense Ministry,” Interfax, 28 August 2017. http://www.interfax.
com/news.asp?y=2017&m=8&d=28
Over 500,000 people have visited venues of the Army 2017 international military-technical forum in the Moscow region….
…”In total, representatives of 114 foreign countries, 65 official military delegations, including 35 high-ranking ones, 20 of them headed by
defense ministers, participated in the forum’s work in five days,” Mironov said.
Source: “Russia signs $300 million worth of foreign contracts at Army-2017 forum - FSMTC chief,” Interfax, 30 August 2017. http://www.
interfax.com/news.asp?y=2017&m=8&d=30
…The total worth of contracts signed with foreign partners at the Army-2017 international military-technical forum is $300 million, the
Federal Service for Military-Technical Cooperation (FSMTC) Director Dmitry Shugayev said….

OE Watch | October 2017

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s Shoigu Impresses Niger with Syria Experience
OE Watch Commentary: In late August, Russia hosted
an international military defense forum known as “Army
2017,” which provided an opportunity for Russian officials to
meet with foreign officials on the sidelines of the event. As
the accompanying Russian-language article from newstes.ru
discusses, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu met with
Niger’s Defense Minister and signed an agreement on military
cooperation. One of Shoigu’s selling points to Niger was
Russia’s experience in Syria, including its de-mining operations.
One of the exhibitions at Army 2017 involved Russia’s hightech military achievements and aspects of Russia’s counterterrorism campaign in Syria. According to Shoigu, Russia has
learned about how modern terrorists are fighting from being
in the hottest spots in the world. Responding positively to the
exhibit, Niger’s Defense Minister said that Niger’s servicemen
could use lessons learned from the exhibit, including in Niger’s
campaign against Boko Haram.
Shoigu also sought to elevate Russia as a global leader in
counter-terrorism at the forum, calling for a unified global
front against international terrorism. Niger’s Defense Minister
seems to have received the message. He noted that countries
neighboring Niger, such as Libya, Mali, Chad and Nigeria
have parts of their territory controlled by terrorists and that
cooperation with Russia was therefore welcome to remedy this
situation. In addition, he said that Russia’s actions in Syria were
justified. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Министр обороны России генерал армии Сергей Шойгу
пригласил военнослужащих Нигера ознакомиться с сирийским
опытом ВС РФ в разминировании (Russian Army General Defense
Minister Sergei Shoigu invited Nigerien servicemen to get acquainted with
the Syrian experience of the Russian Armed Forces in mine clearance),”
newstes.ru, 22 August 2017. https://goo.gl/URzPwN
Russian Army General Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu met with the
Minister of National Defense of Niger, Mutari Kalla, within the framework
of “ARMY-2017”. The head of the Russian military and the Minister of
National Defense of Niger signed an agreement on bilateral military
cooperation. Kalla Mutari, in turn, expressed the hope that the agreements
will form the basis of new relations between the two countries.
The Russian Defense Minister also invited the delegation of Niger to
become acquainted with the Syrian experience of the Russian Armed
Forces in demining. “Currently, there is a lot of work to be done in Syria.
Probably, you saw that this center carries out not only demining, but also
the training of specialists. I recommend that you familiarize yourself with
this experience,” Shoigu suggested.
“We know that some countries are at a deadlock about the situation in
which they are controlled by terrorists. And that is why we very much
appreciate the cooperation with Russia, and our task is to liberate
neighboring countries from terrorists. That’s why we are cooperating with
Russia,” said Mutari Kalla.

“During the exhibition you will familiarize yourself
with... [Russia’s] experience in Syria.”

Russian Army General Sergei Shoigu in 2013.

Source: kremlin.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASergey_Shoigu_2013.jpg, (CC BY-SA 3.0).

OE Watch | October 2017

63

DPRK
A Chinese Scholar’s Perspective on the North Korea Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: Since January 2017, North Korea’s nuclear
program has received heightened attention because of the country’s
continued missile tests, including a possible hydrogen bomb on 3
September 2017. Chinese academics have expressed their views on the
crisis in the Korean Peninsula in various journal articles throughout
the year. In the accompanying Chinese-language article for the journal
Fengmian Huati (cover story), which was posted on China’s equivalent
of google scholar, wenku.baidu.com, a Chinese scholar argued that the
US policy of rebalancing in the Asia-Pacific requires a moderate level of
tension on the Korean Peninsula.
The scholar interprets the previous administration’s approach to mean
that “the US does not want to solve the North Korea nuclear issue, but
[wants] to create an excuse to contain China.” In addition, the scholar
North Korea’s nuclear backpack - North Korea Victory Day-2013 01.
believes that because trends in East Asia have been in China’s favor, the
Source: Stefan Krasowski, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/dd/North_Korea%27s_nuclear_backpack_-_North_Korea_
Victory_Day-2013_01.jpg, CC BY 2.0.
US is creating pressure on North Korea, thus forcing it to experiment
with nuclear weapons as a defensive measure. This in turn creates
a Cold War scenario and allows the US to form a “Little NATO” in the region with South Korea and Japan. North Korea’s nuclear weapons,
according to this view, are largely benign and are a form of capital for future negotiations.
The scholar also believes that the US-South Korea collaboration on the THAAD (terminal high-altitude area defense) missile defense system
endangers China’s national interests and upsets the balance of power in East Asia. At the same time, all of the initiatives to contain North Korea’s
nuclear weapons put China in a position where it must agree to such initiatives, but this undermines China’s relationship of mutual trust with North
Korea. However, when the demands against North Korea are unreasonable and China sides with North Korea, it creates resentment against China
by the US and international community.
The scholar sees four possible futures. First, there may be a “clean landing,” which means there will be a peaceful way to solve the North Korea
crisis. Second, there may be a “soft landing,” in which China advocates denuclearization and peace processes but there will be difficulties in
achieving this result. Third, there may be a “hard landing,” which is a war on the Korean Peninsula, although the possibility of this is small but
growing. Fourth, and finally, there may be “no landing” at all, a scenario in which the US and North Korea continue in a long-term confrontation.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The U.S. and South Korea even decided to deploy the THAAD missile defense system, endangering
China’s national interests and upsetting the security balance in Northeast Asia.”
Source: “朝鲜半岛局势的新特点和中国政策调整建议 (New Characteristics of the Situation on the Korean
Peninsula and Suggestions for China’s Policy Adjustment),” wenku.baidu.com, 21 July 2017. https://wenku.baidu.com/
view/0ce9145ecbaedd3383c4bb4cf7ec4afe04a1b1fd?pcf=2#2
Over the past 20 years, Sino-U.S. cooperation in dealing with the North Korea nuclear issue has been replaced by a new situation in which
the U.S. has adopted the Asia-Pacific rebalancing strategy to contain China by exploiting the North Korea nuclear issue. The Asia-Pacific
rebalancing requires moderate tension on the Korean peninsula, and Obama’s strategic patience policy was that the U.S. does not want to solve
the North Korea nuclear issue, but to create an excuse to contain China. The THAAD system’s deployment and the South China Sea arbitration
are for the United States to contain China with a double-weighted hammer.
The U.S. successfully used the North Korea nuclear issue to rupture Sino-South Korean relations and to improve South Korean-Japanese
relations. South Korea is committed to the deployment of the United States on THAAD so that the balance of power between Chinese and U.S.
policy reverses the trends for China. Relations between South Korea and the U.S. are close to signaling that the U.S. is creating the Northeast
Asian “Little NATO”, which is a new Cold War risk. North Korea needs to seize time to further enhance the level of its nuclear weapons and
increase its future negotiation capital.
China’s policy on the peninsula is facing a difficult time. With North Korea’s two nuclear explosions, the U.S. and North Korea are the winners
in achieving their goals. The U.S. and South Korea even decided to deploy the THAAD missile defense system, endangering China’s national
interests and upsetting the security balance in Northeast Asia. Unification with North Korea is unrealistic through the unreasonable demands of
the negotiations, which once lead the countries to resent China and back the U.S.
There may be a “ full landing”, that is a peaceful way to solve the problem, but the possibility is zero in the near future. For a “soft landing”
China advocates the denuclearization and peace processes, but this is often difficult to achieve. A “hard landing” is to resolve the problem of war
on the peninsula, but this possibility is low with a clear upward trend. “No landing” is where the two sides have a long-term confrontation.
OE Watch | October 2017

64

DPRK
China: US Presence is a Bigger Threat than North Korea
OE Watch Commentary: Many would consider a neighbor in
possession of nuclear arms that are controlled by someone who is
perceived as unstable, to be a huge threat. From a Chinese point
of view, however, the biggest threat is not the perceived madman
next door, but rather US presence in the Korean peninsula. The
following three articles from Chinese sources demonstrate this
point.
China does not tend to announce its missile tests. In May,
however, according to the first article, the Chinese Ministry of
Defense announced that the People’s Liberation Army Rocket
Force conducted a missile test (believed to be a Dongfeng
series missile), over the Bohai Sea. The fact that these types of
announcements are rare, led analysts in China to believe that that
particular test was in response to US deployment of the Terminal
High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) anti-missile system to
South Korea, of which China is vehemently opposed.
More recently, as the second article explains, on 5 September,
only two days after Pyongyang conducted its last nuclear test,
China shot down simulated low flying missiles over Bohai Bay
as part of an exercise. According to Beijing-based naval expert
Li Jie, the exercise, which was reportedly the third one in the
Bohai Bay area since late July, was intended to send a strong
signal to condemn North Korea’s “continuous and provocative
acts.” However, Li adds that the exercise was also a warning “to
the United States and President Donald Trump, who has made
repeated threats to stage military action against North Korea.”
Interestingly, what does not seem to be reflected in Chinese
open sources are any strong feelings of being threatened by, or
indications of military responses meant to counter North Korea’s
nuclear advancement. While Chinese military exercises might
be perceived by some as sending a strong signal to North Korea,
they are more strongly focused on the United States in response
to either the deployment of the THAAD anti-missile defense
system or US-South Korean military exercises. According
to Shanghai-based military analyst Ni Lexiong in the third
article, “Beijing is now under growing threat from the “Korean
peninsula.” It is worth drawing attention to the fact that Ni
does not single out North Korea as being the threat. Instead he
goes on to say that the exercises are messages to the United
States that Beijing does not want to see a war near China’s
coast. Also in the third article, Collin Koh, a maritime security
expert at Singapore’s Nanyang Technological University says
that the “Chinese military was responding to shows of force by
the US Navy and its allies off the peninsula in recent months,
especially those by US carrier strike groups.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“This shows China is prepared and able to
stop any power that threatens
stability in the region...”

Source: Minnie Chan, “China’s Missile Tests in Bohai Aimed at THAAD,’”
South China Morning Post, 10 May 2017. http://www.scmp.com/news/
china/diplomacy-defence/article/2093711/chinas-missile-tests-bohai-aimedthaad-south-korea
“The People’s Liberation Army Rocket Force conducted a test of a new
type of missile somewhere in Bohai [Sea] in recent days, and achieved
desired ¬results,” the ministry said in a statement on Tuesday.
It said the test was designed to boost the military’s capacity to fight threats
to national security.
Military analysts said the “rare high-profile announcement of the missile
test” was a response to the deployment of the US-built Terminal High
Altitude Area ¬Defence (THAAD) anti-missile system in South Korea. The
¬announcement comes after ¬defence ministry spokesman Yang Yujun said
last month that China would conduct live-fire drills and test new weapons to
safeguard its security in response to the THAAD roll-out.
Zhou [Zhou Chenming, from the Knowfar Institute for Strategic and
Defence Studies, a Chinese think tank] said the Bohai Sea had been the
landing site for all sea target missile tests for several years, but this time
“was quite high profile” as the defence ministry announced it. “Missile tests
near the East Sea could cause deterrence to some countries,” Zhou said.
Macau-based military observer Antony Wong Dong said the test might also
be aimed at Washington, which has sent two aircraft carrier strike groups to
waters off the Korean Peninsula.
Source: Kinling Lo, “China ‘Shoots Down Incoming Missiles’ During
Exercise Over Waters Close to North Korea,” South China Morning Post,
5 September 2017. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/
article/2109907/china-shoots-down-incoming-missiles-during-exercise
Beijing-based naval expert Li Jie said that China’s rapid response to
North Korea’s latest nuclear test was a strong signal that it condemned its
neighbour’s continuous and provocative acts.
“This shows China is prepared and able to stop any power that threatens
stability in the region,” he said.
Li, however, added that the drill was also a warning to the United States
and President Donald Trump, who has made repeated threats to stage
military action against North Korea.
“China can only rely on [conducting] more drills to raise its military
capability amid an unstable situation.”
Source: Kristin Huang, “Chinese Navy Keeps Firm Focus on Northern Shores
as North Korean Tensions Rise,” South China Morning Post, 7 September
2017. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2110233/
chinese-navy-keeps-firm-focus-northern-shores-north
Shanghai-based military analyst Ni Lexiong said the exercises in the Bohai
and Yellow seas were meant to safeguard the country’s political centre.
“[Beijing] is now under growing threat from the Korean peninsula, so
the Chinese navy must demonstrate and improve its defence and combat
abilities,” Ni said.
“The exercises are also messages to the United States that Beijing does not
want to see a war near China’s coast.”
Collin Koh, a maritime security expert at Singapore’s Nanyang
Technological University, said the Chinese military was also responding
to shows of force by the US Navy and its allies off the peninsula in recent
months, especially those by US carrier strike groups.
OE Watch | October 2017

65

DPRK
China Must Play Balancing Act on North Korea
OE Watch Commentary: With the Korean peninsula heating up, it
is important to understand the Chinese perspective, given that China
is North Korea’s closest neighbor and ally. Yan Xuetong, director
and professor at the Qinghua University Institute of International
Relations, wrote an insightful piece on the overall transformation of
China’s diplomacy and the country’s role as a rising power. In one
section of the paper, Yan discusses Chinese views on the Korean
peninsula.
Yan explains that scholars have differing views on China’s interests
in the area. Specifically, there are differing opinions regarding
whether China’s priority should be avoiding war or achieving
denuclearization or both. According to Yan, “Some people think we
should both avoid war and pursue denuclearization. This idea that
we can have our cake and eat it too matches the essence of human
nature, but it does not match human ability.” He notes the importance
of prioritizing these interests in a way that matches objective reality,
warning that if the “interest objectives...go beyond China’s military
strength... such interests not only cannot be realized, they will also
impact China’s strategic credibility, thereby causing unnecessary
losses.”
Yan explains that prior to 2013, China had sought to build up its
economy through a “hide and bide” strategy. Now, however, China’s
strategy has shifted based on its achievements and global standing.
Today, having achieved the standing of second strongest economy in
the world, China is focused on “the great revitalization of the Chinese
nation.” In order to achieve this, China must be careful to neither
underestimate nor overestimate its status, because in either case, it
would be detrimental to the country’s national interests.
Yan writes that peacefully “achieving the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula has exceeded the capabilities of all countries;
therefore, China’s denuclearization policy should match China’s
relevant strength.” The article’s bottom line is that China should not
be expected to step in because it has not yet achieved the strength
(military and otherwise) necessary to do so without detriment. The
balancing act it must perform going forward becomes vital to its
continued rise and success. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Yan Xuetong, “(国际关系)阎学通：外交转型、利益排
序与大国崛起 (Yan Xuetong: Diplomatic Transformation, Interest
Priorities, and Great Power Rise),” Sohu, 12 June 2017. http://www.
sohu.com/a/148288804_618422
Presently, there are relatively large differences among scholars
in their views on the Korean Peninsula issue. The main reason for
this is that everyone understands China’s interests on the Korean
Peninsula differently, particularly their views about the interest
priorities between avoiding war or achieving denuclearization. Such
differences in thinking have caused a debate about whether avoiding
war or denuclearization comes first. Some people think we should
both avoid war and pursue denuclearization. This idea that we can
have our cake and eat it too matches the essence of human nature,
but it does not match human ability. When one cannot do both,
one can only choose one or the other or one could lose everything.
Determining the priority of interests that cannot both be attained is
the premise for developing policy that matches objective reality; and
the result of not prioritizing them is that the probability of losing both
is greater than achieving one of them and far greater than achieving
both of them.
When the interest objectives we have developed go beyond China’s
military strength, such interests not only cannot be realized, they will
also impact China’s strategic credibility, thereby causing unnecessary
losses.
The reason hide and bide was less beneficial later on was that our
foreign policy was not able to adjust the judgements made about
our national interest in accordance with changes in our strength
status in a timely manner. Implementing the policy of hide and bide
was reasonable prior to our becoming the world’s second great
power. When China’s strength was clearly insufficient and when
the international community was not taking us as seriously, such a
tactic was effective and gave us a strategic opportunity to develop
our strength. However, as China’s strength status has been elevated,
our strength far exceeding our interest objectives has prompted the
prevalence of the China reasonability theory, and criticism from
the international community that China is an irresponsible power is
troubling China’s rise unnecessarily.

“When the interest objectives we have developed go beyond China’s military strength, such interests not only
cannot be realized, they will also impact China’s strategic credibility, thereby causing unnecessary losses.”
China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | October 2017

66

DPRK
How Would Russia Respond to War on the
Korean Peninsula?
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted Russian-language article from the Moscowbased website mk.ru, which specializes in provocative commentaries on politics and
society, discusses how Russia would respond if a war broke out between the US and North
Korea on the Korean Peninsula. According to an expert from the Center for Political
Technologies, Russia would not take a side in a military confrontation. However, it would
face great danger from any violent escalation or nuclear fallout because it has a border with
North Korea.
The expert argues that Russia previously had leverage on North Korea in negotiations,
but now it is China that holds influence over North Korea’s behavior. North Korea sends
workers to Russia but the level of economic cooperation between Russia and North Korea
cannot compare to that of North Korea and China.
One of the challenges on the Korean Peninsula, according to the expert, is the ambitious
personalities of the North Korean and US leaders. The expert believes Kim Jong-Un is a
young leader without any major accomplishments like his father and grandfather and needs
to prove himself to a domestic audience. The expert also believes US President Trump is
inexperienced in politics so his actions are hard to predict.
The main military measure Russia would take is defensive, according to the expert. This
would include shooting down a nuclear warhead or rocket that accidentally crossed into
Russian territory. The expert does not expect North Korea or the US to intentionally launch
an attack on Russian territory. China, similarly, would prepare its anti-missile defenses in
the case of a war between North Korea and the US.
The expert recognizes that the idea of economic engagement to change North Korea’s
behavior has failed: North Korea still lacks a middle class and has not become an open or
liberal country. The big question, according to the expert, is North Korea’s young leader.
He needs a legendary story, and it may be nuclear weapons tests, if not war, that are the
way for him to prove himself. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Что будет делать Россия в случае
войны США и КНДР (What will Russia
do in the event of a war between the US and
DPRK),” mk.com, 11 August 2017. http://
www.mk.ru/politics/2017/08/11/chto-budetdelat-rossiya-v-sluchae-voyny-ssha-i-kndr.html
For Russia, the escalation on the Korean
Peninsula is very worrying because it, first,
involves the threat of the use of nuclear
weapons, and second, it would occur alongside
Russia’s borders. The escalation coincides
with both North Korea and the United States
having very ambitious leaders now. Now,
on the one hand, Kim Jong-Un needs to
constantly assert himself before his generals
and loyalists. On the other hand, Trump is a
very inexperienced person in politics. In this
situation, predictability is reduced and the
danger increases.
It is impossible to say 100% where a missile
will fly, taking into account the quality of
North Korean missiles and the possible missile
strike of the United States on North Korea.
Russia, of course, should be ready to shoot
down a warhead, which accidentally flies in its
direction. It is clear that no one intentionally is
going to attack Russian territory. Most likely,
China will now also bring its anti-missile
defense to combat readiness.
On Russian territory there are only North
Korean enterprises with workers from North
Korea. But it is not very important for the
economy of North Korea. So the scale of
Russian economic cooperation with Pyongyang
is much lower than that of China. Economic
interaction with North Korea was viewed not
as support for the totalitarian regime, but as an
opportunity to change it, make it more open,
and form a North Korean middle class.

President Putin laying a wreath at a monument to the liberating Soviet Army in Pyongyang.

Source: Presidential Press and Information Office, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3APresident_Putin_laying_a_wreath_at_a_monument_to_the_liberating_Soviet_
Army_in_Pyongyang.jpg, CC BY 3.0.

But now Kim Jong-Un has come to power.
He does not have a legendary story like his
father and grandfather, so he needs to assert
himself and prove that he is special. Hence
the development of a nuclear missile program
and aggressive rhetoric. And now economic
ties, which were previously perceived as an
incentive to change and liberalize the North
Korean regime, have become something that is
condemned.

“For Russia, the escalation on the Korean Peninsula is very worrying because... [it] involves the threat
of nuclear weapons, and... it would occur alongside Russia’s borders.”
OE Watch | October 2017

67

DPRK
Russia and North Korea: The Enemy of My Enemy
OE Watch Commentary: As in other languages, the Russians have an aphorism which captures the notion that “the enemy of my enemy
is my friend,” [враг моего врага - мой друг]. To a large degree, this sentiment exemplifies the Kremlin’s position toward the current crisis
between North Korea and the US. While the Kremlin shares concerns over a nuclear-armed North Korea, it appears willing to provide the
Pyongyang regime with a certain amount of moral support and diplomatic cover to stymie Washington’s efforts. In the accompanying excerpt
from the military journal Военно-промышленный курьер (VPK-Military Industrial Courier), two Russian experts (J. Kedmi and V. Vasilev)
discuss what some within Russia view as a solution to resolving the current crisis on the Korean peninsula.

Russian Embassy in Pyongyang.

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Korea%E2%80%93Russia_relations#/media/File:2011_Russian_Embassy_in_DPRK.jpg CC BY-SA 3.0.

The article begins by taking a gratuitous attack against
Ukraine, pointing out that the recent “launch of a North
Korean ballistic missile (Hwaseong-12) that flew over Japan
with new engines [was] allegedly manufactured in Ukrainian
firm Yuzhmash.” This is likely a deliberate reminder to
Washington that it had better think twice before sending lethal
arms to such a untrustworthy ally. The Russian experts go
on to claim that despite the strong US rhetoric against North
Korea, Washington understands that war “will be a disaster
for South Korea and for Japan,” which in turn will negatively
“affect the world economic affairs.” If this is insufficient to
prevent a US attack, they also suggest that if history is any
guide (e.g. Korean, Vietnam Wars), the situation might escalate
into “a military clash… between the United States and, say,
Russia in the Far East.”

To resolve this crisis, these experts contend that the US must align itself with the “common position of Russia and China,” whereby the US
will “stop joint maneuvers with the South Korean army, … then Pyongyang will stop the development of new weapons.” They also claim that
“both Russia and China” insist that the US “remove the THAAD missiles from South Korea.” They conclude by suggesting that Washington
has “only one way out - to make a good face in a bad game and get out of the region.”
While this article does not carry the official Kremlin approval, it does reflect how the situation is typically portrayed within the Russian
media. The current Kremlin leadership views the US as its chief geopolitical rival, and will likely continue trying to exploit the situation in
North Korea to weaken the US position on the Korean peninsula. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“So the Americans have only one way out - to make a good face in a bad game and get out of the region…”

Source: Mark Sorkin, “Перекройка мира под новый ‘Хвасон,’ (Restoration of the world under a new ‘Hwaseong’),” Военнопромышленный курьер, 5 September 2017. http://vpk-news.ru/articles/38740
In August, things boiled over in Asia. The atmosphere was heated by the missile scandal that broke out after the successful launch of a
North Korean ballistic missile (Hwaseong-12) that flew over Japan with new engines allegedly manufactured in Ukrainian firm Yuzhmash,
and secretly reaching the DPRK…. Political scientist, Yakov Kedmi and the chief specialist of the USA and Canada Institute of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, Doctor of Economics, Vladimir Vasiliev talk about the options available to Donald Trump.
How great is the threat of the military confrontation between Pyongyang and Washington under the existing conditions? And can it spread to
the DPRK’s neighbors - Beijing and Moscow?...
Vasiliev: … I remind you of the words of President Xi Jinping that there is a comprehensive strategic partnership between Moscow and
Beijing.
…And if suddenly everyone understands that America is bluffing, then it will really start…. What it will result in is difficult to say.
Theoretically, a military clash is possible between the United States and, say, Russia in the Far East. Today, with such an escalation of events,
it is impossible to completely exclude such a scenario.
It is also worth taking into account the historical outline of the region: there were two major wars - Korean and Vietnamese. And in both, the
Soviet Union and the United States were indirectly in confrontation…. “Seoul is going to die overnight ...”
Kedmi: Yes, it will be a disaster for South Korea and for Japan…. The Americans will not achieve anything by escalating the conflict… as
they understand how it will affect the world economic affairs.
…And one more important thing is the common position of Russia and China. Washington was told: stop joint maneuvers with the South
Korean army, which are rehearsed scenarios of the invasion of the DPRK and the overthrow of the regime, then Pyongyang will stop the
development of new weapons… And one more requirement of both Russia and China is to remove the THAAD missiles from South Korea…
So the Americans have only one way out - to make a good face in a bad game and get out of the region….
OE Watch | October 2017

68

DPRK
The North Korea-Russia Joint Declaration of Friendship
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2000, when Vladimir Putin became Russia’s
president the first time, North Korea and Russia have had a cordial friendship along
their short border. A recent article from Rodong Sinmun, the daily of the Central
Committee of the Workers Party of [North] Korea, described the common essence of
this continued closeness.
The author remarks on the 17-year anniversary of the adoption of the North KoreaRussia joint declaration of friendship in 2000, proclaiming that the declaration, signed
by Kim Jong Il and Vladimir Putin, “actively propelled the development of friendly
and cooperative relations between North Korea and Russia into the 21st century.” In
proclaiming that continued closeness is in the interest of “a multipolar world and is in
accordance with the trend of trying to establish a new international order,” the author
echoes the language of many speeches given by the Kremlin leadership over the past
A Russian-North Korean summit meeting, Pyongyang (2000).
Source: Russian Presidency Website, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/38435, CC BY 4.0.`
several years. In these speeches, Kremlin leaders often refer to a “multipolar world”
as a goal of Russian policy. The author interprets the declaration of friendship to confirm “the shared view on the issues of opposing activities
that threaten the security of sovereign states and overall world peace.” This reminder of their agreement to oppose activities they deem
threatening is particularly relevant, at a time when both Russia and North Korea are experiencing heightened tensions with the US.
The partnership solidified by the declaration, according to the author, crucially maintains peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia and the
Asia-Pacific at large. The author claims that this declaration serves as a cornerstone to “mutual cooperation in many areas ranging from
the peace and security of Northeast Asia and the world to politics, economy, military affairs, science and technology, culture, and so on.”
According to the author, North Korea-Russia relations largely hinge on this document and reached a new level of cooperation after its adoption.
Finally, the author declares most of the common ground between the two countries and room for expansion of relations lies in their common
goals of “smashing outside interference and pressure and protecting the country’s sovereignty.” Again, this language echoes President Putin’s
common assertions of his need to protect the sovereignty of his country. The author directly cites President Putin’s verbal support of North
Korea through the current nuclear crisis as proof that Russia remains friendly with North Korea, even though North Korea is engaged in harsh
disagreements with the US. Indeed, disputes with the US are a uniting factor for the two countries from a North Korean standpoint. End OE
Watch Commentary (Johnson)

“Russia is a neighbor sharing borders with our country and the North Korea-Russia relations are friendly
relations with a long history. Smashing outside interference and pressure and protecting the country’s
sovereignty are common goals of the two countries…”

Source: Ri Hyo-chin, “북한 - 러시아 우호 관계 발전의 역사적 이정표 (A Historic Milestone in the Development of North Korea-Russia
Friendly Relations),” Rodong Sinmun, 19 July 2017. http://news1.kr/articles/?3052761
It has been 17 years since the North Korea-Russia joint declaration was adopted. At the invitation of great leader Comrade Kim Jong Il, Russian
Federation President V.V. Putin visited our country for the first time as head of state of Russia in July [2000]. During the period of his visit, a North
Korea-Russia summit meeting was held and the North Korea-Russia joint declaration was adopted. The North Korea-Russia joint declaration is
a historic document that actively propelled the development of friendly and cooperative relations between North Korea and Russia into the 21st
century.
The North Korea-Russia joint declaration confirmed that further developing collaboration and close mutual cooperation between our country and
Russia is in the fundamental interests of the people of both countries and a multipolar world and is in accordance with the trend of trying to establish
a new international order based on the principles of equality, mutual respect, and reciprocal cooperation….In addition, [both parties] called for
weakening the elements of use of power in international relations while strengthening strategic and regional security, and confirmed the shared view
on the issues of opposing activities that threaten the security of sovereign states and overall world peace, realizing and developing cooperation in
many areas between the two countries, and turning the 21st century into a century in which the entire people of the world prosper.
The adoption of the North Korea-Russia joint declaration bears significance not only in the development of relations between the two countries of
North Korea and Russia, but also in the sound development of international relations and the guarantee of peace and security of the Asia-Pacific
region and, furthermore, the world….
… the leaders of the two countries confirmed the historical meaning of the North Korea-Russia joint declaration and, based on it, they agreed on
specific directions and measures to further develop mutual cooperation in many areas ranging from the peace and security of Northeast Asia and the
world to politics, economy, military affairs, S&T, culture, and so on….
Russia is a neighbor sharing borders with our country and the North Korea-Russia relations are friendly relations with a long history. Smashing
outside interference and pressure and protecting the country’s sovereignty are common goals of the two countries….
…Recently Russian President Putin, on many occasions, emphasized that the problem does not lie with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
which is protecting itself from outside pressure -- although the United States is raving about North Korean “nuclear and rocket threats” -- and
claimed that the United States should stop threatening North Korea….
…Cherishing and developing North Korea-Russia friendly relations is beneficial to guaranteeing the peace and security of not only the two
countries but also the Northeast Asian region, and furthermore, the world….
OE Watch | October 2017

69

DPRK
Nuclear Dagger: Japanese Views on North Korea
OE Watch Commentary: Japan has a complicated,
often tension-filled relationship with the Korean
peninsula. Evidence suggests early settlers of Japan,
probably including the ancestors of the Imperial line,
came to Japan from or through Korea, though many in
Japan now do not like to acknowledge this historical,
even familial, connection. During its recorded history,
Japan invaded Korea at the end of the 16th century
(during which there was an important landing of
Japanese troops at Incheon; as the Japanese troops
moved up the peninsula, Chinese forces intervened;
pushing Japanese forces back to a pocket around
Pusan; from which the Japanese forces finally
evacuated). After Japan began to industrialize, the
authorities began to think of the Korean peninsula as
a “dagger pointed at the heart of Japan.” They fought
two wars, colonized the peninsula and then fought a
third war, in part, to respond to this perceived threat.
In more recent times, the Japanese government has
seen North Korea as a threat due to its belligerent
[Former] Japanese Minister of Defense Ishiba Shigeru conducts a meeting with Secretary of Defense
behavior (including kidnapping Japanese citizens) and
Robert M. Gates at the Ministry of Defense in Tokyo, 8 December 2007.
Source: By DoD photo by Cherie A. Thurlby via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AShigeru_Ishiba%2C_2007.jpg, Public Domain.
its missile and nuclear programs. North Korea’s recent
launch of an ICBM over northern Japan and its testing
of an alleged hydrogen bomb on 3 September has ratcheted tension higher still. The dagger has become nuclear and some Japanese fear North
Korea’s young dictator, Kim Jong Un, may be willing to use it.
As the first accompanying passage notes, before the latest nuclear test, with the publication of Japan’s 2017 Defense White Paper at the beginning
of August, the Government of Japan made clear North Korea’s continuing missile and nuclear programs meant the rogue regime had attained “a
new level of threat.” Following this, as the second passage notes, reacting directly to North Korea’s self-proclaimed hydrogen bomb test, former
defense minister Ishiba Shigeru appeared on a popular television program and said Japan should reconsider its three non-nuclear principles (not to
possess, manufacture or allow the transit of nuclear weapons in Japan), and consider hosting US nuclear weapons on its territory. Ishiba is widely
considered one of the most likely successors to Abe Shinzo as prime minister. The Abe administration, in a written answer to a question in the
Diet last year, said Japan’s possession of nuclear weapons would not be unconstitutional. Remarkable in and of itself, this was just one of many
questions surrounding the Abe administration’s security policies, and was somewhat lost in the shuffle. Given Japan’s so-called “nuclear allergy,”
the idea may have seemed too far-fetched at the time to be taken seriously. Other than the Abe administration’s position, Ishiba’s remarks marked
the first time since 1960 that such a high-profile politician has said Japan should rely on nuclear weapons on its own soil (Abe’s grandfather, Kishi
Nobusuke, prime minister from 1957-1960, maintained it would be constitutional for Japan to maintain nuclear weapons, but he is the only prime
minister to have done so until his grandson’s reaffirmation last year). (continued)

“Given North Korea’s nuclear and missile development, it is understood the government is considering
the development of a new system for intercepting ballistic missiles. A high-power laser could destroy a
ballistic missile immediately after launch. North Korea is repeatedly using a ‘lofted orbit’ in its launches
which is difficult to intercept with present equipment, so it is planned to respond with new technology.”
Source: 北朝鮮「新たな段階の脅威」 防衛白書、認識厳しく “North Korea, ‘A New Level of Threat’ Relentlessly Recognized
in Defense White Paper,” Nippon Keizai Shimbun (Nikkei), 8 August 2017. http://www.nikkei.com/article/DGXLASFS07H38_
Y7A800C1MM0000/
“Defense Minister Onodera Yoshinori, at the Cabinet meeting on August 8th, presented the 2017 version of the Defense White Paper. He made
clear the continuing development of North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs “had reached a new level of threat,” increasing in scope rapidly
from last year’s white paper.”

(continued)
OE Watch | October 2017

70

DPRK
Continued: Nuclear Dagger: Japanese Views on
North Korea
Japan has maintained its three non-nuclear principles since 1967, when Prime Minister Sato Eisaku announced them in the Diet, and the principles
have been an aspect of the “hade,” or brakes applied to Japanese security policy ever since, a part of what political scientist Andrew Oros calls
Japan’s anti-domestic militarism norm. The nuclear allergy is an important aspect of the norm. In the not-too-distant past, politicians who made
statements counter to the anti-domestic militarism norm were forced to resign from government service, and their careers ended. The degree to
which the public and the Japanese government have been shaken by North Korea’s nuclear dagger is indicated by the fact Ishiba felt free to raise
this issue at all, and in such a public way (on live TV). He has faced no negative consequences. But, as the third passage demonstrates, the lingering
strength of the norm/allergy is indicated by the immediate denials of both the Chief Cabinet Secretary (equivalent to the vice president in the US
system) and Minister of Defense that Japan is considering revising the three non-nuclear principles.
The government of Japan has increased consultations with the US regarding the North Korea threat, and has indicated its intent to buy the Aegis
Ashore missile-defense system, in addition to the Patriot missile and Aegis destroyer systems it already possess. Another report, as noted in the
fourth passage, out on the day of the latest nuclear test, suggests that the Japanese government may try to develop a high-power laser, to be fired
from an aircraft, with the intent to destroy a North Korean missile immediately after launch. According to the report this would be cheaper than
destroying the enemy missile with another missile, and might be more effective, given the lofted orbits North Korea frequently uses. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hunter-Chester)
Source: 石破氏、非核三原則の見直しを提起…ＴＶ番組で “Mr. Ishiba Raises the Question, ‘Shouldn’t the Three Non-Nuclear Principles
be Revised?’ on Asahi Television,” Yomiuri Shimbun, 7 September 2017. http://www.yomiuri.co.jp/politics/20170906-OYT1T50104.
html?from=ytop_ylist
“Ishiba said, “Does it not contradict deterrence to be unable to introduce nuclear weapons? It is the responsibility of politicians to think about
how to use deterrence and how to protect Japanese citizens.”
Source: 菅官房長官、非核三原則を堅持 石破氏の国内配備発言で “Chief Cabinet Secretary Suga, in Response to Mr. Ishiba’s
Statement on Domestic Deployment: We are Sticking to the Three Non-Nuclear Principles,” Hokkaido Shimbun, 6 September 2017. https://
www.hokkaido-np.co.jp/article/130561
“Chief Cabinet Secretary Suga Yoshihide emphasized the idea of adhering to the three non-nuclear principles . . . “We have not yet discussed
the review of the three non-nuclear principles, and we are not thinking about discussions in the future.” Pointing out the use of nuclear power is
legally limited to peaceful purposes, he said, “I am obligated not to accept nuclear weapons, or their manufacture as a signatory of the nuclear
nonproliferation treaty.” Defense Minister Yoshinobu Onodera also responded to the reporters’ question at the Ministry of Defense, “The
government has consistently maintained the three non-nuclear principles. The stance will not change.”
Source: レーザーでミサイル迎撃、発射直後に照射し破壊 “Destroying Missiles Immediately after Launch, with a Laser,” Yomiuri
Shimbun, 3 September 2017. http://www.yomiuri.co.jp/politics/20170902-OYT1T50134.html?from=yartcl_outbrain2
“Given North Korea’s nuclear and missile development, it is understood the government is considering the development of a new system for
intercepting ballistic missiles.
A high-power laser could destroy a ballistic missile immediately after launch. North Korea is repeatedly using a “lofted orbit” in its launches
which is difficult to intercept with present equipment, so it is planned to respond with new technology.”

KREMLIN KONTROL
by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
In 2016 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chief of the General
Staff Valery Gerasimov instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and reestablished the
nation’s military prowess. This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to
describe how control over the security services and the military
have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | October 2017

71

DPRK
North Korea: The View from Egypt
OE Watch Commentary: Egypt-North Korea relations were put in
the spotlight following late August media reports linking the partial
withholding of Egypt-bound US aid to Cairo’s cozy relationship with
Pyongyang. North Korea’s ties to Egypt date to the presidency of Gamal
Abdel Nasser in Egypt (1956-1970), a time when the two countries
were ideologically aligned. During the Arab-Israeli conflict of the
late 1960s and early 1970s, the North Korean military offered limited
though symbolic support to both Egypt and Syria. In the late 2000s,
the Egyptian conglomerate Orascom became the largest private foreign
investor in North Korea, most importantly by establishing that country’s
cellular telecommunications network. Egypt is North Korea’s longeststanding and most important partner in the Middle East. The two
countries’ diplomatic and commercial ties are relatively straightforward
and well established, their military links less so.
The first accompanying passage, written by an Egyptian journalist for
the news website al-Monitor, claims robust military ties between Egypt
and North Korea. The author bolsters his case by citing North Korea’s
military attaché in Egypt, who earlier this year claimed that bilateral
relations would flourish under Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi,
including developments in “the relationship between the Egyptian
and North Korean armies.” These predictions were belied in midSeptember, when Egyptian Defense Minister Sedki Sobhy, during a
visit to Seoul, declared that Egypt was cutting off military relations
with North Korea. The news was carried by South Korea’s official
news agency Yonhap, but has been neither confirmed nor denied by
the Egyptian military.
Egyptian commentators adamantly describe Egypt-North Korea
relations as a standard trade and diplomatic partnership. Any other
characterization, they claim, is based on falsehoods spread by
unidentified parties to harm and further weaken their homeland. For
instance the second passage, from the Egyptian news magazine Rosa
Yousef, argues that the idea of a deep Egypt-North Korea relationship
is based on rumors and lies that are “circulated internationally with the
aim of harming Egyptian interests.” Egypt should “embark on a media
campaign to refute these lies,” its author adds. The third accompanying
passage, from the broad-circulation daily al-Yaum al-Sabaa, warns
against “hack reports aimed at hurting Egypt.” Writing in the context
of Egypt’s relations with North Korea, the author notes: “No country,
no matter who it is, can deny Egypt’s right to determine the countries
with which it has political and diplomatic relations.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

Egyptian Defense Sedki Sobhy meets with his South Korean counterpart, 9/2017.
Source: Egyptian Ministry of Defense, http://www.mod.gov.eg/Mod/AlbDetails.aspx?id=15246, Public Domain.

“…Egypt’s right to determine the countries with
which it has political and diplomatic relations…”
Source:
‫هل تستجيب القاهرة للضغوط األميرك ّية لتجميد عالقاتها مع كوريا الشمال ّية؟‬
Amr Eltohamy, “Egypt unwavering to US pressure over North
Korea,” al-Monitor, 11 September 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/ar/contents/articles/originals/2017/09/egypt-north-korearelations-us-pressure-cut-aid.html (English version: http://www.
al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/09/egypt-north-korea-relationsus-pressure-cut-aid.html)
The State Information Service (SIS), an official government body
affiliated with the presidency, describes on its official website Egypt’s
relations with North Korea as “historic,” and pointed out that the two
countries are tied by around 20 economic, security, media, technology
and cultural agreements, among others… “Relations with Egypt will
develop under Sisi,” North Korea’s military attache at the Korean
Embassy in Cairo, Ju Haq Shul, said April 23 on the 85th anniversary
of the founding of the North Korean army. He said that he is “certain
the development will also include the relationship between the
Egyptian and North Korean armies.”
Egypt is one of three Arab countries (in addition to Syria and
Palestine) that still have an operating embassy in Pyongyang. It is also
one of only five Arab countries to host a North Korean Embassy on its
territory, the other countries being Syria, Algeria, Kuwait and Libya.

Source:
‫أكذوبة العالقات بني مصر وكوريا الشمالية التى يضربوننا بها‬
Islam Kamel, “The Lies we are Told about the Egypt-North Korea Relationship,” Rosa al-Yousef, 9 September 2011. https://goo.gl/2sHoxf
Over the past weeks, rumors have been circulated internationally with the aim of harming Egyptian interests. These rumors revolve around
the idea of a warm relationship between Egypt and North Korea… Egypt needs to embark on a media campaign to refute these lies.
Source:
Youssef Ayoub, “Egypt and North Korea,” al-Yaum al-Sabaa, 3 September 2017. https://goo.gl/3Pn76U

‫مصر وكوريا الشمالية‬

In principle and above all, Egypt is a sovereign nation with the right to establish relations with the countries it sees fit according to its national
interests, so long as these relations do not negatively affect regional and international security. No country, no matter who it is, can deny
Egypt’s right to determine the countries with which it has political and diplomatic relations. This message is clear to all, I believe. Regarding
North Korea, the relationship is purely diplomatic and is indeed an old relationship… Egypt has never been a country to establish relations with
countries in order to harm the interests of other nations. Everyone is witness to that. Cairo follows an honorable and non-aggressive foreign
policy, which is something the US administration needs to understand to avoid falling prey to hack reports aimed at hurting Egypt.
OE Watch | October 2017

72

