community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #2
February 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

IRAN:

FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
9
10
11
12
13

Iran: Revolutionary Guard Crowdsourcing Protestor
Identification
Iran: Was America Behind Uprising?
Iran: Lifting the Ban on Instagram was Illegal
Iranian Authorities Block Internet Access to Citizens Amid
Protests
Turkish Perspectives on Iran
The Sino-Iranian Relationship: Stronger than Ever
China Limits Internet Exposure to Iran Protests
Indonesian Perspectives on the Iran Protests
A Malaysian Perspective on US-Iran Relations
India’s Interest in Stability in Iran
Iran Approaches the Syria-Jordan Border
Saudi-Iran Tensions Seen in Nigerian Crackdown on Shia
Group

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
14
16
17
19
21

Understanding Turkey’s Air and Missile Defense Deals
Turkey to Establish S-400 Missile Defense Regiment
Command
Egypt-Russia Strategic Cooperation Goes Nuclear
ISIS Goes Underground… in the Desert
The ISIS Economy: Will Losing Territory Cripple Islamic
State?

AFRICA
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Somalia: Anger at AMISOM following al-Shabaab Attacks
ISIS Grows in the Sahel
Cameroon: Angry Anglophones, Government Forces, and a
Deteriorating Situation
Counterinsurgency in the Sahel
Hiding Terrorist Funding Flows with Mobile Money
Systems
Somaliland: Peaceful Elections in an Unrecognized Country
Senegal Stops Terrorist Attacks

LATIN AMERICA
30
31
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

Big Colombian Election Coming
Venezuelan Rebel Killed
ELN Wants What the FARC Has
The Dark Web Plagues Latin America and the Caribbean
ISIS Recruitment Represents Growing Trend in Trinidad and
Tobago
Bitcoin as a Response to Hyperinflation in Venezuela?
Why Panga Vessels Continue to Thrive in the Drug
Trafficking World
Colombian Cartels and the Importance of Cocaine
Coordinators
Cuba Responds to Allegations of “Sonic Strike” at US
Embassy Using Online Forum

ASIA-PACIFIC
38
39
40
41
42

China’s Military Base in Djibouti: Features and Motivations
The Chinese Navy’s Top Five Accomplishments in 2017
China’s Strategic Advantage in Selling Cheap Submarines
Why is China the Champion, and not India?
China’s “Physicals for All” Program in Xinjiang

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
43
44
45
46

“Borderization” of Occupied Georgian Territory
A Review of Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces in 2017
Afghanistan’s Cooperation with the SCO
Legitimizing Aina Gamzatova

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
47
48
50
51
53
55
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

Russian General Staff’s Military Thought on “Color Revolutions”
and the Changing Nature of War
Multiple Drones Attack Russian Airbase in Syria
Russia to Focus on Munitions, Instead of Platform
Development
Heavy MLRS Being Added to Russian Division and Brigades
Russian Ground Forces Divisions Upgrading Air Defense
Capabilities
New Naval System Will Be Capable of Launching Air, Shipping,
and Ground Attack Missiles
Russia Increasing Military Capabilities in the Far East
Russian Anti-Satellite Weapons Systems
Russia’s New ‘Dragonfly’ UAV
Altering Lunar History
Shoygu’s Fifth Year Report Card
Electronic Tokens to Track Soldiers
Spetsnaz Minelaying Detachments
Thinning the Ranks
Commercial ATV Headed to Arctic Forces
Russian UAV Regiment Stationed in the Arctic
Russia Tests New ICBM Component in Arctic
“The Cold War Will Look like Child’s Play Compared to New US
Sanctions”
Crypto-Detour around Anti-Russian Sanctions
Russian Digital Sovereignty Effort Led by FSB
Why the Russian Government Needs the Cryptoruble
Cryptoruble Rejected in Favor of a Supranational
Cryptocurrency

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 2

February | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Ludovico Carlino
Alma Keshavarz
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter
Jacob Zenn

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Zach Kelsay

Asia-Pacific

John Fei
Cindy Hurst
Spencer Shanks
Jacob Zenn

Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Matthew Stein

Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Dodge Billingsley
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Mica Hall
Kaitlyn Johnson
Boris Vainer
Tom Wilhelm

ON THE COVER:
Flag of Iran.

Source: By Various [Public domain, Public domain or Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons.

Ali Khamenei with the Revolutionary Guard Corps and Basij - Mashhad,
1999.
Source:By Khamenei.ir (http://farsi.khamenei.ir/photo-album?id=23801) [CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Iran: Revolutionary Guard Crowdsourcing Protestor
Identification
OE Watch Commentary: The protests which erupted on 28 December in
Mashhad and spread across Iran caught security forces by surprise. While
protestors used social media to rally each other and spread word of events in
other cities, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and its associated
media turned to social media to crowdsource identification of protest leaders.
In the accompanying highlighted tweet from the IRGC-affiliated Tasnim,
the news agency is asking its twitter followers to identify suspects. Other
IRGC-related websites like Gerdab.ir also engaged in similar campaigns to
identify protestors. While the Iranian government has gradually improved
its facial recognition capabilities, efforts to mobilize regime supporters to
inform on other Iranians suggests that holes still exist in Iranian security force
capabilities. It also suggests that the government seeks to create a dynamic
by which Iranians must prove themselves and their loyalty by informing on
others. Such crowdsourcing also highlights a disincentive for the Iranian
government to completely close off access to social media platforms.
The tweet’s associated hashtags—all translated from the original Persian—
give insight into how the regime seeks both to rally Iranian nationalism to
the “#Flag_of_Iran” and to spin the protests as an external plot. They also
demonstrate how the IRGC uses the narrative of chaos in Syria to justify
strict security and crack down on demands for reform or democracy. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“#Iran_is_not_Syria.”
Source: “Tasaviri Sardesteh-haye Aghteshashgeran-e
Tehran (Photos of the Agitators of the Unrest in Tehran),”
@Tasnimnews_Fa, 3 January 2018. https://twitter.com/
Tasnimnews_Fa/status/948507708684161024
Pictures of the Agitators
Pictures of the Agitators of the Unrest in Tehran. Do you
know them?
#Uprising_against_Chaos
#Flag_of _Iran
#Trump
#The_Overthrow
#National_Turmoil
#New_Sedition
#We_must_be_Alert
#Iran_is_not_Syria

The Official Seal of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC).

Source: By MrInfo2012 - This vector image was created with Inkscape. (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASeal_of_the_Army_of_the_Guardians_of_the_Islamic_Revolution.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

3

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Iran: Was America Behind Uprising?
OE Watch Commentary: Conspiracy theories run deep in Iranian society.
Iranian television shows poke fun at the Iranian penchant for conspiracy and
Encyclopedia Iranica, the leading international academic reference about Iran,
dedicates an entry to the history of conspiracy theories in Iran. Supreme Leader
Ali Khamenei’s speeches regularly reference alleged American, Israeli, Saudi or
British plots. Therefore, it is not surprising that Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei
would blame the protests which began on 28 December on foreign governments,
external enemies, and conspirators. As the first accompanying tweet from
Khamenei’s twitter feed shows, Khamenei points to “Americans and Zionists”
with the “money for these asinine governments [being] Persian Gulf [Arab state]
money.” What is surprising, however, is that other regime officials publicly denied
any external hand in the unrest. As the second passage demonstrates, Mahmoud
Sadeghi, a parliamentarian and political ally of former President Mohammad
Khatami, tweeted that there was no evidence of “external stewardship” of the
protests. Within a week, his tweet had received over 9,000 likes and over 1,000
retweets, more than double that of Khamenei’s conspiratorial tweet. Most of these
‘liking’ and ‘retweeting’ accounts appear to be originating in Iran, suggesting that
at least some elements of the Iranian public are cynical and increasingly reject the
conspiracies projected by the supreme leader and his government.
The direct contradiction of the Supreme Leader’s line (it does not matter in the
Iranian context that Sadeghi’s tweet came before Khamenei’s because Khamenei’s
word is retroactive) may also provoke a new regime crackdown on allies and
supporters of Khatami and the so-called ‘reformist’ camp. Many reformist
politicians remain in prison despite promises made five years ago by President
Hassan Rouhani to seek their release. The outbreak of unrest and the support
some reformists appear to have given to the protestors’ demands suggests that
imprisoned reformist leaders will not be freed anytime soon. There could also be
an accelerating crackdown on those like Sadeghi who so vocally sought to neuter
the position they understood Khamenei would take to delegitimize the protestors.
If enough Iranian officials internalize Khamenei’s perspective, the regime may see
the protestors’ economic demands as illegitimate. This in turn would mean that the
grievances which exploded on the streets in late December will continue to build.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei.

Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7a/Ali_
Khamenei_crop.jpg, CC BY 4.0

“There has been no stewardship by any foreign agent.”
Source: “Khamenei.ir (Farsi),” @Khamenei_fa, 9 January 2018. https://twitter.
com/Khamenei_fa/status/950669951005839360
@khamenei_ir “In these cases, a triangle has been organized for these
activities.” This map, it is about Americans and Zionists. The money for these
asinine governments is Persian Gulf [Arab state] money. Its podium is also
related to the murderous organization of the hypocrites [the Mujahedin alKhalq]. 5:05 AM - 9 Jan 2018
Source: “Mahmoud Sadeghi,” @mah_sadeghi, 7 January 2018. https://twitter.
com/mah_sadeghi/status/950092749306585088
@mah_sadeghi “According to intelligence officials, in recent unrest there has
been no stewardship by any foreign agent.” 2:52 PM - 7 Jan 2018

Mahmoud Sadeghi.

Source: By Mzzvsdgh – Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=41538301, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

4

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Iran: Lifting the Ban on Instagram was Illegal
OE Watch Commentary: The protests that erupted in Mashhad, Iran’s second
largest city, on 28 December and which quickly spread across the country caught the
Iranian government by surprise. While Iran largely restricts foreign journalists and
almost all diplomats to Tehran, videos and photos of demonstrations quickly began
circulating as Iranians uploaded cell phone camera footage. Significantly, many
showed protestors in provincial towns and cities chanting anti-regime slogans. On
31 December, Iran banned Telegram, a popular social networking application, and
the photo-sharing application Instagram.
In the excerpted article from the Mehr News Agency, a hardline news agency
affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Deputy Attorney General
Abdol Samad Khorramabadi, chair of the Committee for Identifying Criminal
Content, excoriated the Ministry of Communications for failing to block Instagram
before the unrest began. Khorramabadi has long campaigned against social media
access. In July 2017, for example, he declared that Twitter was a “platform for
terrorists” and justified banning it even though many Iranian parliamentarians, the
Supreme Leader, president, and foreign minister all maintain twitter accounts.
Khorramabadi has long been a crusader for a “national internet” whereby
the Iranian government would cut off access to all social media applications
and websites which it does not control. While it is doubtful that the Islamic
Republic has the technical capacity to create a giant, impenetrable firewall, it has
demonstrated the capacity to shut down social media access on a temporary basis.
The embarrassment social media accounts have caused the Iranian government
by exposing widespread anti-regime animus, however, will likely bolster
Khorramabadi and his political allies in their quest to roll back Internet freedom.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Instagram is, in fact, an unmanageable
spy network.”
Source: “Rafa’e Filtir Instagram Khalaf Qanun Bud
(Lifting the Ban on Instagram was Illegal),” Mehr News
Agency, 10 January 2018. https://goo.gl/JRJx8W
Abdol Samad Khorramabadi provided an answer
in a note to a question about “Why has the order
for censorship been removed despite the fact that
Instagram is actually an uncontrollable espionage
network containing millions [of pages] of criminal
content against the country’s security, Islamic morality,
and morality? Do the judicial authorities not want to
prevent these illegal activities?”
“Yes, it’s quite right,” he said, “that the Instagram
social network appears to be an informational network.
Yet, it is in fact an unmanageable spy network that
publishes millions [of pages] of criminal content
against the country’s internal and external security,
and immoral content against Islamic sanctities.
Information about millions of Iranians are stored,
analyzed, and exploited by Instagram servers located in
America. Instagram’s guidance and management are in
the hands of the Great Satan’s espionage services….”

Deputy Prosecutor General Abdol Samad Khorramabadi.

Source: Islamic Republic News Agency, http://img8.irna.ir/1395/13950617/82221138/82221138-71000023.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | February 2018

5

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Iranian Authorities Block Internet Access to Citizens
Amid Protests
OE Watch Commentary: The protests in Iran have
prompted the country’s leaders to censor news and deny
citizens access to the Internet. As protests escalated across
major Iranian cities, Iranians were denied access to popular
applications like the messaging app Telegram and social
media site Instagram. The accompanying passages from
Iranian sources discuss the Iranian government’s view on this
censorship.
Whenever there is unrest in the country, it is routine for
the government to shut down popular media outlets and
slow down the Internet to prevent domestic and international
communication. Iranian officials claim that the government
ought to control the Internet, particularly during times of
turmoil. As the first two passages from Iranian dailies Ettelaat
and Hamshari discuss, Iranian authorities believe that popular
applications may lead to greater numbers of protestors, who
may turn violent. Hamshari interviewed Iran’s Attorney
General, Mohammad Jafar Montazeri, who stated that the
government of Iran does not want to deny the people access
to the Internet, but should nonetheless be in complete control
of it because mass messages and videos can lead to violence
and destruction, citing the current protests as an example.
Montazeri explained that individuals will use applications to
send mass messages to incite violence in parts of the country
that are experiencing protests and may encourage people to
destroy property. As such, according to Montazeri, it is the
government’s responsibility to temporarily block the Internet to
prevent protests from spreading.
Information regarding censoring, blocking applications, and
shutting down the Internet in Iran has been consistent with
what has been reported in state media outlets, which includes
Jomhouri Eslami, a hardline newspaper linked directly to the
Supreme Leader, Shargh, a reformist newspaper, and Javan, a
daily newspaper affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps. Reports overall indicate an admission by the Iranian
government of blocking access to the Internet stating that
restrictions apply to times of civil unrest in the country, without
any further explanation.

“... the decision to censor news, block Telegram,
Instagram, and deny access to the Internet is only
temporary and services will be restored when protests
lighten. The government wants to ‘maintain peace’ and
social media pages are inciting violence.”
Source: “Jabe See-ya Havades Akheer-ra Bahz Mekoneem (Protests Will
Open a Black Box),” Ettelaat, 2 January 2018. https://goo.gl/ggy8E7
The government should have control over access of the Internet in the
country because when there is unrest, people will take advantage of
spreading messages of violence.
Source: “Barkhord Ghateh ba Avamele Eejadeh Naamnee (Deep Clashes
and Insecurity Rise in Society),” Hamshahri, 2 January 2018. http://
www.hamshahrionline.ir/details/394362/Iran/estate
Montazeri said: People should not engage in violence so that the
government takes away their Internet access. The government should
have 100% control over the Internet.
Source: Twitter post by Iranian daily newspaper Jamee Farda, 1 January
2018. https://twitter.com/jameefarda?lang=en
“Mohammad Javad Azara Jahromi [Minister of Information and
Communications Technology] explained that the decision to censor
news, block Telegram, Instagram, and deny access to the Internet is
only temporary and services will be restored when protests lighten.
The government wants to ‘maintain peace’ and social media pages are
inciting violence.”

Note: Telegram and Instagram are Internet-based social
networking and photo-sharing applications that protestors can
utilize to obtain uncensored information and news. Telegram is
the more important of the two applications, with its encryption
capability and use for coordinating protests in Iranian cities.
End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

Screenshot of Twitter post by Iranian daily newspaper Jamee Farda, 1 January 2018.
Source: https://twitter.com/jameefarda/status/947797043128434688.

OE Watch | February 2018

6

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Turkish Perspectives on Iran
OE Watch Commentary: The recent events in Iran have
sparked a debate in neighboring Turkey, where many have
compared them to Turkey’s Gezi Park protests of spring
2013. The accompanying passages from Turkish sources
shed light on this debate, which centers upon the question
of whether external powers are “stirring up trouble” in
Iran. While some newspapers argue that this is the case,
others caution against such conspiracy theories, saying that
the public’s demands should be heard.
As the first passage from pro-government daily
Sabah claims, the events have turned bloody due to
the intervention of “external powers” and “false news,”
and are reminiscent of the Gezi park protests in Turkey.
The second accompanying passage from Turkish progovernment Yeni Safak news source goes even farther and
points to the US and Israel as being behind the protests.
Other similar opinions have also blamed foreign powers,
suggesting that they are trying to contain Iran’s expansionist
policies in Yemen, Iraq and Syria.
However, there have been others who have cautioned
against such conspiracy theories. The third passage
features an analysis by Taha Kılınç, who claims that it
would be incorrect to view the protests as “America is
stirring up trouble in Iran.” Kılınç notes that the people on
the streets in Iran are simply “exhausted from poverty and
being politically let down, [and] are protesting issues that
have accumulated over decades...” He also notes that Iran’s
expansionist policies in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Lebanon
have placed a financial burden on the Iranian public, which
is frustrated that the “mullah class is getting richer” while
they suffer in poverty.
The final passage by academic Mensur Akgün points
out how the instability in Iran is likely to impact Turkey
negatively. He argues that an unstable Iran will make the
Syrian crisis harder to resolve, and will increase tensions
in the Gulf. It will also make the situation in Yemen more
difficult, and possibly increase chaos in the Middle East.
The Gezi Park protests of May 2013 were sparked
following a police raid on a peaceful sit-in by about 500
environmentalists against the planned demolition of Gezi
Park in central Istanbul. Police used pepper spray, tear
gas, and water cannons to break up the demonstrators,
after which tens of thousands of protesters all over Turkey
joined together in peaceful demonstrations. Over the
course of two months, two and a half million people
engaged in peaceful demonstrations in 67 of Turkey’s
81 cities. Their frustration was fueled by concern that
their individual liberties were eroding; and concern that
freedoms of speech, media, assembly, minority rights and
the rule of law were breaking down at an alarming rate. The
Turkish government pointed to “foreign powers” and their
collaborators for instigating the protests. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“... not every protest is a ‘conspiracy.’ In fact, using the word
conspiracy for every event might be a conspiracy itself.”
Source: “Gezi provokasyonu şimdi İran’da sahnede (The Gezi provocation is
now on stage in Iran),” Sabah.com.tr, 3 January 2018. https://www.sabah.com.
tr/dunya/2018/01/03/gezi-provokasyonu-simdi-iranda-sahnede
The demonstrations in Iran which started as a protest against rising prices,
have turned into a bloody event which spread all over the country due to false
news and external powers’ intervention. The events are reminiscent of the
Gezi provocation.
Source: Tamer Korkmaz, “Iran’daki ateşi kimler yaktı? (Who lit the fire in
Iran?),” Yeni Safak, 3 January 2018. https://www.yenisafak.com/yazarlar/
tamerkorkmaz/irandaki-atesi-kimler-yakti-2041834
The chaos plan, whose scenario was written in Washington, is being
implemented in Iran. The events in Iran these days are a close relative of the
Gezi Protests that we had five years ago!
The US-Israel axis is what has cause the protest in Iran. In other words, the
CIA has taken part in the deep operation in Iran, along with the MOSSAD.
Source: Taha Kılınç, “İran’ı kim karıştırıyor? (Who is stirring up trouble in
Iran?),” Yeni Safak, 3 January 2018. https://www.yenisafak.com/yazarlar/
tahakilinc/irani-kim-karistiriyor-2041825
...Iran is once again experiencing protests. At this stage, it would not be
correct to paint the protests as “America is stirring up trouble in Iran.”
Because what we have here are people who, exhausted from poverty and
being politically let down, are protesting issues that have accumulated over
decades...
Iran is currently ruled by an administration that finances conflict/war in
at least four countries (Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and Lebanon) and organizes
the opposition in at least two countries (Bahrein, Nigeria). Of course, this
expansionist policy of a country where the “Islamic Revolution” claim has
been expeditiously turning into a Shia fanaticism puts a financial burden on
ordinary people. Adding in the factors of the mullah class, which has been
getting richer, the restriction of freedoms under the pretext of religion and the
corruptions that have been revealed; the revolt of masses, whose only share
in all this was poverty, is inevitable. We should consider this before saying
“Foreign powers are stirring up trouble in Iran.”
Interpreting the situation as “ foreign powers who wish to take advantage of
this situation anytime anything happens in a Muslim country” might cause us
to miss the bigger picture....
... not every protest is a “conspiracy.” In fact, using the word conspiracy for
every event might be a “conspiracy” itself.
Source: Mensur Akgün, “Iran’ın sorunu aslında bizim de sorunumuz (Iran’s
problem is actually also our problem),” Karar.com.tr, 3 January 2018. http://www.
karar.com/yazarlar/mensur-akgun/iranin-sorunu-aslinda-bizim-desorunumuz-5856
“If Iran becomes unstable... we as Turkey will also be impacted. If Iran is
destabilized, the solution to the Syria problem will become more difficult, and
tensions will increase in the Persian Gulf. The Yemen problem will become
unsolvable. The new Saudi leadership will target Lebanon, and maybe
Jordan.... the Middle East will face chaos... The already sensitive balances in
the region will be disrupted....”

OE Watch | February 2018

7

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
The Sino-Iranian Relationship: Stronger than Ever
OE Watch Commentary: Since the 1950s, China has
maintained deep economic, political, and social relations
with Iran. The accompanying article highlights recent
Western concern over demonstrations in Iran, and makes
the point that China will likely not back any actions that
the UN might take against the Middle Eastern country.
The article offers some specifics on business ties between
the two nations. For example, Chinese investments in Iran
include a $538 million railway deal; and a $10 billion credit
line extended to Iranian banks to finance water, energy, and
transport projects. In addition, China National Petroleum
Corporation may take over French company Total’s stake
to develop Iran’s South Pars gas field, should Total comply
with any imposed sanctions and leave the country. Iran is
clearly an important source of energy and a major hub in
China’s Belt and Road initiative. With so much already
invested between the two countries, it would go against
China’s interests to support any UN-imposed sanctions.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“China would not be affected by anything
the US decided to push at the UN. China
and Russia would also not agree to
penalties for the Iranian government…”

“…unrest (in Iran) was unlikely to deter the country’s
biggest foreign investor, China..”
Source: “Why China Could Double Down on its Support for Iran Despite US Calls
for Action Over Freedom Protests,” South China Morning Post, 4 January 2018.
http://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2126729/why-chinacould-double-down-its-support-iran-despite-us#comments
…unrest (in Iran) was unlikely to deter the country’s biggest foreign investor,
China, and could see it moving even closer to Iran…
Iran is a key player in China’s “Belt and Road Initiative”, a massive plan to link
China to Africa and Europe through trade and infrastructure.
One sign of this continued investment is state-owned China Railway
Construction Corporation’s announcement on Wednesday that it had sealed a
3.5 billion yuan (US$538 million) railway deal with Iran.
… Chinese state-owned investment firm CITIC extended a US$10 billion credit
line to Iranian banks to finance water, energy and transport projects. China
Development Bank followed that with another US$15 billion loan.
China National Petroleum Corporation is also reportedly considering taking
over French company Total’s stake in a project to develop Iran’s South Pars gas
field if Total leaves Iran to comply with sanctions.
Yin Gang, a Middle East specialist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,
said China would not be affected by anything the US decided to push at the UN.
China and Russia would also not agree to penalties for the Iranian government,
he said.

A 2016 meeting between Xi Jinping and Ali Khamenei, Supreme Leader of Iran.

Source: Official website of Ali Khamenei, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/China%E2%80%93Iran_relations#/media/File:Ali_Khamenei_receives_Xi_Jinping_in_his_house_(3).jpg, CC BY 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

8

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
China Limits Internet Exposure to Iran Protests
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 January, tuidang.org, an antigovernment Chinese-language website banned in China, posted the
excerpted article about Chinese media coverage of the protests in Iran.
According to the article, the Chinese government has been careful to
cover only official news and narratives about the protests. Nevertheless,
many Internet users in China have praised the protesters.
The news reports that do get disseminated on the protests reflect
the Iranian government’s position. However, discussion of the Iranian
revolution of 1979 is not mentioned in Chinese media at all. According to
the article, the coverage of the protests in Iran was part of a broader policy
of China to control the ideologies that surface on the Internet and track,
shut down, and forbid content that relates to revolutions. The article also
points out that protests much closer to mainland China, such as in Hong
Kong, have been censored from media reports in China.
Tuidang.org’s own view is that the protests were small-scale at the start
and were caused by discontent over the economy and corruption in Iran.
However, as the protests spread to the cities they transformed into antigovernment protests which demanded that President Rouhani step down.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “伊朗反政府示威 中共禁报导? (Were the Iranian
Anti-Government Protests Censored by the Chinese Communist
Party?),” tuidang.org, 2 January 2018. https://goo.gl/ohYQeA
The Iranian people are currently carrying out large-scale
anti-government demonstrations. It is reported that at least 12
people have been killed and hundreds have been arrested so
far. Many Chinese netizens “praise” Iranian protesters, but the
Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) official media only reports
the Iranian government’s position and deliberately conceals the
truth about the Iranian public protests. On January 1, a special
order circulated by the Central Propaganda Department that was
also circulated on the mainland networks. An urgent directive
ordered a plan for controlling the ideologies on the Internet and
paying close attention to and tracking mentions of the Iranian
revolutionaries, and if necessary, taking coercive measures such
as shutting down networks. “

“Many Chinese netizens praise Iranian protesters but the Chinese Communist Party’s official media only
reports the Iranian government’s position.”

Indonesian Perspectives on the Iran Protests
OE Watch Commentary: On 3 January, Indonesia’s detik.com posted
the excerpted article which discusses how Indonesians in Iran view the
protests. From the perspective of the approximately 370 Indonesian
students in Iran and the Indonesian ambassador to Iran, the protests
were neither as potentially destabilizing as some media in the West had
considered, nor did they signal an end to the government.
According to the Indonesian ambassador in Iran, many of the protests
began with a small crowd and then moved to parks or universities where
they grew. Police then typically used water cannons to drive away the
protesters. The Indonesian ambassador also said that there was little
discussion about who was behind the protests within diplomatic circles,
and no rumors of Western backing for them, as Iran alleged.
In addition, the ambassador said the protests had not halted trading
and academic activities for Indonesians in the country, with the exception
of areas directly surrounding the protests. Nonetheless, the Indonesian
ambassador urged its citizens in the country to avoid crowded areas as a
security precaution. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Di Balik Gelombang Protes Iran: Ketidakpuasan pada
Pemerintahan Mullah (Behind Protests in Iran: Dissatisfaction for
the Government of Mullahs),” detik.com, 3 January 2018. https://
news.detik.com/bbc/3796510/di-balik-gelombang-protes-iranketidakpuasan-pada-pemerintahan-mullah
Ambassador Octavino Alimudin said, “The protests may begin
with a crowd, then move on to the park or to the front of the
university. “The security situation in Iran is generally reported
to be better, although the security forces appear to be on guard
at key points. Asep Nasrullah, an Indonesian student at Gorgan,
for example, about 400 km from Tehran, said, “I went to the
market and saw many policemen securing the city points. Two
days ago there was a water cannon to drive them out.” According
to Octavino Alimudin, diplomats share information, especially
regarding security conditions, and we have not yet focused on
finding out who is behind this all. “So far the demonstration have
not forced daily activities to stop, including trade, except the
shops around the demonstration sites.”

“Diplomats share information, especially regarding security conditions, and we have not yet focused on
finding out who is behind this all.”

OE Watch | February 2018

9

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
A Malaysian Perspective on US-Iran Relations
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpt from the Malaysian
website newstraitstimesonline.com discusses a Malaysian perspective on USIran relations. The author expresses concern over a potential US initiative to
create regime change in Iran, which he claims would destabilize the Middle
East.
The article notes that the recent Iranian protests were spontaneous and
not manipulated by an external power, while the 2009 protests were due to
fraudulent elections. The author faults Iran for not creating better economic
conditions for the Iranian people following a decrease in economic sanctions
from the nuclear deal.
The author considers Iran a net positive in the region, claiming that
Iran’s coordination with Russia helped roll back the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS). He claims that it was Saudi Arabia’s ideology that led to
the rise of ISIS, not Iran’s. The author also suggests that even though the
Iranian people may begrudge their own government, they would resent
any attempt to interfere in their country’s internal affairs. Furthermore, the
author suggests that the US has a poor record in nation-building and there
is no reason to think there would be any improvement if there was a regime
change in Iran.
The author recommends that the US develop people-to-people ties with
Iran and focus its efforts on winning Iranian hearts and minds instead of
on issues related to the government. According to the author, reshaping
Iran depends on empowering the people, including financially, thus
suggesting that greater economic engagement would be key to improved
relations between the US and Iranian citizens. He claims that “an approach
akin to the Marshall Plan that won over Japan post-World War II through
broad reconstruction programs will yield far better results than habitually
threatening Iran’s sovereignty.” End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“An approach akin to the Marshall Plan that

won over Japan post-World War II through
broad reconstruction programs will yield far
better results than habitually threatening Iran’s
sovereignty.”
Source: “Invading Iran will further Inflame the Middle East,”
Newstraitstimesonline.com, 9 January 2018. https://www.nst.
com.my/opinion/columnists/2018/01/323192/invading-iranwill-further-inflame-middle-east
Whereas ordinary Iranians in 2009 were galvanized by a
stolen election and led by intellectuals, these protests are
spontaneous, rudderless and consequently more dangerous. A
US-led military intervention to topple the Ayatollahs, however,
is a terrible idea and will permanently destabilize the Middle
East. Nevertheless, contrary to US anxieties, it is worth
examining why Iran is a net positive for the Middle East. The
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corp (IRGC) and its affiliated
Shia militias, in cooperation with the Russian army, have
been instrumental in breaking the back of global terrorists the
Islamic State (IS). ...the reason IS had so effortlessly blitzed the
Middle East in the first place was largely thanks to the web of
radical thought spun across the region by Saudi Arabia.
When Trump begins... a foreign policy that does not fixate on
sharpening contradictions, he will realize the key to reshaping
Iran is by empowering its people and not further emptying their
wallets.

Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif meeting Malaysian Foreign Minister Anifah Aman, May 2016.
Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AFM_Javad_Zarif_meets_Malaysian_FM_Anifah_Aman_08.jpg, CC BY 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

10

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
India’s Interest in Stability in Iran
OE Watch Commentary: The governments in South
Asia have been closely watching the civil unrest in Iran
as it has unfolded. As the excerpted articles demonstrate,
India has a particular interest in the outcome. The first
article comes from The Wire, an independent English
news website in India, and offers some analysis of the
situation from an Indian perspective. It notes that the
unrest is “nowhere as big as what occurred during the
Green Movement” and that “what is going on presently
is not a revolutionary process, especially because it is
unorganized and leaderless.” The author believes that
“it is highly doubtful that the current Iranian unrest will
somehow blossom into a flame that burns away Iran’s
theocratic regime,” but that “once again, as in 2009, the
Iranian regime finds itself thrown into an unprecedented
crisis of legitimacy.”
While The Wire article does not necessarily advocate
for any particular outcome of the situation in Iran, the
Chabahar Port.
article from the Maharashtra Times, a Marathi language Source: Alireza numberone via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3A%D8%A8%D9%86%D8%AF%D8%B1-%DA%86%D8%A7%D8%A8%D9%87%
D8%A7%D8%B1.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.
newspaper with a large readership in Mumbai, discusses
how India does have a vested interest in Iran. The article notes that on December 3, “the President of Iran, Hassan Rouhani inaugurated Chabahar
port” and that “India has invested $500 million in the project.” India has already sent a well-publicized shipment of grain to Afghanistan through
Chabahar Port and the article notes that one of the goals of the port is to “control the ambitions of China (CPEC and Gwadar).” CPEC refers to the
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and Gwadar (Port) now serves as a waypoint in the corridor after significant Chinese investments. The author
warns that “mismanagement in [Iran’s] Chabahar port will lead to benefits for Pakistan’s Gwadar port.” As the unrest and its aftermath continues
to unfold in Iran, India will be closely watching what happens, particularly as it looks to compete with China. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“India has invested $500 million in the project, while Indian companies have invested Rs 1 trillion [$15.6
billion] in the ‘Chabahar finance center’...”

Source: Jahanbegloo, Ramin. “As Unrest Grips Iran for a Fifth Day, the Regime Is Once Again Locked in a Crisis of Legitimacy,” The Wire, 2
January 2018. https://thewire.in/209899/iran-protest-corruption-supreme-leader-mashhad/
…though the new riots in Iran are general and intense, thus far they are nowhere as big as what occurred during the Green Movement, in
which millions took part. What is going on presently is not a revolutionary process, especially because it is unorganized and leaderless. Also, in
contrast to 2009, these protests seem to be a direct challenge to the rule of the Supreme Leader Khamenei…
Most of the demonstrators who have been questioning the entire legitimacy of Iran’s supreme leader and the Islamic regime in the past week
are, unlike their parents, children of the Iranian revolution. They belong to a new generation who did not experience the revolution of 1979
and want another Iran…Having said this, one needs to also add that Islamic Iran is more divided than at any time since 1979, a divide between
the Rouhani government and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) that have the monopoly of violence in the country…But one way
or another, it is highly doubtful that the current Iranian unrest will somehow blossom into a flame that burns away Iran’s theocratic regime.
However, once again, as in 2009, the Iranian regime finds itself thrown into an unprecedented crisis of legitimacy…
Source: “चीन व पाकला शह देण्याची सागरी संधी (A Maritime Opportunity To Deal With China and Pakistan),” Maharashtra Times, 26
December 2017. https://maharashtratimes.indiatimes.com/editorial/article/iranian-president-hassan-rouhani-inaugurates-chabahar-port/
articleshow/62245802.cms
On 3 December, the President of Iran, Hassan Rouhani inaugurated Chabahar port... welcom[ing] a new era [in the] tripartite relationship of
Iran, India, and Afghanistan. India has invested $500 million in the project, while Indian companies have invested Rs 1 trillion [$15.6 billion]
in the ‘Chabahar finance center’…All three countries will be getting individual benefits through this marine transport and will also control the
ambitions of China (Sipak and Gwadar ports)…
Along with the Chabahar port formation, India needs to build a railway line of 500 km Zaheden in Iran. This route will help getting direct
entry into Afghanistan…Around 218 km railway line work of the project has completed. The port and railway line needed to start at the same
time to take the maximum financial benefit out of it. But the work delayed due to insufficient funds…
The mismanagement in Chabahar port will lead to benefits for Pakistan’s Gwadar port. This port is just 72 km away from Chabahar port.
It is true that India has planned Chabahar port to challenge Gwadar port, but the development and survival capacity of port depends on its
lucrative capacity of international trade…
OE Watch | February 2018

11

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Iran Approaches the Syria-Jordan Border
OE Watch Commentary: In the early stages of the
Syrian conflict, President Bashar al-Assad famously
quipped that Daraa Province, on the Syria-Jordan border,
was as much a Jordanian problem as it was a Syrian one.
Since November 2017, a growing number of Arabiclanguage media reports have highlighted Iran’s growing
influence in Daraa, something that inevitably affects
Jordan. As the first accompanying excerpt suggests, “Iran
does not aim to reach the Israel border with the Golan as
much it wants to reach the Jordanian border.”
A key element of Iran’s strategy for gaining a foothold
in Daraa involves establishing strong links with reliable
allies on the ground. As the second article discusses, this
effort predates the current conflict by several years and
includes as its methods “spreading Shi’ism” and “gain[ing]
loyalty in exchange for money and influence” in several
parts of Daraa Province. Most recently, according to the
article, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) has
established a new militia called the “Brigade 313” based
in the Daraa town of Izraa. The article claims this group
is present in one of the provincial capital’s neighborhoods
and that its members “have different security ID cards than
those of the regime and have vast powers.” Syrian army
fighters, according to the article, are not allowed “into the
neighborhoods they control without permission from the
unit commander.”
Iran’s strategy for gaining a foothold in this area also
includes diplomatic outreach. As the third accompanying
article notes, recent geopolitical shifts have left the
Jordanian government and people feeling “politically
isolated [with] deep differences with our traditional allies.”
In response, “pundits have called on the leadership to
react to such realities and open channels with perceived
foes, including Iran.” The article explains how several
influential Jordanian writers have recently called on the
kingdom to respond to Iranian overtures, with one of
them noting: “We have to open the door for new players,
especially those who stand with us… Iran is offering us
economic partnership and we should accept.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“...[Jordanian] pundits have called on the
leadership to react to such realities and
open channels with perceived foes, including
Iran…”

Source:
‫سيناريوهات عسكرية تنتظر الجنوب السوري‬
Dhiaa Awada. “Military Scenarios Awaiting Southern Syria,” Enab Baladi, 24
December 2017. https://www.enabbaladi.net/archives/193437
… Iran has become a prominent player in southern Syria… According to
[Military Analyst Colonel Abdullah] al-Asaad, Iran does not aim to reach the
Israel border with the Golan as much it wants to reach the Jordanian border
and is currently focused on rural western Suwaida, of which it recently gained
control. Al-Assad attributes this to the fact that Israel will not allow Iran to
reach this border, which is confirmed by recent Israeli attacks and strikes on
Iranian positions. Influential countries in southern Syria consider the arrival
of Iranian militias to the Syria-Jordan border and the border with the occupied
Golan as a “regional red line”…
Source:
‫ والتدخل اﻹيراني في درعا‬313 ‫اللواء‬
Samir al-Saadi. “Brigade 313 and Iranian Intervention in Daraa,” al-Modon, 11
November 2017. https://goo.gl/Pf5gDL
Iranian intervention in southern Syria began more than 10 years ago by
spreading Shi’ism in the towns and villages of Shaykh Maskin, Nawa, Izraa,
Qarfa and Bosra. Iran was also able to gain loyalty in exchange for money
and influence. From this period until the Syrian Revolution was launched in
2011 many [Shi’a Mosques] were built in the region… In mid-2014 Iran began
to organize its loyalists as the “Brigade 313” led by Mohammed Khodor (Abu
Kazem) and numbering 75 members, with unlimited support and powers… “The
Shi’a militiamen are based in the regime-controlled neighborhood of Dara’a alMahata and number no more than 100 members. They have different security
ID cards than those of the regime and have vast powers.” A [defected] officer
also said that their clothing and food were also different, adding “They did not
allow us into the neighborhoods they control without permission from the unit
commander.”
Source: Osama al-Sharif. “Amid shifting regional alliances, will Jordan open up
to Iran?” Al-Monitor, 2 January 2018. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2018/01/jordan-iran-alliance-jerusalem-israel.html
Still, there is a feeling of growing isolation and perhaps even marginalization
by Jordan in light of shifting alliances and new geopolitical realities in the
region. As such, pundits have called on the leadership to react to such realities
and open channels with perceived foes, including Iran…
Amid such solemn developments, calls for Jordan to respond by improving
ties with Tehran have been made by a number of influential pundits… Writing
in the daily Al-Ghad on December 26, political commentator Mohammad Abu
Rumman also called on the government to open up to Iran “especially now
that Tehran is the gateway to Iraq with its vast market and standing offer to
provide us with cheap oil.” But, he added, “Such a move should not mean that
we must change our alliances but to give us the chance to protect our national
interests.” Abu Rumman said, “We should be aware that we are politically
isolated and that we have deep differences with our traditional allies.” The
editor of Al-Ghad, Jumana Ghuneimat, also called on Jordan to “review its
traditional alliances at a time when Tehran is sending positive messages to
Jordan.” Writing on December 19, she said, “We have to open the door for new
players, especially those who stand with us. … Iran is offering us economic
partnership and we should accept”…

OE Watch | February 2018

12

PERSPECTIVES ON IRAN
Saudi-Iran Tensions Seen in Nigerian Crackdown on
Shia Group
Source: “El-Zakzaky: Hurting memories of a massacre

(II),” Newtelegraphonline.com, 28 December 2017. https://
newtelegraphonline.com/2017/12/el-zakzaky-hurting-memoriesmassacre-ii/

OE Watch Commentary: In December 2015, the Nigerian army
clashed with the Islamic Movement of Nigeria (IMN), Nigeria’s largest
Shia group in northern Nigeria, killing hundreds of the Shia group’s
members. On the two-year anniversary of this incident, the excerpted
article from Nigeria’s newtelegraphonline.com offered perspectives
on the reasons for the clash and subsequent killings. According to one
perspective, Nigeria’s crackdown on the group was due to the rivalry
between Saudi Arabia and Iran; and eliminating the Shia group was
intended to please Saudi Arabia. According to this perspective Nigeria
is loyal to Saudi Arabia.
The article claims that, after the incident, Nigerian president
Muhammed Buhari spoke with Iranian president Rouhani and said
he would safeguard all Muslim lives. While some in the Nigerian
government saw that call as Iranian interference in Nigeria’s internal
affairs, the article suggests otherwise. It notes that despite a court
order demanding the release of Ibrahim al-Zakzaky (the group’s leader,
who disappeared following the incident but recently resurfaced) from
a hospital where has been receiving treatment for injuries sustained
in the clashes, the Nigerian government has still not let him go free.
The article points to this as evidence that the Nigerian government is
not intending to assuage any of Iran’s concerns about the incident. As
such, the article claims that the crushing of the group’s members may be
connected to “an expression of Nigeria’s loyalty to Saudi Arabia. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

The diplomatic row between Saudi Arabia and Iran is a possible
factor fueling the IMN [Islamic Movement of Nigeria] massacre in
Nigeria. The standoff between the Sunni populated Saudi Arabia
and Shi’ite populated Iran is already impacting the country,
saying the crushing of the members by the military might not
be unconnected with an expression of Nigeria’s loyalty to Saudi
Arabia. This view may have been affirmed by the reported phone
call to Nigeria’s President Mohammadu Buhari by the Iranian
President, Hassan Rouhani who was quoted by the IRNA, just
two days after the incident, telling Buhari to ensure that “minor
disputes must not be allowed to turn into deep differences.”
However, investigations by New Telegraph revealed that the
Federal Government had seen the phone call as interference in its
local affairs. This belief may be reinforced by the government’s
decision not to obey its own court order as regards the release ElZakyzaky...”

“The standoff between the Sunni populated
Saudi Arabia and Shi’ite populated Iran is already
impacting [Nigeria].”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues

OE Watch | February 2018

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Understanding Turkey’s Air and Missile Defense Deals
OE Watch Commentary: On 29 December, Turkey and Russia
finalized a deal for Moscow to supply Ankara with S-400 surface-to-air
missiles, that the two countries had been working on for over a year. Just
as the details of that deal were becoming clear, on 5 January, Turkey also
took the first step towards a deal with the Franco-Italian group EUROSAM
to develop and produce a long-range air and missile defense system. While
this development caused some confusion about Turkey’s motivations,
the accompanying passages from Turkish sources shed light on Turkey’s
calculations for each of these deals. The passages highlight that the S-400s
will fulfill Turkey’s need for air defense, while the EUROSAM deal will
fulfill Turkey’s need for missile defense.
The first accompanying passage discusses the EUROSAM deal,
which “aims to defend against threats from stealth aircraft, drones and
missiles...” The passage also quotes a EUROSAM statement which says,
“The joint development activity is expected to support Turkey’s indigenous
air and missile development program in addition to opening up prospects
for exports and longer-term co-operation of Turkey, Italy and France.”
This is crucial, because the S-400 deal with Russia would not be able to
satisfy this need. The second and third accompanying passages highlight
the assessments of two Turkish experts on weapons systems and military
strategy who have analyzed the technical and political/strategic aspects of
the S-400 purchase. The second passage, from a report by Can Kasapoğlu,
defense analyst at the Center for Economic and Foreign Policy Research,
highlights his core military assessment of the S-400 deal, which is that
“Ankara’s immediate aim is to procure the system primarily for air defense
missions as a surface-to-air missile (SAM) asset, rather than performing
ballistic missile defense (BMD) functions. This priority largely stems
from the Turkish Air Force’s currently low pilot-to-cockpit ratio (0.8:1 by
open-source 2016 estimates)... Turkey will first and foremost operate the
S-400s as a stopgap measure to augment its air superiority calculus over
geo-strategically crucial areas.”
In the third accompanying passage, Sıtkı Egeli, one of Turkey’s foremost
experts on weapons, defense and strategy, notes that “a modern air defense
concept is based on many receptive, weapons and communications
systems working in an integrated way that close the gaps in each other’s
vulnerabilities and that complement each other...” The author then
continues by saying that otherwise, enemies will target the weakest point
of the defense chain to destroy the air defense architecture that way. He
notes, for example, that “the S-400, which is known to be effective in longrange and mid/high altitude settings, should be expected to be targeted
with low-altitude reconnaissance missiles or mid-range ballistic missiles
that the S-400 can’t address.”
This is where the EUROSAM deal comes in. As the final passage
discusses, “in the aftermath of 15 July... there was a reduction in the
number of F-16 pilots, creating a need to develop [Turkey’s own] air
defense. This is the reason for the S-400 purchase.” However, since the
S-400 is not compatible with NATO infrastructure, it will not be able to
protect against missile defense. For this reason, Sinan Ülgen, President of
the Center for Economic and Foreign Policy Research, calls this system
“half-blind.” The author says that this is why Turkey is buying its missile
defense system from EUROSAM, which is compatible with the NATO
infrastructure. Thus, a much more effective defense system is established.
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“We are actually buying two separate missile
defense systems. Turkey has two needs to ensure
its security. One is air defense, and the second
is missile defense. The S-400s will fulfill the
first, and the EUROSAM [deal] will fulfill the
second.”
Source: “Turkey awards missile system study to Franco-Italian
group, Turkish firms,” Hurriyet Daily News, 5 January 2018.
http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkey-awards-missilesystem-study-to-franco-italian-group-turkish-firms-125304
Turkey took a step on January 5 toward closer defense
cooperation with France and Italy with a contract for a study
into the development and production of a long-range air and
missile defense system.... Turkey awarded the 18-month contract
to the Franco-Italian Eurosam consortium and its Turkish
partners Aselsan and Roketsan, Eurosam said in statement.
... The three-country missile program ... aims to defend against
threats from stealth aircraft, drones and missiles, Eurosam said.
“The joint development activity is expected to support Turkey’s
indigenous air and missile development program in addition to
opening up prospects for exports and longer-term co-operation
of Turkey, Italy and France,” Eurosam said.
Source: Can Kasapoğlu, “Turkey’s S-400 Dilemma,” [Turkey]
Center for Economic and Foreign Policy Research (EDAM),
July 2017. http://edam.org.tr/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/
s400en.pdf
This report’s core military assessment of a possible S-400 deal
concludes that Ankara’s immediate aim is to procure the system
primarily for air defense missions as a surface-to-air missile
(SAM) asset, rather than performing ballistic missile defense
(BMD) functions. This priority largely stems from the Turkish
Air Force’s currently low pilot-to-cockpit ratio (0.8:1 by opensource 2016 estimates). Thus, ... Turkey will first and foremost
operate the S-400s as a stopgap measure to augment its air
superiority calculus over geo-strategically crucial areas.
Although it is not a combat-tested system, not only Russian
sources but also many Western military analysts evaluate
that the S-400 is a robust anti-access & area-denial (A2/AD)
asset. Therefore, if SAM configuration is planned correctly, the
system could theoretically give a boost to Turkey’s air defense
capabilities. However, it would be unrealistic to portray the
S-400 solution as a panacea for protecting the Turkish territory
and population against ballistic missiles. In the absence of a
robust network of satellites, radars, early-warning aircraft, and
sensors connected with a tactical data link, as well as without
a layered interception capacity including exo-atmospheric
coverage, the S-400s’ BMD role would be very limited.”

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Understanding Turkey’s Air and Missile
Defense Deals
Source: Sıtkı Egeli, “S-400 alımı,
hava savunması, füze savunması,
NATO: Mitler ve Gerçekler (The
S-400 purchase, air defense, missile
defense, NATO: Myths and
Realities),” Kokpit.aero, 2 August
2017. http://www.kokpit.aero/
s400-sitki-egeli
“... a modern air defense concept is
based on many receptive, weapons
and communications systems
working in an integrated way that
closes the gaps in each other’s
vulnerabilities and that complement
each other; as opposed to a single
system. Otherwise, enemies will
target the weakest point of the
defense chain and try to destroy the
air defense architecture that way.
For example, the S-400, which is
known to be effective in long-range
and mid/high altitude settings,
should be expected to be targeted
with low-altitude reconnaissance
missiles or mid-range ballistic
missiles that the S-400 can’t
address.”

Source:Verda Özer, “Füzeler Rusya’dan mı Batı’dan mı? (Are the Missiles from Russia or from the
West?),” Milliyet.com.tr, 6 January 2018. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yazarlar/verda-ozer/fuzelerrusya-dan-mi-bati-dan-mi--2585992/
Right as all the details about the S-400 missile system from Russia were revealed.... All of a sudden,
the news that President Erdogan would sign a missile agreement with joint French-Italian EUROSAM
comes out. Now people are confused: Are we buying the missile system from Russia? If so, then
where are we putting this European defense system?...
The answer is simple. We are actually buying two separate missile defense systems. Turkey has two
needs to ensure its security. One is air defense, and the second is missile defense. The S-400s will
fulfill the first, and the EUROSAM [deal] will fulfill the second.
The air defense system’s mission is to identify the planes that violate our air space and take them out
of Turkish territory or when necessary, to shoot them down. Traditionally, this was done by Turkey’s
own national air defense infrastructure. But, in the aftermath of 15 July, with the operations against
the Turkish Armed Forces, there was a reduction in the number of F-16 pilots, creating a need to
develop our air defense. This is the reason for the S-400 purchase.
....Now, since the Russian S-400 system cannot be integrated into this NATO infrastructure, it cannot
be used to protect against missile defense. For this reason, Sinan Ülgen, President of the Center
for Economic and Foreign Policy Research, says that this system is “half-blind.” And that is why
Turkey is buying its missile defense system from EUROSAM, which is compatible with the NATO
infrastructure. Thus, a much more effective defense system is established, that can use NATO’s
“signals intelligence,” which the S-400’s wouldn’t be able to access.
What is the strategic meaning of this dual defense system? Is Turkey trying to balance its alliances
with Russia and the West? Sinan Ülgen’s answer is critical: Turkey is cooperating with Russia to
alleviate the gap in its air defense in the aftermath of 15 July. So this is a short-term, pragmatic
cooperation. The alliance with the West is long-term, permanent and is continuing as it always has.
So, the two are not alternatives to each other.”

S-400 Triumf air defence system transporter erector launcher.

Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AS-400_Triumf-34.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

15

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Establish S-400 Missile Defense Regiment
Command
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
passage from Turkish daily HaberTurk discusses plans
for an “S-400 Missile Defense Regiment Command”
to be established within the Turkish Armed Forces,
to handle the S-400s that are being purchased from
Russia. According to the passage, the regiment will
consist of two battalions and four squadrons, and
will have 36 launchers, each with the capacity to fire
four missiles, for a total capacity of 144 missiles. In
addition to discussing the components of the system,
the passage also notes that the system will integrate
a “friend-enemy recognition system.” As the passage
notes, Turkey is the first country to purchase the system
from Russia, in a deal worth $2.5 billion. Delivery of
the first system is planned for the first quarter of 2020.
End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: “S-400 sistemi için ‘S-400 Füze Savunma Alay Komutanlığı’ kurulacak
(S-400 Missile Defense Regiment Command to be established for the S-400
system),” Haberturk.com.tr, 4 January 2018. http://www.haberturk.
com/s-400-sistemi-icin-s-400-fuze-savunma-alay-komutanligi-kurulacak-1781973

Command’... will consist of two battalions

Turkey will be the first NATO member to purchase S-400s from Russia. According
to the agreement, Russia will be paid $2.5 billion,... the payment will be made in
rubles. 45% of the total will be made up front. The other 55% will be credited by
Russia.... Delivery of the first system is planned for the first quarter of 2020.

“The ‘S-400 Missile Defense Regiment

and four squadrons. The Turkish Armed
Forces will deploy an S-400 battalion at
two different points across the country,
each having 72 missiles, for a total of 144
missiles.”

The two S-400 systems purchased from Russia will be organized in the Turkish
Armed Forces under a “S-400 Missile Defense Regiment Command.” The
regiment command will consist of two battalions and four squadrons. The Turkish
Armed Forces will deploy an S-400 battalion at two different points across the
country, each having 72 missiles, for a total of 144 missiles.
... Each S-400 system will include missile ramps called “launchers,” along with
long-range missiles called “Big Bird,” an engagement radar which guides missiles
called “Grave Stone,” and a command-control tool named “55K6E.” Each of the
elements that make up the system are placed on a vehicle with wheels. As such,
they can be transported to whichever region needs it during a crisis.
.... According to the current plans, ...there will be a total of 36 launchers in the
regiment. Each launcher has the capacity to fire four missiles [at once]. Thus,
there will be a capacity to fire 144 missiles at once.

The S-400 system’s control will be completely in the hands of the Turkish Armed
Forces. While it will not be integrated into the NATO system, it will also not be in
Russia’s control. The system will integrate a “ friend-enemy recognition system.”
... With the system, each squadron will be able to recognize 36 separate enemy
threats and respond.

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | February 2018

16

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt-Russia Strategic Cooperation Goes Nuclear
OE Watch Commentary: Russian-Egyptian strategic
cooperation continues to deepen, most recently with
a December 2017 agreement for Russia’s state-owned
nuclear power company Rosatom to build Egypt’s
first ever nuclear power plant in al-Dabaa, along the
Mediterranean coast. The accompanying excerpts highlight
foreign perspectives on the impact of deepening RussianEgypt strategic cooperation and the nuclear agreement in
particular.
The first article, from the Saudi daily Elaph, notes Israeli
concerns with Egypt’s nascent nuclear program, which
some in Israel fear could eventually become weaponized.
However, the article also cites two Arab experts, one
of whom downplays Israeli concerns as “not based on
reality,” while the other points to a plan by “regional and
international powers [who seek] to plunge the region into an
arms race in order to exhaust its resources.”
The second article, from the magazine of Egypt’s semiofficial daily al-Ahram, is an enthusiastic overview of the
burgeoning strategic alliance between Egypt and Russia.
The article characterizes the al-Dabaa nuclear deal as the
start of “100 new years of strategic partnership.” The article
adds that Egypt chose Rosatom from among 6 bidders
because “the Russian offer stated that al-Dabaa remained
the property of the Egyptian Arab Republic and that Egypt
had the right to collaborate with other countries in the
subsequent stages for the plant,” in addition to the fact that
“the Russian offer did not impose any political conditions
on Egypt to build the nuclear plant.” More broadly, the
article celebrates Russian support for Egypt and argues that
the countries face similar foreign and domestic challenges
“targeting their political stability and threatening their
national security.”
The third article is written by Abdel-Halim Qandil, a
prominent Egyptian intellectual who was among the most
outspoken critics of ex-president Hosni Mubarak. Qandil
praises the deepening strategic cooperation with Russia as a
way for Egypt to free itself from “the shackles of American
occupation... on [Egypt’s] political, economic and military
decision-making.” For the past four decades, he argues,
Cairo’s regional policies “were nothing but a translation
from English to Arabic of Washington’s decisions.” He
claims that the past four years have changed this and
that we are now in the “heart of the American autumn in
Egypt,” with the al-Dabaa nuclear plant project marking a
major turning point in America’s fading influence in Egypt.
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…Russia helped Egypt return with strength
to the regional and international stage and
supports its participation in all regional
initiatives while also fighting against any
attempts to marginalize Egypt’s role…”

Source:
‫البرنامج النووي املصري يثير قلق إسرائيل‬
Sabri Abdel Hafidh. “Egyptian Nuclear Program Worries Israel,” Elaph, 11
January 2018. http://elaph.com/Web/News/2018/1/1185489.html
Israel expressed concern with the possibility of Egypt expanding its nuclear
program beyond the reason for its establishment - electricity generation - and
to include nuclear weapons. According to Rafael Ofek, an Israeli nuclear
technology expert, “Israel’s intelligence agencies have had doubts, for several
years, that Egypt does not only seek to possess nuclear energy but wants
to secretly build nuclear military capabilities, especially since Cairo has
allocated enormous sums to strengthening and arming its military”… Egyptian
production, in particular the military, has progressed significantly in recent
decades. Nuclear weapons are back on the agenda for Egypt and Saudi Arabia,
after the agreement with Iran in July 2015… Military expert, Gen. Fouad
Hussein, said that Israeli concerns are not based on reality, noting that the
Egyptian nuclear program has well known goals ever since the agreement was
signed with Russia… Dr. Mohammed Yosri, an expert in nuclear engineering…
said that Egypt has fought against the spread of nuclear weapons and adopted
an initiative for the Middle East to be a nuclear weapons-free zone. However,
several regional and international powers seek to plunge the region into
an arms race in order to exhaust its resources. Egypt will not fall into this
quagmire… This is not the first time Israel has expressed concern regarding
Egypt’s nuclear program, which is to be established with Russian help.
Source:‫ عام من التحالف اإلستراتيجى بني روسيا ومصر‬100 :‫من السد العالى إلى محطة الضبعة النووية‬
“Ayman Samir. “From the High Aswan Dam to the al-Dabaa Nuclear Plant: 100
Years of Strategic Alliance between Russia and Egypt,” al-Ahram al-Arabi, 13
December 2017. http://arabi.ahram.org.eg/News/129443.aspx
The Egyptian-Russian “Achievements Summit” which brought together
Russian President Vladimir Putin and President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi launched
100 new years of strategic partnership between the two countries, following the
signing of the Dabaa Agreement which is in force for 90 years beginning 2026.
This adds to more than 250 years of strong relationships between the Egyptian
and Russian people… Russia helped Egypt return with strength to the regional
and international stage and supports its participation in all regional initiatives
while also fighting against any attempts to marginalize Egypt’s role… Russia
sees Egypt as an “Axis of Stability” in the Middle East and investing in Egypt
as “Investing in Stability” … Egypt chose the Russian offer out of 6 offers,
considering that the Russian offer stated that al-Dabaa remained the property
of the Egyptian Arab Republic and that Egypt had the right to collaborate
with other countries in the subsequent stages for the plant. It also lines up
with Egypt’s political, technical and social interests… The Russian offer did
not impose any political conditions on Egypt to build the nuclear plant… The
political relationship between the two countries has boomed since the 30 June
Revolution, resulting in visits by Russia’s foreign and defense ministers to Egypt
on 14 November 2013 and a visit by Egypt’s foreign and defense ministers to
Russia on 12-13 February 2014. The political discussions took place under
the “2+2” model, making Egypt the only Arab country with which Moscow
follows this model, which it employs with five other countries: the United
States, France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Japan… a commitment by both
countries to support one another politically at the regional and international
levels, in light of the foreign and domestic challenges faced by both countries
targeting their political stability and threatening their national security.

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

17

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Egypt-Russia Strategic Cooperation
Goes Nuclear
Source:
‫خريف أمريكا في مصر‬
Abdel-Halim Qandil. “America’s Autumn in Egypt,” al-Quds al-Arabi, 18 December 2017. http://www.alquds.co.uk/?p=846230
… the shackles of American occupation for four decades on our political, economic and military decision-making are being broken…
Relations with the United States became a heavy burden and have been lightened to the extent possible over the past four years. All that
remains of them are ghostly shadows and persistent crises… the years of flourishing Egypt-US relations were also years of Egyptian
decline… Cairo became nothing, a lost echo without a voice of its own. Its regional policies were nothing but a translation from English to
Arabic of Washington’s decisions… Today we are in the heart of the American autumn in Egypt. The launch of the al-Dabaa nuclear plant,
in collaboration with Russia, may constitute the fall of the major autumn leaf in the American tree in Egypt… It is no coincidence that the
political environment that led to the al-Dabaa project resembles in many ways what happened in Egypt in the mid-1950s, when the monopoly
of Western weapons for the Egyptian military was broken and weapons procurement was diversified, including an increased reliance on
Soviet weapons… something similar has happened over the past four years, with Egypt breaking its near-total reliance on American weapons
and the development of a comprehensive policy of diversified weapons sources and a major leap in local military production capabilities…
Egyptian interest in the Palestinian issue has increased, with “Tight Link” policies with all Palestinian factions. This bothers Israel and
angers Washington, which attempted to punish Egypt by withholding aid and limiting the weapons provided to the Egyptian military and
opening its appetite to put additional pressure on Egypt. This does not seem to have had an effect for Washington, as Egypt made its decision
and appears more committed than at any point in the past to end the American occupation on Egyptian decision-making.

AL-DABAA

Location of El Dabaa.

Source: Author using OpenStreetMap © OpenStreetMap contributors, https://www.openstreetmap.org/search?query=dabaa%20egypt#map=6/32.036/30.872&layers=T, CC BY-SA 2.0 (https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright ).

OE Watch | February 2018

18

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
ISIS Goes Underground… in the Desert
OE Watch Commentary: The desert of al-Anbar
Province, along with the adjacent areas north of the
Euphrates River and across the border with Syria,
constitute the key remaining safe haven for the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). The area’s
physical environment is challenging, partly because
the natural caves dotting the vast and sparsely
populated landscape make concealment relatively
easy for insurgents. As the first accompanying article
notes, the terrain “is difficult for tanks and military
equipment to enter, with the exception of soldiers,
who in the past have turned into easy targets for
al-Qaeda and later ISIS gunmen.” The area includes
several wadis (dry riverbeds), including Wadi Hawran
which stretches over 300 miles, and “a vast mountain
range with tens of caves and earthen cavities, in
addition to those dug by the group itself.”
Locating subterranean shelters can be painstaking,
“as they are below ground and have been carefully
camouflaged.” An Iraqi tribal leader fighting ISIS
(cited in the third accompanying excerpt) notes
how the “primitive method” of “traversing long
distances looking for [the tunnels]” is the only way
to comb the area. As the second passage notes,
even when cave and tunnel entrances are found,
their occupants may be absent, as ISIS informants
within the military and security apparatus are
believed to tip off the militants, who are then able
to slip away for the duration of the operation only
to return shortly thereafter. Either way, tunnels or
caves often remain only partially explored; for as a
source quoted in the second excerpt notes, “Security
forces do not know the end of these conduits, since in
some of the clearing operations they go in for a single
kilometer but then turn back, fearing collapse of the
tunnel or coming under attack.” The second excerpt
also recounts the case of an occupied tunnel being
destroyed by airstrikes, to which an influential tribal
leader in al-Anbar objected, as “it would have been
preferable to have sprayed something to drug them
rather than killing them, to know where these tunnels
led and who had paid for them.”
The third accompanying passage highlights the
large number of tunnels across the Syria-Iraq desert
border, including one recently found that was up to
a mile long. The article cites a colonel in the Iraqi
Border Guard Force who claims that “ISIS has a
map of tunnels dug professionally over the past
years, which we believe are as many as 100 along the
border. That is what we are now looking for and they
must be destroyed no matter what the cost.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫ الدبابات ال تصل إلى كل األماكن‬...‫معارك الصحراء العراقية‬
Mohammed Ali. “Iraqi Desert Battle… Tanks Cannot Reach Every Place,” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 25 November 2017. https://goo.gl/2D1XMY
…“Around 2,000 fighters from ISIS are believed to be in the desert following their
withdrawal from the cities that were liberated in Iraq, as well as in [the Syrian cities
of] Deir Ezzor, al-Raqqa and Albu Kamal. This is due to the desert’s expansive area,
the ease of hiding there, and its difficult topography, which provided and continues to
provide safe haven to armed groups ever since the occupation of Iraq in 2003 and up
until now”…
The difficulty of the operations stems from the presence of terrain that is hard for
tanks and military equipment to enter, with the exception of soldiers who in the
past have turned into easy targets for al-Qaeda and later ISIS gunmen. During the
occupation of Iraq, American forces lost tens of soldiers in operations launched to
control this very desert, which had become a haven for gunmen and outlaws in Iraq.
The desert has 16 wadis, most prominent among them Wadi Hawran… as well as a
vast mountain range with tens of caves and earthen cavities, in addition to those dug
by the group itself. It is hard to find them as they are below ground and have been
carefully camouflaged. The desert is also hot and dry in the summer, and extremely
cold in the winter.
Source:
‫األنبار تبحث عن مملكة داعش السر ّية تحت األرض‬
Wael Na’ima. “Anabar Seeks ISIS Secret Underground Kingdom,” al-Mada, 14
December 2017. https://goo.gl/vA1TVb
Since the liberation of the districts of Rawa and al-Waqa’in in western Anbar last
month, local officials have begun warning about the Sahara Desert and the danger
that it poses to cities. These warnings returned despite Prime Minister Haider alAbadi’s announcement early this week that the entirety of Iraq had been liberated
from ISIS. The fighters have disappeared in vast areas that contain large geological
folds and bends, which make it harder to find them. Most prominent among these
areas are the wadis (dry riverbeds) and the larges among them is Wadi Hawran,
which extends for 540 kilometers… According to Qatri al-Obaidi, the Popular
Mobilization leader in western al-Anbar, “the al-Anbar desert represents 51% of
Iraq’s territory and it cannot be controlled in one or two months… The operations
have not and will not stop. We need constant raids and clearing operations before we
can say that the wadis are clear of ISIS”… Officials in al-Anbar believe that “ISIS
spies” within security institutions notify the organization on the timing of military
operations so they can hide for a temporary period…
According to an anonymous military source in al-Anbar: “The Tribal Mobilizations
and army units were fired upon from a hidden spot in northwest Hit, resulting in
one soldier being killed. The remaining attackers fled into a tunnel at the mountain
foothills. Security forces tried to dig into the tunnel but were unable due to the rocky
nature, which precluded the option of widening it. They relied on the American
side, which confirmed the presence of 22 militants inside the tunnel. At midnight
on Tuesday, aircraft struck the tunnel with a missile, destroying it completely. We
discovered that it was 60 meters long.” Naim al-Kau’d, for his part, objected to the
killing of the gunmen, arguing instead for detaining them to know how they had hid
in tunnels for two and half years since Hit had been liberated, saying that “It would
have been preferable to have sprayed something to drug them rather than killing
them, to know where these tunnels led and who had paid for them.” The security
source in al-Anbar added that ISIS relies on natural tunnels to hide and then digs and
expands them for kilometers. He added: “Security forces do not know the end of these
conduits, since in some of the clearing operations they go in for a single kilometer but
then turn back, fearing collapse of the tunnel or coming under attack.”

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

19

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: ISIS Goes Underground… in the Desert
Source:
‫ وخشية من غدر نظام األسد‬...‫ نفق تؤخر غلق الحدود العراقية السورية‬١٠٠
Mohammed Ali, “100 Tunnels Delay Sealing the Iraq-Syria Border… and Fears of Assad Regime Perfidy,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 2 January 2018.
https://goo.gl/WhPPLn
The greatest challenge in [sealing the border] are the tunnels dug by [ISIS] between Syria and Iraq, of which there are approximately 100
according to Haqqi Muahid al-Janabi, a colonel in the border guard forces. He added that his forces had discovered 4 tunnels in the past
month, some up to 1.5 kilometers long and via which ISIS members moved to and from Iraq… “ISIS has a map of tunnels dug professionally
over the past years, which we believe are as many as 100 along the border. That is what we are now looking for and they must be destroyed
no matter what the cost”… Shaykh Fawwaz al-Awada, head of one of the tribes fighting against ISIS, noted that finding these tunnels would
be among their priorities, explaining that they would resort to primitive methods, which involve “traversing long distances looking for [the
tunnels], even if this takes two or three more months.”

“The fighters have disappeared in vast areas that contain large geological folds and bends, which make it
harder to find them.”

Bedouin, Syrian Desert (2010).

Source: By yeowatzup (Bedouin, Syrian Desert), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABedouin%2C_Syrian_Desert_(5080529920).jpg, CC BY 2.0.

AVAILABLE AT:

http://online.fliphtml5.com/tqvn/mcja/#p=32

by LUCAS WINTER, FMSO
OE Watch | February 2018

20

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The ISIS Economy: Will Losing Territory Cripple Islamic
State?
by Ludovico Carlino
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Terrorism Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 23, dated 9 December 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/economy-will-losing-territory-cripple-islamic-state/

OE Watch Commentary: Two recent offensives in Syria against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) have squeezed its so-called caliphate
into a small pocket of territory between the Syrian and the Iraqi border. More crucially, these two successful operations have almost ended the
group’s ability to generate the revenue necessary to sustain its operations. As the first accompanying passage notes, on 12 November 2017, the
SDF, a coalition of Sunni/Kurdish fighters spearheading the offensive against ISIS in eastern Syria, seized the al-Tanak oilfield in Deir al-Zour
province from the group. Just a few weeks earlier, on 21 October, the Syrian army wrested control of the al-Omar oilfield, also in Deir al-Zour
province, from ISIS. The ground operation, supported by air power, ultimately deprived the terrorist group of the most important energy asset
under its control since 2014.
Since the establishment of its self-proclaimed caliphate in 2014, ISIS had effectively reached economic self-sufficiency through the illegal
exploitation of energy, business, agricultural and commercial assets in territory under its control in Syria and Iraq. As such, it was frequently
described as the richest terrorist organization in history. Without that constant flow of cash replenishing its coffers and underpinning the attempts
at governance and the highly bureaucratic structure it set up, its caliphate (used in this article to refer to the administrative body of ISIS) would
probably never have reached the semblance of a functioning entity.
At the time, ISIS’s finances were based on four pillars. The first was the production and smuggling of energy-related products, such as oil,
natural gas and gasoline. Second, ISIS had a pervasive system of taxation on the population and on the profits of all commercial activities held
in areas under its control as well as the confiscation of commercial assets and properties. Third, ISIS conducted a range of illegal activities,
including bank robberies, drug and antique smuggling, kidnappings for ransom and the exploitation of local resources such as agriculture. Finally,
ISIS managed state-run businesses, including small enterprises such as transport companies or real estate agencies.
At the peak of ISIS territorial strength in Syria and Iraq, around late 2014, the group was exploiting more than 360 oil and gas fields in the
two countries, including those in the oil-rich Deir al-Zour province, home to two-thirds of Syria’s energy assets. Meanwhile, about nine million
people were living in the caliphate and were compelled to pay taxes and fines to the group or face brutal punishments. Major population centers —
including Mosul, Ramadi and Tal Afar in Iraq, and Raqqa, Deir al-Zour and Mayadin in Syria — provided the group with crowded markets from
which a share of the profits ended up in its own treasury. This strict control over populace and territory, coupled with the lawlessness in Syria and
western Iraq, ultimately enabled ISIS to create a parallel economy to sustain its territorial gains and fund its war machine.
However, providing basic services to the local population, running militant training camps and supporting thousands of fighters and their
families who had migrated from different parts for the world to pursue their dream of living in a state “truly governed by Islamic law” all required
regular funds. As this system was largely dependent on the exploitation of territory, ISIS’ ability to generate money has always been strictly
correlated to its level of territorial control.
By about mid-2015, for instance, when its caliphate still encompassed large swaths of territory in both Syria and Iraq, ISIS’ overall monthly
revenue was estimated at around $80 million. Approximately 50% of this came from taxation and confiscation, while some 43% came from oil
revenue. In early 2016, as its territorial control started to decline rapidly, the group’s monthly revenues dropped by about 30 percent— as the
population living within the caliphate declined to around six million people, leaving it with fewer people and businesses to tax and less property
and land to confiscate. Meanwhile, oil production also went down from 33,000 barrels to 21,000 barrels per day. This was the result of energy
assets being retaken from ISIS’ control, especially in Iraq, and the increased military efforts of the US-led coalition to degrade the group’s ability
to produce energy-related products. Almost all of the main oilfields operated by the group were targeted by airstrikes, resulting in reports of
extensive structural damage and the slowing of oil production.
By June 2017, three years after ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi declared the caliphate, the group had lost more than 60 percent of its territory
and 80 percent of its revenues. There was a steady decline in the group’s financial streams: oil production and smuggling, taxation, confiscation
and other illicit activities. As the second accompanying passage notes, average monthly oil revenue went down by 80%, and income from taxation
and confiscation has fallen by 79 percent. Territorial losses have played a key role in contributing to this loss of revenue. In particular, the group
has been hurt by the recapturing of heavily populated Iraqi cities, such as Mosul, and oil-rich areas in the Syrian provinces of Raqqa and Homs.
As the group’s strategic priority will now be waging a guerrilla style insurgency in both Syria and Iraq, the group will likely channel the money
it has stockpiled over the years to fund its future campaigns. This is a considerable amount, and will be sufficient for ISIS to remain relevant in the
years to come, even without territory under its control to exploit. End OE Watch Commentary (Carlino)

“The sharp decline in territory has also damaged IS’s ability to collect revenue from oil production and
smuggling, taxation, confiscation, and other similar activities.”
(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

21

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: The ISIS Economy: Will Losing Territory
Cripple Islamic State?
Source:
‫عاصفة الجزيرة تحرر حقل التنك النفطي وقرية البصيرة‬
(Al-Jazeera Storm liberates the al-Tanak oilfield and
the town of al-Busayrah), Hawarnews, 12 November
2017. https://goo.gl/9Ubivs
Al-Jazeera storm [the name of the SDF operation]
today liberated the Al-Tanak oil field and the village of
Al-Basira in the countryside of Deir Al-Zour from the
hands of mercenaries.”

Source: “IS has lost 60% of territory, 80% of revenue: analysts,” Al Monitor, 29
June 2017. http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/afp/2017/06/syria-conflict-iraq-is.
html#ixzz54Nq6Lt4H
“The sharp decline in territory has also damaged IS’s ability to collect revenue
from oil production and smuggling, taxation, confiscation, and other similar
activities.
IHS Markit said IS’s average monthly revenue has plummeted by 80 percent,
from $81 million in the second quarter of 2015 to just $16 million in the second
quarter of 2017.”

Flags of the Syrian Democratic Forces, People’s Protection Units, and Women’s Protection Units at the center of the city of Raqqa after its complete capture by the SDF.
Source: By Voice of America Kurdish via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASDF%2C_YPG%2C_and_YPJ_flags_in_Raqqa_centre.png, Public Domain.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377

OE Watch | February 2018

22

AFRICA
Somalia: Anger at AMISOM following al-Shabaab Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: On 14 October 2017, a truck bomb
exploded in the center of Mogadishu, claiming the lives of over
500 people. This shattered any thoughts that the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) had finally secured the city, or at
least made it safe enough that no major attacks by al-Shabaab could
occur. Al-Shabaab never claimed responsibility, but as noted in
the accompanying article, the attack featured the group’s signature
traits. In the aftermath of the destruction, much of the people’s
anger is directed at the very organization tasked with protecting
them: AMISOM.
According to the article, AMISOM has secured the major
towns – though the 14 October explosion calls that into question
– but has failed to dominate large swaths of territory outside
Mogadishu and the regional/state capitals. One expert quoted in
the article relays that AMISOM is ill-equipped to take the fight
into rural areas or to embark on a counterinsurgency campaign.
Furthermore, as the accompanying article demonstrates,
AMISOM is sometimes thought of as part of the problem, accused
of selling weapons to the very terrorist organization it is supposed
to be combating. Still, despite its numerous flaws, it is thought
that the planned and ongoing withdrawal of AMISOM forces will
only make matters worse for the country as the Somali armed
forces are not considered capable enough to replace them.
As the accompanying article details, there are numerous other
problems hindering Somalia’s fight against al-Shabaab. These
include a lack of Somali forensic labs and the requisite skills
within the Somali security apparatus to conduct investigations
on attacks involving explosives. Without such equipment
and capabilities the Somalis are often dependent on foreign
governments for significant investigative assistance when a truck
bomb goes off in Mogadishu or a suicide vest at a checkpoint.
This has led to claims that the findings from such incidents are not
always readily shared with the Somalis.
There are ongoing training efforts directed at the Somali
forces, if not in forensic investigations at least in basic soldiering.
However with that training occurring in Uganda, Sudan, and
Djibouti, as well as in Somalia itself by several foreign militaries,
there is concern that a lack of uniformity and/or cohesion could
occur. Such fractures within the Somali military might become
particularly apparent when AMISOM withdraws.
The numerous problems Somalia faces in its fight against
al-Shabaab, brought to the forefront by the 14 October truck
bombing, are forcing many to reassess the best way to defeat the
terrorist organization. This includes the idea of possibly further
loosening the arms embargo that adversely impacts government
forces. Meanwhile many in the country will continue to feel under
siege as al-Shabaab continues to prove it is not defeated. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“With the October 14, 2017 truck bombing in
Mogadishu, the local terrorist group Al Shabaab...
served notice.. that it was still capable of striking panic
into the nation’s heart, despite its territorial loss.”

Brigadier General Kayanja Muhanga, the African Union Mission in Somalia’s Ugandan
Contingent Commander, visits the site of a VBIED attack conducted by the militant
group al- Shabaab in the Somali capital of Mogadishu.
Source: AMISOM, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2017_10_15_VBIED-3_(37714449661).jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Nurddin Farah, “Why Somalia is Al Shabaab playground,”
The East African, 30 December 2017. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/
magazine/foreign-factor-in-the-siege-of-Somalia/434746-4246234hu28v0z/index.html
And with the Somali National Army not equipped to take over from
AMISOM, and AMISOM engaged in corruption and selling weapons to
Al Shabaab, Kenya accused of exporting charcoal, Ethiopia suspected of
having its own designs, the US, Britain and the UN’s information-sharing
not forthcoming, is there any wonder why there has been no tangible
progress in the fight against the terrorists in Somalia?
Under Siad Barre, Somalia had been a secular state, quite unlike any
other Muslim nation. Now the Arabs had a free rein to impose their
language, harden the Somalis’ moderate way of worship and change the
traditional manner in which our people dressed.
With the October 14, 2017 truck bombing in Mogadishu, the local
terrorist group Al Shabaab had just served notice on everyone that it was
still capable of striking panic into the nation’s heart, despite its territorial
loss.

OE Watch | February 2018

23

AFRICA
ISIS Grows in the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: The good news is that the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has been dislodged from large
areas in Iraq and Syria; the bad news is that it is trying to
make up for that lost ground in Africa. As the accompanying
article relates, ISIS’s African territorial push has been deadly,
with the losses including four US and five Nigerien soldiers
from an October clash with the jihadists on the Mali border.
Unfortunately, Mali and Niger are not the only countries where
ISIS has a foothold, making them a dangerous threat across a
significant portion of the Sahel. Even more discouraging, as the
article continues, is that the prospects of defeating ISIS and/or
neutralizing its radical ideology are far from assured.
French and other western troops, in conjunction with local
forces, are determined to defeat the group, but there have been
very few clear victories against the terrorists. A Middle East
and Africa analyst for the French daily newspaper Le Monde
has predicted that the Western troops’ commitment to the
mission would wane over time, with a significant factor for this
decline being a loss of trust in local partners. Meanwhile, those
local partners feel marginalized, as they are instructed what to
do by their western protectors, who they feel do not understand
the local conditions such as tribal politics and how to deal
with clans. The analyst claims that “Mali is our Afghanistan,”
pointing out the two countries are following similar patterns:
“first a military triumph, then a failed reconstruction and then
a gradual spread of new insurrection, more brutal and more
politically shrewd than the previous one.”
A think-tank study has provided a series of reasons for why
jihadism has spread in the Sahel. One may think the area
would be rather difficult for such a movement to take root,
given that the people traditionally have not been known for
religious zealotry. However, the spread of Wahhabism, the strict
interpretation of Sunni Islam that originated in Saudi Arabia,
has disseminated throughout the region, and with it the violence
of jihadism.
Another major factor allowing for the rise of terrorism in
the region has been the presence of essentially ungoverned
spaces. These voids are sometimes filled with terrorist
organizations such as ISIS or al-Qaeda that provide services
and/or opportunities absent governments that do not. Further
compounding the problem is that these ungoverned spaces do
not lend themselves to creating any sense of national identity.
As the article points out, French President Macron has called
for urgent action to combat Islamic extremism in Africa.
However, while speed is required to meet the challenge of
terrorism, it will take a long time to defeat it. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“‘Mali is our Afghanistan’ ... both countries [are]
following similar patterns: first a military triumph, then
a failed reconstruction and then a gradual spread of new
insurrection, more brutal and more politically shrewd
than the previous one.”

International terrorists on their way to fight in northern Mali.
Source: Magharebia, https://goo.gl/WK11Fz, CC By 2.0

Source: “Islamic State seeks new foothold in Africa,” Deutsche Welle, 2
January 2018. http://www.dw.com/en/islamic-state-seeks-new-foothold-inafrica/a-41977922
After the terrorist organization al Qaeda, now the so-called “Islamic
State” is trying to expand its influence in Africa. Military means alone are
not enough to fight it.
It’s not yet clear whether money or military aid will be enough to stop
the expansion of jihadism in the region, or indeed to drive it back. The
challenges facing the alliance are immense.
[A] Middle East and Africa analyst for French daily newspaper Le Monde
wrote in November: “Mali is our Afghanistan.” He said both countries
were following similar patterns: first a military triumph, then a failed
reconstruction and then a gradual spread of new insurrection, more brutal
and more politically shrewd than the previous one...
All this has prompted French President Emmanuel Macron to call for
international and urgent action against Islamist extremism in Africa. But
he surely knows that speed is but one factor in the fight against terrorism.
Paradoxically, what he might need most of all to win this battle is time. A lot
of time.

OE Watch | February 2018

24

AFRICA
Cameroon: Angry Anglophones, Government Forces,
and a Deteriorating Situation
OE Watch Commentary: In October 2016, a group of Anglophone
lawyers went on strike to reject the appointment of French-educated
judges to their courts. Back then, few would have predicted that this
modest initiative would eventually lead to the present state of violent
affairs between the English-speaking minority and the Francophone
dominated government in Cameroon. Indeed, as the accompanying
article relates, this is now Cameroon’s most alarming internal conflict
since it gained independence from France in 1960, with scores of
civilians and at least sixteen army and police officers dead. Thousands
have fled to Nigeria for safety, and the country’s elite Rapid Intervention
Battalion, normally used to fight Boko Haram, has been deployed to the
country’s English-speaking regions.
The government’s initial instinct to respond to protests and grievances
with force – the first demonstrations in the latter part of 2016 were
met with security forces and mass arrests – along with later measures
such as cutting off the Internet for periods of several months have been
characterized as counterproductive. There were talks at one time, but
they ended when the government not only banned the negotiating group
representing the Anglophones, but also detained its leaders. Thus, what
had once been mainly grievances against the perceived imposition
of French in the judicial system has now escalated into demands for
more autonomy and even secession among some. In fact, on 1 October
2017 that last demand played out when the Southern Cameroonian
Ambazonia Consortium United Front declared the independence of
Ambazonia is the name given to the area in dark orange which some Anglophones
in Cameroon want to secede.
the Federal Republic of Ambazonia. The Cameroonian government
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Southern_cameroon_map.JPG, Originated CIA World Factbook, Public
Domain.
responded to the declaration with what the UN described as “excessive
Source: Amindeh Blaise Atabong, “Pushed to extremes: Cameroon’s
use of force.” Since then the separatists have struck back, launching
escalating Anglophone crisis,” African Arguments, 8 January
attacks that have resulted in several casualties.
2018. http://africanarguments.org/2018/01/08/pushed-to-extremesThese tensions between the government and the Anglophone
cameroons-anglophone-crisis-escalates/
community come at a particularly bad time for Cameroon. The
What began as more specific grievances regarding the perceived
northern part of the country is combating Boko Haram and trying to
deal with the thousands of refugees that the insurgency has created. In imposition of French in courts and schools has escalated into
demands for greater autonomy, federalization and even secession.
the east, there are refugees as well as rebels from the ongoing troubles
Meanwhile, the repression of largely peaceful protests has
in the Central African Republic. All of this is playing out against
contributed to the emergence of armed groups calling for secession.
the backdrop of the country’s economy suffering from a precipitous
Even moderate voices have been pushed to more extreme positions,
drop in commodity prices. There is yet one more factor to throw into
and Cameroon has seen attacks on security forces and growing
the mix: multiple sets of elections, including for president, this year.
threats of a violent insurrection.
These elections could help decide whether the country continues to
However, many Cameroonians are concerned that the conflict will
emphasize a military solution to the issue of Anglophone grievances
or, as the UN has been pushing, engage in talks to find a peaceful one. deepen and spread. As the government’s crackdown continues, there
are suggestions that militant elements within the secessionist groups
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
are gaining in strength, number and resolve.

“Even moderate voices have been pushed to more
extreme positions, and Cameroon has seen attacks
on security forces and growing threats of a violent
insurrection.”

In December, Brigadier General Donatien Melingui Nouma,
commander of the troops in the South West region, revealed that
some of his troops had defected to the separatists. He also claimed:
“We know that they are trained by foreigners, including some white
mercenaries whose nationality I would not mention.”

OE Watch | February 2018

25

AFRICA
Counterinsurgency in the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying article relates, several African countries
had warned against the potential consequences of a military intervention in Libya, but the
intervention proceeded anyway, successfully toppling Muammar Gaddafi in 2011. However, the
spillover from that operation bolstered Mali’s Tuareg rebellion, which in turn led to a jihadist
incursion. France launched Operation Serval in January 2013 to provide military support to
their former colony, but soon the radical Islamists spread to neighboring countries. France
then launched Operation Barkhane in August 2014 to combat the threat that was now engulfing
much of the Sahel. Other counterinsurgency forces have since joined France in the fight. The
accompanying article provides insight into who is present in this heavily militarized region.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
consists of about 13,000 troops. Its original mission in 2013 was to stabilize northern Mali
following France’s devastating attacks on the jihadists there. Unfortunately for MINUSMA the
jihadists quickly rebounded and, as the article relates, the UN peacekeeping force found itself
incapable of adequately dealing with the mobile and experienced guerrillas. Repeated revisions
of its mandate and heavy funding still have not rendered MINUSMA capable of completing its
core missions of protecting civilians and defending human rights.
The newest arrival among the international contingents is the Group of Five Sahel joint
force (FC-G5 S). While its 5,000 troops are from the African countries of Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Niger, and Mauritania, much but not all of its funding comes from outside the continent,
including France, the European Union (EU), Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. FC-G5 S is expected
to reach its full capacity in March 2018, but that date may be overly ambitious given that the
force still faces numerous challenges, including the question of long-term funding. Another
force comprised of African troops – the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) – has also
struggled with budgetary issues, degrading its combat effectiveness.
The EU and the United States are also involved in counterinsurgency operations in the Sahel.
With so many different forces, there are concerns about coordinating activities. In addition, as
the article points out, errant bombs and mistaken actions could risk driving the locals to side
with the jihadists. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: Fabien Offner, “A Dozen Shades of
Khaki: Counter-insurgency Operations in
the Sahel,” IRIN, 11 January 2018. http://
www.irinnews.org/analysis/2018/01/11/
dozen-shades-khaki-counter-insurgencyoperations-sahel
In 2011, several African states warned
about the likely consequences of an
international military intervention in Libya
aimed at toppling Muammar Gaddafi. Now,
six years after his death, security in the
Sahel region has never been worse.
“Mali’s roots were rotten, it just needed a
breeze to make it collapse,” summarized a
former Malian minister recently.
France never fully left Africa when it
ceased to be a colonial power, and it keeps
making new appearances.
“This is exactly what we never wanted to
see in West Africa: very powerful bombs
which, despite their reputed precision,
cause dozens of civilian casualties, and
provide armed, anti-Western jihadist
groups with hundreds of new candidates
for recruitment,” warned Gilles Yabi of the
Wathi think-tank.

“Now, six years after [Gaddafi’s] death, security in the Sahel region has never been worse.”

A Dutch soldier with MINUSMA, one of several military forces in the Sahel.

Source: Ministry of Defense, Netherlands, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dutch_MINUSMA_troops,_UN_mission_Mali_01.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | February 2018

26

AFRICA
Hiding Terrorist Funding Flows with Mobile
Money Systems
OE Watch Commentary: “Follow the money” has long been an aphorism to combat crime, but as communications technology has become
increasingly sophisticated, following the money has become markedly more difficult. As the accompanying article relates, the rise of mobile
money systems in Africa has enabled criminals and terrorists to readily hide their flow of illicit funds.
Regarding criminal or terrorist fund transfers, much of the money is moved in small amounts, often at less than $1,000 per transaction, so
that it does not garner unusual attention. As a result, the authorities are frequently unable to detect such transfers among a very large quantity of
legitimate mobile transactions such as remittances home from workers abroad. A transaction where terrorists send $300 using a mobile money
system is very similar to $300 sent for school fees and supplies, even if security services have the capability of reading the messages, which
they frequently do not.
Law enforcement’s job of sifting through mobile traffic to find illicit fund transfers is further complicated by the fact that terrorist
organizations often run legitimate businesses, or at least what outwardly appear to be legitimate businesses, such as small restaurants, gas
stations, and transport companies. This results in money flows for terrorist activities and business expenses being comingled, making detection
of the former difficult from the latter.
The increasing widespread use of cryptocurrencies has added yet another layer of difficulty to those trying to stem the tide of terrorism
funding. Cryptocurrencies, whose encryption is essentially unbreakable, are increasingly being used on mobile devices, meaning that law
enforcement is probably going to have to determine if illicit fund transfers are taking place through other means than just examining cell
phones and similar devices.
According to one expert cited in the article regarding Uganda, the decline of suspicious transactions in that country’s financial sector
probably reflects more of a way that terrorists are moving money, such as using virtual currencies, than an actual decline in terrorist funding.
With terrorists exploiting technologies that make fund transfers almost invisible, security agencies will need to adopt more innovative strategies
if they want to limit one of the main resources – money – fueling terrorist activities. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Huge volumes of small transactions handled by mobile money services
in the face of minimal surveillance have enabled swift movement of funds
for terrorist groups.”

Source: Bernard Busuulwa, “Uganda:
How Terror Groups Keep Cash Flows
Under the Radar, The East African,
12 December 2017. http://www.
theeastafrican.co.ke/business/How-terrorgroups-keep-cash-flows-under-the-radar/2560-4224890-f4aqvnz/index.html
Huge volumes of small transactions
handled by mobile money services in the
face of minimal surveillance have enabled
swift movement of funds for terrorist
groups.
Mobile money systems pose the biggest
challenge to Ugandan agencies fighting
illicit financial flows.
“Terrorism financing is harder to
tackle, compared with money laundering,
because it is channeled through legitimate
channels like mobile money services
and involves small amounts, estimated
at less than $1,000 per transaction,”
said a senior manager at FIA [Financial
Intelligence Authority].

Mobile money systems have been a boon to many Africans for legitimate transactions, but terrorists also use
them to make it difficult to detect fund transfers.
Source: Erik Hersman/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/whiteafrican/2620808675, CC By 2.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

27

AFRICA
Somaliland: Peaceful Elections in an Unrecognized
Country
OE Watch Commentary: No country recognizes Somaliland’s claim to sovereignty. However,
as the accompanying article notes, with yet another “presidential election” just completed (the
third in 14 years), the self-declared country is hoping its peaceful transition of power will garner
additional international respect and perhaps even the recognition it so desires.
For many this Somaliland election was particularly noteworthy. Besides a successful
voter registration effort that for the first time ever used an iris-scanner system in Africa, the
unrecognized nation also held its first ever presidential debate. This is not to say that Somaliland’s
“democracy” is perfect. Its presidential election was postponed for two years, and personal
tensions between the challengers, along with accusations of voter fraud, led to protests which
led to three deaths. Despite these setbacks, the actual overall process was largely peaceful, and
international observers declared there were no significant election day voting irregularities.
Clan loyalty, as has happened in previous elections, largely shaped the voting. Isaaq sub-clans
Habar Awal and Habar Jeclo came together to provide Muse Bihi Abdi from the Peace, Unity, and
Development Party, also known as the Kulmiye Party, with the presidency. While elections are
successful in providing a relatively smooth transition in power, they are also divisive activities
that can fuel clan anger. As the accompanying article relates, the new president must fulfill his
promises to heal the divides and tamp down clan-based politics, or the democratic process could
derail.
Somalia continues to claim Somaliland for itself, as one part of one nation. Somaliland, which
has largely avoided the anarchy and violence that have plagued Somalia for decades, continues to
press for independence. By showcasing warts and all during its successful democratic transition
of power, Somaliland is hoping to convince the world that the time has come for it to be finally be
recognized as a sovereign nation, and that it can serve as an example for other nations in the region
to improve their stability and security. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: Omar S. Mahmood,
“Somaliland’s New President Has Work
to Do,” Institute for Security Studies
(South Africa), 10 January 2018. https://
issafrica.org/iss-today/somalilands-newpresident-has-work-to-do
With the inauguration of Muse Bihi
Abdi on 13 December 2017, Somaliland’s
oft-delayed presidential election
process officially ended. The Kulmiye
party retained power, but the president
changed for the third time in 14 years
– impressive for an unrecognized
nation, all the more so considering the
neighborhood it’s in.
Divisions revealed by the highly
contested election must be managed to
avoid becoming entrenched.
Yet the vote also demonstrated the limits
of Somaliland’s current reach, and the
continued divisions that characterize the
east. Voting was ultimately cancelled in
the town of Badhan, and the electoral
process excluded the Puntland-occupied
districts of Las Qoray and Dhahar.

“The Kulmiye party retained power, but the president changed for the third time in 14 years –
impressive for an unrecognized nation, all the more so considering the neighborhood it’s in.”

The House of Elders (Upper House of Parliament) in Hargeisa, capital of Somaliland (Somalia).
Source: Vincent van Zeijst via Wikipedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somalia_(Somaliland),_Hargeisa,_House_of_Elders.JPG, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

28

AFRICA
Senegal Stops Terrorist Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 January, the excerpted Frenchlanguage article in the Malian publication kibaru.ml reported on
the ongoing terrorist trial in Dakar of Senegalese national, Maktar
Diokhané. A notable revelation in the article is that Diokhané had
received money from the Boko Haram leader, Abubakr Shekau, to send
15 Senegalese fighters to join Boko Haram. Diokhané had also met with
the aide to Mokhtar Belmokhtar (former military commander of alQaeda in the Maghreb, or “the Bin Laden of the Sahara” as the article
refers to him) in Mali in 2011. Diokhané’s plans went wrong, however,
when he was arrested in Niger on the way to receive the fighters who
had fought for Boko Haram in 2016.
According to the article, another Senegalese cell planned to
conduct a terrorist attack in Senegal on the country’s Independence
Day on 4 April 2017 or on Eid Al Kabir on 1 September 2017. The
Mali-based jihadist group, Ansar Dine, was directing the cell and
provided its members with fake Senegalese passports. The cell was
in southern Senegal awaiting orders to attack. Although the cell had
taken precautions to avoid the fate of an imam arrested in 2015 for
communicating with Boko Haram, the Senegalese security services
were, according to the report, able to use cyber surveillance to track
their communications. This is how that plot was broken up.
These two cases show that although Senegal has remained one of
the few West African countries to not have suffered a terrorist attack in
the last several decades, there are terrorists seeking to end this relative
calm. In addition, the article shows that the terrorists are attempting to
learn from past mistakes and are seeking to reach out to other groups
in Mali and as far as Nigeria. Nonetheless, thus far Senegal has proven
adept and shown its capabilities in cyber surveillance and coordinating
counterterrorist activities with other countries in the region. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“There was a cyber surveillance device capable
of undermining any attempt to carry out subversive
actions by jihadists on Senegalese soil.”
Source: “Les projets d’attentats d’Ansar Dine au Sénégal, la
rencontre de Makhtar Diokhané avec Mokhtar Belmokhtar (The
plans of Ansar Dine attacks in Senegal, the meeting of Makhtar
Diokhan with Mokhtar Belmokhtar),” kibaru.ml, 4 January 2018.
https://kibaru.ml/fr/art/bzuvd
Ansar Dine planned to attack specific targets in Senegal. The
jihadists had chosen April 4, 2017, the independence day of Senegal,
to carry out the assault. Their project failed, but they did not bury
their desire to attack Senegal. A new date was fixed, September
1 coinciding with the celebration of Eid Al Kabir. These failures
are explained by the increased surveillance of exchanges between
jihadists by the Senegalese security services. Indeed, there was a
cyber surveillance device capable of undermining any attempt to
carry out subversive actions by jihadists on Senegalese soil.
In any case, it emerges from Makhtar Diokhané’s hearings that
he had met one of the forefathers of jihad in the Sahara or the Bin
Laden of the Sahara, Mokhtar Belmokhtar in 2011. It was agreed
that Senegalese who would later join Boko Haram would do a
fifteen-day military training and integrate with al-Qaeda in the
Islamic Maghreb. He was spotted in Handak after receiving funds
from Abubakar Shekau in the amount of 6,000,000 naira (about
9 million FCFA), and he organized the return of Senegalese who
fought for Boko Haram.

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.

OE Watch | February 2018

29

LATIN AMERICA
Big Colombian Election Coming
OE Watch Commentary: The title of the accompanying source,
“Crucial Elections in Colombia,” sums up a consequential political
condition in Latin America right now. Colombians are facing
particularly important presidential elections, the first round of
which is scheduled for 27 May. If no candidate achieves an absolute
majority in the first round, a runoff of the two top vote-getters
will take place on 17 June. The winner will likely be inaugurated
on 7 August. The accompanying passage gives a good summary
of the candidate field, and provides insight into what exactly is at
stake. The central issue by far is the fate of the FARC agreement,
which many Colombians (apparently the majority, according to
the reference) find intolerable. The polarization of opinions for and
against the FARC agreement is palpable and is by far the main
sentiment at issue in these elections.
The reference is from a perspective that is anti-FARC and
dissatisfied with the power sharing agreement between the FARC
and the government. Current President Juan Manuel Santos was
apparently one of the intellectual authors of the FARC agreement,
and is an active supporter of its implementation, but he cannot
run for a third term. Organized electoral opposition to the FARC
agreement is divided as to candidates. It appears that from among
the ostensibly opposition candidates, the names to watch are
Alejandro Ordóñez, Iván Duque, and Marta Lucía Ramírez. At this
distance in time it is difficult to interpret from the accompanying
reference (or other sources, for that matter) which of these has the
greatest likelihood of becoming the opposition candidate for the
second round, much less if one of them could win outright in the
first. It seems from the reference that from among the opposition
candidates, Alejandro Ordóñez is the most clearly anti-FARC/antiagreement.
The other side of the ledger has more names to follow, but
is less varied as to the likely policy course. These candidates
would presumably protect and advance the FARC agreement
enthusiastically. They include Gustavo Petro, Sergio Fajardo, Clara
López, Humberto de la Calle and Piedad Córdoba. It is a bank of
candidates clearly identifiable as ‘leftist’ in tone and record.
The reference also expresses a reappearing fear that the
government will attempt to violate the integrity of the electoral
process. Judging from the accompanying reference, as public
decisions go, Colombia’s presidential election will be a significant
decider of the region’s overall ideological azimuth. Colombia may
continue to move toward socialism of the ‘Bolivarian’ variety, or,
depending on the choice of candidates from within the opposition
bank, move sharply away from it and back toward confrontation
with the FARC and its allies. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“The immense majority of the population… is in
disagreement with… what was signed…”

Alejandro Ordóñez, Candidate apparently most likely to dismantle FARC accords if
elected president of Colombia.

Source: By Sdrodriquezt via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alejandro_Ord%C3%B3%C3%B1ez_urosario.jpg, CC
BY SA 4.0.

Source: Darío Acevedo Carmona, “Elecciones cruciales en Colombia
(Crucial elections in Colombia),” El Espectador, Bogotá and Periódico
Debate, Bogotá, 7 January 2018. http://www.periodicodebate.com/
index.php/opinion/columnistas-nacionales/item/17693-eleccionescruciales-en-colombia/
“…The immense majority of the population, according to numerous
surveys, is in disagreement with a great part of what was signed…The
immense majority of the population, according to numerous surveys,
is in disagreement with a great part of what was signed and worried
about the cost paid that rises in the bankruptcy of institutions, the
demoralization of the armed forces, the arrogant management of the
FARC, …etc…
Those who are trying to gather the discontent about the national
disaster propose to create a grand alliance to which for now concur
the Centro Democrático [party] with its presidential candidate Iván
Duque…, sectors of conservativism and independents that support the
candidacies of Marta Lucía Ramírez y Alejandro Ordóñez….
This would be one of the large blocks into which the electoral
contest would de divided. The other group of parties, movements and
candidates unify in the idea of defending the peace accord…”

OE Watch | February 2018

30

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuelan Rebel Killed
OE Watch Commentary: On 15 January 2018, a
Bolivarian unit (NFI) surrounded and killed a small
group of armed men, including Oscar Pérez, a former
Venezuelan police pilot who had mutinied earlier last
year. He was leading what appears to have been an
armed guerrilla resistance group. During the siege, Mr.
Pérez posted videos onto the Internet which appear
to confirm that he and his band were killed in spite of
efforts to surrender. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“They are shooting at us….We said
we were going to turn ourselves in.
Venezuela, they do not want us to
surrender. They literally want to kill
us. They just said so….”

Source: Oscar Pérez, “[VIDEO] ¡UN CRIMEN DE GUERRA! Así fue perpetrado
el asesinato de Oscar Perez ([Video] A War Crime! This is how the murder of
Oscar Perez was perpetrated),” DolarToday, 16 January 2016. https://dolartoday.
com/video-un-crimen-de-guerra-asi-fue-perpetrado-el-asesinato-de-oscar-perez/
“…The immense majority of the population, according to numerous surveys, is in
disagreement with a great part of what was signed…The immense majority of the
population, according to numerous surveys, is in disagreement with a great part
of what was signed and worried about the cost paid that rises in the bankruptcy of
institutions, the demoralization of the armed forces, the arrogant management of
the FARC, …etc…
Those who are trying to gather the discontent about the national disaster propose
to create a grand alliance to which for now concur the Centro Democrático
[party] with its presidential candidate Iván Duque…, sectors of conservativism and
independents that support the candidacies of Marta Lucía Ramírez y Alejandro
Ordóñez….
This would be one of the large blocks into which the electoral contest would de
divided. The other group of parties, movements and candidates unify in the idea of
defending the peace accord…”

ELN Wants What the FARC Has
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
reference gives what appears to be a wellreasoned opinion regarding the National
Liberation Army’s (ELN) negotiating strategy
and position of advantage. As the passage
indicates, the ELN has been conducting
harmful attacks to show its power, after
having demanded a bilateral cease-fire to offfoot government forces. It looks to the FARC
agreement as its negotiating model, with its
leadership in complete sanctuary, where it can
plan moves on its own time. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…the State is at a disadvantage
in the dialogues with the ELN…”

Statements on the second round of peace talks between the Colombian government and the ELN, July 2017.
Source: Cancilleria del Ecuador Flickr Account, https://www.flickr.com/photos/dgcomsoc/34790361704/, CC 2.0.

Source: Juan David Morales Gaviria, “El Eln quiere poner en jaque al gobierno de Juan Manuel Santos (The ELN wants to put the
government of Juan Manuel Santos in check),” El Mundo, Medellín, 10 January 2018. http://www.elmundo.com/noticia/Eln-quiere-poner-enjaque-al-Gobierno-de-Juan-Manuel-Santos/365554
“The attacks perpetrated this Wednesday on the part of the Army of National Liberation (ELN) against the oil infrastructure of the country
and against members of the Armed Forces obey, according to experts consulted by El Mundo, to another move in the political chess game that
that guerrilla group conducted to show its power and expose how, at the point of ending its term, the administration of President Juan Manuel
Santos is found to be weakened….Finally, the expert (retired Colonel John Marulanda, NFI) believes that the State is at a disadvantage in the
dialogues with the ELN because the guerrilla group is managing timing of the negotiations at its whim. ‘Just as happened with the FARC, it is
going to be very difficult to negotiate while the ELN heads are in Ecuador in a safe place and well-protected. The head of the snake continues
there, safe and sound, cogitating what its next move will be in this political chess match.’”

OE Watch | February 2018

31

LATIN AMERICA
The Dark Web Plagues Latin America and the Caribbean
OE Watch Commentary: Latin America currently represents 43%
of the world’s online community, with user connectivity having surged
by 1300% over the last decade. However, as the accompanying passages
discuss, progress comes at a high price. Increased user connectivity
is also giving rise to cybercrimes and the dark web, which enables
connections between terrorist organizations and organized crime groups.
According to the Colombian Police Cyber Center report on cybercrime
and related threats in Colombia in 2016 and 2017, cybercrime costs the
world $575 billion annually (equivalent to 0.5% of the global GDP). In
Latin America and the Caribbean, cybercrime costs $92 billion annually
(16% of the cost of cybercrime worldwide).
Enhanced access to the cyber world leads to the empowerment of
organized crime groups in Latin America and the Caribbean. According
to Amado Philip de Andrés of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in Central America and the Caribbean, the region is
home to some of the world’s most dominant criminal networks dedicated
to running advanced cyber schemes. As the second accompanying
source discusses, Brazil is the regional leader for creating and
employing banking malware which entail malicious email campaigns
that trick people into clicking corrupt website links. Cyber criminals are
then able to steal login and financial data with ease. The source further
indicates that Colombia is also highly prone to cyber attacks with 198
million reported as of September 2017.
In addition, increased connectivity has led to growing links between
South American criminal networks and Islamic terrorist organizations.
Transnational money laundering has at times brought organized crime
groups into contact with such terrorist organizations. For example, as
the third passage discusses, international prosecutors alleged that a
suspected operative for the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah used
encrypted communications to coordinate money laundering activities for
Colombia’s Office of Envigado (Oficina de Envigado) crime group.
To address the rising cyber threat environment, the UNODC
recommends a four-point approach rooted in “prevention, partnerships,
protection and investigation.” The first step in this strategy is for
regional governments to raise awareness and invest in resources to
properly train cybercrime investigators. Since most countries do
not have the means to do so, some nations such as Brazil, Chile,
and Colombia are relying on their Armed Forces to help establish
mechanisms to support the generation of solid cyber defense and
security strategies. For instance, the Colombian War College
(ESDEGUE, per its Spanish acronym) – the institution responsible for
training military and civilian leaders on issues relating to defense and
security in Colombia – developed the “Cyber attack Simulation Against
Critical Infrastructure for Decision-Making” workshop. Participants
studied how attacks to critical infrastructure can occur (for example,
attacks against the power system, such as a pipeline) to learn about
decision-making under pressure during a cyber crisis. In Colombia,
capacity building is done within the defense sector at three levels:
through the Colombian Ministry of National Defense and its cyber
emergency response team; the National Police’s Cyber Center; the Joint
Cyber Command, which include the Colombian Army, Navy, and Air
Force cyber units. Colombia is so focused on fighting cybercrime that
its government introduced a bill to adhere to the Budapest Convention
on Cybercrime, which, as the final source discusses, aims to tackle
computer-related crime through cooperation among nations. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... the Islamic group Hezbollah... is said to have
ties to criminal groups in Latin America such
as the Office of Envigado of Colombia which
supposedly helps the extremist group in money
laundering endeavors.”
Source: “Mercados negros conectados: Cómo la web oscura ha
potenciado el crimen organizado en Latinoamérica (The Connected
Black Market: How the Dark Web Has Empowered LatAm
Organized Crime),” Insight Crime, 17 September 2017. https://
es.insightcrime.org/noticias/analisis/mercados-negros-conectadosweb-oscura-potenciado-crimen-organizado-latinoamerica/
Internet user connectivity in Latin America alone has surged
by 1,300 percent over the last 10 years and the region currently
represents 43 percent of the world’s online community.
Source: “Colombia ha registrado 198 millones de ataques
cibernéticos durante 2017 (Colombia Recorded 198 Million CyberAttacks in 2017),” NC Radio, 26 September 2017. http://www.
rcnradio.com/nacional/colombia-ha-registrado-198-millones-deataques-ciberneticos-durante-2017/
A private study released in Bogotá by Digiware monitored more
than 13,000 devices in the region and reported that Colombia is
impacted by an average of 542,465 cyber-attacks every day. Of
these attacks 39.56 percent target the financial sector; 15.4 target
the government and 25.5 target telecommunications.
Source: “Nexos entre Hezbolá y Oficina de Envigado (Links
Between Hezbollah and Office of Envigado),” El Espectador,
07 December 2017. https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/
elmundo/dea-revela-nexos-entre-hezbola-y-oficina-de-envigadoarticulo-614167
A report released on Monday [December 7th]... indicated that
the Islamic group Hezbollah was responsible for trafficking large
quantities of cocaine in the United States and Europe. Furthermore,
the group is said to have ties to criminal groups in Latin America
such as the Office of Envigado of Colombia which supposedly helps
the extremist group in money laundering endeavors.
Source: “Colombia quiere unirse al Convenio de Budapest contra
la ciberdelincuencia (Colombia Wants to Adhere to the Budapest
Convention on Cybercrime),” Silicon Week, 15 August 2017. http://
www.siliconweek.com/projects/public-sector/colombia-quiereunirse-al-convenio-budapest-la-ciberdelincuencia-87084
The Budapest Convention is an international agreement that aims
to tackle computer-related crime through the harmonization of
national laws, improvement of research techniques, and increasing
cooperation between States and their relationship with the private
sector, in order to prevent crimes in cyberspace.

OE Watch | February 2018

32

LATIN AMERICA
ISIS Recruitment Represents Growing Trend in
Trinidad and Tobago
OE Watch Commentary: Recruitment by the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) in Trinidad and Tobago (TTO) is a growing concern.
According to the first passage, “at least 125 Trinidadians have traveled
to the Middle East to fight for the terrorist group over the past four
years. This figure makes TTO, a country of 1.3 million people, the
largest per-capita hub of ISIS recruits in the Western Hemisphere.”

Source: “Como uma ilha caribenha virou o país com maior
concentração de membros do EI (How Dia a Caribbean Island
Became the Country with the Highest Concentration od ISIS
Members),” UOL Notícias, 12 March 2017. https://noticias.uol.
com.br/ultimas-noticias/bbc/2017/03/12/como-uma-ilha-caribenhavirou-o-pais-com-maior-concentracao-de-membros-do-ei.htm

Multiple questions come to mind when considering ISIS recruitment
as an emerging threat in TTO. Will the Caribbean, and more specifically
TTO, be ready to receive these fighters once they return home? Will
the country be able to deal with lone wolf attacks? Will neighboring
countries be targets of newly trained ISIS soldiers? Considering that a
flight from TTO to Miami is only 3.5 hours, will this pose a threat to the
United States?

According to the “Index of Global Terrorism,” published by the
Institute for Economics and Peace, an estimated 125 Trinidadians
have traveled to the Middle East to fight for ISIS over the past four
years. The figure makes Trinidad and Tobago, a country of 1.3
million people, the largest per-capita hub of ISIS recruitment in the
Western Hemisphere.

It is also important to consider why TTO is a hotbed of recruitment
and how so many individuals were able to leave and return to the
country without any issues. The answer is surprisingly simple: state
policy allows it. In other words, Trinidadians can travel and train with
ISIS fighters, and then return to the country and still enjoy the rights
and privileges as any other citizen who leaves and returns to the country
would. This policy was enacted when the Syrian conflict first began in
2011 and is still in place.
As the second passage discusses, ISIS tends to target poverty stricken
and unemployed males who have limited opportunities for success in an
oil-rich country whose economy has suffered as a result of declining oil
prices. To aid in recruitment, ISIS crafted a discourse that draws from
structural conditions that have historically ostracized young Trinidadian
Muslims, and speaks to the very same demographics that other terrorist
organizations have targeted in the past.
TTO now openly recognizes that ISIS recruitment is an issue
and authorities are taking steps to thwart this. As the third passage
discusses, they plan to fight this trend through increased surveillance
of homegrown terrorist groups and by closely monitoring any efforts
by Trinidadians to send money that would support ISIS operations. The
government has also discussed mechanisms that will help authorities
recognize conditions that predispose individuals to radicalization. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“... an estimated 125 Trinidadians have traveled
to the Middle East to fight for ISIS over the past
four years. The figure makes Trinidad and Tobago,
a country of 1.3 million people, the largest percapita hub of ISIS recruitment in the Western
Hemisphere.”

Source: “Por qué Trinidad y Tobago se convirtió en el país
occidental con más yihadistas de Estado Islámico per cápita (Why
Trinidad and Tobago Became the Western Country with More
Jihadists of Islamic State per capita),” BBC Mundo, 08 March 2017.
http://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-internacional-39149454
ISIS recruitment seems to have intensified with the falling price
of oil in the country as it negatively affected the economy and
increased poverty leaving limited economic opportunities for young
adults. Local Muslim leaders indicated that the economic crisis
prompted many young Muslim followers to join criminal gangs
during which time they were radicalized. At this point, security
officials and terrorism experts believe that as many as 125 fighters
and their relatives have traveled from Trinidad and Tobago to
Turkey and on to ISIS-controlled areas over the last four years.
Source: “Trinidad & Tobago, ¿semillero del Estado Islámico?
(Trinidad & Tobago, Hotbed of the Islamic State?),” El Espectador,
22 February 2017. https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/
el-mundo/trinidad-y-tobago-semillero-del-estado-islamicoarticulo-681339
Trinidadian state security officials have launched intensive
surveillance and monitoring of the country’s homegrown Islamist
movements, which have a history of militancy and crossover with
the country’s violent criminal gangs. Saying their efforts are
bearing fruit, Trinidad and Tobago officials have recently proposed
legislation to crack down on the flow of money to Islamic State
fighters overseas by establishing criminal penalties for those
sending money to the group. “There’s always a concern in terms
of money leaving Trinidad and Tobago that could be involved with
terrorist activities,” National Security Minister Edmund Dillon
said. “There is a minority in the Muslim community and there is a
minority in the criminal community that is hellbent on committing
these types of offenses.”

OE Watch | February 2018

33

LATIN AMERICA
Bitcoin as a Response to Hyperinflation in Venezuela?
OE Watch Commentary: Venezuela’s money is
nearly worthless, and its cash crisis is only getting
worse. In recent months, the bolivar has plunged
in value while prices of basic necessities have
skyrocketed. Furthermore, despite the fact that
Venezuelans are paying more for basic necessities like
food and medicine, shortages are consistently reported
across the country. As the first passage discusses,
Venezuela is now officially in a state of hyperinflation.
According to the second passage, the situation
is leading Venezuelans to resort to the new – and
Back of 100,000 Venezuelan Bolivar Bill.
according to some economists, extremely risky –
Source: By BCV (http://www.venelogia.com/archivos/2050/), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AReverso_de_billete_de_10_bol%C3%ADvares_fuertes_venezolanos.jpg, CC
BY-SA 4.0.
world of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, to salvage
what little value remains from their increasingly worthless bolivars. With this currency, they are paying for everything from doctor appointments
and honeymoons to motorcycles and artisanal beer. At this point, the number of Venezuelans using cryptocurrencies remains unclear, but weekly
Bitcoin trading volume through one popular website soared from about $225,000 in early 2017 to nearly $2.1 million by early December 2017.
The early Venezuelan Bitcoin adopters consisted largely of engineers and business leaders, but these days poor, and even elderly Venezuelans
are making small Bitcoin purchases. While the price of Bitcoin has been highly volatile, Venezuelans with few or no other means of converting
their bolivars into another currency believe it is a safer bet than the Venezuelan bills that are steadily depreciating. It is hard to predict what will
happen with the hyperinflation crisis in Venezuela, but for now, Bitcoin appears to be an appealing alternative to the bolivar. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“As Venezuela’s national currency loses value at a catastrophic rate, thousands have begun turning to the
world of cryptocurrency to salvage what little value remains of their increasingly worthless bolivars.”
Source: “Venezuela entra en hiperinflación por primera vez en su
historia (Venezuela Registers Hyperinflation for the First Time in
History),” El Nacional, 03 November 2017. http://www.el-nacional.
com/noticias/economia/venezuela-entra-hiperinflacion-por-primera-vezhistoria_210319

Source: “Venezolanos ven al bitcoin como salvación mas no
como inversion (Venezuelans See the Bitcoin as Salvation But
Not as Investment),” El Universal, 13 December 2017. http://
www.eluniversal.com/noticias/economia/venezolanos-venbitcoin-como-salvacion-mas-como-inversion_681015

Venezuela’s opposition-led National Assembly said on Tuesday [October
31] that the country had entered a state of hyperinflation. The Assembly
further reported that the country’s inflation rate was now at a staggering
826 percent – and could hit 1,400 percent by the end of the year.

As Venezuela’s national currency loses value at a catastrophic
rate, thousands have begun turning to the world of
cryptocurrency to salvage what little value remains of their
increasingly worthless bolivars.

Venezuelan Currency, Valencia, Casa Paez.

Source: By Andrea Mar Luna (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABilletes_de_Venezuela.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

34

LATIN AMERICA
Why Panga Vessels Continue to Thrive in the Drug
Trafficking World
OE Watch Commentary: The vessels used by Drug
Trafficking Organizations (DTO) have evolved over the last
two decades. They also vary regionally based on distance
travelled, size of the shipment transported, and ability to deceive
authorities. For these reasons, traffickers use a gamut of vessels
that range from fishing boats, yolas, pangas, go-fast vessels and
even submarines. While all of these vessels play an important
role in maritime drug trafficking, pangas appear to be the one
that traffickers consistently turn to. The accompanying passages
discuss why pangas are so popular in the drug trafficking world.
The original panga gained popularity in the 1960s at a time
when they were primarily used for fishing. However, the panga
style boat can be easily retrofitted into what is known in the drug
trafficking world as a “go-fast” boat because of its design. As
the first passage discusses, the original panga was built out of
wood, but over time, producers realized that fiberglass versions
could be mass-produced quickly and cheaply from molds rather
than crafted from wood. The fiberglass models also proved to be
incredibly durable and able to handle outboard engines.
For drug traffickers, the fiberglass feature is significant,
as it provides pangas the ability to evade radar detection.
Furthermore, as the second passage discusses, pangas tend to
be very versatile, plane easily, have good stability in both deep
and shallow water, and can be outfitted with multiple (up to five)
250-300 horsepower engines allowing them to travel up to 100
kilometers per hour in ideal open sea conditions. They are also
relatively cheap to build, making them popular along the entire
coast of Central America because fishermen as well as drug
traffickers appreciate the attributes of the vessel.
Another feature of the newer pangas is the “Delta pad”
which is a flat, slightly concave running surface that extends
along the keel. According to the third passage, this feature
is approximately two inches wide towards the bow and about
16 inches at the transom. It is beneficial to drug traffickers
as it allows them to quickly pull their panga from the ocean
into shallow waters, and onto the beach for a fast offload.
Furthermore, the pad, combined with the narrow beam,
influences the boat’s sea-keeping abilities. This means that the
panga pops onto plane almost instantly and skips on top of a
bay chop rather than cutting through it. For drug trafficking
purposes, this is key because the hollowed out interiors of these
vessels can carry up to 1,500 kilograms or more of cocaine in a
single shipment. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Pangas utilized for drug trafficking purposes are
generally outfitted with GPS equipment and satellite
communications systems. They also possess night
vision equipment and can carry 20 barrels of gas each
containing 55 gallons which means they can travel long
distances without having to re-fuel.”
Source: “The History of the Panga,” Boating Magazine, 10 August 2017.
https://www.boatingmag.com/boats/history-panga#page-10
Here’s how modern fiberglass pangas changed the world: They could be
mass-produced quickly and cheaply from molds rather than crafted from
wood, were incredibly durable and could handle an outboard engine —
like the 40 hp one that Yamaha happened to be marketing to indigenous
commercial fishermen around the world. Furthermore, pangas can run in
all kinds of conditions.
Source: “Los barcos de los narcos (Boats Used by Drug Trafficking
Organizations),” La Semana, 12 December 2016. http://www.semana.com/
nacion/recuadro/los-barcos-narcos/127063-3
Pangas utilized for drug trafficking purposes are generally outfitted with
GPS equipment and satellite communications systems. They also possess
night vision equipment and can carry 20 barrels of gas each containing
55 gallons which means they can travel long distances without having to
re-fuel. Another important feature of drug trafficking pangas is that they
are painted blue, black, or green in their interior to better camouflage
themselves in open sea. The design of these vessels is also important
as they are versatile, plane easily, have good stability in both deep and
shallow water, and can be out-fitted with multiple (anywhere from 2-5)
250-300HP engines allowing them to travel up to 100 kilometers per hour.
Source: “About Pangas,” H & H Boat Works, 10 December 2017. http://
handhboatworks.com/about-pangas/
The classic Panga style hull features a high length to beam ratio, with a
sharp bow that transitions to a shallow dead rise at the stern. In addition,
true Panga hulls will have a “delta pad” which is a flat running surface
starting at the stern that transitions to a point toward bow. These hulls are
exceptionally predictable in heavy seas, as they can be easily stay on plane
to speeds much lower than today’s deep V hulls. The delta pad and narrow
beam also allows for an easy transition to plane, without any sense of
“plowing” as experienced in heavier deep V hulls at below planing speeds.

OE Watch | February 2018

35

LATIN AMERICA
Colombian Cartels and the Importance of Cocaine
Coordinators
OE Watch Commentary: Drug cartels and guerilla
organizations in Colombia such as the National Liberation Army
(ELN) are responsible for cultivating and processing cocaine
shipments. Once this is done, how is the final product moved
from Colombia to its final destination? Colombian news source
El Tiempo recently interviewed a “cocaine coordinator,” the
intermediary that connects the cocaine with the buyer, as well
as the person who coordinates the movement of shipments from
port to port. The first accompanying passage provides highlights
from this interview, shedding light on the complex process
behind the movement of cocaine shipments.
As the passage discusses, the coordinator first works to
get the cocaine onto a cargo ship and into a container. Then
the coordinator must work with logistical operators and antinarcotics police in the country of departure. After that, the
coordinator needs to find corrupt anti-narcotics police in the
receiving country to ensure a smooth hand-off. Before moving
cocaine in a certain container, the coordinator also needs to
investigate the company responsible for carrying the shipment,
because if drugs have been seized from their shipping containers
on previous occasions, it is almost a certainty that their cargo
will be searched at each port. The passage also points out that
seizures from shipping containers are very rare because only
2-3% of all containers are searched and if a seizure does occur,
it is likely because there was a mistake or an informant provided
information to authorities.
The final passage from El Colombiano discusses why this
practice is unlikely to ever end given that anti-narcotics police in
Colombia earn approximately $460 a month, as opposed to the
potential to make up to $3,300 for simply turning a blind eye to
an outgoing shipment. Anti-narcotics police in other countries
with ports of entry such as in Central America and Africa earn
even less than their counterparts in Colombia, making them even
more vulnerable to corruption. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

Source: “La guerrilla trae la coca a Cartagena y busca socios para sacarla
(Guerilla Groups Bring Cocaine to Colombia and Seek Out Associates to
Move it out of the Country),” El Tiempo, 07 November 2017.
http://www.eltiempo.com/justicia/conflicto-y-narcotrafico/entrevista-desalud-hernadez-mora-a-un-traqueto-encargado-de-sacar-droga-de-lospuertos-147230
“I [the cocaine coordinator] work with logistical operators in customs.
These individuals tell me which containers are available to receive
shipments and where they are going. After receiving that information, I
coordinate with corrupt counter-drug authorities in both the departure and
receiving countries so I know what days they are working and to inform
them which shipping company I plan on using to move the load. With that
information, counter-narcotics authorities look at some of the following
aspects of the company: has it been operational for a significant amount
of time, does it have a history of moving illicit shipments, etc. If anything
appears to be out of order, I am notified and must find another container
and company to move the shipment”...
If a drug shipment is seized, those responsible must be found and
the owner of the shipment will demand answers. Almost every time
something is seized from a shipping container, it is because an informant
told authorities because they only search 2-3% of all containers. Other
errors could also raise red flags such as a noticeably altered seal on the
container, poor construction of secret compartments in the containers or
an inspector who has not been paid off and randomly chooses to search
that container.
Source: “Los contenedores envenenados con la cocaína colombiana
(Shipping Containers Contaminated with Colombian Cocaine Shipments),”
El Colombiano, 17 November 2017. http://www.elcolombiano.com/
colombia/los-contenedores-envenenados-con-la-cocaina-colombianaMC7703934
An anti-narcotics officer in Colombia earns $460 monthly, so when they
are offered $3,300 to turn a blind eye and not check a container, they are
usually willing to do it. If the containers leave the port successfully, there
is also the promise that more offers will come which equates to an almost
irresistible financial incentive to corrupt officials.

“An anti-narcotics officer in Colombia earns $460 monthly, so when they are offered $3,300 to turn a blind
eye and not check a container, they are usually willing to do it.”
THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | February 2018

36

LATIN AMERICA
Cuba Responds to Allegations of “Sonic Strike” at
US Embassy Using Online Forum
OE Watch Commentary: In 2014, the United States
announced plans to normalize relations with Cuba
beginning with the opening of an American embassy
in Havana. Full diplomatic relations were restored in
July 2015. However, less than a year later, in February
2016, as the first excerpt from the official Communist
Party of Cuba paper notes, Washington claimed that its
“diplomatic personnel in Havana presented symptoms
provoked by sonic attacks.” The excerpt continues that
the American ambassador and staff experienced “nausea,
headache, balance disorders, hearing loss, facial and
abdominal pain, memory disorders, and concussion” from
the alleged sonic strike on the US embassy in Havana.
In response, the Cuban government opened an online
forum calling for discussion of the scientific probability
of the attacks. As the first excerpt points out, “the online
forum discussion focused on answering three basic
questions: Can the symptoms described be a consequence
of sonic agents? Could other diseases have caused such
symptoms? Is there a probability of psychosocial causes?”
There were over 300 respondents uniformly in support of
the Cuban government’s position denying a sonic strike
on the embassy.
The second excerpt, also from the official Communist
Party of Cuba paper, points out that Cuba blames
the Cuban Right Movement in the United States for
instigating allegations of a strike to “build a new pretext
that leads to a significant setback in relations between
Cuba and the United States.” The article also suggests that
the Cuban government “has never resorted to aggressive
methods… not even during the periods of greatest
tension and bilateral confrontation.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Kelsay)

“For a sonic weapon to produce a concussion... it would
have to behave like a shock wave, which is not the case.”
Source: “Expertos señalan incongruencias en la hipótesis de los ataques
acústicos,” Granma, 16 November, 2017. http://www.granma.cu/
mundo/2017-11-16/expertos-senalan-incongruencias-en-la-hipotesis-de-losataques-acusticos-16-11-2017-00-11-14
With more than 300 interventions and a broad consensus on the inconsistencies
of the hypothesis of an acoustic attack against US diplomats in Cuba, the first
day of the online forum was closed with the participation of scientists and experts
from different scientific fields….
…According to the Washington version, its diplomatic personnel in Havana
presented symptoms provoked by “sonic attacks”. Those affected report having
felt noises within their residences and the following “symptoms”: nausea,
headache, balance disorders, hearing loss, facial and abdominal pain, memory
disorders, and concussion.
The online forum discussion focused on answering three basic questions: Can the
symptoms described be a consequence of sonic agents? Could other diseases have
caused such symptoms? Is there a probability of psycho-social causes?...
… “I can say, responsibly, that the sample of highest intensity reached 74.6
decibels (DB), which is not harmful to human health,” said the specialist, member
of the Committee of Experts.
… Permanent damages only appear when there are high doses of exposure,
above 85 decibels, for a long time, or acoustic traumas, often with impact sounds,
such as blows, explosions ...
…Regarding one of the most unlikely symptoms reported by the US side and
associated with acoustic incidents, the prominent Cuban neurologist, Dr. C.
Nelson Gómez Viera, explained that the concussion (also called minor brain
injury) is a neurological picture that arises as a result of a cranial trauma or
a process of acceleration or sudden deceleration of the skull…. “For a sonic
weapon to produce a concussion, he said, it would have to behave like a shock
wave, which is not the case.”

Source: “Fabricando el pretext: una constant en la poltica de EE.UU. hacia Cuba,” Granma, 31 October, 2017. http://www.granma.cu/
cuba/2017-10-31/fabricando-el-pretexto-una-constante-en-la-politica-de-eeuu-hacia-cuba-31-10-2017-22-10-12
All the previous historical elements help us to put in context the current situation created, where again the extreme right sectors of Cuban
origin… are trying to generate pressure on the Trump administration, to build a new pretext that leads to a significant setback in relations
between Cuba and the United States….
An excellent text by Cuban journalist Sergio Alejandro Gómez, published on the website of Cuba debate, has highlighted the seriousness and
depth of the investigation carried out by the Cuban authorities since they were informed of the facts by the representatives of the United States
government and how it has not been done so far. He has found no evidence to prove the causes and origin of the alleged health problems of
United States diplomats. But Sergio also offers a very important argument that can only be understood if we know the history of the ethical
attitude of the Cuban Revolution and its leadership. Never, nor in the worst moments of the relations between both countries, did Cuba perform
any act that could be harmful to the physical integrity of US diplomats, on the contrary,
If the government of Cuba has never resorted to aggressive methods such as those alleged against US diplomats, not even during the periods
of greatest tension and bilateral confrontation, much less would it make sense to do so after the sovereign decision of December 17, 2014, to
restore diplomatic relations to initiate a process towards the normalization of ties with the United States….

OE Watch | February 2018

37

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Military Base in Djibouti: Features and Motivations
by John Fei
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 17, dated 22 December 2017, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-overseas-military-base-djibouti-features-motivations-policy-implications/

OE Watch Commentary: In November 2017, China’s military conducted significant live-fire
military exercises in Djibouti, marking an important turning point in the People’s Liberation
Army’s (PLA) overseas activities by conducting ground-based exercises in a foreign territory
independent of a United Nations command. The exercises took place around the time of Djibouti
President Ismail Omar Guelleh’s visit to Beijing, a visit that deepened China-Djibouti ties and saw
economic and technical cooperation agreements inked between the two countries.
China’s base in Djibouti, which is the country’s first overseas military base, opened in July
2017 and represents China’s deepening diplomatic and military inroads into Africa. The base
marks an important development in the Chinese military’s ability to provide logistical support to
counterterrorism, anti-piracy, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations. As the first
accompanying passage from the Chinese Ministry of Defense suggests, China has often played
down the military significance of the base, emphasizing its support and logistics roles instead.
However, the recent live-fire drills, along with reports that the base will host up to 10,000 troops,
could indicate an enhanced military role for the base. Currently, it is unclear if the facility
represents an effort for China to enhance its support and logistics capabilities, or suggests greater
ambitions. If China opens more military bases in African and the Indian Ocean region, then the
base would mark the start of a change in Chinese naval ambitions in the Indian Ocean region.
Located on the tip of the Horn of Africa, the Djibouti base sits at a strategic point between the
Suez Canal and the Gulf of Aden. The 36-hectare (approximately 90 acre) facility will likely
host several thousand troops, and have repair facilities for ships and helicopters. There is some
evidence suggesting a large, underground storage facility around 23,000 square meters. The base
lies approximately seven miles northwest of the US base, Camp Lemonnier, and is located in the
general vicinity of the facilities leased by France and Japan in Djibouti.
To better understand the purpose and uses of the Djibouti base, it is helpful to examine three
features of China’s broader foreign policy: migration of Chinese citizens to Africa and Beijing’s
growing diplomatic engagement on the continent; a growing emphasis on maritime military
power and safeguarding citizens abroad, and; the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).
China’s base in Djibouti helps to support Chinese diplomatic efforts in Africa and provides an
outpost to assist growing numbers of Chinese citizens in Africa. Over the years, there has been
a steady increase in the number of Chinese citizens engaged in commerce and living abroad in
Africa and South Asia, and the involvement of Chinese state-owned enterprises in these regions.
This increased Chinese economic engagement in Africa has been accompanied by enhanced
diplomatic efforts—consisting of foreign aid—and over 2,000 Chinese soldiers serving as United
Nations peacekeepers in Africa. China intends the base to serve as a support and logistics facility
for peacekeepers, and also as a naval facility to support anti-piracy operations.
The Djibouti base also reflects a growing emphasis on maritime military interests. In its most
clear articulation of a shift to prioritizing maritime power, China’s 2015 Defense White Paper
noted that China must protect its maritime rights and interests. Over the years, the PLA Navy
has augmented its maritime capabilities, both in terms of rapid shipbuilding, and also operational
learning and participation in joint exercises.
The Djibouti base is an important station along the Belt and Road Initiative’s “belt,” which is
also referred to as the Maritime Silk Road. In Africa, China has invested in a railway linking
Ethiopia with Djibouti, and has plans to construct a natural gas pipeline between the two
countries as well. The Chinese government has trumpeted BRI as a peaceful endeavor that will
spread economic prosperity, but analysts outside of China view it as a way for Beijing to create
new spheres of influence at best, and as a gradual way to increase its military influence at worst.

“The base will provide effective
support to the Chinese military’s
naval escort, peacekeeping and
humanitarian rescue missions
in Africa and western Asia. It
will also be used [for] military
cooperation, military exercises,
[and] protection of overseas
Chinese...”
Source: “中国人民解放军驻吉布提保障基
地成立(People’s Liberation Army Establishes
Logistics Support Base in Djibouti),”
Ministry of Defense of China, 11 July 2017.
http://www.mod.gov.cn/shouye/2017-07/11/
content_4785240.htm
The base will provide effective support to the
Chinese military’s naval escort, peacekeeping
and humanitarian rescue missions in Africa
and western Asia. It will also be used to
better implement military cooperation,
military exercises, protection of overseas
Chinese, and emergency quick response
duties, as well as relevant to preserve the
security of international strategic lines of
communication.
Source: “我军首个海外基地年内将启用，或
部署“陆海空”合成部队 (Our Military’s First
Overseas Base Will Begin Operations Within
The Year, Deploying a Combined “Land Sea
Air”),” Unit QQ News, 7 March 2017 https://
view.inews.qq.com/a/20170307A04DFB00
The base in Djibouti is part of the Haikou,
Hainan Comprehensive Strategic Support
Base. Its primary responsibilities are
providing resupply to the Army and Navy.
The base is approximately 36 hectares, not
far from the port currently operated by a
Chinese company.

Against this backdrop, the Djibouti base will likely fulfill several needs. As the second passage notes, it will provide re-supply and other
support to facilitate the PLA Navy’s anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden, and the PLA’s peacekeeping operations in Africa. The facility
should also provide a hub for the PLA Navy’s naval diplomacy in the region, could assist in future counterterrorism operations, and help with
intelligence gathering. Additionally, it will help expedite evacuations of Chinese nationals in the region. On balance, its primary purpose in the
near term will be to support China’s economic interests along the Maritime Silk Road, and assist in military operations other than war. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fei)
OE Watch | February 2018

38

ASIA-PACIFIC
The Chinese Navy’s Top Five Accomplishments in 2017
OE Watch Commentary: China’s military is in the process of undergoing
some of its most significant reforms since the 1950s. Part of these reforms
include a shift in strategy from being ground forces-centric to expanding naval
and air capabilities. The changing focus is meant to better meet newer security
imperatives, such as enforcing maritime claims and safeguarding sea lanes.
The accompanying passages are from an article summarizing China’s five
primary naval accomplishments over the past 12 months. Topping the list is the
launching of China’s first home-grown aircraft carrier, the Type 001A, which is
expected to go into full service by the end of 2018. The second item on the list
is the Type 055 destroyer, which is reportedly the world’s second most powerful
destroyer after the US Zumwalt class destroyer. Third is the world’s largest
supply ship, followed by the commissioning of the Ezhou, a stealthy guidedmissile frigate designed to boost the navy’s capabilities in the East China Sea.
The final item is the development of the Zhenghe, a large training ship capable
of accommodating 400 sailors at a time. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“China has been keener than ever this year
to grow and show its maritime muscle.”
Source: “Home Grown Aircraft Carrier Tops List of Major
Additions to China’s Navy in 2017,” South China Morning
Post, 31 December 2017, http://www.scmp.com/news/
china/diplomacy-defence/article/2125977/home-grownaircraft-carrier-tops-list-major-additions
China has been keener than ever this year to grow and
show its maritime muscle.
If you missed them, here are the five major additions to
China’s navy over the past 12 months: Home-grown aircraft
carrier… Asia’s ‘most advanced’ destroyer… Biggest ever
supply ship… Powerful patrol vessel… Floating training
center…

China’s second aircraft carrier, the 001A, sitting in Dalian port.

Source: GG001213, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_001A_aircraft_carrier#/media/File:%E5%81%9C%E6%B3%8A%E4%BA%8E%E5%A4%A7%E8%BF%9E%E6%B8%AF%E7%9A%84001A.jpg, public domain.

OE Watch | February 2018

39

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Strategic Advantage in Selling Cheap Submarines
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese actions to sell cheap
submarines to Indian Ocean nations is alarming India. The
accompanying article describes these sales and offers excellent
insight on some of the potential ramifications of such transactions.
For example, in 2013, Bangladesh purchased two used Ming-class
diesel-powered subs, which became operational in 2017. Last year,
Thailand agreed to buy two new Yuan-class subs. In 2015, China and
Pakistan entered into an agreement for Islamabad to acquire eight
Chinese subs.
According to Japan’s Asahi Shimbun news source, China’s
maritime strategy is shifting from being focused on coastal and nearsea defense to one extending to the Pacific and Indian Oceans. In
doing so, China has been building more aircraft carriers and subs.
The article goes on to list several potential benefits for Beijing
to sell subs to Indian Ocean littoral states. First, such sales allow
Beijing to extend its influence. Second, because nations that purchase
Chinese subs must also have the appropriate repair and supply
facilities to meet their requirements, China will require access for
repairs or to acquire weapons. Third, it gives China an avenue to
acquire vital information, such as seabed mapping, which China can
use to its own advantage.
The final note in the article points out that Cuba is one of an
undisclosed number of countries that has also expressed an interest
in purchasing Chinese subs. If that is the case, based on the analysis
and conclusions given, with only about 100 miles separating Cuba’s
closest point to Florida, this is a process worth monitoring. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The more submarines China sells to regional

nations, the more data it will amass that is related
to operations and potential challenges.”
Source: “China Alarms India by Selling Cheap Subs to Indian Ocean
Nations,” Asia Times, 16 January 2018. http://www.atimes.com/
article/china-alarms-india-selling-cheap-subs-indian-ocean-nations
…China’s new focus on the Indian Ocean is part of a shift in
maritime strategy from coastal and near-sea defense to one that
extends to the Pacific and Indian oceans. The strategy puts more
emphasis on aircraft carriers and submarines — which China has
been building at an accelerated rate.
Asahi notes it allows Beijing to extend its influence in related
maritime areas… “This gives China the option of asking that its
submarines be allowed to temporarily berth there for repairs or to
acquire weapons,” Asahi said.
The more submarines China sells to regional nations, the more data
it will amass that is related to operations and potential challenges.
All this can be used to improve China’s sub technology, experts told
Asahi.
Countries purchasing Chinese subs must also rely on Chinese naval
officers and technicians for advice on operations and maintenance.
“Those personnel could also play a key role in gathering vital
information, including seabed mapping, as China strives to improve
its submarine capabilities,” Asahi said.
Egypt and Cuba are reportedly among the other countries that have
expressed an interest in buying Chinese submarines.

Yuan (Type 039A) Class Attack Submarine.

Source: By CSR Report RL33153 China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress by Ronald O’Rourke dated February 28, 2014 (United States Naval Institute News Blog), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AYuan_(Type_039A)_Class_
Attack_Submarine.JPG ,Public domain.

OE Watch | February 2018

40

ASIA-PACIFIC
Why is China the Champion, and not India?
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article from the
Chinese language news site dwnews.com discusses Chinese-Indian
competition. The author posits that China has been more successful
in managing regional security affairs than India. According to the
article, India has been more concerned about geopolitics while
China has consistently emphasized economics. For example, India
has prioritized Afghanistan because of its rivalry with Pakistan
even though it does not gain significant economic benefit from the
relationship with Afghanistan. In contrast, China has focused on
the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which envisions extending an
economic corridor from China through Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The article indicates that whether or not the US succeeds in
Afghanistan, China will be the real winner because it can rely on
the economy, not military, to acquire hegemony. The article argues
that India, like the US, relies on its military for hegemony.
The article goes so far as to recommend that rather than compete
with China, India should seek ways to harness the BRI so that it
also becomes a part of it. For example, according to the article,
China can extend BRI through Afghanistan and Pakistan into the
Indian Punjab region. The author believes this would also improve
relations between India and Pakistan by making them stakeholders
in each other’s economies. This sums up the main point of the
article, which is that turning rivals into stakeholders is the best
way to ensure influence and mutual security. This is, in essence,
China’s intended approach to regional security with the BRI. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“I think what should be considered by Indian leaders
is how to harness the ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ for the
best interests of India.”

Source: “为什么中国总是赢家 印度却走不远 (Why is China Always
the Winner, but India does not Go Far?),” dwnews.com, 10 January 2018.
http://news.dwnews.com/global/news/2018-01-10/60034612.html
India’s diplomacy is always from a geopolitical perspective, such as
Afghanistan, and seldom concerned about the economy. No matter
whether Americans can win the war in Afghanistan, the Chinese people
will become real “winners.” Obviously, India has suffered a series of
setbacks - whether in Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh or Afghanistan - as
India has always stared at China, setting a geographic regional strategy
from a geopolitical perspective. Meanwhile China is in the next step of
the chess game. Basically, it is unlikely that China will use its military
power to establish the position of hegemony and, more likely, it will rely
on economic means. The Belt and Road Initiative may not be a charity,
but it must not be usurious exploitation. It should be propagated that it
contains a “win-win” program.
Obviously, India is also unable to contend with the Belt and Road
initiative, which has astonishing global character. In that case, I think
what should be considered by Indian leaders is how to harness the
Belt and Road Initiative for the best interests of India. Beijing should
probably also propose a small ring extending eastward into our Punjab.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | February 2018

41

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s “Physicals for All” Program in Xinjiang
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpt from Nepal’s largest selling English daily, The Himalayan Times, reports that
beginning in July 2017, authorities in Xinjiang began collecting biometric data as part of a “Physicals for All” program. With a focus on
‘priority individuals,’ the government has collected a range of biometric information on the region’s predominately Uyghur and minority
population. However, the shape and scope of this program has been heavily criticized by international human rights organizations, particularly
by Human Rights Watch.
The Himalayan Times reports that Chinese authorities have begun to amass a significant database of biometric data from the residents of
Xinjiang amid an ongoing and massive security crackdown in the province. According to the report, police are collecting “pictures, fingerprints,
iris scans and household registration information,” while health authorities collect “DNA samples and blood type information” as part of the
program. Citing concerns over mandatory participation, as well as privacy concerns, the paper further notes that human rights organizations are
publically denouncing the collection process, taking place under the so-called “Physicals for All” program. Human Rights Watch in particular
maintains a strong stance against the security crackdown.
As the second excerpt from the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicates, Lu Kang, a spokesperson for the Ministry dismissed the
concerns as “untrue” during a daily press conference on 13 December 2017. While promising progress and emphasizing the “peaceful
and happy life” of residents, Lu decried that overseas observers have been “unwilling to see” the situation for what it is. End OE Watch
Commentary (Shanks)

“The mandatory data-banking of a whole population’s biodata, including DNA, is a gross violation of
international human rights norms, and it’s even more disturbing if it is done surreptitiously, under the
guise of a free health care program.”
- Human Rights Watch, China director Sophie Richardson
Source: “Rights group criticizes China for mass DNA collection in Xinjiang,” The Himalayan Times—World. 13 December 2017. https://
thehimalayantimes.com/world/rights-group-criticizes-china-for-mass-dna-collection-in-xinjiang/
Chinese authorities have collected DNA and other biometric data from the whole population of the volatile western region of Xinjiang,
Human Right Watch said on Wednesday, denouncing the campaign as a gross violation of international norms. Hundreds of people have been
killed in Xinjiang in the past few years in violence between Uighurs, a mostly Muslim people, and ethnic majority Han Chinese, which Beijing
blames on Islamist militants.
The unrest has fueled a sweeping security crackdown there, including mass rallies by armed police, tough measures that rights advocates
say restrict religious and cultural expression, and widespread surveillance. Police are responsible for collecting pictures, fingerprints, iris
scans and household registration information, while health authorities should collect DNA samples and blood type information as part of a
“Physicals for All” program, the New York-based group said in a statement, citing government a document.
“The mandatory data-banking of a whole population’s biodata, including DNA, is a gross violation of international human rights norms, and
it’s even more disturbing if it is done surreptitiously, under the guise of a free health care program,” Human Rights Watch’s China director
Sophie Richardson said. According to the Xinjiang-wide plan posted online by the Aksu city government in July, main goals for the campaign
include collecting the biometric data for all people between the age of 12 and 65, and verifying the region’s population for a database….
…Data for “priority individuals” should be collected regardless of age, it said, using a term the government has adopted to refer to
people deemed a security risk…. Human Rights Watch cited an unidentified Xinjiang resident saying he feared being labeled with “political
disloyalty” if he did not participate, and that he had not received any results from the health checks.
Source: “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lu Kang’s Regular Press Conference on December 13, 2017,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of China. 13 December 2017. http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/t1519191.shtml
Q: According to reports, the Human Rights Watch today issued a report expressing concern about the Chinese government’s moves in
Xinjiang to obtain DNA from every single resident. What’s your response to this?
A: This organization you mentioned has kept making false allegations on China-related issues all along. That’s why I would like to say that
such allegation is not even worth your time.
In terms of the situation in Xinjiang, we have said from this podium many times that with economic development, people in Xinjiang are living
a peaceful and happy life, and the situation there is sound. Indeed, certain people overseas may be unwilling to see such a situation. I would
like to tell them that the Chinese government will continue to uphold the unity of people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang, safeguard their happy
life and promote progress in various fields of Xinjiang.

OE Watch | February 2018

42

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
“Borderization” of Occupied Georgian Territory
OE Watch Commentary: There have been a number of reports in
According to the official data submitted by
Georgian media about border problems regarding the occupied regions
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, but few of them go into any detailed
the Georgian State Security Service [SSS], the
analysis of the broader problem. The accompanying excerpted article,
borderization process became intensive from
from the Georgian independent news website Netgazeti, looks at the
problem of what some Georgians refer to as the “borderization” of
February 2013.
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and the author offers a few solutions
Source: Kakhishvili, Levan. “ბორდერიზაცია საქართველოში:
worth noting.
შესაძლებელია თუ არა რუსეთის პოლიტიკასთან გამკლავება
The author is a researcher at the Georgian Institute of Politics, a
(Borderization in Georgia: Is it possible to cope with Russian policy?),”
Netgazeti.ge, 25 December 2017. http://netgazeti.ge/news/242817/
non-partisan research organization in Tbilisi, Georgia. He mentions
that in the Tskhinvali region (South Ossetia) there are “barbed wire
After the August 2008 Georgian-Russian war, Russia recognized
and fences installed by the Russian occupation troops along more
the independence of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region, but this has
than 52 km of the occupation line” and “more than 48 km” along the proved not to be the last stage of Russia’s aggressive policy regarding
border with Abkhazia. He also notes that “Tbilisi has no direct levers Georgia and the occupied territories. The first instance of the so-called
to influence Moscow’s behavior regarding the occupied territories.”
“borderization” was registered a year later - in August 2009…The
The author believes that to resolve the borderization problem, “it is
aforementioned process involves installing artificial barriers, fences,
barbed-wires, and banners marking the so-called border and digging
necessary to act within the frames of what is possible” and makes
ditches and trenches along the occupation line…
four recommendations.

“

”

His first recommendation is to support “people on both sides of the
administrative borderline” and to “simplify procedures for obtaining
Georgian passports.” Secondly, he suggests developing an action
plan with “procedures that will define concrete responsibilities in
case of new instances of borderization.” Third, he recommends
creating an “integrated state communications strategy” in order
to deal with “the Kremlin’s narrative that is aimed at exerting a
psychological influence on the public.” Finally, he recommends
that the Georgian government become better at “informing
the international community on the process of borderization,”
specifically to “coordinate its anti-occupation policy with Ukraine
and Moldova in order to shape a joint position at international
forums.” Georgia’s potential cooperation with Ukraine and Moldova
in border security is particularly notable as all three have been
working with European governments on a variety of projects,
including security. The author’s recommendations are not likely
to become policy, but they do offer some insight into what action
Georgia could take as reports of the borderization process continue
to surface. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

According to the official data submitted by the Georgian State Security
Service [SSS], the borderization process became intensive from
February 2013…They involve 33 villages along the occupation line of
the Tskhinvali region and additional seven villages along the Abkhaz
occupation line…The total length of the occupation line in the Tskhinvali
region is more than 350 km with barbed wire and fences installed by
the Russian occupation troops along more than 52 km of the occupation
line. As regards occupied Abkhazia, the total length of the occupation
line is comparatively shorter and amounts to 145 km and the total length
of illegal fences, barbed wire, and trenches is more than 48 km…
Georgia must face reality: For the time being, Tbilisi has no direct
levers to influence Moscow’s behavior regarding the occupied
territories in Georgia. Correspondingly, it is necessary to act within the
frames of what is possible. This encompasses four major directions:
First, the government should continue to support people on both sides
of the administrative borderline…simplify procedures for obtaining
Georgian passports to make public services available to the population
residing on the occupied territories and enable them to use the benefits
of visa-free travel to the EU.
Second, in order to find mechanisms for coping with the existing
situation, it is important that the state set up an interdepartmental
working group to study the problem, shape a consistent official
position, and elaborate an integrated action plan…The action plan
must encompass details of all the procedures that will define concrete
responsibilities in case of new instances of borderization.
Third, it is necessary to elaborate an integrated state communications
strategy…Supplying the public with precise information on the issue
and confronting the Kremlin’s narrative that is aimed at exerting a
psychological influence on the public…

Map of Georgia showing the autonomous republics of Abkhazia (de facto
independent) and Adjaria, and the de facto independent region of South Ossetia.

And finally, the Georgian government is to improve their practices of
informing the international community on the process of borderization…
The government should also coordinate its anti-occupation policy
with Ukraine and Moldova in order to shape a joint position at
international forums. This will enable to place borderization within the
broader frames of the aggressive policy Russia is pursuing against its
neighbors…

Source: United Nations Cartographic Section, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AGeorgia_high_detail_map.png, Public Domain.

OE Watch | February 2018

43

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
A Review of Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces in 2017
OE Watch Commentary: The government of
Kazakhstan continues to implement a number of
reforms in the country’s armed forces, particularly
regarding the modernization of its weapons
and equipment inventory. The accompanying
excerpted article reviews important developments
in the Kazakh Armed Forces in 2017, providing
an update on how this modernization process is
going and what this could mean for Kazakhstan’s
defense industry and security cooperation. The
article, from the Russian language news website
Inform Buro, notes some basic information about
the armed forces, including its “annual budget of
382 billion Tenge ($1.15 billion).” This number is
down roughly $500 million from a couple of years
ago, but still represents one of the largest defense
budgets in Central Asia and it is not likely to drop
any further soon.
The article points out that the Kazakh Air Force
now has Su-30SM fighters and that “by the end
of the year, there will already be eight aircraft in
Kazakhstan, almost a full squadron.” The author
states that “within the next few years the fleet
of combat aircraft will be upgraded” and that
this follows Kazakhstan’s acquisition of various
transport aircraft, including the “C-295 from
Spain” and the “Mi-17 and Mi-171 helicopters
from Russia” a few years ago. This is in addition
to the acquisition of “four Mi-35M helicopters”
and “another four helicopters [to] be delivered.”
The article also includes an update on the
production of the mine-resistant ambush-protected
“Arlan” and that “the exact number of (the Arlan)
armored vehicles in Kazakhstan’s inventory is
unknown,” but “there are an estimated 200.” One
of the main goals for the growth of Kazakhstan’s
defense industry has been to purchase weapons
and equipment from various international defense
firms with a stipulation that production will take
place in Kazakhstan. While the large number
of Arlan armored vehicles in service is only
an estimate, news of its continued production
confirms that Kazakhstan’s defense industry is
experiencing some growth. Lastly, the author
mentions that at the center of the modernization
process “are domestic engineering enterprises
and foreign defense enterprises, mostly Russian.”
If Kazakhstan’s acquisition of additional Su30SM fighters and Mi-35M attack helicopters
in 2017 is any indication of the direction of the
country’s defense industry, it appears that Russia
is maintaining a significant part of this sector. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Involved with this are domestic engineering enterprises and
foreign defense enterprises, mostly Russian.”

Kazakh Sukhoi Su-30SM at Irkutsk-2.

Source: Alexey Korshunov, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AKazakh_Sukhoi_Su-30SM.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: Bedenko, Grigoriy, “Вооружённые силы Казахстана: итоги 2017 года (The
Armed Forces of Kazakhstan: the results of 2017),” Inform Buro, 13 December 2017.
https://informburo.kz/stati/vooruzhyonnye-sily-kazahstana-itogi-2017-goda.html
The Armed Forces of Kazakhstan celebrated its anniversary this year – 25 years
since its establishment. The Kazakh Army today is not the same as it was a dozen or so
years ago. 80 thousand soldiers and officers, most of which are contractors, an annual
budget of 382 billion Tenge and a rearmament program, which is being very actively
implemented. Inform Buro prepared a review of events in Kazakhstan’s Armed Forces in
2017.
…The newest multifunctional Su-30SM fighters have looked particularly effective
and by the end of the year, there will already be 8 aircraft in Kazakhstan, almost a full
squadron…Today, the most experienced pilots of the 604th air base at Taldykorgan fly
the Su-30SM…Within the next few years the fleet of combat aircraft will be upgraded.
Just three or four years ago we saw how the military transport aircraft, the C-295 from
Spain, came to us (and) the Mi-17 and Mi-171 helicopters from Russia. Now it’s on to
combat aircraft…The latest acquisition of the Air Force are is four Mi-35M helicopters….
In December or early January, another four helicopters will be delivered…
In 2017 Kazakh ground forces continued to be supplied with a completely new type
of armored vehicle. It is the heavy armored personnel carrier “Arlan,” which is
manufactured by the joint venture Kazakhstan Paramount Engineering…Arlan is a 16
ton mine-resistant ambush protected version of the (South African) Paramount Group’s
Marauder…The exact number of (the Arlan) armored vehicles in Kazakhstan’s inventory
is unknown. It appears, from open sources, that there are an estimated 200…
It needs to be noted that the rearmament program of Kazakhstan’s Army includes
the modernization of existing Soviet-made equipment. Involved with this are domestic
engineering enterprises and foreign defense enterprises, mostly Russian…

OE Watch | February 2018

44

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Afghanistan’s Cooperation with the SCO
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Afghanistan
has expressed its interest in joining the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) several times since its first request in
2015. It is unknown if or when this will take place, but
statements made by Afghanistan’s Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah at the recent SCO meeting in Russia provide some
insight into the why Afghanistan would like to join the
organization. The accompanying article, from the English
version of the independent news website Tolo News discusses
the Afghanistan-SCO relationship in light of Abdullah’s recent
comments.
Abdullah’s main message was to “call upon SCO member
states to use their leverage and contacts with armed Afghan
militant groups to urge they enter into intra-Afghan talks.”
While he does not mention any specific SCO members, the
Afghan government has made similar statements to Pakistan,
which joined the SCO in June 2017. This is in addition to the
hostility between Afghanistan and Pakistan related to a number
of issues, particularly dealing with terrorism. It is worth noting
that issues between Pakistan and India (which also joined in
June 2017) did not prevent either from gaining membership in
the SCO.
Abdullah also requested that the SCO “grant Afghanistan
permanent co-chairmanship for the future Contact Group”
[cooperation] and that Afghanistan maintains “interest in
acquiring full SCO membership” as well as developing
“enhanced cooperation on anti-terrorism between SCO
member states and Afghanistan.” He also mentioned that they
would like to work with “the China-led Silk Road Economic
Belt and other similar integration platforms.”
SCO members established the Afghanistan Contact Group
in 2005 as a mechanism for increased cooperation between
the organization and Afghanistan, but it only resumed work
in October 2017 after several years of no activity and it has
not been clear what the group will do now. The SCO gave
Afghanistan observer status in 2012, after which the Afghan
government made its first request to join the organization in
2015. However, outside of annual summits or conferences,
not much has progressed in this area. As such, despite the
Afghan government’s desire for closer cooperation with the
SCO, past cooperation suggests it may take time for this to
develop. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah called on the member
states of the organization to use their leverage in bringing
militant groups in Afghanistan to the Afghan negotiations
table.”

Dr. Abdullah Abdullah at Embassy of Afghanistan, in New Delhi.

Source: Hariva, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ADr._Abdullah_Abdullah_at_Embassy_of_Afghanistan%2C_in_New_Delhi_2016-02-01_(2).jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: “Abdullah Calls On SCO Members To Support Afghan Peace Talks,”
Tolo News, 1 December 2017. http://www.tolonews.com/afghanistan/abdullahcalls-sco-members-bring-militants-peace-table
Addressing the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) meeting in
Russia on Friday, Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah called on the member
states of the organization to use their leverage in bringing militant groups in
Afghanistan to the Afghan negotiations table.
“We Call upon SCO member states to use their leverage and contacts with
armed Afghan militant groups to urge they enter into intra-Afghan talks,”
Abdullah said…
“In order to further enhance cooperation and achieve progress between
the SCO and Afghanistan, we propose the following: SCO grant Afghanistan
permanent co-chairmanship for the future Contact Group to help address the
challenges that confront Afghanistan and the region; we renew our interest
in acquiring full SCO membership…we are seeking enhanced cooperation on
anti-terrorism between SCO member states and Afghanistan,” he added.
“We also look forward to working with member states on SCO’s development
strategy and important initiatives such as the China-led Silk Road Economic
Belt and other similar integration platforms,” he stated. “I would like to
mention Heart of Asia Istanbul Process, RECCA, and projects such as CASA
1000, TAPI and Chahbahar among important initiatives…”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

OE Watch | February 2018

45

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Legitimizing Aina Gamzatova
OE Watch Commentary: The recent article from Islamdag.
ru, Dagestan’s largest and most popular Islamic news and
content website, entitled “Why is Aina Gamzatova a Candidate
for the Russian Presidency?”, is less an article and more a series
of favorable editorial justifications for Aina Gamzatova’s run
for the Russian presidency. Before and since Mrs. Gamzatova
made her candidacy official by filing with Russia’s Central
Election Commission, she has had little to say on the issues
except that she supports a stronger unified Russia - Christian
and Muslim - and wants an end to the Islamic radicalism that
has torn apart her homeland of Dagestan and the region in
which she resides.

“If this was the decision of Aina Gamzatova herself, then,
in that case, there could be doubts. But, as we know, this
decision is supported by the Sheikh of the Naqshbandi and
Shazali tariqats, and the Mufti of Dagestan, the husband of
Aina Gamzatova, Ahmad Abdulaev.”

What is interesting about this article is that it originates from
a web news portal that Mrs. Gamzatova owns and operates,
Islam.ru. One might get the impression that the story was
contrived from within her media organization to justify her
candidacy to the Muslim population of Dagestan itself—
her most probable but problematic supporters. The editorial
voices that comprise the article cover topics like instability
in Dagestan and the North Caucasus region, unfavorable
economic conditions for the population, the threat of radical
Islam, public service, Muslim women’s rights and Mrs.
Gamzatova’s right to run for President as a Muslim woman.
The editorial compilation specifically addresses Mrs.
Gamzatova’s charitable efforts beside her husband, the Mufti
of Dagestan. Other topics covered include the threat of radical
Islam and the concept in the stricter religious quarters of her
home turf where women are restricted in their agency. Much
is made of the fact that her husband is the Mufti of Dagestan,
which leads to a contradictory thread to her rationale for her
candidacy—or perhaps a carrot to appease more fundamentalist
Muslims who might oppose her effort because she is a
woman acting on her own. The article makes it clear she
has the blessing of the male religious figures that matter,
by pointing out, “As we know, this decision is supported by
the Sheikh of the Naqshbandi and Shazali tariqats, and the
Mufti of Dagestan, the husband of Aina Gamzatova, Ahmad
Abdulaev.”
Mrs. Gamzatova is also craftily compared to the great
Dagestani Imam Shamil (1797-1871). Imam Shamil is the
measuring stick one is held to in the region when in a position
of power or seeking power and that comparison is one
everyone in the region will understand. There will be those
who will not accept this comparison for many reasons. Just
two decades early another Shamil, the Chechen Shamil Basaev
(1965-2006) was the military or combatant face of the Chechen
independence movement. He too, especially in the first war
1994-1996 was often compared to the legendary Imam Shamil
and part of his initial legitimacy was rooted in that comparison.

Mufti of the Republic of Dagestan Ahmad-Haji Abdulaev.

Source: www.president.e-dag.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMufty_of_Dagestan.png, CC BY 3.0.

Source: Почему Айна Гамзатова выдвигается кандидатом в президенты
России? (Why is Aina Gamzatova nominated as a candidate for the
presidency of Russia?),” Islamdag.ru, 3 January 2018. http://islamdag.ru/
analitika/48109
“They say a woman should stay at home and watch the fire. There is no
doubt. But, every time Alima said “A woman should stay at home” they added
“She can only go out if necessary.” Until Aina Gamzatova nominated her
candidacy for the presidency of the Russian Federation, 99% of women clung
to the words “They can go out only when necessary.”
...
“If this was the decision of Aina Gamzatova herself, then, in that case, there
could be doubts. But, as we know, this decision is supported by the Sheikh of
the Naqshbandi and Shazali tariqats, and the Mufti of Dagestan, the husband
of Aina Gamzatova, Ahmad Abdulaev.”

Not one of the authors comprising this news piece suggest that Aina Gamzatova has a chance in a Russian national election. In fact, only
one, Aisha Anastasia Korchagina, even mentions Russia or its current president, posing the question, “Who can be an alternative to Putin?”
Instead the focus is clearly for the people of Dagestan and the north Caucasus. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

OE Watch | February 2018

46

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian General Staff’s Military Thought on “Color
Revolutions” and the Changing Nature of War
OE Watch Commentary: In the wake of the
dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Russian
General Staff identified Western democracy and
civil society building programs as part of the
threat assessment in their practice of military
science. In the current volume of the Russian
General Staff Academy’s journal, Vestnik,
the accompanying article analyzes the “Color
Revolutions” of Ukraine (Orange), Georgia
(Rose), and Kyrgyz (Tulip) in the context of the
current Russian military thought paradigm.
The authors A.S. Brychkov and G.A.
Nikonorov begin their article with a critique
of the Clausewitzian dictum that “war [is] an
extension of politics by violent means” and they
question “whether we have reached a point of
never going to war again or [whether] wars will
still be there but will change their nature rather
than substance.” Following the General Staff’s
discipline of historical analysis, the Cold War is
poignantly summed up as: “The adversary that
defeated us did so without resorting to combat.”
The authors raise the comparison of WMDs
and the experience via the Soviet Union in
losing against this sort of threat, and they posit
that Russia “will need to revise the emphasis
previously placed on armed conflicts.” This is in
support of current Russian thought that describes
a perpetual state of war. The article proceeds to
define the threat aspects of “Color Revolutions”
in this light.

“We have to treat these social experiments as ordinary coup d’etat.”

Ukrainian protesters, Orange Revolution. Kiev, November 2004.

Source: Wikimedia Commons: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Joesjtsjenko_Marion_Kiev_2004.jpg CCA-SA 3.0.

Source: А. С. Брычков и Г.А. Никоноров, Вестник, “Цветные революции в России:
возможность и действительность,” Вестник, 3 (60), 2017, стр. 4-9 (A.S. Brychkov and
G.A. Nikonorov, “Color Revolutions in Russia: Possibility and Reality),” Vestnik, 3 (60)
2017, pp. 4-9).
The adversary that defeated us did so without resorting to combat. We, on the other hand,
were investing everything in the military component of national security and waited for
shots to be fired. The Soviet Union was defeated by a non-military strategy without oldfashioned combat intervention…

One of the article’s main purposes is to
associate the phenomenon of “grand-scale social
Initiating social action, that result in regime change in specific countries became known
transformations” with economic development
as color revolution because during this process the opposition used different colors for
through a military science prism. This rejects any identification. Regime change in these countries did not signify a radical shift in the form
indigenous desires for Western-style democracy
of governance, political or social institutions. We have to treat these social experiments as
or social assistance by the Russian populace
ordinary coup d’etat, since only the top leadership changed. However, politologists wanted
and correlates national and individual economic
to create an appearance of grand-scale social transformations that were allegedly in
stress to the threat. The article catalogs an
consort with hopes of the peoples of these nations and thus called them ‘revolutions’…
extensive list of US and Western governmental
The United States is the principal instigator and financier of “reformatting” the global
and non-governmental organizations and
geopolitical map, which is consistent with the role this country has been playing as the
programs that “create an appearance of grandworld policeman and fundraiser for the transnational capital...
scale social transformations that were allegedly
in consort with hopes of the peoples.” The
authors state that “there will always be a traitor who will open the city gates.” The article associates national economic degradation with the
goals of these organizations and programs and their activity to lure average Russians into becoming such “traitors.” This subjective-intoobjective reality aligns with the Russian military science factor of “psychological preparation” of the population for support of the forces.
Interestingly, Brychkov and Nikonorov also outline the strategy and tactics of Color Revolutions in “defeating a geopolitical adversary.” They
list weakening the opponent, changing the political course from ‘Our nation comes first’ to pro-Western, and gaining control over the country’s
resources by using ‘controlled chaos’ technologies that ultimately will reduce and degrade the Russian population and place “their national
resources under control of transnational corporations.”
From the Russian perspective, their argument is not really one of pro- or anti- democracy. Rather, it is one of forecasting the changing nature
of war in the fashion of current General Staff thinking. Brychkov and Nikonorov conclude by stating that “Miscalculations in the internal
politics cannot be solved by any kind of special forces, nor by the patriotically minded part of the population who are not interested in a coup.
War and chaos caused is not by force but by weakness of the intendent object thereof.” End OE Watch Commentary (Wilhelm, Vainer)
OE Watch | February 2018

47

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Multiple Drones Attack Russian Airbase in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: According to Russian and other sources, on 5 January 2018, Russia’s Khmeimim Air Base in Syria was attacked
with multiple drones. Taken together, the reports demonstrate the emergence of a new tactic in the terrorist and insurgent playbook, war reporting
in Russia, and how propaganda evolves.
According to the TASS official news website, on 5 January 2018, Russian forces at Khmeimim Air Base successfully defended themselves from
an attack by 13 drones. Quoting an official Russian Defense Ministry (MoD) report, TASS stated there were no casualties and no equipment
damage. The Moskovsky Komsomolets newspaper added that the Ministry’s press release about the attack indicated that it was the first time “the
terrorists” have carried out a mass attack using drones. According to Sputnik News, the Russian MoD said the attack had been foiled. While
ten of the drones targeted the Khmeimim Air Base and three others were sent toward the Tartus Naval Base, all of the drones were downed in
a controlled area outside the base. Three were detonated when they hit the ground and seven were destroyed by Pantsir-S air defense missile
systems. MoD’s Facebook post indicated that the six drones not destroyed by the Pantsir-S were intercepted by Russian Electronic Warfare
complexes, which took over control of their trajectory.
Moskovsky Komsomolets posited that the attempted attack marks the first time the terrorists have used modern guidance technologies on
satellite GPS because the drones used were capable of carrying out attacks from a range of about 100 kilometers. According to the MoD’s
Facebook post, Russian specialists are currently determining supply channels through which terrorists obtained the technologies and devices,
as well as examining the type and origin of explosive compounds and foreign detonating fuses carried by the drones. The MoD also stated that
these “aircraft-type drones” were fitted with pressure transducers and altitude control servo-actuators. The post also suggested the “terrorists”
could have gotten the technology from a country with well-developed technological capabilities of satellite navigation and remote control to drop
improvised explosive devices on assigned coordinates. While much of the Defense Ministry’s report seemed to be confirmed by The Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights, as reported by BBC.ru, according to them, the drones were rather primitively constructed with lots of tape and a
motor.
In the hours and days following the report of the attack, some Russian officials and casual commentators quoted in Echo Moskvy, Interfax and
TASS suggested that the US or Israel were behind the attack. A particularly ominous comment in Live Journal stated: “It won’t be so funny once
these self-styled drone makers crawl to the four corners of the earth.” End OE Watch Commentary (Wilhelm, Hall, Bartles, Finch, Winter)

“It won’t be so funny once these self-styled drone makers crawl to the four corners of the earth.”

Photo of UAV downed during attack on Khmeimim air base, 5-6 Jan 2018.

Source: Russian MoD Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/mod.mil.rus/photos/pcb.2031218563787556/2031214087121337/?type=3&theater, CCA-4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

(continued)
48

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Multiple Drones Attack Russian Airbase
in Syria
The following sources were used in this article:
a.
8 January 2018 TASS official news website
b.
8 January 2018, Moskovsky Komsomolets
c.
9 January 2018 Sputnik News https://sputniknews.com/
military/201801091060605452-russia-create-anti-drone-forces/
d.
http://www.mk.ru/politics/2018/01/08/minoborony-soobshhilo-podrobnostiob-atake-dronov-na-bazu-khmeymim.html)
e.
7 January 2018, (http://www.bbc.com/russian/news-42596160)
f.
(https://meduza.io/news/2018/01/07/pravozaschitniki-rasskazali-ob-otbitoyatake-dronov-na-rossiyskuyu-bazu-v-sirii). (http://www.bbc.com/russian/news42613267).
g.
(https://www.facebook.com/mod.mil.rus/posts/2031218563787556)
h.
(https://russian.rt.com/world/news/468303-minoborony-predotvratiloataki-terroristov-drony-siriya).
i.
(https://echo.msk.ru/news/2125840-echo.html).
j.
(https://twower.livejournal.com/2209550.html#comments)

Source: Facebook post by the Ministry of Defense
of the Russian Federation, Facebook, 8 January
2018. https://www.facebook.com/mod.mil.rus/
posts/2031218563787556
Security system of the Russian Khmeimim air base
and Russian Naval CSS point in the city of Tartus
successfully warded off a terrorist attack with massive
application of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) through
the night of 5th – 6th January, 2018.
As evening fell, the Russia air defence forces detected
13 unidentified small-size air targets at a significant
distance approaching the Russian military bases.
Ten assault drones were approaching the Khmeimim
air base, and another three – the CSS point in Tartus.
Six small-size air targets were intercepted and taken
under control by the Russian EW units. Three of them
were landed on the controlled area outside the base,
and another three UAVs exploded as they touched the
ground.
Seven UAVs were eliminated by the Pantsir-S antiaircraft missile complexes operated by the Russian air
defence units on 24-hours alert.
The Russian bases did not suffer any casualties or
damages.
The Khmeimim air base and Russian Naval CSS point
in Tartus are functioning on a scheduled basis.
Currently, the Russian military experts are analyzing
the construction, technical filling and improvised
explosives of the captured UAVs...
It was the first time when terrorists applied a massed
drone aircraft attack launched at a range of more than
50 km using modern GPS guidance system
Technical examination of the drones showed that such
attacks could have been made by terrorists at a distance
of about 100 kilometers.
Engineering decisions applied by terrorists while
attacks on the Russian objects in Syria could be
received from one of countries with high-technological
capabilities of satellite navigation and remote dropping
control of professionally assembled improvised explosive
devices in assigned coordinates. All drones of terrorists
are fitted with pressure transducers and altitude control
servo-actuators.
Terrorists’ aircraft-type drones carried explosive
devices with foreign detonating fuses.

Photo of UAV downed during attack on Khmeimim air base, 5-6 Jan 2018.

Source: Russian MoD Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/mod.mil.rus/photos/pcb.2031218563787556/2031214087121337/?type=3&theater, CCA-4.0.

The Russian specialists are determining supply
channels, through which terrorists had received the
technologies and devices, as well as examining type and
origin of explosive compounds used in the IEDs. The
fact of usage of strike aircraft-type drones by terrorists
is the evidence that militants have received technologies
to carry out terrorist attacks using such UAVs in any
country.
OE Watch | February 2018

49

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia to Focus on Munitions, Instead of Platform
Development
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying excerpted article
A special emphasis must be made on equipping
from Izvestia, the Russian Federation will now emphasize the development
and production of munitions instead of expensive weapons platforms. The
troops with high-precision air, land and sea
Izvestia article makes the point that precision munitions, such as the 3M-14
weapons, unmanned airstrike complexes, and
Kalibr-NK (SS-N-30A) land attack cruise missile, launched from older and/
or less technologically advanced platforms in Syria were quite successful.
individual equipment for servicemen, as well as
Apparently, there has been an ongoing debate in Russian security circles
advanced reconnaissance, communication and
about whether the finite amount of defense dollars are better spent on
expensive platforms (aircraft, ships, etc.) or more modestly priced platforms
electronic warfare systems…
with better munitions. President Putin’s recent comments at a meeting of
-Vladimir Putin
the Defense Ministry Board, appear to make it clear that Russia will favor
the latter, as can be seen in the accompanying excerpted Kremlin press
release. In practice, this decision means that the 2027 State Arms Program will likely look significantly different from its predecessor, which
emphasized platform development. It is important to note that this change does not mean that Russia will stop the development and fielding of
technologically advanced platforms, but instead this development will likely slow, and fewer expensive platforms will be produced. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“

”

Source: Aleksey Ramm, Sergey Valchenko, Dmitriy Strugovets, “Ставка
на высокоточное и высокоэффективное (Banking on Precision and High
Efficiency),” Izvestia Online, 25 December 2017. https://iz.ru/687444/
aleksei-ramm-sergei-valchenko-dmitrii-strugovetc/stavka-na-vysokotochnoe-ivysokoeffektivnoe
…Vladimir Putin summed up the numerous arguments about the new National
Arms Program (GPV), which have been going on for almost a year,” military
expert Vladislav Shurygin told Izvestia. “The defense industry notionally split
into two camps. One advocated the maximum funding of the building of new
‘platforms’: tanks, field guns, aircraft, helicopters. Their opponents sought
a reduction in the building of platforms to a rational level and allocation of
the maximum funding for precision weapons: guided munitions and cruise,
aeroballistic, and hypersonic missiles. It was reasonably maintained that
even an old aircraft with new precision munitions and missiles would acquire
serious possibilities. The argument of the defense industrialists became most
intense in November and December of this year. but now Vladimir Putin has
closed the books. He supported the supporters of precision weapons.
Their part was taken in his speech by Sergey Shoygu also. The defense
minister observed that it was precision missiles: Kalibr, Kh-101, Iskander, and
Kh-55, which had been employed against the most important facilities of the
rebels…
Arms systems have in the modern world been divided into “platforms” and
“munitions” for quite some time now…The previous GPV was oriented toward
the building of platforms. The Defense Ministry was to have received 60 T-50,
120 Su-35S, 60 Su-30SM, and 17 MiG-35 fighters, 24 MiG-29K/KUB carrier
fighters, and up to 140 Su-34 tactical bombers. The funding for pilot projects
for new airborne platforms was far less in the new GPV.
“The experience of Syria showed that special platforms: nuclear-powered
destroyers and aircraft carriers, are not needed for the employment of Kalibr.
The majority of launches were performed from on board conventional dieselpowered submarines and small guided-missile ships,” military historian
Dmitriy Boltenkov observed. “The Kh-101 were fired not by the PAK-DA but by
modernized Tu-95MSM bombers.

Source: Expanded meeting of the Defence Ministry Board,”
Kremlin Website Press Release, 22 December 2017. http://
en.special.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56472
Vladimir Putin visited the Peter the Great Military
Academy of the Strategic Missile Forces, where he took
part in an annual expanded meeting of the Defense
Ministry Board…
President of Russia Vladimir Putin: Comrades officers,
“… Second, our new State Armament Program will
get underway next year. We discussed its key features
in May and November at our meetings in Sochi and
numerous meetings in Moscow. A special emphasis must
be made on equipping troops with high-precision air, land
and sea weapons, unmanned airstrike complexes, and
individual equipment for servicemen, as well as advanced
reconnaissance, communication and electronic warfare
systems…”
“…as I noted we are detecting further attempts to upset
strategic parity by deploying the global missile defence
system [Ballistic Missile Defense System] and conventional
attack systems that are comparable to nuclear weapons.
In terms of strike power and accuracy, they are hardly
inferior to nuclear arms. What are they designed for? I
believe they serve only one purpose, blackmail, because
they create the illusion of a potential unpunished strike…”
“Today our nuclear forces reliably ensure strategic
deterrence but we must develop them further. By the end
of 2017 the share of modern weapons in Russia’s nuclear
triad reached 79 per cent and by 2021 they should be
equipped with modern arms by up to 90 per cent. I am
referring to missile systems that are capable of confidently
overcoming existing and even projected missile defence
systems…”

OE Watch | February 2018

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Heavy MLRS Being Added to Russian Division and Brigades
OE Watch Commentary: According to the
accompanying excerpted article from Izvestia, Russian
motorized rifle and tank brigades and divisions will be
equipped with the Uragan-1M Multiple Launch Rocket
System (MLRS). Previous reporting on the Uragan1M MLRS stated that it was capable of firing 220mm
and 300mm rockets. These rockets are stored in their
firing canisters, so instead of using a crane to reload
each rocket into the MLRS (the practice with previous
version of the Uragan), the crane simply removes the
empty pod, and replace it with a fully loaded pod of
the desired caliber. According to Izvestia, the Uragan1M is also capable firing 122mm rockets, the same
rockets fired by the BM-21 Grad MLRS battalions
that are found in most maneuver units. If this change
is implemented, Russian maneuver units will gain an
organic capability to significantly extend the brigade’s
range of fire (220mm and 300mm MLRSs are routinely
attached to maneuver units). Currently, the MLRSs
and howitzers found in maneuver units (with the best
equipment) have a maximum range of approximately
60-70km, the Uragan-1M equipped with 300mm
rockets has a maximum range of about 120km. The
details of how this reform is to be implemented have yet
to be released, it is unclear if the BM-21 Grad battalion
will be replaced by the Uragan-1M, or if Uragan-1Ms
will simply be added to the existing assets, or some
combination thereof.
According to the accompanying article from
Svobodnaya Pressa, the adoption of the Uragan-1M
will not cause Russia to abandon development of
the Tornado-S, a modernized version of the Smerch
300mm MLRS system. (Tornado-S/Smerchs are found
in Russian artillery and MLRS brigades) The Russian
Federation has recently combat tested the Tornado-S
in Syria, and now will begin to field the Tornado-S,
as Smerchs retire. Although both the Uragan-1M and
Tornado-S are both capable of firing 300mm rockets,
apparently the Tornado-S will also have rockets
(probably better described as missiles) capable of 1
meter accuracy, and ranges of up to 200km. It was
unclear if there is an equipment difference between the
Uragan-1M and Tornado-S, that allows the firing of
these greater ranged rockets, or if the Tornado-S only
fires these rockets due to doctrinal reasons.
As described in the accompanying article from RIA
Novosti, Russia greatly values long range, and relatively
low-cost precision artillery. The article describes how
artillery is still quite effective, even in the era of UAVs
and Precision Guided Munitions (PGM), as these UAVs
and PGMs cannot always be relied upon when the
enemy is equipped with sophisticated electronic warfare
and air defense systems. In sum, the Russian Federation
is developing precision munitions, but is hedging her
bets by still being able to conduct mass fires. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Yevgeniy Andreyev, Bogdan Stepovoy, and Aleksey Ramm, “Артиллерия
наращивает мощь: Армейские соединения усиливаются тяжелыми артсистемами
(Artillery Is Building up its Power: Army Formations Are Being Strengthened with
Heavy Artillery Systems),” Izvestia Online, 14 December 2017. https://iz.ru/675176/
evgenii-andreev-bogdan-stepovoi-aleksei-ramm/artilleriia-narashchivaet-moshch
The Ministry of Defense has begun the large-scale reform of artillery units.
Uragan-M1 multiple rocket launcher systems, Msta-M2 self-propelled guns, and
unmanned aerial vehicles are entering the inventory of the artillery regiments and
brigades. The super-high yield artillery systems – Pion and Tulpan – are being
returned. There have not been such large-scale changes in the Army for more than 30
years. The artillery units will substantially expand the range of combat missions that
are being accomplished and they will increase effectiveness, kill range, and fire power.
In the experts’ opinion, the tactics of a contemporary engagement will be seriously
changed after the conclusion of the reform.
Ministry of Defense personnel told Izvestia that the decision has been made to
radically increase the firepower of the artillery subunits and combined-arms
(motorized rifle and tank) divisions and brigades. In particular, Uragan heavy multiple
rocket launcher systems will appear in them. Unmanned aerial vehicles will guide
artillery to the targets…In 2013-2017, seven self-propelled artillery regiments – in the
composition of five motorized rifle and two tank divisions - were formed in the Russian
Army…
Ministry of Defense personnel reported the changes to the structure of the artillery
regiments and brigades to Izvestia. Previously, there were two battalions, which were
equipped with self-propelled howitzers, and one Grad multiple rocket launcher system
battalion in the divisions’ artillery regiments. That same quantity of artillery was in
the combined-arms brigades…Since the fall of this year, Uragan 220mm MLRS have
begun to appear in the artillery regiments and brigades. The 4th Tank Division’s
275th Self-Propelled Artillery Regiment was the first to receive the new vehicles. A full
battalion set of these systems – eight launchers - is already on the unit’s books.
Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy told Izvestia that “the formations’ firepower
substantially increases” with the appearance of the Uragan systems. “Uragan is a
universal system,” Viktor Murakhovskiy told Izvestia. “New munitions – cassette, fuelair explosive, and enhanced range – have been developed for the Uragan systems. This
multiple rocket launcher system can also use munitions from the Grad 122-millimeter
system”.
Besides long-range howitzers and multiple rocket launcher systems, the artillery
brigades and regiments will receive unmanned reconnaissance complexes with
automated command and control systems (ASU). The appearance of the Orlan-10
unmanned artillery reconnaissance complex (BKAR) is seriously affecting the tactics
of the conduct of an engagement… Furthermore, the Orlan-10 can determine the
location of enemy counterbattery radars, including portable radars – of the American
AN/TRQ-36 type, with an accuracy of up to several meters.
In the opinion of Military Commentator Vladislav Shurygin, the RF Ministry of
Defense has accomplished a revolution in military affairs. “In recent years, the
significance of artillery has declined and precision-guided weapons have taken its
place: guided bombs and missiles”, the expert said. “Artillery was considered to be
ineffective. By way of illustration, approximately 3,000 projectiles are expended for
the guaranteed destruction of one concrete blockhouse based upon the standards.
But right now Russian artillery has received unique capabilities. One can actually
accomplish that combat mission with one shot. The commanders of units and subunits
have received a universal tool, which permits them to detect and destroy any targets
on the battlefield in real time”…

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Heavy MLRS Being Added to Russian
Division and Brigades
“The Ministry of Defense has begun the large-scale reform of artillery units. Uragan-M1 multiple rocket
launcher systems, Msta-M2 self-propelled guns, and unmanned aerial vehicles are entering the inventory of the
artillery regiments and brigades.”
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Опыт боёв в Сирии: На смену «Смерчу» приходит «Торнадо» (Experience of Battles in Syria: The Tornado-S is
Replacing the Smerch),” Svobodnaya Pressa Online, 1 January 2018. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/189816/
The Tornado-S new-generation multiple rocket launcher (MLRS) has been successfully tested in Syria…The Tornado-S is a thorough upgrade to
the Smerch MLRS… A barrage from six Smerch vehicles can halt the advance of a motorized rifle division…
In the Tornado-S the developers have achieved even tighter clustering, with salvo dispersal of no more than 0.3 percent of the firing range. The
range has been increased to 200 km, at which point dispersal is within 600 meters -- which, basically, is the diameter of the circle (more accurately
-- an ellipse) within which all 12 projectiles land. More precise guidance to a target is available using a UAV also sent up from the launch vehicle…
The projectiles are stabilized by being rotated in the launch tubes. Autonomous adjustment of heading and pitch while in flight is provided by gasdynamic fins operated from a high-pressure gas generator.
The system can take a broad variety of projectiles, to perform a broad variety of combat tasks. In addition to the armor-piercing rounds
mentioned earlier, this includes cluster, high-explosive, and shaped-charge loads comprising 588 destructive elements capable of piercing 160-mm
armor. Also available are antitank mines. A single salvo can lay 300 mines in the path of enemy armor about to attack. There are also thermobaric
rounds, which function as vacuum bombs. The projectile warhead payload is about 280 kg, with minor variations depending on type of munition.
Yet another type of munition has appeared in the new MLRS’s arsenal, one that is fully equivalent to the operational-tactical class of precision
missiles [such as the Tochka-U or Iskander missile systems]. It uses GLONASS for guidance to the target…Deviation from the target is no more
than one meter…the range is several hundred kilometers. Moreover, it can be fired either singly or in barrages in which the number of rounds can
be varied.
The loading procedure has changed significantly change. With the Smerch the transport and loading vehicle inserts an 800-kg rocket projectile
into each launch tube in sequence, which can take 20 minutes or more. With the Tornado-S the entire pod of launch tubes with projectiles already
in place is installed onto the vehicle by crane in a single move…
Source: Andrey Stanavov, “Выстрел в стратосферу: почему Россия делает ставку на дальнобойные пушки (A Shot into the Stratosphere: Why
Russia is Prioritizing Long-Range Guns),” RIA Novosti Online, 14 December 2017. https://ria.ru/defense_safety/20171214/1510867314.html
Cheap, reliable, and aimed - thanks to these qualities, artillery is not only not lagging behind the positions of tactical missile systems, but are also
even outperforming them at certain points. By way of illustration, it is practically impossible to detect in a timely manner and shoot down a flying
projectile. However, the war of technologies is proceeding even here – the designers of guns and munitions are fighting for each centimeter of
accuracy and range…
Long Range
…It is noteworthy that if the firing range of the Pion 2S7 203-millimeter self-propelled artillery gun reaches 47 kilometers and the advanced
Koalitsiya-SV 152-millimeter self-propelled howitzer shot an experimental projectile to a range… of 70 kilometers… The American M109 Paladin
self-propelled gun reaches targets using rocket-propelled projectiles at distances, which do not exceed 30 kilometers.
A Favorable Solution
According to the experts’ assessments, no adequate replacement for classic tube artillery is expected for the time being or in the near future.
Despite the high accuracy and effectiveness, state-of-the-art operational-tactical missile complexes, such as the Tochka-U and Iskander, are too
complex to manufacture and are expensive in order to directly compete with guns under conditions of the unleashing of a large-scale war. And
their missions are different…
…sophisticated munitions and unmanned aerial vehicles are only good when the enemy doesn’t have powerful electronic warfare and air defense
systems. “But if you will clash with a technically well-equipped enemy, he will rapidly knock out all radio ranges and GPS-GLONASS signals,”…
Once again, we will have to rely upon topographic maps, firing tables, and meteorological data…
Tube Precision-Guided
However, Russian weapons manufacturers are not standing in place and are continuously working on increasing the accuracy of the guns and
munitions. A large number of types, including advanced munitions, which are in the experimental design work stage at the time being, are being
developed for their artillery pieces. Guided projectiles based upon the Krasnopol are known, which were developed for the destruction of hardened
facilities from a single shot. The classic laser guidance mechanism requires the illumination of the target by an artillery spotter, who is located at
line of sight…
Furthermore, they plan to introduce guided projectiles with miniature extendable aerodynamic rudders and a fuse, which contains a GLONASS
chip, into the new howitzers’ basic load of ammunitions. The guidance principle is very interesting: the shot is conducted with the enhancement of
the range and deviation to the side, after which the projectile begins “to steer” toward the target, the coordinates of which have been loaded into
the chip. What is important is that that fuse practically does not affect the cost of the munition…
OE Watch | February 2018

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Ground Forces Divisions Upgrading Air Defense
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
Izvestia discusses a major change in Russian motorized rifle and tank
divisions. Previously, these divisions would have a regimental set of
16 Osa (SA-8 GECKO) or Tor (SA-15 GAUNTLET) missile launchers
in their anti-aircraft missile regiment, while the anti-aircraft missileartillery battalions found in the four maneuver regiments would have
batteries of: missile-gun systems, ZSU-23-4 Shilka (GUN DISH) or
2K22 Tunguska (SA-19 Grison); close-range, tracked missile systems,
the 9K35 Strela-10 (SA-13 Gopher); and close-range portable systems,
Igla (SA-18 GROUSE) or Verba (SA-25). If this reform is implemented,
the systems in the anti-aircraft missile regiment will be replaced by
Buk-M2s (SA-17 GRIZZLY) or Buk-M3s. (Currently, Buks are only
found in Ground Forces air defense brigades, but it often supports/
covers maneuver brigades and divisions). This would be a significant
capability increase. The Osa has a 15km range, while the Tor has a
12km range. In comparison, the Buk-M3 has an approximate range of
70km, and reportedly has a limited capability to engage ground targets.
In addition, the division’s maneuver regiments will gain an anti-aircraft
missile battalion, equipped with Tors (likely 12 launchers per battalion).
Although not mentioned, it is likely that the maneuver regiments will
retain their anti-aircraft missile-artillery battalions (for providing point
defense, and defeating small UAVs). Aside from the obvious area denial
considerations of adding Buks to divisional MTO&Es, this change is also
significant because the Buk will become the first piece of equipment that
could be found in maneuver divisions, but not maneuver brigades.
In theory, these organizational changes will give the Russian
motorized rifle (3 motorized rifle regiments and 1 tank regiment) or
tank division (3 tank regiments and 1 motorized rifle regiments) four
anti-aircraft missile battalions and an anti-aircraft missile regiment
(typically, the anti-aircraft missile regiments found in divisions only have
subordinate batteries, no subordinate battalions). In practice, of Russia’s
eight divisions, only a few have all four maneuver regiments, so most
divisions will only have three anti-aircraft missile battalions. Despite
this, this reform will significantly increase the divisions’ capability to
deny air space, an especially important capability when combatting peerlevel adversaries. In terms of area defense, the 70 kilometer range of
the Buk-M3 will be able to fully cover the division in combat formation,
including the rear logistic areas. The Tor will be able to fully protect
the individual regiments in combat formation, and are designed to not
only destroy aircraft, but also cruise missile and other precision guided
munitions. Also to be considered is the role of the electronic warfare
company. The electronic warfare company works closely with these air
defense units by feeding the air defense units targeting data, and can
also help protect the air defense units from enemy precision munitions.
These anti-aircraft missile units in conjunction with the anti-aircraft
missile-artillery battalions found in the maneuver regiments will give the
division an effective area, as well as point defense against air threats. The
accompanying excerpted article from Interfax quotes Russian Ground
Forces Commander-in-Chief, Colonel General Oleg Salyukov on Russian
Ground Forces air defense capabilities as saying, “Our troops’ surfaceto-air missile systems and complexes [are] capable of fighting all existing
means of aerial warfare.” End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm, “Пехота и танки
получат новый зенитный купол (Infantry and Tanks Units Will
Receive a New Air Defense Dome),” Izvestia Online, 22 December
2017. https://iz.ru/685386/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm/pekhota-itanki-poluchat-novyi-zenitnyi-kupol
An echeloned air defense dome will cover Russian infantrymen,
tank crewmen, and artillery personnel. The rearming and
significant reinforcement of the standard anti-aircraft missile
battalions, which exist in all tank and motorized rifle divisions, will
begin in 2018. Instead of the obsolete Osa [SA-8 Gecko] shortrange air defense missile complexes, they will receive state-ofthe-art Buk-M2 [SA-17 GRIZZLY] or Buk-M3 medium range air
defense missile complexes…
It is assumed that the anti-aircraft missile battalions, which are
in each Ground Troops division based upon the TO&E, will be
rearmed with Buk complexes in the next few years. In 2018, the
anti-aircraft missile battalion in each of the four divisions will
receive Buks: two in Western Military District and one each – in
the Southern and Central Military Districts. In each battalion, the
Buk air defense missile complex – will have up to three batteries of
four launchers each…
The Buk-M2 has been arriving in the troops since 2008. This is a
medium-range air defense missile complex – up to 50 kilometers.
The complex is mounted on a tracked chassis and can easily follow
attacking units. This air defense missile complex is known for its
versatility and can shoot down both standard aerodynamic targets
(aircraft, helicopters, and cruise missiles) at all altitudes, and
also more complex offensive air weapons, for example, ballistic
missiles or guided aircraft bombs. In the future, they are planning
the modernization of all of the tactical Buk complexes to the latest
version – the Buk-M3…
One more significant innovation within the new Tactical Air
Defense Development Concept – is the creation of an anti-aircraft
missile battalion (with Tor launchers [SA-15 GAUNTLET]) in each
of the division’s motorized rifle and tank regiments. These air
defense missile complexes previously constituted the foundation
of the division’s air defense. Now there will be four anti-aircraft
missile battalions in each division…[typically, the anti-aircraft
missile regiment only has subordinate batteries, no subordinate
battalions]
Retired air defense Lieutenant-General Aleksey Gorkov told
Izvestia that the combination of the Buk and Tor complexes will
permit them to provide each division with full-fledged echeloned
air defense. “The Buk complexes will destroy targets at the
distant approaches and the Tor complexes will provide coverage
at close range. It will turn out to be a multilayered and often time
overlapping, in particular, based upon altitudes and range, air
defense zone,” the expert pointed out. The complexes supplement
each other, the Buk complexes have some facilities to cover and the
Tor complexes have others. In the aggregate, it will turn out to be a
joint fire system, a type of ‘impenetrable dome’”…

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Ground Forces Divisions Upgrading
Air Defense Capabilities
“Our troops’ surface-to-air missile systems and complexes [are] capable of fighting all existing means of
aerial warfare.”
-Russian Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief, Colonel General Oleg Salyukov

Source: Russia’s air defense can counter all existing means of aerial warfare - Ground Forces commander-in-chief,” Interfax, 25 December
2017.
Russian air defense weapons can counter any means of aerial warfare that currently exist in the world, the Ground Forces’ commander-inchief Oleg Salyukov said on Friday.
“Our troops’ surface-to-air missile systems and complexes have the characteristics making them capable of fighting all existing means of
aerial warfare,” Salyukov told reporters on Friday.
The rise of military threats in the aerospace sphere necessitate “a coordinated development of missile-space and air defense systems to meet
qualitatively new requirements,” Salyukov said.
New air defense units have been formed, armed with the S-300V4 [SA-23 GLADIATOR] SAM system and the Buk-M2 [SA-17 GRIZZLY]
complex, the commander said. The rearming with Buk-M3, Tor-M2 [SA-15 GAUNTLET] and the Verba [SA-25] portable SAM complex
continues, he said…

9A317 TELAR for Buk-M2 air defence system.

Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Victory-Day-Rehearsal-in-Alabino-21April2017/i-dPMGMNW, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
New Naval System Will Be Capable of Launching
Air, Shipping, and Ground Attack Missiles
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation has made great
efforts to enforce the principles of interoperability and modularity
throughout her Armed Forces. The accompanying passages from
Izvestia discuss how these principles are being implemented in
naval air defense, and shed light on the next generation of Russian
universal missile launchers.
In terms of naval air defense, these principles are being
implemented in two ways. The first is the type of munitions that
are being fielded. Instead of developing new air defense missile
Admiral Essen.
systems, Russian air defenders are ‘borrowing’ systems from their
Source: By Gollevainen, MConrads, http://www.shipbucket.com/drawings/2572, CC 4.0.
Ground Forces and Aerospace Forces brethren. For example, as
mentioned in the first accompanying passage, Russian naval vessels are being equipped with naval variants of the S-400, an Aerospace Forces
air defense system, and the Buk, a Ground Forces air defense system. (Although not mentioned in this article, a naval variant of the Aerospace
Forces close-range Pantsir-S air defense system can also be found mounted on Russian ships.) Aside from the obvious benefit of reducing
development costs, the economy of scale issues involved with producing existing systems also provide additional financial benefits for state
coffers.
The second way that Russia is implementing these principles is through the development of a modular launch system capable of firing different
types of missiles. The Russian Federation is already fielding the 3S-14 universal vertical launcher. The 3S-14 is capable of firing several
different missiles including the: 3M55 Onyx (SS-N-26 Strobile) anti-ship missile, the 3M-54 Kalibr (SS-N-27 Sizzler) anti-ship missile, the 3M-14
Kalibr-NK (SS-N-30A) land-attack cruise missile, and Russia’s new 3M22 Tsirkon (SS-N-33) supersonic anti-ship missile.
The second accompanying passage discusses the next generation of Russian universal missile launchers. The UKSK-M will be capable of not
only firing the same missiles as the 3S-14, but will also be capable of firing air defense and antisubmarine missiles. Due to the varying lengths
and diameters of these different missiles, these launchers are likely to waste a significant amount of space for most applications, but in exchange
Russia would gain a universal launcher capable of being installed on Russian submarines, cruisers, destroyers, frigates, and even corvettes. This
universal launch system will certainly complicate ascertaining the capabilities of any given ship equipped with such a system, as the capabilities
of the ship would only be known, if the type of missiles loaded into the internal launchers is known. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov, Aleksey Ramm, and Nikolay Surkov: “«Адмиралов» вооружат «сотовыми ракетами» (The ‘Admirals’ Will
Be Armed With ‘Cell Missiles’),” Izvestia Online, 3 January 2018. https://iz.ru/682833/aleksandr-kruglov-aleksei-ramm-nikolai-surkov/
admiralov-vooruzhat-sotovymi-raketami
Russian ships are to be protected by supersonic weapons. Project 11356 frigates (the so-called Admiral series) will be equipped with unique
9M100 interceptor missiles. Currently the 11356 frigates are armed with Shtil-1 anti-aircraft missile systems. Missiles from this system are
capable of hitting targets at long range but cannot easily cope with maneuverable objects near the ship. Special cells with the 9М100 will be
loaded onto vertical launchers of the Shtil system. According to experts, this will significantly expand the combat capabilities of the frigates ̶ a
layered air defense system will be deployed around them.
Izvestia was told in the Navy High Command that the project to equip Shtil-1 anti-aircraft missile systems with 9М100 missiles is at the
technical evaluation stage. It is assumed that they will be included in the armament of project 11356 frigates and other newly constructed
ships.
The 9М100 was originally designed for the S-400 Triumf anti-aircraft missile system and its maritime modification, the Poliment-Redut…
The 9M100’s firing range is from 500 meters to 15 kilometers. It can hit targets at altitudes from 5 meters to 8 kilometers. The missile can
effectively hit targets moving at speeds up to 3,600 kilometers per hour…The new project 11356 interceptors on board the frigates will be
placed in special cells. These are several plastic transport-and-launch containers combined in a single structure. This cell fits in a standard
Shtil anti-missile system launcher.
Naval expert Aleksandr Mozgovoy told Izvestia that the presence of highly maneuverable anti-aircraft missiles in the on-board anti-missile
system is of great importance for project 11356 frigates. “These are ships operate without air cover, so they need a layered air defense,” the
expert explained. “The Shtil anti-missile system that is now mounted on them has a range of about 70 kilometers and it ensures a reliable
interception of aerial attack assets on distant frontiers. But to operate at close quarters it is advisable to have small, fast, maneuverable
missiles. Plus, they take up less space and many more can be taken on board. The new missiles will significantly expand the combat
capabilities of these ships.”
The Shtil-1 anti-aircraft missile system is equipped with the upgraded Buk-class 9-М317-ME guided missile-interceptor system. It can hit air
targets at altitudes from 15 meters up to 35 kilometers and at distances up to 70 kilometers. This anti-aircraft missile system comprises from
one up to three combat modules, each with 12 transport-and-launch containers. Depending on the number of modules, the munition comprises
from 12 up to 36 missiles. The design of the anti-aircraft missile system initially suggests the possibility of using missiles of other types and
smaller sizes. That made it easy to upgrade the 9М100 product for the Shtil.
(continued)
OE Watch | February 2018

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: New Naval System Will Be Capable of
Launching Air, Shipping, and Ground Attack Missiles
“It will be possible to install the UKSK-M [universal launch system] not only on cruisers and frigates but
also on the lighter corvettes and even on small missile ships of very compact dimensions. Older ships will
be fitted with the launcher during routine overhauls.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Nikolay Surkov, Yevgeniy Dmitriyev, “Универсальная пусковая установка позволяет применять любые ракеты
в любых погодных условиях, [Multipurpose System Will Enable Use of Any Missile in Any Weather],” Izvestia Online, 17 November 2017.
https://iz.ru/654343/aleksei-ramm-nikolai-surkov-evgenii-dmitriev/rossiiskii-flot-poluchit-superraketnitcu
Russia’s warships are to get an “everything” launcher that can store and fire all types of missile in service with the Navy, even in the
strongest storm -- antiaircraft, cruise, antiship, and even antisubmarine. They currently have several types of launcher for different missile
types. The new product’s official name is UKSK-M (ship’s universal launch system). It comes as a container with pods and is mounted
beneath the ship’s deck. Each pod is designed to hold one missile. Externally, only the protective lids are visible. According to experts, this
new development means that warships can make maximum use of their capabilities and take on board only the type of missile they need for a
specific purpose.
Development work on the UKSK-M is already under way, Izvestia was told at the Navy’s high command. The plan is that after completion
of trials, the launcher will enter service with Russia’s warships of the future. It will be possible to install the UKSK-M not only on cruisers
and frigates but also on the lighter corvettes and even on small missile ships of very compact dimensions. Older ships will be fitted with the
launcher during routine overhauls…
Naval expert Dmitriy Boltenkov told Izvestia that a universal system with vertical launch gives greater flexibility when deploying ships. “You
can load the exact type of missile you need to do a specific job,” he pointed out. “For example, to support an operation on land you take more
cruise missiles and to escort an aircraft carrier task force -- antiaircraft and antiship missiles. But there are certain technical challenges.
Missiles come in various sizes and the fixing points inside the UKSK-M will have to be equally effective at holding both light and short and
heavy and long items. It will also need a unified system for the missile and the ship to exchange information. For that, you need not only the
same connectivity for the missiles but also specialized software for the electronics.”

“Russia’s warships are to get an “everything” launcher that can store and fire all types of missile
in service with the Navy, even in the strongest storm -- antiaircraft, cruise, antiship, and even
antisubmarine.”

91RE1 submarine launched anti-submarine missile from Kalibr-PLE/Club-S system.
Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2011/i-4TQjBZW/A, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Increasing Military Capabilities in the Far East
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation has recently announced several force structure changes to increase military capabilities
on her Eastern border, for the purposes of coastal defense and area denial. (Russia has already announced the creation of a Coastal Defense
Division in Chukotka.) Specifically, the Russian Federation appears to be interested in hindering the freedom of movement of the US Navy in
the Northern Pacific. The first accompanying excerpted article from Izvestia discusses Russian plans to field a new aviation regiment and Air
and Air Defense Army in the Russian Far East. The passage quotes military expert Aleksey Leonkov as saying that the US’s military activity in
the region “has increased many-fold under the pretext of the North Korean missile threat.” According to the second passage, also from Izvestia,
Russia will deploy new coastal defense missile systems (Bal [SSC-6 SENNIGHT] and Bastion [SSC-5 STOOGE]) in order to deny “access to the
Sea of Okhotsk and to the coasts of Primorye to American aircraft carriers.” End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“This region has recently become ‘hot’. The US’s military activity here has increased many-fold under
the pretext of the North Korean missile threat…We directly border Alaska in the Chukotka and Kamchatka
Region, where major US aviation and naval bases have been built. The United States has six aircraft
carriers in the Pacific Ocean….” - Military Expert Aleksey Leonkov
Source: Sergey Valchenko, Aleksey Ramm, and Yevgeniy Andreyev,
“Дальний Восток прикроют морским воздушным щитом: На
Тихоокеанском флоте создается новая армия ВВС и ПВО (They Will
Cover the Far East with a Naval Air Shield: A New Air and Air Defense
Army Is Being Created in the Pacific Fleet),” Izvestia Online, 18 December
2017. https://iz.ru/679966/sergei-valchenko-aleksei-ramm-evgenii-andreev/
dalnii-vostok-prikroiut-morskim-vozdushnym-shchitom

Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm, “«Бастион»
на Курилах: Новые базы на островах прикроют мощной
системой береговой обороны (The ‘Bastion’ in the Kuriles:
They Will Cover the New Bases on the Islands with a
Powerful Coastal Defense System),” Izvestia Online, 29
November 2017. https://iz.ru/676106/nikolai-surkov-alekseiramm/bastion-na-kurilakh https://iz.ru/news/666216

In 2018, they will merge the Pacific Fleet Naval Aviation and air defense
forces into the composition of a powerful army with headquartered on
Kamchatka. The new operational combined formation will consist of at least
two divisions – aviation and air defense forces. It has been tasked to monitor
the air situation on Kamchatka and Chukotka and in the Arctic Region.
Based upon expert assessments, the formation of an Air and Air Defense
forces Army neighboring Alaska attests to the buildup of the Pacific Fleet’s
strike potential.

Russia will build bases on the strategically important islands
of the Kuriles Archipelago. They will cover Paramushir
and Matua from attacks from the sea with a powerful
missile shield. Bal [SSC-6 SENNIGHT] and Bastion [SSC5 STOOGE] coastal anti-ship missile batteries will be able
to sweep with fire the water area along nearly the entire
Kuriles Archipelago – from Kamchatka to Iturup. The work
on equipping the firing positions will begin already in 2018.
According to the experts’ assessments, the new coastal
defense system will permit them to reliably “secure” the Sea
of Okhotsk and cover Primorye and Sakhalin from the attacks
of a hostile navy…

Ministry of Defense personnel reported to Izvestia that the formation
of the Air and Air Defense Army will begin in 2018. Aviation units and
the air defense missile and radiotechnical troops will be transferred to
its composition. The future operational combined formation’s area of
responsibility extends from the Northern Kuriles to the Arctic Wrangel
Island…Unmanned aerial vehicle subunits will become part of the
composition of the composite aviation regiments, along with squadrons
of antisubmarine warfare and transport aircraft, fighters, reconnaissance
aircraft, and missile-equipped aircraft.
The 317th Composite Aviation Regiment, which is deployed at Yelizovo
near Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, and the 53rd Air Defense Division that is
also based there will constitute the foundation of the new army’s grouping…
The aviation and air defense forces that have been assembled under oneman command will be able to effectively track threats in their area of
responsibility and effectively counter them. The grouping’s mission – is to
exclude a surprise air attack and to instantaneously disrupt any attempts to
challenge the Russian borders. The Air and Air Defense Army will operate in
a single command and control loop with the main forces of the Pacific Fleet
and of all Eastern Military District.
Military Expert Aleksey Leonkov told Izvestia that the creation of these
formations on the Pacific Axis is not a moment too soon. “This region has
recently become ‘hot’. The US’s military activity here has increased manyfold under the pretext of the North Korean missile threat,” Aleksey Leonkov
explained. “We directly border Alaska in the Chukotka and Kamchatka
Region, where major US aviation and naval bases have been built. The
United States has six aircraft carriers in the Pacific Ocean...”

The Bastion mobile coastal complexes are armed with
Onyx supersonic anti-ship complexes, which are capable of
destroying targets at ranges of up to 600 kilometers (with
the availability of a helicopter with a radar complex). The
Bastion batteries, which are deployed on the island of Matua
in the middle of the Kuriles Archipelago, are capable of
sweeping with fire the entire archipelago – from Kamchatka
in the north to Iturup in the south. This will permit them to
reliably “secure” the Sea of Okhotsk and to cover Sakhalin
Island and Primorye from possible attacks…The men and
equipment that are deployed here will control the northern
portion of the Kuriles Archipelago and will also provide
additional cover of Petropavlovsk, where ballistic missile
submarines are based…The Bal complexes (firing range up
to 120 kilometers) will provide the defense of the navy bases
themselves in the event that the enemy will turn out to be
closer or will attempt to land an amphibious assault force on
Matua or Paramushir.
Naval Expert Aleksandr Mozgovoy told Izvestia that the
bases in the Kuriles will permit the guarantee of security of
the straits between the islands and to reliably close access to
the Sea of Okhotsk and to the coasts of Primorye to American
aircraft carriers…
OE Watch | February 2018

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Anti-Satellite Weapons Systems
OE Watch Commentary: Russia is attempting to well position itself for different space contingencies. The accompanying excerpted article
from Izvestia discusses a few of Russia’s anti-satellite developments. Russia has long been interested in various laser technologies to counter
imagery satellites. The Sokol-Echelon Laser System, usually referred to as the Beriev A-60, is a powerful laser mounted to an Il-76MD aircraft.
In theory, this system will be able to disable overhead satellites, not by shooting them out of the heavens, but instead by damaging their optics
or other components. The Krasukha-2 counters aircraft and space-based radar systems by emitting energy at the same frequency as emitted by
radars, in order to interfere with the radars’ operation. The accompanying article from Interfax mentions the development of the ‘Tirada-2S,’
likely a wide-band SATCOM jammer, and the ‘Rudolf,’ a mobile anti-satellite missile that is likely launched from an ICBM launcher. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Dmitriy Kornev, “Космос как поле боя: Военный эксперт Дмитрий
Корнев — об арсенале будущих орбитальных войн (Space as a Battlefield: Military
Expert Dmitriy Kornev - On the Arsenal of Future Orbital Wars),” Izvestia Online, 14
December 2017. https://iz.ru/680335/dmitrii-kornev/kosmos-kak-pole-boia
The US Armed Forces Strategic Command (STRATCOM) Commander…
recently stated that Russia and China are developing and testing antisatellite
weapon systems. The General explained about weapons, which can jam [satellite]
communications, and about laser weapons…The development of those combat
systems is usually conducted in a situation of heightened secrecy but, nevertheless,
information about “counter-space” systems become accessible to the public from
time to time.
The first thing that comes to mind, when they talk about the creation of jamming
by spacecraft – is the somewhat latest domestic radiotechnical and laser systems.
The most futuristic of them – is the Sokol-Echelon Laser System [also known as
the Beriev A-60] This is a special aircraft complex with an experimental laser
mount, which is designed for the destruction of spacecraft optical systems. “The
Sokol-Echelon, like other state-of-the-art laser complex, is not capable of shooting
down a satellite – a truly fantastic amount of energy is needed to do this. But it can
disable the optical sensors…”
The second real counter-space system – is the Krasukha-2 broadband
radiotechnical jamming station. Its purpose – is to cover fixed ground-based
facilities from air and space electronic reconnaissance systems. The E-8C JSTARS
aircraft, the radars of strike aviation aircraft, reconnaissance and reconnaissancestrike unmanned aerial vehicles, and also reconnaissance satellite radars are
the Krasukha-2’s main targets. Of course, that system – is not a weapon in pure
form, but this is a combat radiotechnical system, which can be employed against
spacecraft and disrupt the nominal operation of its detection systems…

Source: “Russia says it is developing anti-satellite
weapons” Interfax, 30 November 2017.
The Russian Federation is developing advanced antisatellite weapons, a research institute of the Russian
Defense Ministry has said.
According to Oleg Achasov, deputy head of the 46th
Central Scientific Research Institute, work is under
way in several areas and will be completed under the
State Armaments Program for 2018-2027. In particular,
he said that the Russian Federation is developing
“the mobile anti-satellite strike system Rudolf” and
“the mobile anti-communications satellite electronic
warfare system Tirada-2S”…
According to the website of the Russian Defense
Ministry, this Central Scientific Research Institute
(TsNII) drafts armaments programs and provides the
foundation for “the prospects for the development
of the armament system of the Armed Forces of the
Russian Federation”.

“... the Russian Federation is
developing ‘the mobile anti-satellite
strike system Rudolf’ and ‘the mobile
anti-communications satellite electronic
warfare system Tirada-2S’.”

Taganrog. Beriev Aircraft Company. Beriev A-60.

Source: By Alexxx1979 (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ATaganrog_Beriev_Aircraft_Company_Beriev_A-60_IMG_7981_1725.jpg, [CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia’s New ‘Dragonfly’ UAV
OE Watch Commentary: Recent developments in military
technologies have largely favored asymmetric warfare capabilities
rather than traditional developments. In particular, unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) play an increasing role in militaries all over the
world. The Russian military continues to develop UAV capabilities,
and according to the recent article in the pro-government source
Izvestia, it has successfully tested a new category of reconnaissance
UAV in Syria.
The article reports that the new drones detect mines and other
explosives without significantly endangering personnel. The
engineers remain in a nearby armored vehicle, controlling and
monitoring the drone throughout the search. The UAV, called the
Strekoza (Dragonfly), detects mines more consistently and more
quickly (flying 20 kilometers/hour) than engineers, and can operate
successfully both in populated and unpopulated areas. According to
the author, it will be most useful in open wastelands, where limited
cover greatly endangers the lives of personnel with traditional
mine detection devices, but is also helpful in population centers,
where accuracy and speed are critical to the prevention of civilian
casualties.
The drones, “designed for use by mobile engineering
reconnaissance teams,” can be transported easily in the Russian Tigr
armored vehicles. The Strekoza weighs 12 kilograms, can carry a
payload of an additional 2 kilograms and “can stay aloft for up to 40
minutes” using its eight electronic motors. It is designed to detect
semiconductor components. While this leads to the detection of both
mines and other explosives, the drones also check for “caches of
weapons and ammunition, communication devices, and hardware.”
The Strekoza can then determine the type of weapon detected
and transmit the information to nearby engineers, who are then
deployed to disarm the detected explosives. The UAV is also fitted
with a video camera to allow for visual inspection of targets prior to
deploying engineers.
The nonlinear radar of the Strekoza allows for detection of the
unsystematic planting patterns. The ability of the drone to detect
explosives in cities and through buildings ensures fewer civilian
casualties and an effective handling of urban explosives. According
to the author, these features in particular will ensure successful
removal of explosives with limited casualties in Syria and other
similar zones. End OE Watch Commentary (Johnson)

“The Strekoza is designed to replace the
military engineer with a mine detector, especially
when under fire in open country.”

Source: Nikolay Surkov, “Мины найдет робот-«стрекоза» Российские
саперы испытали в боевых условиях уникальный комплекс
инженерной разведки (‘Dragonfly’ Robot Will Locate Mines; Russian
Military Engineers Tested Unique Engineering Reconnaissance System
in Combat Conditions),” Izvestia Online, 27 November 2017. https://
iz.ru/657812/nikolai-surkov/miny-naidet-robot-strekoza
Russian military engineers have received the Strekoza unique robotic
engineering reconnaissance system. It is an unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) equipped with a non-linear radar, camera, and GPS module.
It is designed for remote search for mines and improvised explosive
devices. The drone is able to quickly survey a large area and identify
sources of danger. The Strekoza has already been tested in Syria.
According to experts, the use of such UAVs significantly reduces the
risk to life of military engineers and speeds up demining activities….
…The drone was especially in demand when checking large open
spaces around population centers and also wasteland.
The Strekoza is designed is to replace the military engineer with a
mine detector, especially when under fire in open country. The UAV is
deployed from an armored vehicle, in which the operator remains, and
systematically combs the area in automatic mode. When detecting an
explosive the Strekoza determines its coordinates and transmits them in
real time to a control panel.
The Strekoza UAV is designed for use by mobile engineering
reconnaissance teams. With a mass of about 12 kilograms, it can be
transported by a Tigr armored vehicle. It can stay aloft for up to 40
minutes and can carry up to two kilograms payload.
The Strekoza carries the nonlinear NR-900K Korshun underneath
its body. It is designed to search for controlled mines and explosive
devices and other equipment containing semiconductor components —
whether on or off. When a probe signal from a transmitting antenna
interacts with semiconductors it is re-emitted and returns to the radar
receiving antenna.
In this way it checks roads and buildings for the presence of
radio controlled bombs, mines, and any munitions containing
semiconductors. It can also look for caches of weapons and
ammunition, communication devices, and hardware….
…The drone is lifted into the air by eight miniature electric motors,
which make it look like a big black spider. Flight speed when
performing engineer reconnaissance, up to 20 kilometers per hour,
provides a quick scan of the area. The UAV is also fitted with a video
camera for visual inspection of suspicious objects. Detected explosive
devices are neutralized or destroyed by military engineers.
Military expert Oleg Zheltonozhko told Izvestia that the widespread
introduction of robotic systems in Syria helped reduce risks for
engineering troops personnel….
…According to reports by Russian military engineers, the use of
nonlinear radar became one of the main methods of searching for
explosive devices in Syria. This was due to the unsystematic mining
of areas by the militants and the use of a large number of improvised
explosive devices in urban areas, which ruled out demining using the
classical method.

OE Watch | February 2018

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Altering Lunar History
OE Watch Commentary: The Soviet
Union’s space program was one of its greatest
achievements. Whether launching the first
orbital satellite, sending the first animal, man
and woman into space, conducting the first
space-walk, or making the first unmanned lunar
landing, the USSR often led the US in the space
race. The Russian record over the past 25 years
has not been as impressive, and nostalgia over the
USSR’s space achievements remains a source of
national pride. This nostalgia, combined with the
current anti-American climate, has resulted in
some Russians today questioning whether the US
actually landed men on the moon in July 1969.
The brief excerpt from the normally authoritative
Military Industrial Courier (VPK) describes the
Russian rationale behind this skepticism.
The article begins by asserting that “there
are more and more arguments from foreign
researchers refuting the landing of Americans
on the Moon.” The reason that Russians have
not fully joined in this chorus of doubt “is
economic,” suggesting that Soviet and Russian
leaders and scientists “exchanged the gold of
silence for material and momentary political
benefits.” The article goes on to assert that “the
whole [US] lunar program was invented” and
that Russia today has “recognized specialists
who could prove this case with the necessary
scientific and technical justification.”

Astronaut David R. Scott, commander, gives a military salute while standing beside the deployed U.S. flag
during the Apollo 15 lunar surface extravehicular activity (EVA) at the Hadley-Apennine landing site (1971).
Source: By NASA James B. Irwin, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AScott_Gives_Salute_-_GPN-2000-001114.jpg, Public domain.

“The exposure of this myth will be a powerful blow to the image of
the United States in the world.”

The article concludes by stressing that now is
the time for Russia to expose this “truth,” since
the country is facing “a massive offensive on all fronts of the ideological and information war.” To counterattack, Kremlin leaders must expose
“this myth [which] will be a powerful blow to the image of the United States in the world.” Over the past several years, the Kremlin-sponsored
media has orchestrated a campaign to convince its population that the West/US is determined to weaken Russia. To fight back against such a
determined enemy, some Russians are now advocating a revision of history. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: Boris Loznevoy, “Лунная пыль в глаза. Посадка Аполлонов – красивая картинка или политическая сделка? (Moon Dust in Eyes.
The Apollo Landing- a beautiful picture or a political deal?),” Военно-промышленный курьер (VPK-Military Industrial Courier), 19 December
2017. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/40501
There are more and more arguments from foreign researchers refuting the landing of Americans on the Moon. Supposedly, even Trump’s
adviser on science recognized the landing of the Apollo as a fake. And what about us? Who, if not Russian scientists, designers and astronauts,
could set the record straight!
In this matter, aside from the technical aspect, there were many political decisions that clearly played along with the American version. There
are several explanations for the Soviet position. The main thing was economic. We exchanged the gold of silence for material and momentary
political benefits. Is it not time to tell the truth about this adventure, without waiting for a self-disclosure from the Americans themselves?
After all, this lie can be cast by them as another victory in the struggle of the two systems, as a political scheme, which eventually led to the
destruction of the USSR and the US victory in the Cold War. … Their whole lunar program was invented. In the matter of space flights, we have
recognized specialists who could prove this case with the necessary scientific and technical justification….
…This is especially true at the present time, when “a massive offensive on all fronts of the ideological and information war is against Russia.
It’s time to show the world not only petty lies with a test tube of anthrax, but also lies on an interplanetary scale. In fact, most of humanity still
believes that the Americans were on the moon. The exposure of this myth will be a powerful blow to the image of the United States in the world.

OE Watch | February 2018

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Shoygu’s Fifth Year Report Card
OE Watch Commentary: In November 2017, Sergey
Shoygu celebrated his fifth anniversary as Russia’s Defense
Minister, and as the brief excerpt from a long, detailed
article in the governmental newspaper, Rossiyskaya
Gazeta, points out, his record of achievements in this
post has been impressive. To review these successes,
“Shoygu presented an unprecedented open briefing [in late
December] on the state of the domestic Armed Forces at
the Ministry of Defense Expanded Collegium session.” To
highlight Shoygu’s accomplishments, the excerpt claims
that “during the last five years, our Armed Forces have
literally been transformed, having conducted a qualitative
leap both based upon the combat training level and also
based upon the mastery of the latest combat equipment.”
Carefully avoiding any mention of Crimea or SE
Ukraine, Defense Minister Shoygu began his review by
listing the many military successes in Syria. Besides
giving “more than 48,000 servicemen… truly invaluable
combat experience,” the Syrian mission has allowed for
a striking display of Russian firepower. All totaled, “215
types of weapons” were employed; everything from longrange precision-guided missiles to the latest air defense
systems. And while a number of “deficiencies and defects
were identified, 99 percent [of them] were eliminated
already during the course of combat operations.” Besides
liberating more than 1,000 populated areas, Russian
forces “killed 60,318 guerrillas, of them 819 leaders of
bandit formations,” and destroyed “396 illegal oil drilling
locations and their processing plants… and also 4,100
tanker trucks.”
Defense Minister Shoygu went on to review the other
major military accomplishments during his tenure (e.g.
new weapon systems, more realistic exercises, improved
logistic systems, a higher percentage of contract soldiers,
improved military housing, etc…). It is a long and notable
list, facilitated by the new “Russian Federation National
Defense Command and Control Center.” According to
Minister Shoygu, this center is a “5th-generation command
and control system,” allowing for “the integration into a
single inter-branch coordination system of 158 federal and
regional authorities, and 1,320 defense industrial complex
state corporations and enterprises.”
While reviewing the many indicators of renewed military
prowess, Shoygu pointed out, “We are not rattling sabers
and we don’t intend to fight with anyone,” adding that, “in
the process, we are not advising anyone to test our defense
capability for strength.” The article concludes on a positive
note, insisting that after listening to “Shoygu’s briefing,
one can arrive at only one conclusion: The Russian
Armed Forces are strong as never before, have combat
experience, and are prepared to defend the Fatherland on
land, at sea, in the sky, and even in space.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“The Russian Armed Forces are strong as never before,
have combat experience, and are prepared to defend the
Fatherland on land, at sea, in the sky, and even in space.”
Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “Шойгу: Армия получила бесценный боевой опыт
и готова к защите Отечества (Shoygu: The Army Has Received Invaluable
Combat Experience and is Prepared to Defend the Fatherland),” Rossiyskaya
Gazeta Online, 22 December 2017. https://www.rg.ru/2017/12/22/shojgu-armiiapoluchila-bescennyj-boevoj-opyt-i-gotova-k-zashchite-otechestva.html
RF Defense Minister General of the Army S.K. Shoygu presented an
unprecedented open briefing on the state of the domestic Armed Forces at the
Ministry of Defense Expanded Collegium session. From it, it follows that during
2017, and if more precisely – during the last five years, our Armed Forces have
literally been transformed, having conducted a qualitative leap both based upon
the combat training level and also based upon the mastery of the latest combat
equipment.
The Minister began his report for the first time with an analysis of the Russian
Army’s participation in actual combat operations on Syria’s territory. He
pointed out that more than 48,000 servicemen obtained truly invaluable combat
experience in Syria…. Every missile destroyed the assigned target. Special
Operations Forces accomplished the missions for the destruction of the bandit
formations’ leaders and terrorists’ facilities in the deep rear…
…It is no secret that the majority of the models of our military equipment were
tested in the Syrian Operation. The Minister cited the precise figure. These are
215 types of weapons. During their combat employment, 702 deficiencies and
defects were identified, 99 percent of which were eliminated already during the
course of combat operations…. The Russian troop contingent destroyed 8,000
armored vehicles and pickups with heavy machineguns, and 718 plants and
workshops for the manufacture of weapons and munitions during the course of
the engagements with the bandit formations on Syrian territory. It killed 60,318
guerrillas, of them 819 leaders of bandit formations…. As a result of the VKS
aircraft operations, 396 illegal oil drilling locations and their processing plants
were destroyed, and also 4,100 tanker trucks. During the support of the Russian
Aerospace Forces to the Syrian government troops and volunteer militia, 1,024
populated areas, including the most significant cities…were liberated….
…On the whole, the events, which were stipulated by the State Defense Order
2017, were fulfilled. Approximately 15,000 various troop training events were
conducted in the Armed Forces, which is 20 percent more than in 2016…. Sergey
Shoygu did not limit himself to the briefing for last year. He summed up the
results of the last five years. And they are also impressive….Today the Russian
Army is state-of-the-art, mobile, compact, and combat-capable.
“We are not rattling sabers and we don’t intend to fight with anyone,” Shoygu
pointed out, having added that, in the process, we are not advising anyone to test
our defense capability for strength.
The Minister had to comment on the Russian Federation National Defense
Command and Control Center that was created with his direct participation.
In Shoygu’s words, with its deployment, we have emerged at a 5th-generation
command and control system. The National Center’s information platform has
permitted the integration into a single inter-branch coordination system of 158
federal and regional authorities, and 1,320 defense industrial complex state
corporations and enterprises.… From Sergey Shoygu’s briefing, one can arrive
at only one conclusion: The Russian Armed Forces are strong as never before,
have combat experience, and are prepared to defend the Fatherland on land, at
sea, in the sky, and even in space.
OE Watch | February 2018

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Electronic Tokens to Track Soldiers
OE Watch Commentary: Alongside incorporating the
latest technology into their weapon systems, the Russian
military has introduced high tech advances into how it
manages personnel. The accompanying excerpt from
the pro-Kremlin source Izvestia Online describes a new
electronic token issued to military personnel which both
monitors movement and stores vital personal information.
Domestically produced, “the electronic token is a small
plastic card,” which has been battle hardened to withstand
extreme temperatures and EW measures.
The excerpt describes how these tokens will allow the
Defense Ministry “to monitor the movement of troops on
the unit’s territory, the time taken to get to secure facilities,
and can keep track of access to restricted information
resources.” The collection of this information will make
“it possible to analyze the work of both the military unit
and a specific soldier.” A successful trial program using
these tokens has already been completed, “and their mass
issue began in the autumn of this year [2017] to serving
conscripts and contract soldiers.”
The article quotes a military expert who asserts that
besides personal and health information, the token “stores
the serviceman’s financial documents, food certificates,
weapon securement logs, and much other information.”
This will purportedly streamline bureaucratic processes
within the military, since all the soldiers’ vital “information
is stored on a chip and changes in data are entered
instantly.” Another expert quoted in the article suggests
that these tokens will help “to improve discipline among
servicemen and security in military units.” Advances in
technology continue to change how militaries operate, and
issuing electronic tokens to Russian soldiers may improve
both bureaucratic procedures and accountability. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The introduction of the new tokens will
allow the Defense Ministry to monitor
soldiers’ access to secure facilities, track
the time spent in a particular premises,
... confirm the right to social, financial
and other services and maintain their
records.”

Source: Vladimir Zykov and Aleksey Ramm, “Военным начали выдавать
электронные досье (Soldiers Start to be Issued with Electronic Dossiers),”
Izvestia Online, 20 November 2017. https://iz.ru/671424/vladimir-zykov-alekseiramm/voennym-nachali-vydavat-elektronnye-dose
The mass issue of electronic tokens to Russian servicemen has begun…. The
tokens record personal data, access keys to various premises, biometric and
medical information, and the results of combat training. Thus, the Defense
Ministry now has the capability to monitor the movement of troops on the unit’s
territory, the time taken to get to secure facilities, and can track of access to
restricted information resources. Experts are confident that all the gathered
information will be provided to a unified information system of the Ministry of
Defense. This will make it possible to analyze the work of both the military unit
and a specific soldier.
As Izvestia was informed by the Defense Ministry, the first pilot batch of
electronic tokens was issued to privates and sergeants at the end of last year.
The trial was deemed a success, and their mass issue began in the autumn of
this year to serving conscripts and contract soldiers….
The electronic token is a small plastic card. Hidden inside the chip is an
information store. All the electronics are developed and produced in Russia.
The chip is capable of operating at temperatures from minus 50 to plus 50
degrees Celsius. The information on it will be retained if an adversary employs
electronic warfare [EW] measures or the token is exposed to electromagnetic
radiation. Data from the electronic tokens can be read using special fixed and
mobile scanners. The latter is especially important in a combat environment.
Doctors will be able to easily acquire all the information about a wounded
serviceman within seconds.
The introduction of the new tokens will allow the Defense Ministry to monitor
soldiers’ access to secure facilities, track the time spent in a particular premises,
and confirm the right to social, financial and other services and maintain their
records. The chip records all the information from a military ID card: full name,
military rank, unit number, blood group, and so on.
“The electronic tokens will very much simplify military bureaucracy,”
Izvestia was told by military expert Vladislav Shurygin. “Aside from personal
information, the unit stores the serviceman’s financial documents, food
certificates, weapon securement logs, and much other information. Previously
the records had to be constantly maintained and the data verified. That was
especially difficult when transferring a person between units. In such cases it
was necessary to collect a package of documents, verify them, and correctly fill
them out. Now all the information is stored on a chip and changes in data are
entered instantly.…”
…Andrey Kolesnikov, director of the Association of Internet of Things,
considers that the use of electronic tokens will allow the Defense Ministry
to improve discipline among servicemen and security in military units.
“The Russian Army will get objective data on which to make the necessary
conclusions,” the expert told Izvestia. “Discipline among servicemen as well as
the security of facilities will be improved since it will be clear who is where….

OE Watch | February 2018

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Spetsnaz Minelaying Detachments
OE Watch Commentary: While many countries
have renounced or limited the use of landmines, Russia
continues to develop and strengthen its ability to use
this weapon on the modern battlefield. The brief excerpt
from the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestia Online, describes
the formation of new “special minelaying detachments,”
capable of “stealthily” entering the “enemy’s rear areas in
two or three armored vehicles… to plant various types of
controlled engineer munitions.”
The first company-sized unit “is already operating
within the 1st Guards’ Engineer-Sapper Brigade,”
(Murom, Vladimir Oblast) and is purportedly armed
with “the newest armored vehicles and high-tech systems
with artificial-intelligence elements in their armory.”
The vehicles are a “spetsnaz version of the homelandmanufactured ‘Tigr’ armored vehicle” which “thanks to
their high off-road capability” are capable of “conducting
rapid raids into the enemy’s rear areas.” The unit is armed
with “both conventional Soviet- and Russian-produced
mines and intelligent systems,” which are “equipped with
various electronic (seismic, thermal, optical) sensors and a
system of remote control from a special tablet.”
According to the military expert quoted in the article,
“the Russian Army is devoting great attention to the use
of engineer munitions.” Mines can offer an asymmetric
advantage to a smaller force as they are able to “block off
roads and areas of terrain that the adversary might use for
maneuvering or transporting cargo,” while reducing “the
risk to our own fighting men.” This expert goes on to add
that “mines remain... one of the most effective and popular
means of armed combat.”
The article dismisses the notion that landmines should be
banned, asserting that “despite criticism from human rights
campaigners, given proper control and observance of all
the requirements, explosive obstacles pose a danger only to
the adversary.” The Russian military continues to enhance
its ability to employ mines both in defensive, and as this
article suggests, in offensive operations. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Special minelaying subunits have been

created in the Engineer Troops, capable of
secretively penetrating the adversary’s rear
areas in order to plant explosive obstacles
or destroy important assets there.”

Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm, “В российской армии появились
«стелс-саперы» (‘Stealth Sappers’ Have Appeared in the Russian Army),”
Izvestia Online, 26 December 2017. https://iz.ru/674692/nikolai-surkov-alekseiramm/v-rossiiskoi-armii-poiavilis-stels-sapery
Special minelaying subunits have been created in the Engineer Troops, capable
of secretively penetrating the adversary’s rear areas in order to plant explosive
obstacles or destroy important assets there. The “stealth sappers” have the
newest armored vehicles and high-tech systems with artificial-intelligence
elements in their armory. Experts note that mines make it possible to cover
the flanks, constrain the adversary’s maneuvers, and set up ambushes with an
insignificant number of personnel being involved.
The Defense Ministry has informed Izvestia that one further type of spetsnaz has
been created in the Russian armed forces -- special minelaying detachments. The
first such company is already operating within the 1st Guards’ Engineer-Sapper
Brigade. It is expected that a similar subunit will appear in every engineer
brigade.
In a special minelaying company there are several dozen high-caliber engineers.
These subunits are intended not for comprehensive minelaying of terrain, but for
pinpoint, clustered application. The spetsnaz men stealthily move up to the front
line or into the enemy’s rear areas in two or three armored vehicles and plant
various types of controlled engineer munitions there undetected. Their target
may be a bridge over a river or an important road along which enemy troops are
sure to pass. Using secretly planted obstacles, it is possible to set up an ambush,
to cover a threatened zone, or even to blockade a population center by mining its
outskirts.
For moving around, the “stealth sappers” use a spetsnaz version of the
homeland-manufactured “Tigr” armored vehicle. Thanks to their high off-road
capability, these vehicles make it possible to conduct rapid raids into the enemy’s
rear areas, and they provide the sappers with sufficient firepower and armor
protection against possible contact with the adversary. The special companies’
armory comprises both conventional Soviet- and Russian-produced mines
and intelligent systems. As Izvestia has reported previously, entire explosive
complexes have already been developed for the Russian Army, equipped with
various electronic (seismic, thermal, optical) sensors and a system of remote
control from a special tablet.
Military expert Oleg Zheltonozhko has noted that the Russian Army is devoting
great attention to the use of engineer munitions. “They are an effective means
of covering terrain and do not require the constant presence of personnel -which is especially important where soldier numbers are small, as they are,
for example, in special subunits,” the specialist noted. “It is possible to block
off roads and areas of terrain that the adversary might use for maneuvering
or transporting cargo. A competently planted minefield replaces an entire
detachment. At the same time, the risk to our own fighting men is reduced.”
Oleg Zheltonozhko added that mines remain as one of the most effective
and popular means of armed combat. “Despite criticism from human rights
campaigners, given proper control and observance of all the requirements,
explosive obstacles pose a danger only to the adversary,” the expert explained….

OE Watch | February 2018

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Thinning the Ranks
OE Watch Commentary: A modern and combatready military remains a key priority for the current
Kremlin leadership. Trillions of rubles have been spent
over the past several years to improve the overall image
and fighting capabilities of Russia’s armed forces.
However, as the brief excerpt from the pro-business
daily Kommersant claims, this combat ready, martial
demeanor is not reflected in all those who wear the
Russian military uniform- especially among senior
officers. According to the passage, “Russia’s Defense
Ministry has decided to discharge obese servicemen”
in an effort to improve the military’s image, and
perhaps, trim down the upper-level ranks.
The article points out that “commanders will be
instructed to draw up a list of subordinates with stage
III and IV obesity, after which a medical commission
will rule on their fitness for military duties.” The article
explains the “four stages of obesity: Stage I is when
excess body mass exceeds the ‘ideal’ by 10-29 percent,
stage II by 30-49 percent, stage III by 50-99 percent,
and stage IV is more than twice the ‘ideal’ body mass.”
This excerpt explains that “the Defense Ministry would
not reveal how many servicemen are expected to fall
into a category liable for medical discharge, citing data
protection,” but that this “move will make it possible to
sharpen up the ranks.”
Covering the same story, the second excerpt is from
a Siberian news source (URA News), which includes
quotes from two popular military journalists (Viktor
Baranets and Dmitry Litovkin). Baranets points
out that these high levels of obesity are rare in the
military and that these “measures will affect less than
one percent.” He goes on to posit that there is now “a
struggle for the image of the army – fat slobs are not
liked anywhere: neither in the troops, nor among the
staff.” Litovkin echoes these sentiments, stating that
“it is unseemly when heavy, obese generals stand in
the ranks,” and that their poor physique “is not an
example for young officers.” Litovkin ends the article
on an optimistic note, claiming that the “leaders of the
Syrian operation” are a good example of today’s more
professional-looking Russian officers, as they were
all “smart, physically strong people, without flabby
stomachs.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The army is supposed to keep itself
in shape.”

Source: Ivan Safronov, “Минобороны объявило войну лишнему весу (Defense
Ministry Declares War on Surplus Weight),” Kommersant Online, 8 November 2017.
https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3472466
Russia’s Defense Ministry has decided to discharge obese servicemen: A directive
to this effect has already been circulated to the personnel officers of all units.
Commanders will be instructed to draw up a list of subordinates with stage III and
IV obesity, after which a medical commission will rule on their fitness for military
duties….
… According to the book Obesity, published in 1964 and written by Professor
Mikhail Yegorov and Doctor Leonid Levitskiy, medics identify four stages of obesity:
Stage I is when excess body mass exceeds the “ideal” by 10-29 percent, stage
II by 30-49 percent, stage III by 50-99 percent, and stage IV is more than twice
the “ideal” body mass. Kommersant’s sources at the Defense Ministry would not
reveal how many servicemen are expected to fall into a category liable for medical
discharge, citing data protection. But they did say that the move will make it possible
to “sharpen up the ranks:” “The army is supposed to keep itself in shape.”
Source: Sergey Makeev, Leo Istomin, “Некоторые военные срочно ставили себе
клизму, чтобы похудеть (Some military urgently gave themselves an enema in order
to lose weight),” URA News, 18 November 2017. https://ura.news/news/1052313004
The Russian Armed Forces will get rid of military personnel with excess weight.
This decision was taken by Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu following the results of
the medical examination of servicemen in 2017. Until December 15, service personnel
with third and fourth degrees of obesity will be offered to resign or transfer to other
posts.
The presence of such an order was confirmed to the correspondent of URA.RU by
the military observer of Komsomolskaya Pravda, the retired colonel and former head
of the press service of the Defense Ministry Viktor Baranets. “There is indeed such
an order of the Ministry of Defense, which says it will fire military personnel who
fall under the third and fourth degrees of obesity. But we are not talking about mass
layoffs - the measures will affect less than one percent,” the source said….
…According to the expert, the new order of the Ministry of Defense will become
a signal for those who do not care about their physical form and the image of the
Russian military in general: “There is a struggle for the image of the army – fat slobs
are not liked anywhere: neither in the troops, nor among the staffs…” Baranets noted
that there will not be hasty decisions on dismissals - all those who do not meet the
parameters will get a chance to improve their physical form, and the final decisions
will be taken by the chief medical department and the main personnel department of
the Ministry of Defense.
More details about the causes and consequences of the “cleansing” of the military
ranks “URA.RU” was told by retired colonel, military expert, TASS military observer
Viktor Litovkin. “The army is an organism young, so the personnel hunger does
not threaten it. Nevertheless, some colonels and generals should carefully consider
this order and take up their own figure. Because it is unseemly, when heavy, obese
generals stand in the ranks. This is not an example for young officers. This order will
force some officers to do more physical training, and take better care of their health,”
said Litovkin….
…According to Litovkin, the leaders of the Syrian operation are a good example
for overweight officers: “they are smart, physically strong people, without flabby
stomachs...”

OE Watch | February 2018

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Commercial ATV Headed to Arctic Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Russian Arctic forces have a variety
of tracked vehicles, snowmobiles and ATVs that perform well
in the hostile climate. However, many of these come with a
hefty price tag. The Russian Ministry of Defense is looking at
civilian manufacturing to produce ATVs that can do a similar
job for cheaper. The commercial Шерп (Sherp-for Sherpa) may
fill the bill. The Military would rename it the Кречет (KrechetGyrfalcon, the largest of all the falcons which breeds in the Arctic
and Far North). The accompanying article from Izvestia discusses
the features of this vehicle.
According to the article, “the Arctic Jeep” can cope with any
lack of roads and can also float. It can start up at air temperatures
ranging between -76° and 122° Fahrenheit. Various weapons,
“Sherp” ATV.
Source: By TonyHansson (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASherp.jpg ,CC BY-SA 4.0.
reinforced armor, or other protection may be installed for the
military use of the vehicle. The passage quotes military expert Aleksey Khlopotov who points out that the vehicle will not require serious
armor, considering that the real threat in the Arctic is more likely to come from “sabotage and reconnaissance groups with …small arms,” as
opposed to “troops with tanks and artillery.” It can be viewed at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IRdOIS2EuFk. The commercial version
sells for $50,000. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Defense Ministry will equip Arctic brigades with the Krechet all-terrain vehicle...

In the opinion
of experts, the small, simple all-terrain vehicles will become a kind of ‘Arctic jeep’ and will be in demand
among the troops.”

Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Aleksey Ramm, “Army Will Get ‘Arctic’ Jeep.’ Military Units Above Arctic Circle Will Be Equipped With
Simple Economical All-Terrain Vehicles,” Izvestia, 6 January 2018. http://iz.ru
The Defense Ministry … states that trials of the Krechet light all-terrain vehicles intended for Arctic brigades and other units operating
beyond the Arctic Circle will begin in the winter of 2018. After completing the trials and the necessary modifications, the vehicle will be
recommended for adoption into the arsenal.
Under conditions of almost impassable terrain, according to the military, the small all-terrain vehicles will be the optimum means of transport
for special subunits of the Arctic grouping. One of their main tasks will be to seek out and destroy enemy saboteurs. These vehicles will also be
suitable for delivering freight and personnel to remote posts.
The all-terrain vehicles have already been tested under various climatic and landscape conditions – in the polar Urals, the Taymyr and Yamal
tundra, the Altay Mountains, and even the deserts of the United Arab Emirates. The test results showed that the all-terrain vehicle is capable
of coping with any lack of roads and can also float. It starts up confidently at air temperatures ranging between -60° and 50° Centigrade [-76°
and 122° Fahrenheit].
The TekhnoImpuls Company …states that their vehicle … is excellent for military use…. Various weapons, reinforced armor, or other
protection may be installed.
The Krechet’s great cross-country capability is ensured by low-pressure tires and a clearance of 600 mm [two feet]. The wheel pumping
system makes it possible to distribute pressure through the axles in the required ratio. The 6 x 6 wheelbase is an original development by the
enterprise.
The key feature of the design of the undercarriage is the gearbox, which makes it possible to use economical, low-power units. This gives the
Krechet an unprecedented range – 1,500 km. Patrols will be able to stay out on their routes for several days without refueling.
“The Defense Ministry is now deploying a large number of troops in the Arctic Region, and the military needed special hardware. Massproduced vehicles are needed in the Far North – kind of ‘ jeeps,’ suitable for use under very difficult conditions,” military expert Aleksey
Khlopotov stated. “The Defense Ministry needs simple vehicles that are economical to use. Everywhere in this region … are complex sections
of terrain with hundreds of rivers, lakes, and marshes that are impossible to overcome without special gear. The main requirements for allterrain vehicles are good cross-country capability in swampy terrain and the ability to move through water.”
The specialist added that the Russian defense industry is presently manufacturing good-quality all-terrain vehicles. But this is very heavy and
“voracious” hardware. Therefore the military are considering … purchasing a light all-terrain vehicle from companies unconnected with the
defense industry. If the Krechet satisfies all the requirements, the Defense Ministry will sign a contract with the manufacturer.
“These vehicles will not require serious armor,” Aleksey Khlopotov pointed out. “It is hard to believe that our hypothetical enemy would
decide to send troops into the Arctic with tanks and artillery. But sabotage and reconnaissance groups with …small arms are a real threat.”
The MOD plans to deploy a coastal defense division in Chukotka [opposite Alaska] in 2018. The military mission will be to patrol the coast
and counter a landing by enemy saboteurs. In the event of a large-scale enemy landing the Arctic infantry will have to quickly cover the
threatened salient. The absence of roads where the military will have to operate can be overcome only with special gear.
OE Watch | February 2018

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian UAV Regiment Stationed in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying passage from Na Strazhe
Zapolyarya-- Russia’s Northern Fleet’s
newspaper-- discusses Russia’s first (and
so far its only) UAV regiment which is
part of the Northern Fleet. According
to the article, the location was chosen
based on the goal of ensuring security for
Russia’s economic activity in the Arctic
region and for “developing, guarding, and
defending strategic areas of the Arctic
Ocean.”
As the article notes, there are two types
of systems in service with the Northern
Fleet’s UAV regiment: the Forpost-1, and
the mobile Orlan-10. These systems have
been in the force for several years and
Russia is developing UAVs particularly
for the Arctic. These include longdistance UAVs, helicopter UAVs, cargo
UAVs, scientific UAVs and even a nuclearpowered underwater drone [autonomous
underwater vessel-AUV]. UAVs, perhaps
from this regiment or the Central Military
District, supported the riverine landing
exercise at the river port of Dudinka
on the Yenisei River last August.
The first career UAV officers will be
commissioned from the prestigious
Zhukovskiy and Gagarin Aerospace
Academy this year and some graduates
will be assigned to the regiment. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“UAV detachments and

squadrons have been formed
throughout the Russian
Federation Armed Forces
but Russia’s first and so far
only UAV regiment is in the
Northern Fleet. Its location
was not chosen at random.
Our state has been paying
particular attention in recent
years to ensuring security for
Russia’s economic activity in
the Arctic region, and to …
developing, guarding, and
defending strategic areas of
the Arctic Ocean.”

Mobile Orlan-10 UAV.

Source: Mil.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AITC-UAV_01.jpg ,CC BY 4.0.

Source: Anna Korolkova: “The First and Only,” Na Strazhe Zapolyarya [On Guard at the Polar
Region], 15 December 2017.
In essence, UAVs are first and foremost reconnaissance devices. Using them makes it possible to
instantly obtain appropriate and relevant information, assess the situation, and make decisions when
executing combat and training missions....
UAV detachments and squadrons have been formed throughout the Russian Federation Armed
Forces but Russia’s first and so far only UAV regiment is in the Northern Fleet. Its location was
not chosen at random. Our state has been paying particular attention in recent years to ensuring
security for Russia’s economic activity in the Arctic region, and to … developing, guarding, and
defending strategic areas of the Arctic Ocean. Unmanned aviation is an essential tool in this
process....
The Northern Fleet’s UAV regiment was formed just a year ago. Since then a training facility has
been established, cubicles and hangars for the equipment have been made ready, and the airfield
has been reinstated after being closed for 20 years. It launched its first UAV on 7 July 2017. There
are two types of system in service with the Northern Fleet’s UAV regiment: the Forpost-1, which
operates from a fixed location, and the mobile Orlan-10. The aircraft in the Forpost system can
remain airborne for up to 18 hours, and those of the Orlan for 12 hours. New UAVs will arrive in
the future. By 2019, the regiment will be equipped with the specialized training simulators needed to
maintain and improve the UAV operators’ skills.
Regimental Commander Colonel Sergey Stepanov states that his subordinates are already a
cohesive military team capable of accomplishing any mission assigned to them. The Northern Fleet
regiment’s UAVs are used for reconnaissance, observation, and surveillance of the fleet’s zone of
responsibility, inspecting the coastline, topographical surveys of the terrain, checking the condition
of military infrastructure sites, assessing the quality of troops’ camouflage, visual monitoring
of combat training events by the fleet’s subunits, detection of targets for preparation of their
coordinates, artillery fire adjustment, and guiding combat aviation.
The Northern Fleet regiment’s UAV combat crews provided security this year for the “Arctic
-- Territory for Dialog” international forum, held in Arkhangel’sk in March. They helped assess
the effectiveness of fire at the main operational and combat training event of the Northern Fleet’s
forces and troops for the 2017 training year -- a performance-appraisal command and staff exercise
by the fleet’s mixed forces under the leadership of Vice Admiral Nikolay Yevmenov, Commander
of the Northern Fleet. The regiment’s UAVs were also used for information support in a unique
tactical-operational exercise to erect and defend a bridge across the Kola River in the settlement
of Shonguy…. UAV support is irreplaceable also for peaceful purposes, like detecting oil spills and
monitoring the condition of electrical transmission lines and pipelines.
This year, the regiment will receive its first officer graduates from the Unmanned Aviation Faculty
of the Aerospace Academy named in honor of Professor N. Ye. Zhukovskiy and Yu. A. Gagarin.
OE Watch | February 2018

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Tests New ICBM Component in Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: Russia continues to upgrade its
ICBM capability. The accompanying passage from an article
in the Independent Barents Observer, an independent online
newspaper covering the Barents Region and the Arctic,
discusses an ejection test of the Sarmat missile (NATO
designation: Satan-2) which took place at the Plesetsk launch
site in late December. The test was reportedly successful.
According to the article, the new missile will replace today’s
R-36M (NATO designation: SS-18 or Satan) silo-based
ballistic missile. The Sarmat reportedly has a maximum
range of 16,000 kilometers.
The Plesetsk Cosmodrome has been around since 1957
and is truly a veteran launch site for the Soviet and Russian
missile programs. However, its high latitude dictated that
most of the famous Soviet-era launches were from Baikonaur
Cosmodrome in what is today Kazakhstan. Russia now rents
Baikonaur from Kazakhstan, but has increased its missile
activity in Plesetsk. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“...the Sarmat is … able to penetrate any
American anti-ballistic missile system.”

Source: “Russia tested most deadly nuke-missile,” The Independent
Barents Observer, 28 December 2017. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/
security/2017/12/russia-tested-most-deadly-nuke-missile
“Russia’s new super-heavy thermonuclear armed ballistic missile is one step
closer to deployment. The missile is a core part of the ongoing modernization
program for the silo-based ballistic missile forces, one of the most costly
legs of the country’s rearmament program. The test has so far not been
officially reported by the Defense Ministry…, but a brief note in Moskovsky
Komsomolets refers to the test taking place at the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the
Arkhangelsk region on … 27 December. The test was reportedly successful.”
A so-called ejection test is not a full launch, but limits the firing to the first
stage engine. Moskovsky Komsomolets writes that the missile flew “several
dozen kilometers.”
The Sarmat missile, NATO … designation Satan-2, can reportedly carry a
payload of about 10 tons allowing for up to ten heavy nuclear warheads, or
15 lighter ones with yields ranging from 150 kilotons to one megaton. The
Russian Military TV channel Zvezda states that, like the submarine-based
missile Bulava, the Sarmat is … able to penetrate any American anti-ballistic
missile system.
The new missile will replace today’s R-36M (NATO designation SS-18 or
Satan) silo-based ballistic missile. Sarmat has a maximum range of 16,000
kilometers.

Intercontinental ballistic missile SS-18 Mod 5, Strategic Missile Forces museum.

Source: By Michael (Nuclear silo), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASS-18_missile%2C_Strategic_Missile_Forces_museum.JPG, CC BY 3.0.

OE Watch | February 2018

67

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
“The Cold War Will Look like Child’s Play
Compared to New US Sanctions”
OE Watch Commentary: In a recent interview with The Financial Times, Herman
Gref, Head of Sberbank, a state-owned Russian banking and financial services company,
commented on the negative effects that a new round of US sanctions would have on
Russia. His comments were repeated by Interfax.ru and many other Russian language
news outlets. The accompanying passage transcribed from a YouTube video discusses his
comments and puts them in context.
In addition to strongly stating the negative effect Russia’s exclusion from the
international SWIFT system would have, Gref said he is counting on President Putin to
adopt large-scale reforms if and when he is re-elected in March 2018. He specifically
notes a reform proposal made by Aleksey Kudrin, the Russian Minister of Finance 20002011. Kudrin’s proposal recommends reducing the role of government in the economy,
which is more in line with Gref’s previously stated advocacy against a cryptoruble and for
the legalization of cryptocurrencies, wherein he sees the future of currency in general.
According to the author, Gref is right to worry, because an exclusion from the
worldwide system of money transfers would signal a cardinal shift from pinpointed,
targeted sanctions, to a more systematic approach to affect Russia overall. As the
author sees it, Putin will likely downplay the gravity of the sanctions, nevertheless, the
“cleptocracy” will feel the hit. Despite his clear disdain for those in power, the author
builds his case systematically, suggesting the government’s next move will likely be one
to protect the interests of the oligarchy.
The author claims that Putin’s party, United Russia, already has a plan. As announced
at the recent party convention, the party’s plan would move the tax burden from the
business sector to the consumer sector, to alleviate the pressure on businesses, thus
spurring economic growth.
While tax schemes abound, the real danger for Russia in the threat of next round of US
sanctions is the continual backsliding of the economy. The author sites the dilemma faced
by the Russian government of paying pensions while attempting to limit the growth of
the national debt, which in 2018 will require 1/20th of the funds coming into government
coffers just to service. So far the gap has been covered by reserve funds, but starting this
year, according to the budget, the debt will be serviced ironically by a fund started to
support the national pension fund by investing in infrastructure.
Furthermore, the author notes that even rising oil prices would not help, because
increased expenditures go primarily towards funding national security and law
enforcement. Meanwhile, industrial production has taken the fastest dive since the
2009 economic crisis, unemployment is rising, and Russia has increased its ownership
of American bonds, so the US has levers on the Russian economy at both ends. As
one of the 472 commentators to the report states, “Sanctions are what’s imposed, but
“shanktions” are the result.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

“Every government has its mafia,
but Russia is the only mafia with its
own government.”
Source: Тэнгу, “Греф: ‘Холодная война
покажется детской забавой’ по сравнению с
санкциями США. Отключение от SWIFT (‘The
Cold War Will Look Like Child’s Play’ Compared
To US Sanctions. Exclusion from SWIFT),”
Youtube.com, 25 December 2017. https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=8qrF0BuiB30
Every government has its mafia, but Russia is the
only mafia with its own government.
…
The politicians announced the need to increase
taxes. The government considers it necessary
to increase the tax burden on consumers to
speed up economic growth. The Head of the
Ministry of Economic Development, Maksim
Oreshkin announced it at the Unified Russia
Party convention. According to Oreshkin, the
new taxes, which they will work on introducing
after the 2018 presidential election, must include
transferring the tax burden from businesses
to individuals. “Moving the tax burden from
investors to consumers is a structural change,
which will aid in economic growth,” Oreshkin
said.
…
As paradoxical as it might sound, even an
increase in oil prices won’t solve the budget
problems. “Additional resources go primarily
towards security forces,” says an analyst for the
Center for Development at the Higher School
of Economics, Andrey Chernyavskiy. So, in
November (2017) the expenses portion of the
budget was increased by 361 billion rubles, and
of that – 180 billion rubles – were designated
for national defense and security, and law
enforcement.
…

Map of countries which implemented sanctions against Russia following the annexation of Crimea in 2014.

The reports of increased unemployment are even
more alarming in the context of other negative
indicators demonstrated by the domestic economy
recently…RosStat (Russia’s State Statistics
Agency) announced that industrial production in
Russia had gone down by 3.6 percent in November
2017, after zero growth in October. This is the
fastest drop since the crisis of October 2009, when
the Russian economy took a nose dive as part of
the worldwide downturn.

Source: By Zhitelew, modified by Elmor via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASanctions_2014_Russia_(Crimea).png, CC0 Universal Public Domain.

OE Watch | February 2018

68

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Crypto-Detour around Anti-Russian Sanctions
OE Watch Commentary: The recent rise in popularity of
blockchain technology has led many to consider it for conducting
business outside the international SWIFT banking system, making
sales and purchases in some cryptocurrency instead of in a recognized
fiat currency, such as US dollars or euros. In response to Russia’s
annexation of Crimea in 2014, Great Britain suggested excluding
Russia from SWIFT as a form of sanctions; today, however, the
technology exists for Russian businesses to find a way around such
an obstacle.
While the SWIFT leadership argued that excluding Russian banks
would actually harm SWIFT itself, the author of the accompanying
article suggests that SWIFT criticized blockchain out of fear that its
own system and substantial influence in the world could be displaced.
According to the article, the anonymity afforded by Bitcoin
or other cryptocurrencies would likely not be possible using a
government-owned, government-regulated, or government-created
blockchain platform, and therein lies the rub. In fact, this idea
has been discussed for quite a while, always coming back to using
cryptocurrencies as understood in the “classic” meaning, i.e.
decentralized and anonymous, not in the sense it has been (mis)
applied in the term ‘cryptoruble’.
As the author notes, it has been suggested that the Kremlin could
see cryptocurrencies as a way around Western sanctions, especially
in the financial sector. In February 2017, Internet Ombudsman
Dmitry Marinichev suggested letting all legal entities – both
individuals and companies – register in Crimea, conduct operations
using Bitcoin, and convert them into rubles. This has the potential
to attract entrepreneurs. According to Marinichev, this would “give
Crimeans the opportunity to be part of the worldwide financial
system while also avoiding sanctions and prohibitions on moving
capital.”
Not coincidentally, in June 2017, the Russian Ministry of Finance
suggested allowing cryptocurrency transactions in Crimea as a way
to increase foreign tourism. Of course, creating a ‘Black Silicon
Valley’ is a risky proposition: as the author notes, while no one
can prohibit blockchain operations, regulators across the world
could collectively decide not to recognize them. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hall)

“The First Vice President of the Russian Federation
Igor Shuvalov...emphasized that President Putin
had shown a great interest in these (blockchain)
technologies, and had literally caught ‘blockchain
fever’.”
Source: Вера Соколова, “Криптообход антироссийских санкций
(Crypto-Detour around Anti-Russian Sanctions),” SVPressa, 1
September 2017. https://svpressa.ru/blogs/article/180575/
In Russia the interest in blockchain started after sanctions were
introduced. As is well known, a significant part of the measures have
to de specifically with the financial sector and limits opportunities for
banks and companies who come under the sanctions to attract lines of
credit, especially for the long term.
Moreover, the threat of tightening these measures up to and including
excluding banking institutions from the SWIFT system is always
hanging over the country’s head. On August 25, it became known that
that’s exactly what happened with two banks in Crimea – RNBK and
Tempbank. Although they stated that the exclusion had no effect on
them because they work only in Russian and use a domestic [funds]
transfer system, no one can guarantee that one of the bigger banks
won’t be the next in line.
It’s no coincidence that the majority of Russian financial institutions,
up to and including the government’s Sberbank, don’t operate on the
peninsula – the threat of sanctions is too great. Blockchain and its
potential would help solve the problem of attracting the investments to
the peninsula that it so needs, and getting around those limitations.
…
Of course, if it’s the government using blockchain, there will be no
anonymity, but in the case of Crimea, the type of anonymity Bitcoin or
other cryptocurrencies afford is exactly what advocates of this plan are
counting on.
...
“The First Vice President of the Russian Federation Igor Shuvalov...
emphasized that President Putin had shown a great interest in these
(blockchain) technologies, and had literally caught ‘blockchain fever’.”

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | February 2018

69

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Digital Sovereignty Effort Led by FSB
OE Watch Commentary: The
Federal Security Service (FSB) has
been participating in the International
Standardization Organization (ISO) effort to
develop a standard for blockchain technology.
This will allow the Russian government to
use the new technology in the future, and
to keep it Russian, according to Aleksey
Urivskiy, one of the Russian members of the
ISO’s special committee.
As described in the article, the first
in-person meeting of the ISO Special
Committee to Develop a Standard for
Blockchain Technology took place in Sydney,
Australia in April 2017. The Russian
delegation of four people was led by FSB
agent Grigoriy Marshalko, according to
ISO member Maxim Shevchenko. However,
Marshalko told Russian business daily
Vedomosti that he represents the FSB
on a different committee, the Russian
Committee of RosStandard for Standardizing
Cryptography. He referred all questions
regarding his participation in ISO to the FSB,
which did not respond for comment.

“The task of the Russian representatives
to the ISO committee is to ensure Russian
cryptographic algorithms make their
way into the international standard for
blockchain.”
- Aleksey Urivskiy, Expert and member of
Russian ISO Special Committee to Develop a
Standard for Blockchain Technology

FSB Emblem.

Source: By Espfutbol98 (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AFSB_Emblem.png, CC0 Universal
Public Domain.

According to Shevchenko, the legal regulation of blockchain throughout the world
in general, and in Russia in particular, is just starting to be developed, while the
government regulates cryptographic information protection relatively strictly. For
example, those projects certified by the FSB are connected to systems that review
personal data, and to bank-client systems for legal entities.
The government laid out its plans for blockchain in the Program for the Digital
Economy, which was approved at the end of July. According to the document, a
set of normative acts which would allow for a legal experiment in using blockchain
should be ready in the fourth quarter of 2018. By the end of March 2019, the
documents should be approved, and the experiment itself is planned for the fourth
quarter of 2019. The experiment will last one year, and the results will be used to
set the legal conditions for using blockchain.
The biggest challenge now is how to move forward quickly, while at the same
time maintaining an all-Russian technology. According to the article, as well
as to the many official opinions stated in the months prior to the President’s
announcement about the creation of a ‘cryptoruble’ in October 2015, Bitcoin and
other cryptocurrencies use “Western” technology, while Russia should use Russian
technology. In fact, as the Vice President of Sberbank (a state-owned Russian
banking and financial services company) admits in the article, its blockchain
projects primarily use foreign cryptographic protection. Meanwhile, one of their
projects, the Masterchain platform, has already been certified by the FSB.
According to the author of the book “Battle for the RU-net,” The FSB is trying to
add Russian algorithms to the international register to make Russian Internet users
choose the domestic blockchain – voluntarily at first, then as a requirement. In his
opinion, this is part of the digital sovereignty the government is developing. End
OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

Source: Екатерина Сирнова, Елена Мухамешина,
“ФСБ участвует в разработке международного
стандарта блокчейна (The FSB is participating in
developing an international standard for blockchain),”
Vedomosti, 18 August 2017. https://www.vedomosti.
ru/technology/articles/2017/08/18/730045-fsbblokcheina
Because cryptographic protection is at the heart
of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies, the
delegation to the international committee is comprised
of members of the Russian committee of RosStandard
for standardizing cryptography, according to
Shevchenko. The committee develops standards for
cryptographic information protection. The FSB is
in charge of its work: according to the committee
regulations, the Chairperson is a member of the FSB.
A special committee for blockchain in Russia will start
its work in the Fall. RosStandard started selecting
experts for the committee August 11, 2017.
The task of the Russian representatives to the
ISO committee is to ensure Russian cryptographic
algorithms make their way into the international
standard for blockchain, according to one of the
experts and member of the committee, Aleksey
Urivsky.
The lack of blockchain-based decisions certified
by the FSB and the FSTEK (Federal Technical and
Export Control Service) is one of the minuses of
this technology, a representative of the Ministry of
Communications told Vedomosti in May.
…
Without the means to certify electronic signatures,
as used in blockchain, Russian institutions will likely
not be able to use blockchain, Urivsky continues. It
should not include any Western cryptography, he says.
According to a representatives of the Ministry of
Communication, the plusses of blockchain are that it’s
impossible to change past transactions and you can
trace all the stages of a deal.
…

OE Watch | February 2018

70

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Why the Russian Government Needs the Cryptoruble
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article discusses
several compelling reasons for the Russian government to move
forward with creating a cryptoruble. These range from national
security and fighting crime to deposing the US dollar as the
worldwide reference currency.
The author suggests the exclusion of several banks on the US
and European sanctions list from the international interbank
money transfer system (SWIFT) should be a red flag regarding
Russia’s dependence on the system, as this represents a significant
national security vulnerability. If the entire country were to be
excluded, the country’s economy would hardly function, and the
country itself would be thrown back into the technological dark
ages of several decades ago.
Instead of remaking their own domestic version of every new
technology in recent memory (smart phones, money transfer
systems, etc.), the author suggests using the cryptoruble as a
leapfrogging technology to replace credit/debit card transactions.
The overwhelming advantage for the government is that it can
gain greater control over the banking sector and return to a more
centralized monetary policy. All non-cash payments would be
visible to the government, and, as the author suggests, this would
reduce credit card fraud and other illegal financial transactions.
Ironically, the author recasts the cryptoruble as a safe haven
from the shadow economy, instead of its jumping off point. He
contends that the cryptoruble should replace the cash ruble,
which would reduce the currency available for criminals to
engage in anonymous transactions.
Finally, the author discusses how a cryptoruble would be
the first step towards making an international cryptocurrency
that would displace the US dollar as the world’s foremost
reference currency. Predictably, the author suggests this new
super-currency would be “based on the national currencies” of
Russia and its allies, “China, Venezuela, Iran,” thus making it
the antithesis to “real” cryptocurrencies, which are beholden
to no country. The author suggests that the cryptoruble as
the common cryptocurrency among Russia and its allies
would “provide a greater degree of security in international
transactions, allowing [Russia] to stop using the SWIFT system,
from which Russia could be excluded anyway as part of another
round of sanctions.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

“The cryptoruble is the first step towards
no longer using the dollar in international
transactions with our allies (China,
Venezuela, Iran), to be followed by the
creation of an international cryptocurrency...
it would provide a greater degree of security
in international transactions…”

Central Bank of Russia, Neglinnaya street 12, Moscow, Russia.

Source: By Ludvig14 (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMoscow_RussiaCentralBank_M00.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: Федор Наумов, “Цифровой сувернитет. Зачем правителсвту
понадобится крипторубль (Digital Sovereignty: Why the Government
Needs the Cryptoruble),” Forbes.ru, 3 November 2017. http://www.forbes.
ru/finansy-i-investicii/352381-cifrovoy-suverenitet-zachem-pravitelstvuponadobilsya-kriptorubl
The introduction of sanctions has shown that Russia must create its
own systems and technologies, so as not to end up cut off from the global
technological infrastructure.
…
The situation in the banking sector: As of today, there are many banks in
Russia that use the non-cash ruble in grey [economy] schemes and do not
extend credit [to their customers], thereby limiting the ability of the Central
Bank to carry out monetary policy. A new, modern type of non-cash ruble –
the cryptoruble – could solve the problem by making the system of non-cash
payments more transparent and significantly reducing the number of illegal
[financial] operations.
The fight against the shadow economy: In this country, the time has come,
little by little, to squeeze cash out of circulation, in order to shut down part
of the grey economy.
…
The cryptoruble is the first step towards no longer using the dollar in
international transactions with our allies (China, Venezuela, Iran), to be
followed by the creation of an international cryptocurrency along the lines
of the special lending and borrowing rights.
Based on the currencies of allies, it would provide a greater degree of
security in international transactions, allowing [us] to stop using the SWIFT
system, from which Russia could be excluded anyway as part of another
round of sanctions.”

OE Watch | February 2018

71

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Cryptoruble Rejected in Favor of a Supranational
Cryptocurrency
OE Watch Commentary: In preparing to meet the deadline
set by President Putin to have the regulatory framework for
both “traditional” cryptocurrencies and the cryptoruble in place
by 1 July 2018, the Central Bank (CB) and Ministry of Finance
(MinFin) have submitted a bill for review, which they discussed
at a meeting of the Public Council on 28 December 2017. The
accompanying articles provide insight into their proposal,
which favors creating a supranational digital currency instead
of a cryptoruble.
According to the first article, both the First Vice-Chair of the
CB Olga Skorobogatova, and the Deputy Minister of Finance
Aleksey Moiseev, declared the creation of a cryptoruble not to
be worthwhile. They quickly turned to selling the positive side
of their recommendation, namely, that Russia look at creating
a supranational digital currency that would work across the
EurAsian Economic Union (EAEU) or within the framework
of Brazil-Russia-India-China-South Africa economic union
known as BRICS.
The rest of the meeting was dedicated to a discussion of
how to regulate “real” cryptocurrencies. According to the
third article, the CB considers them not to be viable forms of
payment, while the MinFin adds they could be treated as a form
of property and could be used to trade for other property, i.e.
not “buying” and “selling” per se.
As they try to thread this regulatory needle, the Deputy
Minister of Finance discussed the other highlights of the part of
the bill on regulating “classic” cryptocurrencies. According to
the second article, he suggested this “other form of property”
would be called a “token” and that tokens would be “mined”
and that “miners” would be considered entrepreneurs and
their activity would be taxed as such. Moiseev emphasized,
however, that the part about taxing miners was not in this bill,
but would be worked out in the future.
According to the second article, the bill also suggests a
stock market approach, in which the market/trading house
would need a license, but says nothing about the circulation of
cryptocurrencies themselves.
Given the lack of concrete decisions and the suggestion
to scrap the President’s idea of the cryptoruble, which Putin
publicly announced Russia would issue, we will likely not know
the fate of any cryptocurrency until the actual law is passed.
Certainly, the importance of the cryptoruble and of regulating
all cryptocurrencies cannot be understated as the President
aims at a fourth term in March 2018, in conjunction with the
Digital Economy project which was announced last year. End
OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

“... the Bank of Russia is looking at the possibility of
introducing a supranational digital currency within the
framework of BRICS or the Eurasian Economic Union
(EAEU).”
Source: “ЦБ в 2018 году начнет обсуждение единой цифоровой валюты
с патнерами по ЕФЭС и БРИКС (In 2018 the Central Bank Will Start
Discussions about Creating a Unified Digital Currency with Its Partners in
the EAEU and BRICS),” Interfax.ru, 28 December 2017. http://interfax.ru/
business/593815
“It does not seem altogether justified, from the perspective of
macroeconomics and the population, to introduce a national digital
currency. The idea that seems to us worth discussing with our colleagues
is introducing a digital currency in the EAEU or within the framework of
BRICS,” said Skorobogatova.
…
On Thursday [December 28, 2017], the Deputy Minister of Finance Aleksey
Moiseev said he does not consider creating a cryptoruble in Russia to be
worthwhile.
Source: ”Критпорубль пошел на повышение. Минфин представил
законопроект о цифровых активах (The cryptoruble Has Been
Promoted. The Ministry of Finance Presented a Bill about Digital
Assets),” Kommersant.ru, 28 December 2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/3512307
At the Public Council December 28, the Deputy Minster of Finance Aleksey
Moiseev presented the key elements of the bill on regulating digital financial
assets. Among them – the definition of a digital asset (token) as an “other
property”, mining (creating tokens) as an entrepreneurial activity, as well
as using a stock market for digital assets transactions.
Source: ”Ольга Скоробокатова: ЦБ РФ не признает криптовалюты
расчетным или платежным средством (Olga Skorobogatova: The CB RF
Does Not Consider Cryptocurrencies a Means of Payment),” Bitsmedia, 28
December 2017. https://bits.media/news/tsb-rf-ne-priznaet-kriptovalyutyraschetnym-ili-platezhnym-sredstvom/
The Ministry of Finance suggests defining cryptocurrency as a “different
form of property” rather than a form of payment/settlement. You would
not be able to buy anything with them, but you would be able to obtain
cryptocurrency and exchange it for other property. At the same time,
according to Skorobogatova, the Bank of Russia is looking at the possibility
of introducing a supranational digital currency within the framework of
BRICS or the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU).

OE Watch | February 2018

72

