community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #1
January 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

CRYPTOCURRENCIES
AND BLOCKCHAINS
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
13
14
15
17
19
20
21
22

The Kremlin’s Cryptocurrency Sanctions Bypass
Testing Crypto in Separatist Regions
The Cryptoruble: Not Exactly a Hard Currency, Not Exactly
the Russian Bitcoin
The Cryptoruble: A Test-Tube Baby among Natural
Cryptocurrencies, or Just an Electronic Ruble?
Questions Surrounding the Cryptoruble
Cryptocurrency Mining: A Hot Topic in the Energy Sector
China Aims to be Global Leader in Blockchain Technology
A Chinese Insider Analysis of Bitcoin in North Korea
North Korea Cyber Crime Shifts Gears
Malaysia Eyes New Era of Cryptocurrency and Terrorism
Financing
Malaysia Seeks to Regulate Cryptocurrencies
Vietnam Bans Bitcoin
Concerns about Cryptocurrency and Terrorism Financing in
Indonesia
The Market for Bitcoins in India
Digital Currencies in the Middle East and North Africa
Turkey Grapples with Blockchains and Cryptocurrencies
Blockchain’s LATAM Anti-Corruption Promise
Venezuela’s New Crypto-Oil Money
Gold Mining in Venezuela

23
24
26
28
29
30
31
32

China in the “Post-American” Middle East
Russia’s “Victory Lap” in the Middle East
Will Russia Establish a Military Base in the Red Sea?
What Next in the Renaissance Dam Conflict?
Algeria Rejects Joining Saudi-Led Terrorism Coalition
Iran: Khamenei Speaks on Views toward America
Iran: New Military Budget Proposed
Iran’s Amphibious Aircraft from Russia

ASIA-PACIFIC
48
49
50
51
52

AFRICA
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

Drivers of African Instability
Somalia: Who Will Fill the Security Void after AMISOM?
Women in al-Shabaab: Why They Join, What They Do
Gunsmithing: A Lucrative Business in West Africa
Eritrea: Cracks in “Africa’s North Korea”
Boko Haram’s Soft Targets: Refugees and IDPs
Inside the Mind of Mali’s Mausoleum Destroyer

LATIN AMERICA
40
41
42
42
43
44
45
46
47

Argentinean Submariners Lost at Sea
Debating the Impeachment of Former Argentinean
President
Who Is the President of Honduras?
New Old Chilean President Not Socialist
Electric Substation Event in Venezuela
The FARC’s Political Aspirations
Colombia to Train 20,000 Police Officers in Central America
Military Cooperation in South America
Brazil Hosts First Ever Humanitarian-Logistics Exercise in
South America

ASEAN Leaders Discuss Security Challenges
China Unveils World’s Fastest Amphibious Assault Vehicle
Rohingya Crisis: Will China’s Mediation Succeed?
China’s Relationship with Chile
China Considers “Defensive Mobilization” for Potential War on
Korean Peninsula

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
53
54
56

Kazakhstan’s New Military Doctrine
India’s Reaction to Russian Security Cooperation with Pakistan
Georgia: A Counterterrorism Operation Raises Questions

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
57
58
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
69

The Wagner Private Military Company
Russia Ponders the Creation of a Russian STRATCOM
New Artillery Rounds Will Extend Russian Artillery Range
Schemes to Skirt Sanctions
Can Russia Mobilize Military Medical Care?
Strengthening Military and Historical Claims to Crimea
Permanent Iskanders in Kaliningrad
Deciphering Russian Weapon Developments
In the Rucksacks of the Sofrino Brigade: Snickers and Pork Fat
Russian NBC Arctic Training in 2017
Russian Military Vehicle Winterization Challenge

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 1

January | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter
Jacob Zenn

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

		
Asia-Pacific

Fen Chen
R. Evan Ellis
Cindy Hurst
Sudha Ramachandran
Jacob Zenn
		
Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Source: By Comfreak, https://pixabay.com/en/matrix-code-computer-pc-data-356024/, CC0.

Matthew Stein

		
Russia, Ukraine, Europe

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER: Matrix.

Dodge Billingsley

Les Grau
Mica Hall

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
The Kremlin’s Cryptocurrency Sanctions Bypass
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying
article, “the Kremlin is considering cryptocurrencies
as a way of bypassing the international sanctions that
are affecting the country’s defense capabilities.” Up until
now, Russia’s defense industries have resorted to “import
substitution” to ameliorate the affects of sanctions by either
developing their own products or acquiring necessary
components via other countries. However, sanctions recently
imposed against major Russian defense firms may now
restrict the Kremlin’s ability to sell weapon systems to foreign
customers. The brief excerpt from an interview in the Russian
online news outlet Fontanka.ru describes how the Kremlin
“is considering cryptocurrencies as a way of bypassing the
international sanctions that are affecting the country’s defense
capabilities.”
While the excerpt does not provide a detailed explanation
of how the Russian cryptocurrency system will work, it does
claim that such a tool will allow “Russia’s trade partners… to
remain unnoticed by the United States” and thus would ensure
that they do “not fall under the sanctions.” The article points
out that “such ideas have already been discussed at the level of
the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa)” where
they “discussed the possibility of creating a cryptocurrency
for the organization.” Even before the crisis began between
Russia and Ukraine, the Kremlin leadership was aggrieved
that the US dollar served as the global reserve currency. They
contend that this economic advantage translates into American
military prowess. The Kremlin regards economic sanctions
as a powerful tool in America’s hybrid warfare strategy, and
Russia has been at the forefront in efforts to weaken American
economic might.
The Kremlin remains determined to modernize its armed
forces, and will search for means to bypass sanctions so that
Russia can continue rebuilding its military. This article asserts
that “the cryptoruble is an excellent countermeasure” to
Western sanctions and that the Kremlin leadership is waiting
for the just the right moment. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

Bitcoin logo on top of a United States Dollar.

Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BitCoin_Logo_With_US_Dollar.png, CC0 Universal Public
Domain.

“The cryptoruble is an excellent countermeasure…”
Source: Nikolay Nelyubin interviews businessman Yevgeniy Lifshits,
“Бутеринки спасут Россию и сделают Путина президентом (‘Buterinki’
Will Save Russia and Make Putin President),” Fontanka.ru, 25 September
2017. http://www.fontanka.ru/2017/09/25/055/
The Kremlin is considering cryptocurrencies as a way of bypassing the
international sanctions that are affecting the country’s defense capabilities…
Businessman Yevgeniy Lifshits thinks that the “cryptoruble” will come into
being very soon: Right before the Russian Federation presidential election….
…[Nelyubin] At what level are these discussions taking place? Which
ministries and sectors are worried?
[Lifshits] At the level of the VPK [military industrial complex] overseers and
manufacturers. It is also being discussed at fairly high-level meetings in the
Defense Ministry, Rostekh, and so on….
…[Nelyubin] Aside from observing reality, what do the powers-that-be need
to understand?
[Lifshits] The [United] States introduces the sanctions via SWIFT (the
largest international interbank system of transferring information and making
payments -- ed.) and monitors them there too. But companies want to work,
all this wrangling is of no benefit to them. How does this work? You see, you
have a buyer, company X, in Europe. It does not want to give away the fact it
is working with you, so that it does not fall under the sanctions. Then X buys
“Rucoin,” it uses this to settle its accounts with you, and you then convert the
profit into whatever currency you need, in China, for example. It is almost the
same as the way Iran went back to commodity exchanges when it was subject
to sanctions. It is just that today there is a new financial instrument. Drug
dealers and so on were the first to use Bitcoin. And now for the state it is the
way out of [a] difficult situation….
[Lifshits] …And this will happen the instant that they clearly see a way of
avoiding the sanctions using the cryptoruble….
…[Nelyubin] Give a prediction about the timescale. When can this
“command” be expected?
[Lifshits] There are two predictions. If this is the “chief executive’s” trump
card, then he will play it at the elections. Second is that the idea is undergoing
evolutionary development under the pressure of the West’s sanctions. This
means that if everything we described in our report is a cunning plan by
the Kremlin controlled by the President, then it will be one of the “saving
Russia” election narratives. This means the timeframe is the 2018 presidential
election, when Vladimir Putin saves the country from sanctions…. The
cryptoruble is an excellent countermeasure….
…[Nelyubin] When the Russian Federation is using cryptocurrency
transactions, what proportion of the overall Russian economy will it account
for?...
[Lifshits] Even today it is advantageous for Russia for foreign payments….
Of course if the state supports external payments. Such ideas have already
been discussed at the level of the BRICS…. Russia’s trade partners want to
remain unnoticed by the United States.
…[Nelyubin] But in general does the cryptoruble have a lot of supporters at
the top?
[Lifshits] Yes, a lot. It is just that this is the “tsar’s” trump card, so it must
not be played before the time is right. My theory is that this is the way out and
the trump card of the “tsar.” To show the West that we are not Iran, and we
can respond in a more technologically savvy way, and bypass the sanctions.
The economic ones first and foremost….
OE Watch | January 2018

3

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Testing Crypto in Separatist Regions
OE Watch Commentary: The current Kremlin leadership
remains intent on weakening the US dollar. They see a direct
nexus between dominant US military power and the status of the
dollar as the global reserve currency. According to the Kremlin’s
logic, unseating the dollar as the reserve currency will force
Washington to live within its fiscal limits, which will, in turn,
force the US to reduce defense spending. This reduced US global
military presence will then allow other regional powers (like
Russia) the opportunity to dominate what they maintain is their
legitimate sphere of interest. The Kremlin is increasingly looking
at cryptocurrencies as one of the tools to unseat the dollar as the
global reserve currency.
The brief excerpt from the opposition news site Meduza
explores attempts by three pro-Russian separatist regions
(Abkhazia, Transnistria and the Donetsk Peoples Republic
or DNR) to develop cryptocurrencies to both attract foreign
investment and to bypass Western economic sanctions. Each
of these Kremlin-sponsored regions came into existence with
Russian political, economic and military support. Isolated from
foreign investment, the economies of these regions remain on
Russian life support, and as the Russian economy has weakened,
Kremlin aid has proven insufficient. As the article points out,
leaders in these regions hope “to use cryptocurrencies to make a
great economic leap.”
While these regions have plenty of computer expertise to
develop cryptocurrency accounts, the article describes their lack
of reliable electricity (to run advanced computers) and the want of
support from the local leadership who suspect that this new form
of currency might negatively affect their extortion-fueled budgets.
Moreover, the article stresses that wealthy entrepreneurs who
have expressed an interest in investing in this project, have yet to
secure guarantees from local leaders that their investments will
not be stolen.
The article briefly describes a recent conference sponsored
by the Russian Duma which has become involved in “drafting
a bill about cryptocurrencies.” The author points out that “the
composition of the conference participants was interesting:
Almost one in five of them was either a general or a lieutenant
general,” and that during the presentations, one speaker “proposed
turning the Donbas into a special territory for experiments with
a digital economy.” The article concludes on a positive note,
asserting that this new currency “can make it possible to get
around the financial blockade on both the DNR and Crimea, and
also to attract hundreds of millions, if not billions, bypassing the
United States and the EU,” and finally claiming that “the world
will switch to cryptocurrency.” The Kremlin leadership may be
testing the employment of cryptocurrency in these separatist
regions before adopting wider employment. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“I am sure the world will switch to cryptocurrency.”
Source: Ilya Zhegulev, “Блокчейн как инструмент развития ДНР
(Blockchain as a Tool for Development of DNR),” Meduza, 17 October
2017. https://meduza.io/feature/2017/10/17/blokcheyn-kak-instrumentrazvitiya-dnr
…Unsurprisingly, enthusiasts and even functionaries from Abkhazia, the
DNR [Donetsk People’s Republic], and Transnistria are beginning to talk
about a possible cryptocurrency future for these territories….
…One of the first was a project from Abkhazia…Abkhazia plans in this
way to overcome its 25-year oblivion and to attract foreign investment:
Unlike ordinary money, so far there is no way of tracking the circulation
of cryptocurrencies, and investors will not be affected by the current
restrictions regarding the unrecognized republic…
… Abkhazia is not the only unrecognized state neighboring Russia that
is dreaming of entering the technological future by means of blockchain.
The entrepreneur Igor Chayka, son of the Russian Procurator General, is
already declaring that he intends to build mining farms in Transnistria, and
ministers from the local government attend conferences about blockchain
in the Donetsk People’s Republic -- but Abkhazia’s plans are the most
formalized and grandiose: The intention there is to use cryptocurrencies to
make a great economic leap….
… Initially Morgunov’s idea was to use blockchain as a simple and reliable
means of controlling humanitarian aid coming into the DNR, ruling out
the possibility of embezzlement. “There were situations in which money
was assigned to provide help for the Donbas, but nothing at all reached
the end consumer,” he protests…. He did not get the impression the person
he was talking to understood anything, but in February 2016 he was
summoned to the state security ministry itself for a chat with the ministry’s
technology specialist. He understood the situation far better and, according
to Morgunov, told him directly: “We won’t touch you, but as soon as you sell
your first Bitcoin, we’ll come to you right away. You can talk as much as you
want, but don’t do that.”
… in June 2016 salvation came from Moscow. Morgunov was summoned
to the State Duma for a conference organized by Andrey Lugovoy -- the
LDP deputy whom the British authorities accused of murdering Aleksandr
Litvinenko and who was now drafting a bill about cryptocurrencies. “The
composition of the conference participants was interesting: Almost one
in five of them was either a general or a lieutenant general,” Morgunov
recalls. As part of his presentation he proposed turning the Donbas into a
special territory for experiments with a digital economy.
… No other major investors in blockchain technology have appeared in the
DNR either. The republic government is not prepared to provide them with
any guarantees… External investors need guarantees that the equipment
will be intact….
…“This issue is not yet being dealt with at [the] state level,” Muratov says.
“If they ask for help, I am prepared to provide that help. So far, no one has
asked.” Be that as it may, one of the Donetsk Republic’s leaders is sure
blockchain is a tool that can make it possible to get around the financial
blockade on both the DNR and Crimea, and also to attract “hundreds of
millions, if not billions, bypassing the United States and the EU.” “This is
a more transparent and open system than the one based on the US dollar,”
Muratov claims. “I am sure the world will switch to cryptocurrency.”

OE Watch | January 2018

4

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
The Cryptoruble: Not Exactly a Hard Currency,
Not Exactly the Russian Bitcoin
OE Watch Commentary: After several months of publicly struggling
with the undefined status of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies in use by
the Russian public, the government announced that it has decided to issue
its own cryptoruble in the near future. Despite this seemingly decisive
move, the announcement leaves the market and the Russian public as
unclear as ever: Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies remain unregulated, and
are officially neither legal nor illegal in Russia.
At least one popular media platform has expressed skepticism regarding
any economically motivated need for a cryptoruble. According to the
author, there are several factors driving the rush to issue a national
cryptocurrency.
First, the Minister of Communication and Mass Media, Nikolay
Nikiforov, has suggested Russia must get out in front of other Eurasian
Economic Union countries, especially Kazakhstan, which has already
announced plans to create a state-issued cryptocurrency. Several experts,
across popular media sources, have characterized this move as a matter of
national pride, rather than a purely economic decision.
Second, according to the author, once a national cryptocurrency is
created, it will be easier for the government to both control that particular
financial instrument, as well as outlaw or at least better control other
cryptocurrencies.
The third factor the author mentions is Russia’s long-held desire to
unseat the dollar as the primary reference currency worldwide. The
author suggests Russia’s contribution of the cryptoruble could move it
one step closer to creating a convertible (hard) currency, which could be
adopted by other countries as a form of payment.
Fourth, the author suggests this move is considered to be part of the
government’s “Digital Economy” project much lauded in official circles
and scheduled to be complete by the end of the next presidential term in
2024.
As the author emphasizes, the cryptoruble is in no way an independent
hard currency, the way Bitcoin, Etherium, and others are, because the
emission and circulation will be government owned and controlled, and
transactions will be taxed as personal income. Also unlike Bitcoin, there
will likely be no mining, and if there is, it will be government regulated.
According to the article, the cryptoruble is postured as creating a
safe option for Russian citizens. President Putin has suggested that
unregulated “Western” cryptocurrencies provide an opportunity for
money laundering, avoiding paying taxes, financing terrorism, and
running scams on Russian citizens. The Head of the Central Bank,
Elvira Nabiullina, has compared the circulation of cryptocurrencies with
pyramid schemes. End OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

Cryptoruble –The Russian National Cryptocurrency.

Source: via Pixabay.com, https://pixabay.com/en/ruble-money-russia-coin-russian-2152534/, Public Domain.

Source: Anatoliy Alizar, “Путин распорядился выпустить
российскую криптовалюту – крипторубль (Putin has ordered
the issuing of a Russian cryptocurrency, the cryptoruble),” Geek
Times, 15 October 2017. https://geektimes.ru/post/294373
President Putin has ordered that Russia issue its own
cryptocurrency, the cryptoruble. The decision was announced
by the Minister of Communications and Mass Media, Nikolay
Nikiforov, at a closed-door meeting with members of the Moscow
Capital Club. The details of the closed-door meeting were made
known to journalists at Argumenty i Fakty.
“I am so certain we’ll issue the cryptoruble for one simple
reason: if we don’t, our neighbors in the Eurasian Economic
Union (EEU) will do so in two months,” he said.
The unique thing about the cryptoruble will be the complete
government control over its emission and circulation. A personal
income tax of 13% is also being considered on purchases and
sales [of cryptorubles], if the owner is not able to explain how they
were obtained.
The Minister strongly emphasized that the creation of a
cryptoruble in no way indicates the legalization of Bitcoin and
other cryptocurrencies, insofar as they are based on Western
cryptographic protocols, not on certified Russian cryptography.
It is likely there will be no independent mining of the cryptoruble
at all...
[Mikhail Maschenko, an analyst for eToro, a social network
for investors in Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent
States:] “The creation of some type of cryptoruble may be helpful
enough to solve the country’s internal problems, like controlling
the movement of money flows and rooting out corruption,
nevertheless, this “upgrade” can’t become a fully functioning
instrument of trade on a global level.”

“The creation of some type of cryptoruble may be helpful enough to solve the country’s internal problems,
like controlling the movement of money flows and rooting out corruption, nevertheless, this “upgrade” can’t
become a fully functioning instrument of trade on a global level.”
- Mikhail Maschenko, an analyst for eToro, a social network for investors in Russia and the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
OE Watch | January 2018

5

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
The Cryptoruble: A Test-Tube Baby among Natural
Cryptocurrencies, or Just an Electronic Ruble?
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Russian
Minister of Communications and Mass Media, Nikolay
Nikiforov, President Vladimir Putin has decided Russia
will develop and start issuing its own cryptocurrency in
the near future. This announcement follows a discussion
of how to best handle Western cryptocurrencies as used in
Russia, culminating just five days prior, in President Putin’s
directive to the Minister of Finance, Anton Siluanov, to
start regulating the process of all cryptocurrency emission,
mining, and circulation throughout the country.
On the heels of this announcement, a number of experts
as well as citizens have expressed doubt regarding the
advisability and feasibility of the announced quick launch of
the cryptoruble. According to the two experts interviewed
in the accompanying article, several factors have led to this
growing skepticism.
The compressed timeline announced for the currency
launch suggests the move is more politically motivated than
economically, as far as the Russian domestic economy is
concerned. The idea of a cryptocurrency is fashionable
in the current economic climate, and Russian bureaucrats
appear anxious to show the President that they can execute.
This was evidenced as well in the development of the
recent “Digital Economy” project earlier this year. The
potential release of a cryptocurrency elsewhere in the postSoviet space would bruise Russia’s ego. Russia has also
demonstrated concern over China’s potential launch of a
cryptoyuan that could potentially disrupt the hegemony of
the dollar, given China’s economic powerhouse status.

“A cryptocurrency whose emission is regulated by the
government is, forgive me, an oxymoron.”
- Aleksey Rayevskiy, General Director of the company Zecurion
Source: Игорь Серебряный, “Зачем России крипторубль: эксперты в
недоумении (Why does Russia need a cryptoruble? Experts are Stumped),”
Rambler, 16 October 2017. https://news.rambler.ru/markets/38165540-ekspertyobyasnili-neobhodimost-sozdaniya-kriptorublya/?updated
Where and how this news was announced creates a strong sense that the
launch of the cryptoruble was more a political decision than an economic one,
suggests Aleksey Rayevskiy, General Director of the company Zecurion.
“When such projects are launched in a hurry, there’s no hiding their effort
to take advantage of the economic climate. The top boss was told about
cryptocurrencies and, having caught “digital economy fever”, he demanded
that we should have it at least as good as they do. In Nikiforov’s initiative I see
nothing more than a mindless attempt to report back to the leadership, so the
leadership will be happy with how quickly its wishes are fulfilled,” Rayevskiy
told Ridus in his version of the apparent all-hands-on-deck effort.
…
The unique thing about cryptocurrencies (including Bitcoin) is that they forge
together both technological and economic aspects. If you “melt it down”, in
place of bronze you’ll get tin and copper. That’s impossible in chemistry and
it’s impossible in the world of finance. It’s either “crypto”, or it’s centralized
emission, like in that old joke, “either take off your cross or put your knickers
back on”.
... “A cryptocurrency whose emission is regulated by the government is, forgive
me, an oxymoron,” considers Rayevskiy.

...
The name “cryptoruble” is misleading, because the
Economic factors are built into the very protocol of cryptocurrency. The parts
government will control its emission and circulation, and
of this system behave one way or another, not because someone programmed
there will be no mining. It will effectively be another form
them to do so, but because one or another algorithm generates (mines) a greater
of electronic money and the exchange rate will likely be
reward. In the project as announced by Nikiforov, some emission center takes
pegged to the regular ruble. It will have no inherent value
because it is not independent of government control, the way on the function of choosing the algorithms,” suggests Rayevskiy.
real cryptocurrencies are, and it is not convertible, the way
hard currencies are. Experts speculate the government may require government bodies be paid in cryptorubles, simply to generate demand.
The use of any cryptocurrency in Russia is cause for concern, as no bank in Russia currently processes such operations. Cryptocurrencies
have heretofore been considered to occupy a grey zone, with authorities taking actions that tend towards criminalizing rather than legalizing
them. End OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | January 2018

6

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Questions Surrounding the Cryptoruble
OE Watch Commentary: Several cryptocurrencies are already traded and mined within
Russia, without any official legal status. This raises various questions regarding the future of
cryptocurrencies in general and the announced cryptoruble in particular. The accompanying
passage discusses some of these questions. The passage is from a website titled Kripto-ruble.ru,
and is written by the site’s owner, who registered the website on 15 October 2017, the very day that
President Putin announced plans to issue the cryptoruble.

“While we’re developing the
digital economy, we won’t
get anywhere by prohibiting
things.”

According to the author, although the official opinion on cryptocurrencies and blockchain
technology appears to have moved towards acceptance, there are still many unknowns. The
author suggests that the government is attempting to harness a technology that has become
popular precisely thanks to its chaotic, unregulated and decentralized nature. And while the
cryptoruble has yet to be officially issued, it has already had a significant impact on the buzz in
Russia surrounding the cryptomarket.

- Nikolay Nikiforov, Minister of
Communications and Mass Media
of the Russian Federation
Source: “Крипторубль: что это такое,
можно ли купить, когда выпустят и как
заработать? (The cryptoruble: What is
it, can you buy it, when will they issue
it, and how can you make money with
it?),” Kripto-ruble.ru, first published on
or around 17 October 2017, subsequently
updated on or after October 24, 2017.
https://kripto-rubl.ru

The author emphasizes the party line insistence that while some blockchain technology may be
good, there is a difference between Russian technology and foreign technology. According to the
Minister of Communications and Mass Media, Nikolay Nikiforov, mining of the cryptoruble may
be allowed, but that mining cannot be based on foreign cryptography technologies, so Russia must
create its own. In an update on developments, Nikiforov added that the technology part is almost
worked out and, pending the approval of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation (CB RF)
and the Ministry of Finance (MinFin), they would move on to phase two of the project. President
Putin has ordered the government to come up with a legal framework by June 2018.

It is presumed that the Russian
cryptoruble will be released as soon as
possible, literally within several months
after the plans for its development
were confirmed. The problem is, it’s
not exactly clear which direction they
should work in. That’s why the process
of development and infusion of this
technology may drag on for a while.
Experts presume the cryptoruble may
take hold in Russia in ten years, however,
what we don’t know right now is where,
exactly, it will be used. Right now the
Central Bank of Russia is only looking
at a new kind of currency, so [any]
government decision made regarding this
issue might be contradictory [emphasis
added]...

Article 75 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation states, “The monetary unit of the
Russian Federation is the ruble. Monetary emission is carried out exclusively by the Central Bank
of the Russian Federation. The introduction and emission of other monies within the Russian
Federation is not allowed.” In considering the juxtaposition between this and the pace at which
the project appears to be progressing, the author concludes, as have many other cryptocurrency
experts, that the cryptoruble will not be considered currency or cryptocurrency in the traditional
sense of the word. To avoid having to change the Constitution, which would require a referendum,
the government and the CB RF may decide to treat the cryptoruble as some other financial
instrument, such as stocks.
Even if it is treated as money, as the author suggests, it is difficult to predict what the affect will
be on average Russians. Considering that the emissions will be controlled by the government,
according to the author, the exchange rate will be precisely what the CB RF sets it at. This
national cryptocurrency may help large companies optimize their cash flow and its use may be
limited, for all intents and purposes, to business. On the other hand, given the recent excitement
in Russia over Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, there may be a run on the cryptoruble and,
depending on how the CB RF handles it, its value could skyrocket. As Dmitriy Marinichev,
Internet Ombudsman of the RF stated at the Open Innovations forum 16-18 October, it will take a
while to work out the legislation, until a comprehensive solution can be found for all the potential
problems surrounding the cryptoruble. As the author notes, Marinichev calls this a transitional
period for the Russian cryptoeconomy. End OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

[Nikolay Nikiforov, Minister of
Communications and Mass Media of
the Russian Federation:] “While we’re
developing the digital economy, we won’t
get anywhere by prohibiting things.”

Open Innovations Forum and Technology Show Logo, 10 July 2015.

Source: By Пресс-центр форума “Открытые инновации” via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AOpen_Innovations_Forum_and_Technology_Show_Logo.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

7

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Cryptocurrency Mining: A Hot Topic in the Energy Sector
OE Watch Commentary: Even before the official
announcement regarding the development of the
cryptoruble, the enormous energy required for
cryptocurrency mining had become a hot topic for
those in the energy sector. According to the first article,
as part of his presentation at the recent Energy of
Possibilities Forum, the Governor of Leningrad Oblast,
Aleksandr Drozdenko, addressed representatives of
small and medium-sized businesses with an offer to
move in next door to the new local power plant.
As miners near the finite number of Bitcoin available,
the computing power needed to decrypt and mine
Bitcoin has increased significantly. As a result, miners
are looking for cheap sources of electricity and energy
providers may be able to capitalize on the opportunity
to attract new high-tech ventures to develop their local
regions.
Aside from this resourcing issue creating further
divisions of haves and have-nots, the question of
energy production sustainability looms large on the
horizon. According to the second article, Bitcoin
mining currently makes up .13% of the world’s energy
consumption, a jump of 29.98% in the last month alone.
The author points out that if the energy usage continues
to grow at that rate, it will equal 100% of current
energy consumption worldwide by 2020. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hall)

“If Bitcoin miners around the world made up their own
country, they would be in 61st place in the world in energy
consumption, surpassing 159 other countries.”
Source: “Крипторубль – предполагамое место рождения (Cryptoruble’s presumed
birthplace),” freedman.club, 20 September 20 2017. https://freedman.club/riptorublpredpolagaemoe-mesto-rojdeniya
As you know, the construction of Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant Number 2 (LAES2) in Sosnovy Bor is nearing completion. As part of this, a large area where the first
nuclear power plant was is now about to be freed up. We thought long and hard
about how to use the space in the future, including for a modern technology park, but
now we have the idea to offer up this space to be used for creating innovative highenergy requirement [production] plants. We haven’t ruled out that this space could
be of interest to the developers of the Russian cryptocurrency.”
Source: “Майнеры биткойна занимают 61-е место в мире по расходам
электроэнергии (Bitcoin miners are in 61st place in the world in energy usage),”
prizm24.ru, 20 November 2017. http://prizm24.ru/mayneri-bitkoyna-zanimayut-61-emesto-v-mire-po-rashodam-elektroenergii/#more-1603
According to the new statistics, the electricity used for Bitcoin mining could power
2.4 million homes in the U.S. and 6.1 million in Great Britain…Analysts at Citigroup
have calculated that, given this level of energy expenditure, mining cryptocurrency
may no longer be profitable as soon as 2022. For the current market model of mining
to be at least somewhat profitable, in five years the exchange rate for Bitcoin will
have to be between $300,000 and $1.5 million...
“If Bitcoin miners around the world made up their own country, they would be in
61st place in the world in energy consumption, surpassing 159 other countries.”

A mining farm of Genesis Mining located in Iceland. The picture shows mainly Zeus scrypt miners.

Source: By Пресс-центр форума “Открытые инновации” via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AOpen_Innovations_Forum_and_Technology_Show_Logo.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

8

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
China Aims to be Global Leader in Blockchain Technology
OE Watch Commentary: China appears to be setting its
sights on becoming a global leader in blockchain technology.
According to the accompanying article, in October, the Chinese
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology published an
82-page white paper, which stated that China wanted to be at
the forefront globally in blockchain technology, encouraging
businesses to strive to set global technical standards. This
followed the Ministry’s launch of a “trusted blockchain alliance”
to “speed up study of the digital ledger” in September.
At the same time, the country is also trying to reign in
cryptocurrencies. Chinese officials shut down dozens of Bitcoin
exchanges and stopped at least one industry conference from
taking place in Beijing. In addition, the People’s Bank of China
has been leading the effort to crack down on Bitcoin exchanges
and Initial Coin Offerings (ICO), which Investopedia defines
as “an unregulated means by which funds are raised for a new
cryptocurrency venture.” According to the article, the Bitcoin
boom and the quick spread of ICOs “alerted the Chinese
government that cryptocurrencies were becoming tools of
speculation and even crime.”
It is worth noting that China has banned Bitcoin and Ethereum,
the most popular digital currencies, and it wants to issue its own
digital currency, presumably backed by a basket of commodities
or equities. It will be interesting to see where this leads as
cryptocurrencies are underpinned by blockchain. We have yet
to see how much influence and control China will have over this
up-and-coming, yet still widely speculative technology. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Is China Still Keen to Develop a Sovereign Digital Currency After
Ban on Bitcoin Trading?” South China Morning Post, 25 September 2017.
http://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2112578/china-still-keendevelop-sovereign-digital-currency-after-ban
As dozens of Bitcoin exchanges in China were told to shut down and at
least one industry conference was forced to flee Beijing for Hong Kong,
the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology last week launched a
“trusted blockchain alliance” to speed up study of the digital ledger.
The IT ministry in October published an 82-page white paper announcing
its desire to be at the forefront globally in blockchain technology and
encouraging Chinese businesses to become involved in setting global
technical standards.
The central bank, meanwhile, has set up a special institute to study
digital currency, and Zhou Xiaochuan, its governor, told a press
conference in March that the central bank encouraged the development of
technologies such as digital currency and blockchain.
The Bitcoin boom and the quick spread of initial coin offerings, however,
alerted the Chinese government that cryptocurrencies were becoming
tools of speculation and even crime.
It banned ICOs [Initial Coin Offerings] earlier this month, defining them
as illegal fundraising, and told exchanges of Bitcoin and other digital
currencies to shut down trading.
While the PBOC [People’s Bank of China] is leading government
agencies in a crackdown on ICOs and Bitcoin exchanges, the central bank
is trying to separate ICOs from blockchain technology, even though many
coin offerings are designed to fund blockchain-based projects.
However, the jury is still out on whether China can embrace blockchain
by banning Bitcoin and ethereum, the most popular digital currencies.

“The IT ministry... published an 82-page white paper announcing its desire to be at the forefront globally
in blockchain technology and encouraging Chinese businesses to become involved in setting global
technical standards.”

The People’s Bank of China headquarters in Beijing, 2016.

Source: By Max12Max (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/42/People%27s_Bank_of_China_Headquarter%2C_Beijing.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

9

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
A Chinese Insider Analysis of Bitcoin in North Korea
OE Watch Commentary: On 30 November, a Chinese financial
website featured the excerpted article about the benefits of Bitcoin’s
price surge to North Korea. According to the author, the downturn in
international financial markets as a result of North Korea’s ballistic
missile launch in May 2017, coincided with a surge in the price of
Bitcoin. In May 2017 Bitcoin was still valued below $2,000, while in
December 2017 the value exceeded $15,000. The columnist argues
that subsequent ballistic missile launches after May 2017 also saw
surges in Bitcoin’s value. If true, this would mean that North Korea
could potentially influence Bitcoin’s value by conducting more
ballistic missile launches.
The author suggests that North Korea began investing substantially
in Bitcoin prior to its May 2017 ballistic missile launch. Because
almost no private citizens (and only senior commanders) can own
computers, the author argues that it must be the North Korean
government that has been mining Bitcoins through a governmentowned company. According to the author, this may have become
a national policy after North Korea faced stronger US economic
sanctions, China’s ban on the import of its coal, and a massive
reduction of foreign exchange sources for the country. The article
also points out that the anonymity of Bitcoin makes it a perfect tool
for money laundering, which is why China has banned it while North
Korea has become a full-fledged participant in it.
The author admits he is making an assumption but notes that the
current market stock of Bitcoin is about 16.5 million, which means
that there are 4.5 million remaining Bitcoins that are unmined. If
North Korea can develop a large mining machine, it can dig out
enough Bitcoins such that Bitcoin mining alone can exceed the
country’s total net exports and earn the country billions of dollars.
As such, the article suggests that Bitcoin can help insulate North
Korea from the effects of economic sanctions and other international
legal regimes that constrain the country’s behavior. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“I believe that Bitcoin also has the potential [to

be used for] money laundering, which may be one
of the reasons the Chinese government banned it,
while North Korea has been attracted to it.”
Source: “杜坤维：比特币暴涨！ 朝鲜是最大赢家” (Bitcoin
soared! North Korea is the biggest winner),” jrj.com.cn, 30 November
2017. http://opinion.jrj.com.cn/2017/11/30090123717969.shtml
As the situation in North Korea suddenly tightened, the financial
markets reacted immediately. Bitcoin, which has been criticized
for being a virtual bubble, has become a hedge against the world
financial markets. Market analysts point out that Bitcoin has several
features that make it an attractive investment in this economic
turmoil.
It is precisely because of the above attributes of Bitcoin, I believe
that Bitcoin also has the potential [to be used for] money laundering,
which may be one of the reasons the Chinese government banned it,
while North Korea has been attracted to it. North Korea launched
a Bitcoin mining operation on May 17. Prior to this, North Korea’s
Bitcoin activity was minimal.
Starting May 17, there was exponential growth. Mining machines are
unlikely to be privately owned. They are more likely to be owned by a
government-backed company.
With the strengthening of U.S. economic sanctions, China’s ban on
the import of coal from North Korea and the massive reduction of
the foreign exchange sources of North Korea, it is not impossible for
North Korea to choose to be a country for mining. It hopes to use
Bitcoin to respond to economic sanctions and escape the economic
crisis.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | January 2018

10

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
North Korea Cyber Crime Shifts Gears
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Korea Internet and
Security Agency (KISA), the number of attacks emanating from
North Korea on virtual money targets in South Korea increased
3.7 times in the last year. In the past when one considered cyber
attacks from North Korea, it was predominantly about disruption.
Although inconclusive, it is believed that the 2014 malware attack
against Sony Pictures had a North Korea connection and was
a classic case of a cyber attack dedicated to disrupt a company
and even an industry. Now, it appears that the Pyongyang
regime has opened up another cyber warfare front, which is
potentially more destabilizing globally. Now it is all about stealing
cryptocurrencies and Bitcoin seems to be in North Korea’s
crosshairs.

Source: “북한 해커들 금융보안원 사칭해 비트코인 해킹” (North
Korean Hackers Target Bitcoin as source of Financial Security for
Regime),” Coin News, 10 November 2017, https://blog.naver.com/
eflora/221137312401
“South Korea’s internet security authorities have pointed to a
tremendous rise in malware attacks where North Korean hackers are
looking for Bitcoin to fund the Kim Jong-un regime...
According to the Korea Communications Agency, the number of
malicious codes detected increased from 1,438 in 2016 to 5,366 during the
same period January to September 2017.”

As the accompanying passage discusses, in 2016 there were 1,438 cases of computer crimes targeting coin-to-coin payments in South
Korea, by North Korean hackers. From January to September 2017 there have been 5,366 cases of coin-to-coin malware targeting. Hundreds
of millions of dollars of virtual currency has been stolen. The passage claims that this is being done to “fund the Kim Jong-un regime.”
North Korea has always struggled to finance its shaky regime. As a result it continues to extort the international community when
possible. Meanwhile Pyongyang also engages in a variety of illicit activities including but not limited to the counterfeiting of US $100 bills or
“supernotes,” and drug production and smuggling across the Chinese border primarily along the Tumen River sector. All of these activities
continue to be undertaken to beat the ill effects of international sanctions against the regime.
For years there has been some level of sanctions targeting North Korea for its human rights record and its constant drive to build a nuclear
arsenal and the delivery systems capable of striking out against its enemies. Recent sanctions may be having an adverse effect on Pyongyang,
and although China is still an ally, there hasn’t been the usual unqualified support from Beijing that North Korea may have been accustomed
too. As a result, economic instability is likely on the rise. Consider the wave of fishing boats washing up on Japanese shores over the last 12
months. Is this a signal of a deteriorating economic situation in North Korea?
North Korea appears as hard pressed as ever to fund its regime. Cryptocurrencies might well be considered the regime’s way out.
Pyongyang seems to have gone all in on stealing cryptocurrencies and South Korea seems to have borne the brunt of North Korea’s attacks
thus far. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“According to the Korea Communications Agency, the number of malicious codes detected increased from
1,438 in 2016 to 5,366 during the same period January to September 2017.”

North Korea Flag on top of world map with code.

Source: Created by Dodge Billingsley with background from https://pixabay.com/en/matrix-code-data-networking-1735640/, CC 0..

OE Watch | January 2018

11

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Malaysia Eyes New Era of Cryptocurrency and Terrorism
Financing
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article discusses
the decision of Malaysia’s central bank – Bank Negeri Malaysia
(BNM) – to require people who convert cryptocurrency, such
as Bitcoin, into money to report such transactions. According to
the BNM governor, this move is necessary so that intelligence
agencies have greater access to this information. The rise of
the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has coincided with
an increase in Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs) and
necessitated this move. According to the article, between
January and June 2017, Malaysia’s Financial Intelligent
Unit (FIU) received 346 terrorism financing-related STRs
compared with only 93 terrorism financing-related STRs in
2015.
Like Indonesia, Malaysia reports that most terrorists
who have been engaged in terrorism financing in Malaysia
have donated in small amounts ranging from $20 to $200.
However, they do so in huge volumes. A 19-year old boy who
was arrested in October for funding the bombing of a beer
festival, for example, was part of what is a called a “wolf
pack.” This is a group of people operating independently and
sending small amounts of money to the same terrorist group
to facilitate an attack. This makes them hard to detect. The
boy was among 20 Malaysians who have been arrested for
terrorism financing in the last year.
The new regulations on cryptocurrencies are a response
to what Malaysia considers to be a new era in the financial
sector. The article states that the BNM governor wants to
avoid being oblivious to these developments even if the longterm implications of cryptocurrencies and terrorism financing
remain to be seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The advent of digital currencies will mark the beginning
of a new era in the financial sector. As authorities, we
cannot be oblivious to these developments.”

Source: “Malaysia to enforce cryptocurrency regulation in 2018,”
Channelnewsasia.com, 22 November 2017. http://www.channelnewsasia.
com/news/business/malaysia-to-enforce-cryptocurrency-regulationin-2018-9428242
Malaysia’s central bank, Bank Negeri Malaysia (BNM), will designate
persons converting cryptocurrencies into fiat money as reporting institutions
under the Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism Financing and Proceeds of
Unlawful Activities Act 2001 from 2018. BNM governor Muhammad Ibrahim
said, “We need to prepare ourselves, as according to many pundits, digital
currencies will become the new norm…. The advent of digital currencies will
mark the beginning of a new era in the financial sector. As authorities, we
cannot be oblivious to these developments.”
Muhammad said that greater access to intelligence information for financial
institutions and rising threat from the Islamic State had resulted in the upward
trend of reporting of Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs). The increase in
the number of small terrorist cells, and lone wolf actors radicalized remotely
over the internet also makes detecting and halting terrorism financing even
more challenging, the governor said.
Malaysia’s head of counter terrorism said that 20 Malaysians have been
arrested since last year for their involvement in terrorist financing. Most have
been charged in court under terror offences. “The amount collected from
each donor was usually small, ranging from US$20 to US$200, but the volume
was huge,” he said.

The Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia) headquarters in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Source: By User:Two hundred percent. (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/42/Central_Bank_of_Malaysia_headquarters%2C_Kuala_Lumpur.jpg , CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | January 2018

12

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Malaysia Seeks to Regulate Cryptocurrencies
OE Watch Commentary: Malaysian authorities
are trying to establish control over digital currencies
amid growing concern over the possibilities of money
laundering and terrorism financing through the trading
of cryptocurrencies. According to the accompanying
passage from a Bangkok-based newspaper, in early
2018, Bank Negara (Malaysia’s central bank) will
designate individuals converting cryptocurrencies
into fiat-money currencies (government-backed legal
tender) as “reporting institutions under the AntiMoney Laundering, Anti-Terrorism Financing and
Proceeds of Unlawful Activities Act 2001.” According
to Muhammad Ibrahim, governor of Bank Negara,
this will prevent criminals from abusing the system
and ensure the financial systems remains stable. Under
the Act, all of Malaysia’s reporting institutions will be
required to take preventive measures to prevent their
institutions from being used as a conduit for money
laundering and terrorism financing activities. This is
reportedly Malaysia’s first attempt to try to regulate
cryptocurrencies in the country. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Malaysia Seeks to Reign in Digital Currencies,” The Nation Online, 23
November 2017. http://www.nationmultimedia.com/detail/asean-plus/30332361
In the first notable move to regulate the world of cryptocurrencies in Malaysia,
the country’s central bank says it will deem all parties acting as exchanges as
“reporting institutions,” requiring them to provide detailed information on buyers
and sellers of such currencies.
“Beginning in 2018, Bank Negara [Malaysian Central Bank] will designate
persons converting cryptocurrencies into fiat-money currencies as reporting
institutions under the Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism Financing and
Proceeds of Unlawful Activities Act (Amla) 2001,” [Governor of the Malaysian
Central Bank, Bank Negara] Muhammad Ibrahim said.
“This is to prevent the abuse of the system for criminal and unlawful activities and
ensuring the stability and integrity of the financial system,” he noted at the Third
Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit 2017 in Kuala Lumpur...
Under Amla, all reporting institutions will be required to undertake preventive
measures to prevent their institutions from being used as a conduit for money
laundering and terrorism financing activities.
“We need to prepare ourselves, as according to many pundits, digital currencies
will become the new norm,” said Ibrahim.

“We need to prepare ourselves, as according to many pundits, digital currencies will become the new
norm.”
- Governor of the Malaysian Central Bank, Muhammad Ibrahim

Vietnam Bans Bitcoin
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted announcement from the
State Bank of Vietnam, the central bank of Vietnam, shows that Vietnam
has banned Bitcoin and other virtual currencies. According to the
announcement, which references a new decree, the only non-cash payments
the State Bank will permit include checks, payment orders, collection
orders, bank cards and other payment instruments as prescribed by the
State Bank. This means that Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, which
are not mentioned, are banned. The announcement also makes clear
that Bitcoin and other similar virtual currencies are not lawful means of
payment in Vietnam.
As evidence of the seriousness of the State Bank’s ban on Bitcoin, the
decree imposes an approximately $6,000 to $7,000 fine for using Bitcoin
and other cryptocurrencies. Those who use cryptocurrencies to buy or
sell items can also be subject to prosecution and imprisonment. There is,
however, not a ban on mining or exchanging virtual currencies. This means
that not all activities related to Bitcoin are banned in the country.
Vietnam’s ban on Bitcoin coincides with similar bans in China and
Indonesia, along with India’s ongoing discussions on banning it. However,
this does not necessarily signal a broader regional trend in Asia, given
that other countries, such as Japan, have not banned Bitcoin. There
is no evidence that Vietnam’s ban is related to terrorism financing, in
contrast to Indonesia, where the concern is precisely that. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“In accordance with the provisions of law,
Bitcoin and other similar virtual currencies are
not a legal means of payment in Vietnam.”
Source: “Thông tin liên quan đến việc sử dụng tiền ảo
(Announcement related to the use of virtual currency?),” www.
sbv.gov.vn, 30 October 2017. https://goo.gl/8rZ3K8
Over the past period, following the direction of the Prime
Minister, the State Bank of Vietnam has developed and improved
the legal framework relating to payment instruments. The
provisions on payment instruments are as follows: Non-cash
payment instruments used in payment transactions include
checks, payment orders, payment orders, collection orders, bank
cards and other payment instruments as prescribed by the State
Bank. Payments are illegal by means other than those specified
in Clause 6. The use of illegal means of payment (including
Bitcoin and other similar virtual currency) will be subject to
fines of between VND 150 million and 200 million. At the same
time, as of January 1, 2018, the act of issuing, using, or using
illegal means of payment (including Bitcoin and other similar
virtual currency) may be subject to prosecution.

OE Watch | January 2018

13

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Concerns about Cryptocurrency and Terrorism
Financing in Indonesia
OE Watch Commentary: On 8 November, the South China Morning
Post featured an article discussing the threat of cryptocurrencies as a tool
for terrorism in Indonesia. The article, which was based on a new joint
study of Indonesia’s National Counterterrorism Agency, State Intelligence
Agency, and Financial Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (PPATK)
recalled that since 2015, online donations have been the most common
way to finance terrorist attacks in Indonesia. According to the chairman
of the PPATK, terrorists in Indonesia call for donations on WhatsApp and
Twitter; and then use Bitcoin and PayPal to transfer money. Most of these
donations are reportedly small, ranging from $100 to $1,000, which makes
them hard to track. However, they are also continuous, which means they
are able to have a large impact. In some cases, terrorists in prison have
even received smuggled cell phones and used them to deliver sermons and
solicit funds from supporters online.
There have also been cases of cryptocurrencies being used in terrorism
cases unrelated to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) or al-Qaeda.
The article points out a case where a man demanded 100 Bitcoins in
return for defusing a bomb at a mall in Jakarta, although the attack was
thwarted. This is cited as one reason why the Indonesian central bank
has ruled against the use of cryptocurrencies as means of payment in the
country. The article also quotes the chief executive of the Bitcoin exchange
platform Bitcoin Indonesia, who disagrees with that decision and argues
that there have only been a few actual cases where terrorists tried using
Bitcoin, claiming that all other transactions were traceable.
In July Indonesia’s Communications Ministry also decided to
temporarily block access to Telegram until the company’s CEO pledged
to help the Ministry close down radical chat forums. Indonesian
officials have noted that Facebook, Twitter and YouTube have also
cooperated in blocking the sending of terrorist images online. For
the time being, therefore, it appears certain social media applications
and cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, will face an increased level of
government scrutiny and possibly permanent restrictions on their use. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Terror groups now call for donations through
social media and messaging platforms, such
as WhatsApp groups or Twitter.… Bitcoin and
PayPal are also used to move their money..”

Source: “Support for Islamic State? In Indonesia, there’s an
app for that,” scmp.com, 8 November 2017. http://www.scmp.
com/week-asia/politics/article/2118968/support-islamic-stateindonesia-theres-app
Since 2015 online donations have been the avenue of choice
for Islamic State-supporting groups hoping to finance attacks in
Indonesia, the world’s most populous Muslim-majority nation.
That is according to a new joint study by the country’s National
Counterterrorism Agency, State Intelligence Agency, and
Financial Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (PPATK),
which examined the banking transactions involved in terror
cases between 2014 and August 2017. “Terror groups now call
for donations through social media [and messaging platforms]
such as WhatsApp groups or Twitter,” said Kiagus Ahmad
Badarudin, chairman of the PPATK. “Bitcoin and PayPal are
also used to move their money.”
Encrypted messaging platforms such as Telegram and
WhatsApp are proving popular not only with active terror cells
in Indonesia, but even with militants who are already behind
bars. Authorities suspect the services are used by imprisoned
terrorists, using mobile phones smuggled into their jails, to
propagate their ideologies and even direct attacks from the
comfort of their cells.
While the Indonesian central bank has ruled against the use of
cryptocurrencies as means of payment, this hasn’t stopped techsavvy users from exchanging virtual currencies such as Bitcoin
through local platforms.

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.

OE Watch | January 2018

14

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
The Market for Bitcoins in India
OE Watch Commentary: As the value of
Bitcoin dramatically increased over the past year,
cryptocurrencies and the blockchain technology
behind them have been more frequently looked at by
media and more closely scrutinized by governments
around the world. The accompanying excerpted
articles discuss Bitcoin and the recent rise in value
from an Indian perspective and show how the
cryptocurrency has been impacting the economy.

“To make Bitcoins more acceptable, [real estate brokers]...
push them through a multi-level marketing (MLM) process. The
number of realty brokers, who are now part of this racket, is
huge.”

The first article from Livemint, an Indian daily
newspaper, looks at the recent rise of Bitcoin’s value.
It points out that the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
“issued its third warning about trading in virtual
currencies,” but that despite multiple warnings, “The
number of new users is doubling every three-four
months on Indian trading platforms.” The author
also notes that “in India, the rush for Bitcoins has
outpaced supply by a wide margin,” causing “a
mark-up of around 15-20% to the international price.”
According to the article, the RBI’s Foreign Exchange
Management Act “doesn’t talk about virtual currencies
specifically” and that “In short, it’s all grey.”
The article from India’s Daily News and Analysis
(DNA), an English language daily newspaper,
discusses the impact Bitcoin has been having on the
property market in India. The author discusses that
DNA carried out an investigation into how Bitcoin
is being used and that it “is fast replacing the cash —
read black — component in real estate deals.” The
author notes that “many sellers are now opting for
cryptocoins for property deals and this is especially
true of non-resident Indians, who can, with a few
keystrokes, move this money abroad.” The author
also points out how Bitcoin “is also being offered as
an investment option” by former real estate brokers
through a “multi-level marketing (MLM) process.”
The article goes on to report that many former
brokers “have given up the old trade” and “lure
investors on the assurance of returns of over 300 per
cent in months.” This is in addition to sources involved
in the trade who claimed that “cryptocoin exchanges
have been adding over 2,500 users a day.” The Indian
Supreme Court recently “asked the government
and its agencies… how they planned to regulate the
cryptocurrencies” and three Indian Supreme Court
Justices stated that “crypto money, if unchecked and
unregulated, is a threat to exchequer’s money and
financial sovereignty of the country.” While Bitcoin
mining becomes increasingly complicated and the
impact it has on the Indian economy remains to be
seen, it appears that the Indian government is starting
to see the popular cryptocurrency as a potential threat.
End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Coinsecure Bitcoin Exchange India.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ACoinsecure_Logo_v1.png, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: Philipose, Mobis. “The risks and thrill of investing in Bitcoins
in India,” Livemint, 7 December 2017. http://www.livemint.com/Money/
cwSJNgkEMGeQWMmTxBAY2O/The-risks-and-thrill-of-investing-in-bitcoins-inIndia.html
On Tuesday, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued its third warning about trading
in virtual currencies such as Bitcoin. On Wednesday, the price of one Bitcoin hit a
new high of $12,000…Not that anyone expected RBI’s warnings to cause a dent in
appetite for Bitcoins…The irony is that the more Bitcoin rallies, the more people it
draws into the rally…
For now, multiple hacks, thefts and scams haven’t taken away anything from the
charm of trading in Bitcoins. The number of new users is doubling every threefour months on Indian trading platforms. In fact, in India, the rush for Bitcoins has
outpaced supply by a wide margin. As a result, there is a mark-up of around 15-20%
to the international price; the price of one Bitcoin hovered around Rs9 lakh on the
Coinsecure platform on Wednesday at the time of writing.
…The fact that regulation is not clear is another risk. Bitcoin purchases and sales
in India are undertaken under the premise that they are allowed because they aren’t
explicitly disallowed. Do provisions of RBI’s Foreign Exchange Management Act
(FEMA) apply to Bitcoin bought overseas and later sold onshore?
Perhaps not, some lawyers argue, because FEMA doesn’t talk about virtual
currencies specifically. In short, it’s all grey. If Indian policymakers worry, as China
did, about the multiple Ponzi schemes that have spawned alongside the Bitcoin rally,
and ban trading of Bitcoin platforms, traders could be in trouble…

(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

15

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Continued: The Market for Bitcoins in India
Source: Rai, Dipu. “DNA Exclusive: Post demonetization, Bitcoins new ‘black’ in property market,” DNA, 23 November 2017. http://www.
dnaindia.com/business/report-dna-exclusive-post-demonetization-bitcoins-new-black-in-property-market-2561904
…what many do not know is that the “illegal” currency is already gaining ground in the country. Post-demonetization, which made
hoarding of vast amounts of cash difficult and tricky proposition, different types of cryptocurrencies have replaced the “black” portion in
property deals…Investigation conducted by DNA, which included attending several meetings where cryptocurrency was being hard-sold,
especially as an investment option, shows that cryptocurrency is fast replacing the cash — read black — component in real estate deals.
“Instead of the cash part, many sellers are now opting for crypto coins for property deals and this is especially true of NRIs, who can, with
a few keystrokes, move this money abroad,” said a real estate dealer… Moreover, crypto currency it is also being offered as an investment
option — with real estate brokers, who left the real estate market due to the ongoing slump, offering deals to gullible investors looking
to make easy money in closed-door meetings. To make Bitcoins more acceptable, [real estate brokers]... push them through a multi-level
marketing (MLM) process. The number of realty brokers, who are now part of this racket, is huge.
Almost 70 per cent of erstwhile agents have given up the old trade. They have joined the closed group offering cryptocurrencies. They
lure investors on the assurance of returns of over 300 per cent in months…Sources involved in the trade told DNA that, in India, cryptocoin
exchanges have been adding over 2,500 users a day and have now reached five lakh (hundred thousand) downloads…the Supreme Court
on November 13 asked the government and its agencies, including SEBI, Income Tax Department, RBI and Enforcement Directorate (ED),
on how they planned to regulate the cryptocurrencies. A Bench of Chief Justice of India Dipak Misra and Justices AM Khanwilkar and DY
Chandrachud noted, “... Emerging trend of crypto money, if unchecked and unregulated, is a threat to exchequer’s money and financial
sovereignty of the country.”

Reserve Bank of India, 2011.

Source: By Kolkatan (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/Reserve_Bank_of_India_%28RBI%29_building%2C_September_2011.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

16

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Digital Currencies in the Middle East and North Africa
OE Watch Commentary: Governments in the Middle East and North
Africa have responded to the growing popularity of Bitcoin and other digital
currencies in various ways. Some regulators, most notably in Morocco,
have issued decrees banning Bitcoin transactions; others, including those of
the region’s most populous country (Egypt) and its largest economy (Saudi
Arabia), have warned against trading in such currencies but stopped
short of seeking to regulate them directly. Some others, in particular the
United Arab Emirates (specifically Dubai), have embraced the concept and
introduced a slew of state-sanctioned virtual currencies. Yet underlying
these varied responses, as the accompanying passages note, are traces
of government concern. This has manifested as a behind-the-scenes
crackdown in Egypt and a highlighting of Bitcoin’s incompatibility with
Islamic law in Gulf countries.
As the first accompanying excerpt from Egypt’s semi-official al-Ahram
newspaper details, the official position of Egypt’s Central Bank is that
Bitcoin “is not guaranteed by the banking sector … and dealing with
[Bitcoin] is the responsibility of its users.” Despite this seemingly neutral
position, the article also explains how Egypt’s first Bitcoin exchange (Bitcoin
Egypt), which was to be launched last summer to great media fanfare,
suddenly faced delays and uncertainty. The website on which trading was
to take place went offline in November 2017 and its founders can “no longer
confirm a launch date.” The article notes that Bitcoin is booming in Egypt,
not just as a speculative investment but also as a business opportunity
through “mining.” This is especially lucrative in Egypt and other countries
with low, subsidized electricity prices and cheap domestic currencies.
Dubai’s embrace of virtual currencies is not surprising given its efforts
over the past several decades to position itself as a regional financial center.
Several state-sanctioned cryptocurrencies and an open-source blockchainbased virtual currency called “ArabianChain” are among Dubai’s new
offerings, which are being introduced in part as substitutes for open-source
distributed platforms such as Bitcoin. As the second excerpted passage
explains, one of these new entrants to the market, known as “OneGram,”
seeks to entice users by touting itself as “fully Sharia-compliant” due to the
fact that it is backed by gold.
In early December, a popular Saudi cleric named Assim Alhakeem
declared virtual currencies “Haram” (forbidden in Islam). As the third
accompanying passage explains, this opinion follows a decree by the Turkish
Directorate of Religious Affairs that also forbids the use of virtual currencies
on the basis of their being open to speculation and potentially used for illicit
activities.
Not surprisingly, these judgments stand in contrast to the assessment made
back in 2014 by a supporter of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS),
which are summarized as follows in the excerpted quote from the fourth
accompanying passage: “No one can send a money transfer to a mujahid
or suspected mujahid without the infidel governments who currently rule
knowing… The proposed solution to this is what is known as Bitcoin… By
setting up an anonymous donations system, you could send millions of dollars
at once… and they would arrive directly in the mujahaid’s pocket.” Although
this assessment clearly overstates the ease of Bitcoin’s convertibility to cash,
it does highlight the promise of distributed ledger technology for clandestine
terrorist organizations and the reasons why governments are likely concerned
about its growing popularity. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…There was a time when I knew the whole
tiny [Egyptian] Bitcoin community. Now it’s all
across the country as it booms worldwide …”
Source: Sherif Tarek. “Egypt’s Bitcoin scene seemingly
growing despite looming uncertainties,” al-Ahram English, 9
December 2017. http://english.ahram.org.eg/
NewsContent/3/12/282508/Business/Economy/EgyptsBitcoin-scene-seemingly-growing-despite-loo.aspx
In a widely reported announcement, the founders of Bitcoin
Egypt said in August that their project would be launched
later in the month, suggesting that the North African country
might now be leaning toward a friendly approach to the
world’s leading cryptocurrency. However, the excitement
over what was meant to be the first platform for buying and
selling Bitcoin in Egypt soon subsided, with the Central Bank
of Egypt (CBE) refuting such speculation and reiterating that
it will not regulate digital currency dealings. “This virtual
currency is not guaranteed by the banking sector […] and
dealing with it is the responsibility of its users,” the statement
said. A message on the Bitcoin Egypt website later read, “We
are facing delays and no longer confirm a launch date”…
Soon after, in November, the website went offline… There is
no technical way to estimate the volume of Bitcoin trading
in Egypt, or any other country, for that matter, “but for a
year now there has definitely been a surge in Egypt,” said
the 30-year-old Egyptian, who, bearing in mind the unclear
official stance on digital currencies, preferred to speak on
condition of anonymity. “There was a time when I knew the
whole tiny Bitcoin community. Now it’s all across the country
as it booms worldwide”…
In Egypt, the cost of mining electricity usually comprises
around 25 percent of the profit. “Mining hardware that
consumes 1,300 kw would cost a little less than $100 and
likely generate around $350, $380 worth of digital currency
per month, for instance,” the Bitcoin trader said. “The
productivity and electricity consumption of miners vary, but
that’s the average.” The mining cost will comprise a higher
percentage when Egypt’s electricity subsidies are completely
abolished, as is planned in the coming years. “But today,
given cryptocurrency price increases, as opposed to the costs
in Egypt, it’s fair to say that digital mining is a pretty good
deal and that’s why more and more people get into it,” he
said.

(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

17

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Continued: Digital Currencies in the Middle East and
North Africa
Source: Alice Haine. “A golden crypto currency you can invest in for as
little as $45,” The National (UAE), 2 July 2017.
https://www.thenational.ae/business/
money/a-golden-crypto-currency-you-can-invest-in-for-as-littleas-45-1.91373

Source: “Digital currency Bitcoin ‘forbidden in Islam’, rules
Saudi cleric,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 6 December 2017. https://www.
alaraby.co.uk/english/blog/2017/12/6/digital-currency-bitcoinforbidden-in-islam-rules-saudi-cleric

A popular Saudi cleric has ruled that cryptocurrencies are
prohibited under Islamic law because they are “ambiguous”
As the founder and chief executive of OneGram – the Dubai-based
and provide anonymity to criminals… “We know that Bitcoins
technology company behind the first digital currency completely backed by
gold - Ibrahim Mohammed is confident his cryptocurrency will be a success, remain anonymous when you deal with it… which means that
it’s an open gate for money laundering, drug money and haram
even as competition in the digital currency sphere hots up. He says with
“100s of new coins releasing every day”, it is OneGram’s unique selling point (forbidden) money,” Hakeem said. “There is a lot of ambiguity,
if I have dollars and you have euros and we want to exchange
- the fact that the currency is fully Sharia-compliant - that will set it apart…
this is permissible in Islam with the condition that it is handBecause of the ruling that happened in November 2016 from the Accounting
to-hand… in virtual currencies you don’t have this,” he added.
and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) with
The cleric’s ruling comes after Turkey’s top religious body also
regards to the gold standard. It was the first time gold was deemed to be a
sharia-compliant product and it got us thinking. It evolved into digitisation of decreed that bitcoins were incompatible with Islam because their
gold but then having bigger returns rather than just waiting for the market to value is “open to speculation” and they can be used in “illegal
activities”.
go up - so we combined it with a digital currency.
Source:
‫الـبيتكوين ودورها في تمويل الحركات اإلرهابية‬
Hassan Mohammed, “Bitcoin and its role in financing terrorist movements,” King Faisal Center for Research and Islamic Studies, August
2017. http://kfcris.com/pdf/98958dfe413d878f2567008efa9fb1d1598996789c9d1.pdf
In an article titled “Bitcoin and the Charity of Jihad,” Taqi al-Din al-Mondhor, a man considered close to ISIS, laid down the legal conditions
for the use of Bitcoin according to the group. He emphasized the need to use this virtual currency to fund jihad, noting that Bitcoin is a
practical solution to overcoming the government financial systems which he describes as “infidel.” In his article he explains how to use the
virtual currency and open financial accounts online, as well as transferring money without anyone noticing, when he explains “No one can
send a money transfer to a mujahid or suspected mujahid without the infidel governments who currently rule knowing… The proposed solution
to this is what is known as Bitcoin… By setting up an anonymous donations system, you could send millions of dollars at once… and they
would arrive directly in the mujhaid’s pocket”…

Front entrance of the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates main building in Abu Dhabi, 2013.
Source: By Achilver via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5d/Central_Bank_of_the_United_Arab_Emirates.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

18

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Turkey Grapples with Blockchains and Cryptocurrencies
OE Watch Commentary: Like many
countries, Turkey has been grappling with the
issue of blockchains and cryptocurrencies. As
with many advances in the information age,
written laws have not caught up with rapidly
evolving technologies. While many businesses
in Turkey accept payments in cryptocurrencies,
there are no legal regulations on the issue. The
accompanying passages from Turkish sources
discuss Turkey’s recent efforts to understand
the issue, including calls for regulating and
developing it in the country. These initiatives
indicate that Turkey does not want to fall
behind the rest of the world on this technology.
Meanwhile, the Turkish Ministry of Religious
Affairs recently declared that virtual currencies
are contradictory to the values of Islam and thus
not religiously permissible.
The first passage from the mass daily Milliyet
discusses the first ‘Blockchain Summit Istanbul
2017,’ organized by the Eurasia Blockchain and
Digital Money Research Association (BLASEA).
The summit took place in November at a
university in Istanbul with the participation
of public and private institutions, along with
interested students. It featured discussions on
how the Blockchain system would spread, the
steps that Turkey can take to develop this system
and ideas regarding regulations to adapt current
systems to future ones.
The second passage discusses a recent call by
a member of parliament to start legal regulatory
studies on the cryptocurrency system in Turkey
so that the country “do[es] not fall behind the rest
of the world.” The member notes that as long as
Turkey’s regulations lack anything pertaining to
cryptocurrencies, nothing done in this field can
be considered a crime.
The Ministry of Religious Affairs (Diyanet)
also chimed in to the discussion. In response to
a question they received asking whether it was
religiously permissible to use virtual currencies
such as Bitcoin and Ethereum for investments,
the Ministry declared that cryptocurrencies
are not religiously appropriate “at this point.”
The answer highlighted that cryptocurrencies
do not have a central authority and thus are not
guaranteed by any state, in addition to pointing
out that they are open to speculation and to being
used for laundering money. However, the term
“at this point” suggests that even they are aware
that it may be too late to stop or reverse this
exploding trend. End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya)

“Legal regulatory studies on the cryptocurrency system in Turkey
should be started, so that we do not fall behind the rest of the
world.”
- Deputy Leader of the Nationalist Action Party
(MHP) Ahmet Kenan Tanrıkulu
Source: “Blockchain, İstanbul’da Masaya Yatırıldı (Blockchain Discussed in Detail in
Istanbul),” Milliyet.com.tr, 24 November 2017. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/blockchainistanbul-da-masaya-yatirildi-istanbul-yerelhaber-2423765/
‘Blockchain Summit İstanbul 2017’ took place at the Kadir Has University, with the
participation of public institutions, private sector and interested students. During the
summit, experts on the topic provided important information on Blockchain Technology and
cryptocurrencies, and answered questions.
There was intense interest in the first ‘Blockchain Summit Istanbul 2017’, organized by the
Eurasia Blockchain and Digital Money Research Association (BLASEA)... Topics discussed
included how the Blockchain system would spread in the future, the steps that Turkey can
take to develop this system and ideas regarding regulations to adapt current systems to
future ones.
Source: “MHP’den Bitcoin hamlesi (The Nationalist Action Party’s Bitcoin move),”
Cumhuriyet.com.tr, 12 December 2017. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/
ekonomi/884502/MHP_den_Bitcoin_hamlesi.html
The Deputy Leader of the Nationalist Action Party (MHP) Ahmet Kenan Tanrıkulu
prepared a report on Bitcoin, the virtual currency that is breaking a new record every day.
The report says that “Legal regulatory studies on the cryptocurrency system in Turkey
should be started, so that we do not fall behind the rest of the world.”
“Currently, many businesses in Turkey are accepting payments in cryptocurrencies, and
the number of customers using cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin are increasing. As long as
our regulations don’t have any part that pertain to cryptocurrencies, and as long as illegal
transactions such as tax evasion and money laundering are not done, people will be able to
say that the use of cryptocurrencies are legal. Therefore, shopping with cryptocurrencies,
investing by buying-selling [them] and producing cryptocurrencies by mining are not
considered crimes in Turkey as of yet.”
Source: “Din Işleri Yüksek Kurulu ‘Dijital Kripto Paraların’ Kullanımının Dini Hükmünü
Açıkladı (The Religious Affairs High Council Declared the Religious Decision on the Use
of ‘Digital Cryptocurrencies’),” The Website of the Turkish Ministry of Religious Affairs,
24 November 2017. https://kurul.diyanet.gov.tr/Duyuru-Detay/Duyurular/596/din-isleriyuksek-kurulu--dijital-kripto-paralarin--kullaniminin-dini-hukmunu-acikladi
“Money is a paper or metal item that is printed by a government, used for exchanges within
the country, and which have numeric values written on it. On the other hand, virtual money
is a type of currency that lacks any central financial institution behind it, and that enables
users to conduct trade while being encrypted for each user. For a currency to be recognized
as money, it should either get its value from a government authority or have an internal
value such as gold.
Even though virtual currencies are being used by some as a unit to conduct trade, they
cannot be considered money because they lack the reputation value and power that a
government (and a financial institution to back it up) provides, making it lack government
protection. Furthermore, the fact that their value is open to speculation makes them easily
usable for illegitimate transactions such as money laundering. This and the fact that they
are not under the government’s monitoring and auditing makes it religiously inappropriate
to buy and sell virtual currencies at this point.”

OE Watch | January 2018

19

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Blockchain’s LATAM Anti-Corruption Promise
OE Watch Commentary: Latin America is taken up by the
cryptocurrency wave. The fifth edition of the Latin American Bitcoin
and Blockchain Conference was held in Bogotá in early December.
Feeding the evident optimism is the promise of secure, transparent,
corruption-proof transactions -- including a way to counter mega
corruptions like the recent Odebrecht scandal that, even in corruptionprone Latin America, shocked all but the most jaded. The conference
included more than just Latin American matters. For instance, one
of the presentations was by an African start-up that intends to use
the blockchain technology to facilitate the movement of remittances,
especially from families in the United States. The second accompanying
reference discusses the promise of blockchain technology for the real
estate sector, where there is greater need for transparency in real estate
transactions and property ownership records. (Much of the event, with
most of it in English, can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=QJJwkX_Y7bc) End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Sixteenth-Century Spanish Gold Coin.

Source: Diana Aguilar, “LaBitConf 2017 llevará sorpresas sobre
Bitcoin y blockchain a Bogotá (LaBitConf 2017 will bring surprises
about Bitcoin and blockchain to Bogotá ),” Criptonoticias,
29 November 2017. https://www.criptonoticias.com/eventos/
labitconf-2017-llevara-sorpresas-sobre-bitcoin-blockchainbogota/#axzz50POh52rw

Source: Photo by Geoff Demarest at the Prado Museum, Madrid.

“Public interest in Latin-America about

cryptocurrencies and blockchain is on the rise...”

“Public interest in Latin-America about cryptocurrencies and
blockchain is on the rise, perhaps especially in Colombia, where
[word of] these financial tools is echoing from the news media to the
government sector. It is within this promising landscape that Bogotá
will host the laBITconf 2017 the 4th and 5th of December…among
more than 35 discussion panels the public will be able to drench itself
in new knowledge about mining, ICO, regulation, blockchain apps,
management of blockchain files, the future of the Bitcoin ecosystem
with the arrival of bifurcations, and much more…”

Source: Anthony Couse, “How disruptive technology could
improve real estate transparency,” World Economic Forum, 16
August 2016. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/08/howdisruptive-technology-could-solve-real-estate-s-transparencyproblem/
“The revelations of the Panama Papers in early 2016 have led
to an increasing demand for real estate transparency. The fight
against corruption is decisively on the international political
agenda and, quite rightly, organizations like Transparency
International are now putting the real estate sector under
greater scrutiny.”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | January 2018

20

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Venezuela’s New Crypto-Oil Money
OE Watch Commentary: Venezuela’s President Nicolás Maduro recently
announced the creation of a new cryptocurrency called the “Petro.” As the first
accompanying passage notes, this new cryptocurrency is to be backed by oil and
mineral reserves. It did not take long for threads of critical Internet commentary
to grow. The responses to the announcement of the new currency were cynical.
It appears that some Venezuelans think the Maduro regime is wanting to try out
digital currency to escape international financial sanctions, launder money or
work an exchange rate scheme.
The second reference is an opinion from a former Venezuelan opposition
legislator who makes a central point. He notes that Maduro has not explained
exactly how the new currency could be exchanged by the public for something
with more palpable value. (Even Bitcoin finds some of its viability in its potential
convertibility to a hard currency, the US dollar.) The comment thread attached
to the second article is also quite insightful, one participant noting the seemingly
oxymoronic nature of the Venezuelan crypto-oil money launch. As he points
out, a columnar idea of a cryptocurrency is that the specification of its value
is not based on that of gold or any other tangible thing. It is made valuable as
an exchange vehicle because of the difficulty of fraudulent manipulation of the
transaction record, an immutability provided by complex computer computations
and democratically distributed, time fixed packets of digital evidence.
Providentially perhaps, at almost the same time Maduro announced this hybrid
concept of a cryptocurrency backed by oil and mineral reserves, he had to react
to news that executives in the Venezuelan State oil company PVDSA had been
caught in a huge embezzlement scheme. The third accompanying passage notes
his reaction, expressing “disappointment” with those who “used their positions to
commit crimes.”
The fact that the Venezuelan cryptocurrency launch has some observers
concerned is not surprising. We might consider the consequence and power of
a blockchain-based currency by looking at three components: Who controls
the machines (the computational computer equipment)?; who has access to
the computation (in the effective sense of physical access to the machines
plus knowledge of operation)?; and what were the original purposes of the
currency’s creation? As the fourth passage intimates, Russians and Chinese
are well positioned to have set the purposes of the “Petro,” provide and control
the participating computers and effective access to them. These actors have
considerable control over the Communist Party of Cuba and United Socialist Party
of Venezuela, the two groups that control Venezuelan territory. That influence
owes both to ideological compatibility and financial debt. Indeed, the responses
suggest suspicion. Considering the geopolitical assertiveness in the fourth
accompanying reference (in a Bolivarian sponsored outlet), could it be that the
“Petro” will provide a medium for converting the value of natural resource solids
into financial accounts within a closed non-dollar system of participation by antiUS parties?
There is also the issue of “mining.” Mining, in the vocabulary of the hopeful
cryptocurrency “ecosystem,” refers to the contributions of computer-savvy
participants who help to computationally validate transactions. Creating a
broadly distributed, publicly transparent ledger provides an enhanced degree
of immutability as to the occurrence of a given transaction, its timing and
allocations. People with the necessary computer capacity and a modicum of
computer savvy might “mine” after agreeing to the registration and computational
protocols of a given blockchain community. Within some of these systems, the
miner can receive a small fraction of a transferred amount as a transaction fee or
commission -- as an incentive. This is mining. We will have to wait to see who is
doing the Petro mining. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…What is all this about a cryptocurrency
using petroleum reserves as a guarantee if
one cannot... [exchange] it?…”
Source: Editors, “Maduro anunció la creación de sistema
de criptomonedas para Venezuela (Maduro announces the
creation of a system of cryptocurrency for Venezuela),”
La Nacion, 3 December 2017. http://www.el-nacional.
com/noticias/gobierno/maduro-anuncio-creacion-sistemacriptomonedas-para-venezuela_213991
“He detailed that the value of this new digital money
would, called ‘el Petro’, would be backed by reserves of
gold oil, gas and diamonds….
He affirmed that this system would allow citizens to carry
out distinct transactions.”
Source: Satya Toro, “José Guerra: ‘Arranca mal la
petromoneda’ (José Guerra:: ‘Petromoneda gets off to a
bad start),” El Nacional, 3 December 2017. http://www.
el-nacional.com/noticias/economia/jose-guerra-arrancamal-petromoneda_214013
“José Guerra, representative in the National Assembly
(disbanded and delegitimized by the Maduro regime)
questioned the decision of the president of the Republic,
Nicolás Maduro in having initiated the development
of a system of cryptocurrency using oil reserves as a
guarantee. ‘What is all this about a cryptocurrency using
petroleum reserves as a guarantee if one cannot alienate
[exchange] it?’…
Jesus Rojas Bolivar [site commenter]: Virtual money or
Bitcoin doesn’t have its backing in petroleum or gold or
in anything, it is for that reason virtual, depending on the
confidence that the country has in it, its value calculated
by gigantic computers and extremely complicated
mathematical systems that translate into numbers and
which are what sets for each virtual currency its value
[but] only confidence gives it worth.…
Source: Editors, “Maduro se siente “traicionado por un
grupo” que usó sus cargos para hacer “chanchullos”
en Pdvsa (Maduro feels ‘betrayed by a group’ that
used its government positions to run a scam in
PDVSA [the government petroleum company]),” La
Patilla, 5 December 2017. https://www.lapatilla.com/
site/2017/12/05/maduro-se-siente-traicionado-por-ungrupo-que-uso-sus-cargos-para-hacer-chanchullos-enpdvsa/
“The President Nicolás Maduro:…’I feel disappointed
by a group of ex-companions who used their positions to
commit crimes… Pain- the only cure is justice.’…”

OE Watch | January 2018

21

CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BLOCKCHAINS
Continued: Venezuela’s New Crypto-Oil Money
Source: Editors, “¿Qué es ‘El Petro’, la nueva criptomoneda de Venezuela? (What is ‘The Petro’, the new Venezuelan cryptocurrency?),”
Misión Verdad, 5 December 2017. http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:SmWgOIBddhAJ:misionverdad.com/la-guerraen-venezuela/criptomoneda-venezolana-geopolitica-y-sanciones-gringas-investigacion+&cd=4&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us
“The year 2017 has been key in the transition toward an emerging financial system distanced from the dollar, where Russia and China
have become protagonists in the construction of payments, investments and commercial interchange architecture at the regional level in
national monies, novel factors that are not necessarily inconsistent with cryptocurrency. In the framework of that offensive, as regarding Latin
America, Venezuela has the vanguard role in that geo-economic projection that defies the spinal column of US political power at the global
level: dependence on the dollar.”

Gold Mining in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: In the previous article (“Venezuela’s New Crypto-Oil Money”) the word “mining” is used in the context of the
new cryptocurrencies. Here mining is of the old kind, especially of gold. It is nevertheless connected to the digital currency in that Venezuelan
President Nicolás Maduro claims the new virtual currency, the “Petro,” will be backed by the country’s oil and mineral reserves. Neatly
contrasting with the virtual currency are the gold speckles and nuggets, taken directly from the ground, which ostensibly are to guarantee the
incorporeal stuff. The accompanying report is quite a revelation of economic reality in Venezuela. In a country whose economy suffers from
fixed prices and wages in a text book exercise of centralized socialist control, the goldfields are let loose and producing wild-west style. Potential
earnings in the goldfields and their boomtowns are far higher than the official state wages. The author does not mention the specific mechanism
connecting the Petro to mined gold, but he points out that many of the miners receive pay in the form of electronic transfers rather than cash.
The ancient legend of El Dorado, of Sir Walter Raleigh’s desires, was supposed to exist almost exactly where the (mostly informal) mining
claims now exist, even as a new El Dorado rises in virtual form. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Luis Pico, “Minería en Venezuela, un submundo
sin escasez y con millones en efectivo (Mining in
Venezuela, an underworld without shortages and
with millions in cash),” El Nacional, 5 December
2017. http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/sociedad/
mineria-venezuela-submundo-sin-escasez-con-millonesefectivo_214125
“Because of the difference between what miners get in
comparison with salaried employees, Hurtado assures
that thousands of people are living together who preferred
to abandon the cities and offices in exchange for jungles
and ravines in which adolescents up to adults even older
that 60 have come together.”

“Because of the difference between what
Map of Lake Parime, Location of El Dorado (1625).

Source: By Hessel Gerritsz via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Guaiana_ofte_de_Provincien_tusschen_Rio_de_las_Amazonas_ende_Rio_de_
Yuiapari_ofte_Orinoque.jpg, Public Domain.

miners get in comparison with salaried
employees... thousands of people...
preferred to abandon the cities and offices
in exchange for jungles and ravines.”

OE Watch | January 2018

22

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
China in the “Post-American” Middle East
OE Watch Commentary: In October 2017, the Institute
of West-Asian and African Studies at the Chinese Academy
of Social Sciences published its “Yellow Book” report on
developments in the Middle East and Africa. (The academy
publishes “blue books” focused on the economy, “green
books” on society and the environment, and “yellow
books” on international issues.) A summary of the
report, published in the Arabic-language website of the
Chinese People’s Daily Online and excerpted here, was
picked up by a handful of regional newspapers and news
websites. The report focuses on three main trends: the
US’s declining influence, Russia’s growing role, and the
economic outlook for the region. Its authors believe the
Middle East is entering a “post-American Era” in which
Chinese and Russian influence are likely to grow. This
perception of American retreat and Russian ascendance in
the region is also shared by many local observers, including
in Saudi Arabia (See: “Saudi Arabia’s Tilt Toward Russia,”
OE Watch, November 2017).
There has been growing speculation about Beijing’s
potential role in Syria’s post-war reconstruction. This is
due to several reasons, including the reluctance of Western
nations and Gulf monarchies to participate in any efforts
that may solidify the Assad government’s hold on power;
the fact that Iran and Russia will be unable to carry the
economic burden of reconstruction alone; and Syria’s
location as a potential key piece in China’s One Belt One
Road Initiative (OBOR). The second excerpt, from the
pro-Hizbullah news website al-Ahd, argues that Russian
and Chinese interests and policies are in fact converging
in Syria and beyond, and that the emerging Sino-Russian
alliance will “in the long-term have numerous effects on the
future of both the Middle East and the Far East.”
Although China’s Middle East policy remains primarily
driven by economic considerations, the presence of
thousands of Uyghur jihadists from the Turkistan Islamic
Party (TIP) in Syria has added a military-security
component to its dealings with the region. Chinese
concerns with the TIP may become more acute if the
group’s havens in Syria become compromised and its
fighters seek new theaters to wage jihad closer to the
Chinese mainland. In late November, the Arabic-language
website of Russia’s news agency Sputnik carried a report
claiming Chinese intentions to deploy special forces to
Syria to fight the TIP. The report, based on unspecified
“media sources,” was picked up by a large number
of Arabic-language media on all sides of the conflict,
with most reporting it as fact and speculating on the
implications of this alleged decision. According to the
excerpted passage from the Saudi daily al-Sharq al-Awsat,
the rumor was confirmed by the official Facebook account
of Russian forces in Syria, although it was also denied on
Twitter by Xie Xiaoyan, China’s special envoy to Syria.
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… Beijing is expected to collaborate and move closer to
Russia and the Resistance Axis to resolve the Syrian crisis…
This will strengthen the Moscow-Beijing position in the region
while weakening the American position in West Asia.…”
Source:
‫الكتاب األصفر يستشرف مستقبل الشرق األوسط ما بعد العصر األمريكي‬
“Yellow Book Examines the Future of the Middle East in the ‘Post-American
Era’,” People’s Daily Online (Arabic), 27 October 2017. http://arabic.people.
com.cn/n3/2017/1027/c31660-9285925.html
The study focused on three key issues: decline in American influence, the role
of Russia, and the future of development in the Middle East… The declining
American role in the Middle East has given Eastern powers, particularly
Russia, a chance to strengthen their influence in this important region. At the
same time, the region’s countries are increasingly confident in implementing
their own development plans. The Chinese and Russian models are drawing
greater attention from the countries of the region. The study also noted that the
balance of power in the Middle East is moving from unipolarity to bipolarity,
and from there to multipolarity. With the region’s countries turning eastward,
Asian countries in turn are starting open toward the west and develop strategic
partnerships with countries of the Middle East.
Source:
‫الصني ستلعب بإستراتيجية جديدة لرسم مستقبل سوريا ابرز األبعاد واملجاالت‬
“New Chinese policy to draw Syria’s future… Key dimensions and issues,”
al-Ahd, 30 November 2017. https://goo.gl/XuQq1b
In order for China to expand its influence in the region, it must follow the
Russian model, which obtained positive results in Syria and which does not
intervene in the internal affairs of states, respects their sovereignty, and
supports them in order to achieve shared goals and results. Beijing is expected
to collaborate and move closer to Russia and the Resistance Axis to resolve the
Syrian crisis. China has provided much support to the Syrian government and
also supports the Russian position toward this crisis. This will strengthen the
Moscow-Beijing position in the region while weakening the American position
in West Asia. This will in the long-term have numerous effects on the future of
both the Middle East and the Far East.
Source:
‫قوات صينية تتوجه إلى سوريا‬
“Chinese Forces Head to Syria,” Sputnik (Arabic), 28 November 2017. https://
goo.gl/MqSS6W
Media sources indicate that the Syrian president’s adviser spoke with Chinese
military officials about Chinese special forces fighting terrorists from the “East
Turkistan Islamic Movement,” which Syrian forces have found to be operating
in rural Damascus. The Chinese Defense Ministry aims to deploy two units,
known as the “Siberian Tigers” and the “Night Tigers” to Syria to fight the
East Turkistan Islamic Movement.”
Source:
‫الصني ترسل نمور الليل إلى ريف دمشق‬
“China sends ‘Night Tigers’ to Rural Damascus,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 29
November 2017. https://goo.gl/ferwmU
Russia’s Hmeimim base, in western Syria, claimed… on its Facebook page…
that sources in the Chinese Defense Ministry “confirmed its intention of
sending two special forces units known as the ‘Siberian Tigers’ and the ‘Night
Tigers’ to Syria”…
OE Watch | January 2018

23

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s “Victory Lap” in the Middle East
OE Watch Commentary: On 11 December, Russian President Putin paid
a surprise visit to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad at Russia’s Air Base in
Khmeimim; after which he flew to Egypt and then to Turkey, on the same day.
The accompanying articles from Middle Eastern sources describe this as a
‘diplomatic sprint’ or a ‘victory lap’ for Russia. The passages focus on Russia’s
expanding military and economic ties with Egypt in particular, and point to
this as the solidification of its presence in the Middle East and the Eastern
Mediterranean.
The first passage by Soli Özel, a Middle East expert from Turkey, discusses
Putin’s triple visit and claims that “by visiting Syria, Egypt and Turkey on
the same day, Putin sent the message to friends and foes alike that “I’m in
charge of these areas.” Özel points out that Russia is one of the most important
players in the political future of Syria, and that it is the only actor able to
conduct dialogue with all the parties to the Syrian conflict. In addition to
this presence and influence in Syria, he points out that Russia has also been
showing an increasing interest in Libya, and now with the increasing ties to
Egypt, he claims that Russia is “really firming up its presence in the region.”
Özel makes the claim that “a pro-Soviet alliance block that resembles the Cold
War is emerging.” However, he notes that in contrast to that period, Russia
now also has good relations with Saudi Arabia and Israel.
As the second passage notes, during his visit to Egypt, Putin and Egyptian
President Sisi signed a contract for Russia to start building Egypt’s first nuclear
power plant under a $30 billion contract with Russia’s Rosatom. The Russian
government will provide a $25 billion loan for the project and supply the fuel
for the plant. The author calls the deal the latest deal in Russia’s “nuclear
diplomacy” project, which includes plants in Iran, Turkey, Sudan and Jordan.
The passage also claims that on 28 November, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry
Medvedev “approved an agreement with Egypt on use of the airspace and
airport infrastructure of both countries, raising speculation that Russia plans to
lease Egyptian air bases.”
Russia’s cooperation with Egypt has been expanding, particularly since Sisi
was elected president in June 2014. In March 2015, Russia and Egypt held their
first-ever joint naval exercises in the Mediterranean, which included the Black
Sea fleet’s flagship Moskva missile cruiser. In October 2016, the two countries
held joint military drills involving airborne troops on Egyptian territory for
the first time. In June 2017, the Egyptian Armed Forces received the first
batch of missiles for the S-300VM Antey 2500 missile defense system (NATO
code name: ‘SA-23 Gladiator\Giant’) as the culmination of a 2015 deal signed
between Russia and Egypt.
Given Russia’s presence in Syria and its deepening role in Libya, these
relations with Egypt suggest further expansion of Russian influence in the
Middle East and the Mediterranean. This is significant because it influences
Russian access to the Suez Canal and signals Russia’s intent to protect its
future operations in the region. (Also see: “Egypt Starts Receiving Russian
Air Defense Missiles,” OE Watch, August 2017; “Syria, Egypt, Libya: A New
Russia-Dominated Axis?” OE Watch, May 2017; and “Perspectives on Russian
Motives in Libya,” OE Watch, April 2017.) End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya)

“Russian President Putin... is continuing
his visits, which could almost be described
as a victory lap. By visiting Syria, Egypt
and Turkey on the same day, Putin sent the
message to friends and foes alike that ‘I’m in
charge of these areas’.”
Source: Soli Özel “Kudüs’ten Rusya-Türkiye ilişkisine
(From Jerusalem to Russian-Turkish relations),” Haberturk.
com.tr, 13 December 2017. http://www.haberturk.com/
yazarlar/soli-ozel/1752519-kudusten-rusya-turkiye-iliskisine
Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin, who
declared that he was going to run for president once again,
is continuing his visits, which could almost be described
as a victory lap. By visiting Syria, Egypt and Turkey on
the same day, Putin sent the message to friends and foes
alike that “I’m in charge of these areas.” As he said before
and then reneged, he declared that Russian troops would
withdraw from Syria. By making this statement, he was
basically declaring that he was one of the most important
players in the political future of Syria, while celebrating his
military’s victory against “international terrorists...”
Currently, Russia is the only country who is in dialogue
with every party in the Syrian conflict. The United States,
who trained the YPG [People’s Protection Forces]-heavy
Syrian Democratic Forces, and who has 2000 troops [in
Syria], along with having spent 14 billion dollars, has
basically conceded that Bashar Assad will be in power
until at least 2021. The second visit of Putin’s tour was also
noteworthy due to the balances in the Eastern Med and the
US’s general position in the Middle East.
In Egypt, where the US spends almost 1.5 billion dollars
each year in military assistance, Putin ... [took] the first
step in an agreement to build the country’s first nuclear
plant, and by providing the credit to do so. Thus, we can
say that, following Syria in the Eastern Mediterranean,
and in Libya where it has been showing an interest in the
last few months, [Russia] has started to really firm up its
presence in the region by getting closer to Egypt as well. In
a way, a pro-Soviet alliance block that resembles the Cold
War years is emerging. An important difference from that
period is that Putin’s Syria is improving its relations with
Saudi Arabia while also having quite warm ties with Israel.
Israel’s Prime Minister Netanyahu can almost “drop by” in
Russia, while not facing any resistance from Moscow when
it bombs Hezbollah and Iranian targets inside Syria.

(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

24

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia’s “Victory Lap” in the Middle East
“Putin and Sisi... discussed... construction of Egypt’s first nuclear power plant, under a $30 billion contract
with Russia’s Rosatom.... This deal is the latest deal in Russia’s ‘nuclear diplomacy’ project, which includes
plants in Iran, Turkey, Sudan and Jordan.”
Source: Sergey Balmasov, “Putin’s visit to Egypt inspires hope for growth in Cairo,” Al Monitor, 12 December 2017. https://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2017/12/russia-egypt-putin-visit-sisi-syria-turkey.html
On December 11, Russian President Vladimir Putin completed a diplomatic sprint, touring Syria, Egypt and Turkey in just one day.
... On November 28, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev had approved an agreement with Egypt on use of the airspace and airport
infrastructure of both countries, raising speculation that Russia plans to lease Egyptian air bases.
...
The first order of business when Putin arrived in Cairo and sat down with Sisi was the Syria settlement... Bilateral trade and economy
came up second in their discussion. The annual trade turnover between Russia and Egypt stands at $4 billion and Cairo is very interested
in attracting new Russian investments. Putin and Sisi even discussed creating an industrial zone in Egypt with “ favorable conditions for the
Russian businesses.” The jewel in the crown of that part of the talks was a two-part agreement: construction of Egypt’s first nuclear power
plant, under a $30 billion contract with Russia’s Rosatom. The Russian government has offered a $25 billion loan for the project. The second
part of the agreement holds that Russia will supply the fuel for the plant. This deal is the latest deal in Russia’s “nuclear diplomacy” project,
which includes plants in Iran, Turkey, Sudan and Jordan.

Russian President Vladimir Putin with President of Egypt Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, 11 December 2017.
Source: President of Russia Website, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56354, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

25

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Will Russia Establish a Military Base in the Red Sea?
OE Watch Commentary: In late November,
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir visited Russia and
met with Russian President Putin and Defense Minister
Shoigu in Sochi. As the accompanying passages from
Middle Eastern and African sources point out, a top
item on the agenda during these meetings was the
issue of Russia establishing a military base in Sudan,
in the Red Sea. Russia’s expansion into Sudan and the
Red Sea would be an indication of Moscow’s growing
influence in Africa. While Russia has been expanding
its presence in the Middle East and the Mediterranean
via Syria, Egypt and Libya, it would now be moving
further south along the Red Sea. This would give it
access to the Bab-el-Mandeb strait, which connects the
Red Sea to the Gulf of Aden.
As the first two passages discuss, the Sudanese
President asked Russia to establish a base in Sudan
as “protection from the aggressive acts of the United
States.” The first reaction from the Russian side
was positive, with Frants Klintsevich, First Deputy
Chairman of the Defense and Security Committee of
Russia’s Federation Council, saying that “there are no
reasons for Russia to reject this” but adding that
the ultimate decision would be up to the President.
Bashir also said that Sudan would like to purchase
Su-30 and Su-35 war planes; and S-300 air defense
systems from Russia. As the passages note, Sudan
still uses air defense systems from the Soviet era.
The third passage reports on Russian Prime
Minister Dmitry Medvedev’s comments that Russia
regards Sudan as a major partner in Africa. As the
fourth passage notes, despite the Sudanese President
being charged by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for genocide, Russia has not taken a negative
stance against him. On the contrary, Russia
condemned the ICC decision and withdrew from
the organization in 2016 (after the court released
a report accusing Russia of war crimes when it
seized Crimea from Ukraine in 2014). The passage
discusses that Russia has pursued a balanced policy
toward Sudan and South Sudan, and that it has
common interests with the Sudans, on the issue of
the Red Sea.
The author of the final excerpt looks at the issue
from a broader geopolitical perspective. He points
to China opening a military base in Djibouti in the
Horn of Africa; France’s activities in Mali; and “the
US presence in various parts of the continent.” Now,
with Russia’s potential initiatives in the Horn of
Africa, he claims that the “global powers’ war of
influence which was being fought in the Middle
East, is expanding to Africa,” and suggests that this
war of influence is about to get more intense. End
OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The global powers’ war of influence, which is being fought in the
Middle East, is taking place in Africa too. China opening a military
base in Djibuti, the US’s presence in various parts of the continent,
Russia’s new moves, and France’s initiatives in African countries,
particularly Mali, is a sign that this war will intensify.”

Vladimir Putin and Omar al-Bashir (2017-11-23).

Source: Kremlin.ru via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AVladimir_Putin_and_Omar_al-Bashir_(2017-11-23)_02.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0.

Source: “Bashir Discusses with Russia Setting up Military Base on Red Sea,” Asharq
al-Awsat, 26 November 2017. https://aawsat.com/english/home/article/1095236/
bashir-discusses-russia-setting-military-base-red-sea
During his talks with Putin on Thursday in Sochi, the Sudanese president... called on
Putin to tackle the US intervention in the Red Sea from the standpoint of setting up a
Russian military base in the region...
In a first reaction over the Sudanese-Russian talks on possibility of setting up a
military base on the Red Sea, Frants Klintsevich, First Deputy Chairman of the
Defense and Security Committee of Russia’s Federation Council, said that there are
no reasons for Russia to reject this.
Yet, he pointed that such decision is taken by the Russian president who is the
Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
Source: “Sudan Devlet Başkanı: Putin’le Kızıldeniz’de askeri üs kurma konusunu ele
aldık (Sudanese President: Putin and I discussed the issue of setting up a military base
in the Red Sea),” Tr.sputniknews.com, 25 November 2017. https://tr.sputniknews.
com/rusya/201711251031145094-sudan-devlet-baskan-putin-kizildeniz/
In his meeting with Putin, al-Bashir blamed the US for interfering in other countries’
internal affairs, saying, “This is why there was a huge disaster in Syria. Sudan’s
division into two countries is also due to the US. Therefore we need protection
against the aggressive acts of the United States. We want to cooperate with Russia in
certain fields.”
Bashir also talked about the defense cooperation between Russia and Sudan.
Bashir, who said that Sudan still uses air defense systems produced in the Soviet era,
said that they would like to purchase Su-30 and Su-35 war planes, along with S-300
air defense systems from Russia.
Source: “Africa: Dmitry Medvedev - Russia Regards Sudan As Major Partner in Africa,”
AllAfrica.com, 25 November 2017. http://allafrica.com/stories/201711270360.html
The Russian Prime Minister, Dmitry Medvedev, pointed out that Russia regards
Sudan as a major partner in Africa.

(continued)

OE Watch | January 2018

26

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Will Russia Establish a Military Base
in the Red Sea?
Source: Mustafa Erdemol, “Ortadoğu’da avantajlı hale geldikten sonra: Rusya, Afrika Boynuzu’na bir kez daha geri dönüyor (After getting in
an advantageous position in the Middle East: Russia is once again returning to the Horn of Africa),” Birgun.net, 27 November 2017. https://
www.birgun.net/haber-detay/ortadogu-da-avantajli-hale-geldikten-sonra-rusya-afrika-boynuzu-na-bir-kez-daha-geri-donuyor-192719.html
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir was in Russia for a formal visit. Al-Bashir said that in his meetings with Russian President Vladimir
Putin and Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu in Sochi, they had discussed setting up a military base in the Red Sea...
Russia’s policy of returning to the Horn of Africa started in 2015. Sudan split into two after Omar al-Bashir’s unforgivable mistakes and the
US taking advantage of these mistakes. But Russia pursued a balanced policy toward each of the Sudans. It hosted the Foreign Ministers of
both Sudan and South Sudan in Moscow and discussed “anti-terrorism policies” with them. Russia has common interests not only with the
Sudans, but also with many other countries in the Horn of Africa when it comes to the Red Sea...
Thus Russia has not stood against Sudan’s President Al-Bashir. It condemned the International Criminal Court (ICC)’s... allegations of
genocide, and then withdrew from the ICC...
The global powers’ war of influence, which is being fought in the Middle East, is continuing in Africa too. China opening a military base in
Djibuti, the US’s presence in various parts of the continent, Russia’s new moves, and France’s initiatives in African countries, particularly
Mali, is a sign that this war will get worse.
Thus there is nothing surprising about Russia establishing a military base in Sudan, in the Red Sea. If anything, one might ask what took
them this long, and the answer is that Russia was busy in the Middle East with Syria. And with Ukraine of course.

Map showing the Gulf of Aden, located between Yemen and Somalia.

Source: By Norman Einstein (Own Work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AGulf_of_Aden_map.png, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

27

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
What Next in the Renaissance Dam Conflict?
OE Watch Commentary: The construction and
filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
(GERD) continues to be of concern to the Egyptian
government, led by Abdel Fattah Sisi. The latest
round of technical discussions between Ethiopia,
Egypt and Sudan, held in Cairo in mid-November,
may well be the last, given that Egypt believes
Ethiopia is dragging out the technical discussions
and using them as cover to continue work on
the dam. As a result, the Egyptian government
is expected to turn to politics and diplomacy,
internationalizing the issue in an attempt to
impose at least some of its terms on Ethiopia. The
excerpted samples provide some insights into these
important developments.
The heads of state of Egypt and Ethiopia are
tentatively scheduled to meet in January to discuss
the GERD. In addition, Egypt is expected to turn
to international forums such as the International
Court of Justice and the UN Security Council to
make its case regarding the negative impacts that
the GERD will have on its share of Nile River
water flows. Yet as the first accompanying articles
notes, Egypt’s legal options are limited at this point
“because there is no tangible harm done yet.” Citing
a professor at the University of Cairo, the article
notes that Egypt’s political tools are also limited
and “any further efforts are likely to come too
late.” The second accompanying passage, from the
Saudi daily al-Hayat, echoes this sentiment, noting
that Egypt’s diplomatic options are limited given
its retreat from African politics and Ethiopia’s
growing influence. According to the article, “The
Renaissance Dam crisis reflects… Egypt’s loss of
its previous ability to influence its African domain.”
The third accompanying article, from the Qatari
daily al-Araby al-Jadid, agrees that Egypt has
lost political leverage vis-a-vis Ethiopia and adds
that Cairo will seek to compensate by escalating
its rhetoric through a deliberate media campaign
“which promotes the idea of Egypt resorting to
military action.” Citing an Egyptian diplomatic
source, the article excludes the potential for
an Egyptian military strike on the dam given
“Ethiopian relationships with Israel, the United
States, China, and other influential countries
that could put pressure on Egypt” as well as the
investments that these and other countries have
made in the dam. Instead, it notes that Egypt may
seek to “agitate nationalist factions within Ethiopia”
or “leverage Sisi’s positive relations with the ruling
regime in Eritrea” in order to “put pressure on
Ethiopia without engaging in an armed conflict.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source: Ayah Aman. “Egypt unable to find agreement in Renaissance Dam talks,”
al-Monitor, 22 November 2017. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/11/
egypt-fail-renaissance-dam-negotiations-studies.html
“Legal action at this point might not give decisive results in Egypt’s favor, because
there is no tangible harm done yet. Besides, the political tools are weak amid the
complex regional context. Gulf countries are preoccupied with their disputes and
do not hold real cards to pressure Ethiopia. Eritrea is also fighting its own internal
demons, and Sudan’s stance is known and grows firmer by the day”… like most Egypt’s
moves in the matter, any further efforts are likely to come too late, as the Declaration
of Principles recognizes Ethiopia’s right and sovereignty in building and operating
the dam without binding it to any written pledges to involve Egypt in the storage and
operation processes.
Source:
‫سد النهضة في أثيوبيا مؤشر لتراجع دور مصر األفريقي‬
Aziza Abdelazziz Mounir. “Ethiopian Renaissance Dam Indication of Egypt’s
Declining Role in Africa,” al-Hayat, 2 December 2017. https://goo.gl/XfCrvC
Egypt’s absence from Africa has a clear negative impact on the positions and directives
of some of the influential countries in the Nile River issue, in particular Sudan. Toward
the end of President Mubarak’s rule, Africa was ignored in favor of Palestine, Iraq and
Lebanon, while in the meantime Ethiopia’s political role increased… The Renaissance
Dam crisis reflects the interactions of regional and international politics and Egypt’s
loss of its previous ability to influence its African domain. It also demonstrates
misguided policy vis-a-vis the dam and the lack of a clear position toward it, something
Ethiopia has exploited by inducing Egypt to negotiate, giving the dam construction
legitimacy it did not previously have… it seems that turning to international law will
be [Egypt’s] most likely choice, whether turning to regional organizations such as the
African Union or internationalizing the issue by turning it over to the International
Court of Justice, the Security Council, or the UN General Assembly…
Source:
‫أزمة سد النهضة تنتظر قمة مفصلية بني السيسي وديسالني‬
“Renaissance Dam Crisis Awaits Summit Between Sisi and Desalegn,” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 16 November 2017. https://goo.gl/NrFyFA
The source added that a meeting between Sisi and Desalegn, whenever it takes place,
will not be like previous meetings. For one, it will be preceded by a media campaign
launched by Cairo two days ago and which will presumably continue until the meeting
is held, and which promotes the idea of Egypt resorting to military action. This is
meant to scare Addis Ababa and force it to abide by previous promises… these threats,
however, will not bear fruit according to the source, not only due to the developing
Ethiopian relationships with Israel, the United States, China, and other influential
countries that could put pressure on Egypt, but also because Egypt cannot ignore the
direct investments of some of these countries and others like Italy, Saudi Arabia, and
the UAE in Ethiopia generally and the dam in particular… The question on the minds
of Egypt’s intellectuals and observers is how the escalation may end, given the lack of
trust in a military strike or the ability of establishing an economic embargo on Ethiopia
given the growth of foreign investment there. According to the Egyptian diplomatic
source there are several parallel measures Cairo is currently studying, the first being
resorting to international organizations to resolve the conflict legally, whether through
the Security Council or international arbitration… The second measure is to use its
intelligence agencies to agitate nationalist factions within Ethiopia in order to reignite
that country’s internal crises, as happened two years ago with the Oromo rebellion, in
which Addis Ababa accused Cairo of involvement or at least of providing media support
for Oromo leaders opposed to the central government. Egypt could also leverage
Sisi’s positive relations with the ruling regime in Eritrea to reignite border skirmishes
between the two adversary countries. All of this would seek to put pressure on Ethiopia
without engaging in an armed conflict.
OE Watch | January 2018

28

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Algeria Rejects Joining Saudi-Led Terrorism Coalition
OE Watch Commentary: In late November, 40 countries involved
in a Saudi-led counter-terrorism coalition formed in 2015 met in Riyadh
to discuss terrorism. The coalition includes all Arab League countries
except Algeria. The excerpted French-language article from algeriepart.
com discusses Algeria’s decision not to join. According to the Algerian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the country will not become involved in
conflicts that do not directly affect Algeria. This includes the Arab
League’s efforts to threaten Iran or Hizbollah in Lebanon.
Algeria said that it has its own fight against terrorism within the
country and that it does not have an interest in fighting terrorism
elsewhere. According to the article, a Saudi soldier who was
interviewed by France24 said that Saudi Arabia respects Algeria’s
decision because Algeria is a great power and should be treated as
such. The article also states that Algeria’s position became evident as
early as 2015 when Saudi Arabia began its war in Yemen. At that time
Algeria said that its soldiers would never die for a cause that does not
concern Algeria. The article also attributes Algeria’s policy to its view
that Iranian presidents Khatami and Rouhani are modernists and that
Hizbollah is a defense group against Israel.
The excerpted article shows that Algeria is maintaining neutrality
in the ongoing crisis between Saudi Arabia and Iran. In addition,
Algeria’s position reflects the domestic focus of Algeria’s foreign policy.
Algeria’s position may also have implications elsewhere in Africa.
South of Algeria’s borders in Mali, al-Qaeda affiliates continue to wage
an insurgency. It is therefore unclear, even doubtful, if Algeria would
intervene if the crisis in Mali continues to escalate and if part of the
country again falls under the control of al-Qaeda and its allies. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Algiers refused to join the [Saudi-led]
international coalition to fight terrorism. 40
countries met last Sunday in Riyadh. But without
Algeria.”
Source: “Conflicts régionaux: L’Algérie dit non à l’Arabie Saoudite
(Regional conflicts: Algeria says no to Saudi Arabia),” algeriepart.
com, 29 November 2017. https://algeriepart.com/2017/11/29/
conflits-regionaux-lalgerie-dit-non-a-larabie-saoudite/
Attacking Iran and isolating Lebanese Hizbollah has been Saudi
Arabia’s idea for some time. All the countries in the region have
responded except one: Algeria categorically refuses to be dragged
into these expeditions.
While all the Arab League countries rushed to a meeting of
Foreign Ministers to discuss “the situation in Lebanon” [Algeria’s]
absence could be explained by Algeria’s desire not to interfere
in conflicts that “do not affect it”. Algiers has excellent relations
with Tehran since the arrival in power of the modernist presidents,
Khatami and Rouhani, who has just started a second term as the
head of his country.
These rejections add to the opposition of Algeria when Saudi
Arabia decided, in 2015, to declare war on Yemen.
“Algiers refused to join the [Saudi-led] international coalition
to fight terrorism. 40 countries met last Sunday in Riyadh. But
without Algeria.”

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
CELEBRATING 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | January 2018

29

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Khamenei Speaks on Views toward America
OE Watch Commentary: Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei remains the ultimate authority in Iran,
serving as both the commander-in-chief of the
Iranian armed forces and above all political bodies.
Therefore, what he says sets the tone for the policy
of the Islamic Republic. It is in this context that
the excerpted speech is important: Khamenei’s
antagonism toward the United States suggests that he
places America in the same category as Israel, that is,
an entity with which rapprochement is not possible.
He suggests that any Muslim state that cooperates
with the United States is acting against Islam and is
a participant in an American-led plot to undermine
Iran and the entire Muslim world. By extension, any
American allies—Egypt, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia,
Morocco, and Jordan, for example--are rightful
targets of Iranian opprobrium.

Source: “Didar-e Mosi’valan-e Nizam va Mahamanan Konfarans Vahdat-e Islami
ba Rahbar-e Enghalab (Meeting between Officials of the Regime and Guests of
the Islamic Unity Conference with the Leader of the Revolution),” Khamenei.ir, 6
December 2017. http://farsi.khamenei.ir/news-content?id=38415

While Khamenei describes the notion of resistance
differently, in official Iranian rhetoric, the term
‘resistance’ which Khamenei employs repeatedly, is
often synonymous with support for US-designated
terrorist groups. Political resistance might therefore
entail influence operations and support for pro-Tehran
political and civil society proxies across the broader
Middle East and Islamic world.

Everyone should pay attention to this. Everyone should know this. American
politicians themselves have acknowledged in their analyses – whether knowingly or
unknowingly – that they should wage war and create discord in West Asia and pit
Muslims against each other so that the Zionist regime can have security and live
a comfortable life. They are doing this in order to prevent Muslims from making
progress. They want the body of the Islamic Ummah to lose so much blood in a way
that it becomes weak and unconscious and loses its power of resistance. What should
we do in the face of this? “So stand straight, and follow not the path of those who
know not.” We should not follow the path of the ignorant.

Finally, Khamenei’s rhetoric reflects Iran’s internal
ambition to be a leader of the Islamic world rather
than simply the protector of the Shi’ites. From
Khamenei’s perspective, the Shi’ites are the righteous
Muslims while the Sunnis are those whose exegesis
erred. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Resistance in the arena of military war, in the arena of political war and in the
arena of the war of the wills are different from each other. Nonetheless, resistance is
necessary in all these arenas. If nations and outstanding personalities do not forget
about resistance, victory will definitely be achieved. Of course, today, they have
deployed their forces against the Islamic Ummah: America, global arrogance and
their cohorts including Zionism – the Zionist regime – reactionaries, global money
worshippers, and lustful individuals among Muslims who follow those powers who
have deployed their forces against Islam and against the path of the Holy Prophet:
“You have indeed bestowed on Pharaoh and his chiefs splendor and wealth in the life
of the present.” Today, the Pharaohs are these people. Today, the Pharaoh is America.
Today, the Pharaoh is the Zionist regime. Today, the Pharaohs are their cohorts in the
region who want to gradually pit Muslims against each other and to wage war in the
region. Today, this is America’s plan.

Today, there are unfortunately some rulers and some elite personalities in the region
who dance to America’s tune and do what they want. They work for them against the
Islamic Ummah and against Islam. These things are to the disadvantage of Islam.
We do not have any motivation to be in disagreement with Muslim governments. We
believe in unity. We are interested in unity.

“America has deployed its forces against the path of the Holy Prophet.”

Military officers listening to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://english.khamenei.ir/d/2017/12/06/4/10268.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0 .

OE Watch | January 2018

30

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: New Military Budget Proposed
OE Watch Commentary: On 10 December 2017, President Hassan Rouhani
submitted a draft budget to the Majlis (parliament) for the Iranian fiscal year
which runs from 21 March 2018 to 20 March 2019. While the draft budget is not
final—the Majlis must first pass the draft budget and then Guardian Council, an
unelected clerical body, must also approve it before it can become law—it does
shed light on Iranian military priorities and illustrate the opacity under which the
Islamic Republic’s military operates.
First, with an exchange rate of about 35,000 rials to the dollar, the excerpted
story suggests that the Iranian military budget will be $11.4 billion. This does not
appear much when considering Iran’s broader GDP. Utilizing publicly available
figures, the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimated that, in
2016, Iran’s military budget was just three percent of its gross domestic product.
If the figures in the draft budget provided by the Iranian Students News Agency
are accurate, it suggests that Iran’s military budget as a share of GDP has actually
shrunk.

Source: “Sehom Bish az 400 Trilyon Riali Nehadha-ye
Nizami az Budgeh 97 (Share of Military in 2018 Budget
More than 400 Trillion Rials),” Iranian Student News
Agency, 10 December 2017. https://goo.gl/5fNMtU
With the presentation by the president of the Republic
of the 2018 budget bill to the Majlis, the figures for
military institutions, including the army, the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Ministry of Defense, and
the Basij Organization, were determined… Accordingly,
the Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces, Army,
Revolutionary Guard Corps and Basij funds are as
follows:
•
Ministry of Defense and Armed Force Logistics:
44,971,355,000,000 rials
•
Joint Staff of the Islamic Republic of Iran Army:
97,080,866,000,000 rials
•
Joint Staff of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps: 267,366,971,000,000 rials
•
Basij Organization: 11,804,843,000,000 rials
Of the total budget of the Ministry of Defense,
19,659,138,000,000 rials are to strengthen the defense
and defensive capabilities of the country. Accordingly, the
share of military organizations in the 2018 budget is more
than 400 trillion rials.

This is not realistic, especially given the broad decline in oil prices and Iran’s
very public shopping spree and indigenous military production in the wake of
the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the so-called nuclear deal. Rather,
it appears that much of Iran’s military budget remains off-line. For example,
there is no accounting in the figures provided for Iran’s ballistic missile work
nor the direct deployment of Iranian personnel into the Syrian civil war. To take
Iranian military figures at face value, therefore, would be a mistake. This is
important because often Iranian diplomats and those seeking to downplay Iran’s
military ambitions compare Iran’s military spending by GDP to those of regional
countries like Saudi Arabia and Israel which have far greater levels. However, such comparisons may have little analytical value if Iranian
statistics are not truthful. That said, the relative proportion of spending—with the IRGC receiving nearly triple the amount of money that the
Iranian army receives—does provide some insight into the continued priorities of the ruling regime. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The share of military organizations in the 2018 budget is more than 400 trillion rials [$11.4 billion].”

Iranian cruise missiles on display.

Source:Ministry of Defense of Iran, goo.gl/GDthMp, Public Domain.

OE Watch | January 2018

31

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran’s Amphibious Aircraft from Russia
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) has
announced that it has taken possession of four fixed-wing amphibious aircraft, which
have been added to the Iranian base in the Persian Gulf province of Hormozgan.
IRGC head Mohammad Ali Jafari told Iranian press assembled to witness the
unveiling of the aircraft that “Adding the amphibious aircraft… [demonstrates] a
constant state of improvement.” According to Tasnim News, a web portal affiliated
with the IRGC, the amphibious planes will be stationed at the IRGC-Navy base in
Bandar Abbas. IRGC-Navy chief Ali Fadavi said the planes are LA-8s. LA-8s are
eight-seat amphibious aircraft designed by AeroVolga, a Russian company. They
can be used in both fresh and salt water—although, in Iran’s case, they would likely
be limited to the latter given the lack of any large body of fresh water near Bandar
Abbas. They can operate with wave heights of approximately two feet which, while
small, should not be a problem in the relatively placid waters of the Persian Gulf,
although it may limit their utility in the Gulf of Oman on the other side of the
Strait of Hormuz (alongside which Hormozgan stretches). On land, the LA-8 does
not need a tarmac runway, making it be useful in the desert and scrubland which
characterizes southwestern Iran. `
Iran’s apparent purchase of amphibious aircraft from Russia demonstrates
growing military ties between the two countries. Iran’s claims that the aircraft are
for purely peaceful purposes enables Tehran to bypass sanctions. Nevertheless,
Iran’s possession of amphibious aircraft will have some military utility, both in
terms of surveillance and with regard to the possibility of inserting and recovering
IRGC units both on land and at sea. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Today, there are four fixed wing
amphibious aircraft that have augmented
the IRGC Navy’s capabilities.”
Source: “Alhaq-e Havapaymahaye Abnashin be Niruye
Daryaye Sepah dar Bandar Abbas (The Addition of
Amphibious Aircraft to the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps Navy in Bandar Abbas),” Tasnim News,
13 December 2017. https://goo.gl/5BcsnH
Admiral Ali Fadavi, commander of the IRGC Navy,
this afternoon while visiting the fixed wing, amphibious
aircraft of the naval forces at Bandar Abbas, stated,
“Today, there are four fixed wing amphibious aircraft
that have augmented the IRGC Navy’s capabilities
in Bandar Abbas.” He continued: “These aircraft,
including the LA-8 series dual-engine aircraft, has a
variety of capabilities and can be used for surveillance,
support, rescue, and maritime transport.” The
Commander of the IRGC Navy reiterated, “The ability
to land on water, the ability to [enable] floating radar,
and carry out all flight operations at various levels are
among the benefits of this aircraft.”

Iran’s New Amphibious Aircraft.
Source: Tasnim News, goo.gl/7GZfuh, CC BY SA 4.0 .

OE Watch | January 2018

32

AFRICA
Drivers of African Instability
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article from
a South African source discusses some factors that drive
instability in Africa, in addition to how armed conflict is
changing in the continent. It claims that Africa will remain
turbulent not just because it has so many young people and
such extensive poverty, but also because development is
disruptive. It points out that there are many more non-state
actors than there were in the past. Thus, conflicts are no longer
between a government and one specific armed group but
rather between the government and multiple armed groups.
Additionally, many of these groups fight amongst themselves,
greatly complicating any nationwide peacemaking attempts.
One factor that provides fertile soil for conflict is terrorism,
which has been increasing in Africa. While it has been around
for a long time, now the continent is also struggling with
violent political extremism that originated in the Middle East.
Indeed the accompanying article asks if al-Qaeda and the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) will move their activities
to Africa, as they see their positions weakened in parts of the
Middle East.

Drivers of conflict, such as those that led to the Rwandan genocide, persist in parts of Africa.
Source: Tiggy Ridley/Flickr, https://goo.gl/cnt5us, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

“Violence will remain a characteristic of a number of
African countries for many years to come and Africa
should plan accordingly.”

In addition to terrorism, poverty and demographics are also
discussed as factors that drive conflict. Poverty is a large one,
especially since it is frequently exacerbated by income inequality. Related to that is demographics and the youth bulge: The median age of the
population is only 19, and when young people lack jobs, instability often follows.
The article claims that for Africa to significantly reduce its poverty, it would have to grow by approximately 7% per year. However, long
term forecasts for most of the continent are way below that. Thus, while there is development-- and indeed in some sectors such as telecom it is
quite robust-- the rate of job growth is not sufficient for the growing population. Complicating matters is, as mentioned earlier, that sometimes
development itself can be quite disruptive.
The democracy deficit is another factor that is noted. African governments which should be providing solutions to these problems are instead
sometimes the sources of additional instability. Full democracies or full autocracies tend to be the most stable forms of government, but many
African regimes are a mixture of both, often superficially appearing democratic but lacking the constitutional liberties that enable democracies
to successfully function. This democracy deficit is especially apparent around election time when tensions often build up and ultimately
explode in violence.
There are exceptions. While poor African countries remain dependent on foreign aid, middle income ones are actually attracting foreign
investment. Still, for many countries violence will continue into the foreseeable future. Thus, as the accompanying article relates, the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 which expects the continent can “silence the guns by 2020” remains unrealistically optimistic. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Jakkie Cilliers, “What drives instability in Africa and what can be done about it,” The Conversation (South Africa), 28 November
2017. https://theconversation.com/what-drives-instability-in-africa-and-what-can-be-done-about-it-87626
These seven related factors indicate that the notion that Africa can somehow “silence the guns by 2020”, as advocated by the African Union
as part of its Agenda 2063 is unrealistic. Violence will remain a characteristic of a number of African countries for many years to come and
Africa should plan accordingly.
Internal armed conflict is much more prevalent in poor countries than in rich ones. This is not because poor people are violent but because
poor states lack the ability to ensure law and order. The impact of poverty is exacerbated by inequality, such as in South Africa.
A history of violence is generally the best predictor of future violence… This is very difficult to break. It requires a huge effort and is very
expensive, often requiring a large, multi-dimensional peace mission that only the UN can provide. But, scaling peacekeeping back rather than
scaling it up is the order of the day at the UN.

OE Watch | January 2018

33

AFRICA
Somalia: Who Will Fill the Security Void after AMISOM?
OE Watch Commentary: The African Union Mission to
Somalia (AMISOM) is preparing to withdraw from the wartorn country despite strong concerns that the Somali army is
not ready to protect the nation from al-Shabaab. If the timetable
for withdrawal is not revised, all AMISOM forces will be gone
by December 2020. AMISOM has routinely stated that its
withdrawal would be conditions-based, meaning that they would
not leave until they ensured that Somali troops were able to
maintain security. However, the accompanying article relates
that AMISOM’s withdrawal does not appear to be conditionsbased at all, given that it is planning to withdraw despite
numerous recent attacks by al-Shabaab, including the midOctober truck bombing in Mogadishu that left over 350 dead.
The author claims that such a withdrawal will have “dire
impacts” on the US mission there, which is “dual focused on
training Somali forces but also counterterrorism and targeting
of high value Al Shabaab and... recently, Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria ISIS targets.” There has been progress on both
fronts, and while Somali forces are more capable than they
previously were, thanks in part to well over $1 billion spent
on their training and equipment, it is widely believed that they
will continue to require outside support for some time in their
struggle against al-Shabaab. With AMISOM withdrawing, it is
uncertain which countries will provide that support and to what
degree.
The army has had some successes, including holding onto
land cleared of al-Shabaab. However, the terrorist group still
controls approximately 20% of the country, mostly in the south.
Additionally, parts of Somalia, such as the self-declared state
of Somaliland, are also not under control of the Somali national
government. Thus, the total area of Somalia in which the
national government exerts its authority is less than 50%. With
AMISOM leaving, there is concern that some places where the
army has a rather tenuous hold could fall, making that an even
smaller percentage.
The article’s title, “AMISOM withdrawal tests US mission,”
shows the interest Somalia has in American operations in that
country, a fact reinforced by its use of AFRICOM statements
throughout the article. This may suggest that, with AMISOM
withdrawing, Somalia is wondering what role, if any, the
United States will play in filling the void created by the
departing troops. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The drawdown of AMISOM forces from the
region could have dire impacts on the U.S. mission
there, where just over 500 U.S. troops are currently
serving.”

Ongoing withdrawal of AMISOM soldiers, such as the ones pictured here, has raised
concerns that the Somali National Army might not be fully ready to maintain stability
when AMISOM fully withdraws.
Source: AMISOM, https://goo.gl/e6aDG9, Public Domain.

Source: “Somalia: AMISOM Withdrawal Tests U.S. Mission,” Shabelle
Media Network (Somalia), 10 November 2017. http://radioshabelle.com/
amisom-withdrawal-tests-u-s-mission-somalia/
The drawdown of AMISOM forces from the region could have dire impacts
on the U.S. mission there, where just over 500 U.S. troops are currently
serving.
Troops under the African Union Mission in Somalia, or AMISOM, have
begun a steady withdrawal of forces from the region, amid increasing
violence and threats from resurgent Al Shabab militants.
However, AMISOM’s withdrawal from the region appears anything but
conditions based as the country has been plagued with a spate of vehicle
bombings and killings over the last several months.
Moreover, the withdrawal, especially anything beyond the UN cap, is
likely to impact the U.S. mission in Somalia which is dual focused on
training Somali forces but also counterterrorism and targeting of high
valued Al Shabaab and just recent ISIS targets... According to AFRICOM’s
2017 posture statement presented before lawmakers earlier this year by
Marine Gen. Thomas Waldhauser, AFRICOM has supported efforts to push
AMISOM’s mission into 2019.

OE Watch | January 2018

34

AFRICA
Women in al-Shabaab: Why They Join, What They Do
OE Watch Commentary: The academic field of terrorism studies
which examines terrorists and their motivations, concentrated most
of its early research on men, and paid little attention to women.
Fortunately that glaring omission is changing, with new studies
such as the accompanying one, which focuses on Kenyan women
in the Somali based al-Shabaab terrorist group. The study provides
rich insights in areas such as the hierarchical structure of terrorist
organizations, the day-to-day operations of terrorist camps, why
people join them, and most important, what can be done to dissuade
individuals from joining them.
The study was based on interviews with government officials,
donors, civil society organizations and women who identified as
being returnees from al-Shabaab. Although the research project had
planned to interview 15 returnees, only three actually participated, due
to fears that they could become victims of retaliation if they participate
in such studies.
According to the report, Somali women often find themselves with
little economic alternative but to join al-Shabaab when they live in
areas controlled by the group. There they are often forbidden from
pursuing the type of employment men are allowed to pursue. This
impoverishment combined with extremely high illiteracy makes them
vulnerable to recruitment. The report also discusses other reasons
women join the group, including relationships (following their husband),
extremist ideologies, and revenge for the treatment their loved ones
underwent at the hands of various security agencies. Their roles include
fundraising, cooking, radicalizing the terrorists’ children, gathering
intelligence, providing medical care for fighters, and most notoriously,
suicide bombing; that last one becoming particularly prevalent in
several terrorist organizations across Africa. There is another role they
play, unwillingly and repeatedly…that of sex slave. As one returnee
described, if she refused to have sex the men would threaten to kill
her. Like many females associated with al-Shabaab, she became HIV
positive.
As noted in the article, Kenya, which has suffered a number of
terrorist attacks from al-Shabaab, has emphasized counterterrorism
efforts such as hardened security responses to terrorists on its soil.
This is in contrast to instituting measures to dissuade its own people
- especially impoverished, marginalized Muslim women - from
travelling to Somalia and joining the group. Thus, the research report
recommends Kenya adopt more policies that will result in economic
development to help break the cycle of poverty and to also reduce the
heavy-handed tactics used by security forces in Muslim communities.
Interestingly there is anecdotal evidence that Kenyan women have
started mobilizing on their own to address radicalization and prevent
violent extremism, a positive grassroots action that could help lead
the way for additional government initiatives. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“As actors, women commit, support, facilitate,

prevent and counter violent extremist acts. The
findings of this study show that the roles women
play are intricately connected to their broader
socio-economic, individual, cultural and political
contexts, but at the same time these roles are
deeply nuanced and cannot be generalized across
the board.”

Suicide bomb attacks in Somalia, such as the one pictured above, are often carried
out by female members of al-Shabaab.
Source: AMISOM, https://goo.gl/EhTRak, Public Domain.

Source: Irene Ndung’u, Romi Sigsworth, and Uyo Salifu, “Violent
Extremism in Kenya: Why Women are a Priority,” Institute for
Security Studies (South Africa), November 2017. https://issafrica.
s3.amazonaws.com/site/uploads/mono197.pdf
The development context within which violent extremism is
playing out in Kenya is crucial to this discussion. The interplay
of development deficits and insecurity compounds and heightens
the dynamics of violent extremism and its impact. The combined
challenges of youth unemployment, poverty, inequality and poor
governance (among other things) continue to interact in complex
ways with the insecurity that results from violent extremism.
Women from Majengo and Mombasa blame the poverty and
unemployment in their communities for the radicalization of their
children and the inducement to join al-Shabaab. They noted that alShabaab was taking advantage of this poverty by promising young
people jobs, money and ‘ free stuff.’
As actors, women commit, support, facilitate, prevent and counter
violent extremist acts. The findings of this study show that the
roles women play are intricately connected to their broader socioeconomic, individual, cultural and political contexts, but at the same
time these roles are deeply nuanced and cannot be generalized
across the board. However, the motivation and the extent of this
phenomenon requires further interrogation.

OE Watch | January 2018

35

AFRICA
Gunsmithing: A Lucrative Business in West Africa
OE Watch Commentary: Discussions of ways to control the flow of small arms in Africa
often center on factory manufactured weapons, especially those made outside the continent
and then imported legally or illegally. However, a large number of arms – estimated to be
upwards of 200,000 – that enter circulation are often overlooked. These are the artisanal
weapons, homemade by informal, widespread, numerous, and often clandestine workshops. The
accompanying article discusses this phenomenon in West Africa.

Source: William Assanvo, “Are West
Africa’s Gunsmiths Making Violence
Cheap?” Institute for Security Studies
(South Africa), 27 November 2017. https://
issafrica.org/iss-today/are-west-africasgunsmiths-making-violence-cheap

The article refers to the people who craft these weapons as “blacksmiths,” perhaps because
they are frequently involved in other activities such as fashioning kitchen utensils and farming
implements. Thus, gunsmithing for many is only a part of what they do, often hiding this
activity from the authorities behind their blacksmithing operations. In turn these manufactured
out-of-sight arms are relatively easy to traffic, fueling banditry, organized crime, and clan and
political rivalries more than the imports do. Examples include Ghana, where 90% of weapons
used in armed robberies are manufactured locally, and Mali where the number is 80%.

The trafficking and illicit circulation
of small arms and light weapons are
often discussed in the context of fuelling
instability and insecurity in West Africa.
Rarely, however, is the issue of locally
manufactured weapons given appropriate
attention in these conversations.

The article, which focuses exclusively on West Africa, describes the weapons as often
fairly crude copies of existing ones, including pistols, single and double-barrel shotguns, submachine guns, and even, at least in appearance, the AKM, a modernized version of the AK-47.
Depending on several factors including the type of weapon, prices generally range from around
$15 to $120, making them relatively inexpensive. This low cost encourages their distribution not
just locally but also regionally. Indeed their transborder sales are frequently linked with other
illicit activities including trafficking of drugs and precious minerals.

The weapons are not sophisticated, but
they are dangerous, and are used in serious
crimes. When the police arrested a group
in the northern state of Kaduna, Nigeria,
in August in connection with kidnapping
for ransom, they reportedly recovered
weapons including three AK-47s and 10
locally made sub-machine guns. Over the
past few months, kidnapping has taken on
a dangerous dimension in several parts of
Nigeria.

Attempts to combat the local manufacturing of weapons has resulted in mixed, leaning
towards poor, results. One problem is the industry keeps evolving, so it is difficult for
governments to get a handle on it. Some countries have initiated dialogues with the
manufacturers not so much to ban them from producing weapons but to have better control of
it; however these are individuals who frequently work in the shadows, and they are wary of
government oversight.
Eradication or even just suppressing the local manufacturing of weapons is proving difficult.
Given the lucrative nature of the business, this is unsurprising. However, it is just one more
reason why, as the article states, it is unlikely Africa will reach its goal of “silencing the guns by
2020.” End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Locally produced arms are less controlled and therefore more

easily trafficked. This further encourages illicit circulation throughout
West Africa, especially in border areas.”

Locally produced arms are less controlled
and therefore more easily trafficked.
This further encourages illicit circulation
throughout West Africa, especially in
border areas. Along borders, it appears
that there are implicit links between the
local manufacture of firearms and other
criminal or illegal activities, such as
drug trafficking and illicit exploitation of
precious minerals. These links need to be
further explored.

Parts of Africa, such as Somalia, are awash with weapons, including some that are locally manufactured or modified.
Source: AMISOM, https://goo.gl/yoJ1sX, Public Domain.

OE Watch | January 2018

36

AFRICA
Eritrea: Cracks in “Africa’s North Korea”
OE Watch Commentary: Eritrea hears very little from
the outside world, and the outside world hears very little
from Eritrea, and only from Eritrean refugees. That is by
design: The government of Isaias Afwerki, who has been
in power for over two decades, severely restricts media
and internet access. It also severely restricts the rights of
its citizens, brutally suppressing any sort of opposition
against the regime. This is why, as the accompanying article
describes, a protest that recently occurred in the capital city
of Asmara is rather surprising. Not surprising is that the event
was harshly put down by the special forces. Nevertheless,
it is noteworthy that the teenagers who took to the streets
that day (to oppose the nationalization of an Islamic school)
probably knew they would be met with violence. According
to the article, this suggests that young people are “saying
enough is enough.” This could signal a new willingness of at
least some citizens to stand up against a government whose
cruel oppression of its own citizens coupled with its deliberate
isolation from the outside world has earned it the sobriquet of
“Africa’s North Korea.”
The report discusses that it is perhaps the youth of Eritrea
who are particularly unhappy with the government. They face
long military conscriptions and a marked lack of jobs in the
civilian sector. Many flee only to be stranded in neighboring
countries, while others attempt a risky journey to cross the
Mediterranean. It is not just the poor who flee. Sons and
daughters of the country’s ruling elite also search for a better
life elsewhere. Even President Afwerki’s youngest son,
Berhane, tried to get out, making an attempt in 2015, but
was intercepted by border patrols. As the article states, these
children would rather cut ties with their parents and risk living
destitute than stay in Eritrea.
If leaving is difficult, it is also not easy to stay behind
and protest the conditions. Previous acts of resistance to
the government have been dealt with severely. The article
discusses one instance where 12,000 students were forced to
travel on foot for over three weeks – two died crossing a river,
two from snake bites, and then 34 more when they arrived at
their destination and were not properly sheltered.
So far incidents against the regime appear isolated, with no
coordination around a large collective movement. However,
even if totally spontaneous, the fact that a protest occurred
in Asmara is quite notable. Also notable is that the police
sent to disperse them instead told the young people that they
shared their grievances, and did not open fire. Unfortunately
the country’s special forces did not share the same sentiment
as the police, for when the students got near the Presidential
palace, they opened fire. Because it happened in “Africa’s
North Korea,” it is unknown if there were casualties, and if so,
how many. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“But in the face of clear threats and repression by the
regime, and in the absence of an organized opposition,
groups of youth may be beginning to take matters into their
own hands.”

Isaias Afwerki, President of Eritrea.

Source: Freedom4E/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:President_Isaias_Afewerk.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

Source: Abraham Zere, “Fight not flight: Eritrea’s youth taking matters
into their own hands,” African Arguments, 29 November 2017. http://
africanarguments.org/2017/11/29/eritrea-youth-are-taking-matters-into-theirown-hands/
On the 31 October, Eritrea experienced a rare protest as hundreds of people
took the streets in opposition against the nationalisation of an Islamic school.
Government forces reacted in characteristically brutal fashion and dispersed
protesters with gun-shots in the capital Asmara.
For over 16 years, there has been virtually no space to challenge the
government of Eritrea. There is no independent press or right to free
association and movement. Internet penetration is almost non-existent. And
extreme militarization and surveillance pervade society.
These acts of insubordination suggest that many young people are now
saying enough is enough. There does not seem to be coordination around a
collective movement. But in the face of clear threats and repression by the
regime, and in the absence of an organized opposition, groups of youth may
be beginning to take matters into their own hands. Knowing no-one will
instigate change for them, frustrated young people may be feeling a greater
sense of ownership over their own affairs and future.

OE Watch | January 2018

37

AFRICA
Boko Haram’s Soft Targets: Refugees and IDPs
OE Watch Commentary: It was 2009 when Boko
Haram launched its reign of terror; it was also 2009
when its founder and leader, Mohammed Yusuf, was
killed. For the next several years, despite some civilian
casualties, the group mostly directed its violence against
the country’s security forces. As a result, civilians
were generally not afraid of Boko Haram. In fact, since
the government was so disliked because of its brutal
retaliations, in some regions the terrorist group was even
able to garner sympathy. However, as the accompanying
article relates, eventually Boko Haram expanded its list of
targets to include people they felt were not truly Muslim
for not practicing the terrorists’ version of Islamic law.
The situation became worse in 2016 when Boko Haram
split into two factions with one, led by Abu-Musab alBarnawi, mainly targeting security forces and the other,
led by Abubakar Shekau, preferring a more indiscriminate
approach. It is Shekau’s faction that has been responsible
for brutal attacks on the populace, including setting fire to
buildings where civilians are locked inside.
It is also Shekau’s faction that has been attacking two
particularly soft targets: refugees and internally displaced
people (IDPs). The majority of these attacks are carried
out by female suicide bombers who attract less suspicion
than men, and are thus better able to enter camps. Besides
Nigeria, attacks have occurred in Niger, Cameroon,
and Chad. As a result the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has called for
additional security for displacement areas.
The article advances three theories as to why Boko
Haram is targeting refugees and IDPs. The first theory
is that “Boko Haram could be strategically generating
migration to overwhelm governments in an attempt to
force them to submit to its demands. It may be trying
to make the cost of mass migration higher than its
demands or future demands.” Additionally, since Boko
Haram controls the flow of these people to a large extent,
targeting them increases the terrorist organization’s
bargaining position with those governments. The second
theory is that these attacks turn communities against
the refugees and IDPs, making it difficult for anyone including those who want to leave Boko Haram - to return
home. Finally, these soft targets, especially women and
children, boost Boko Haram’s visibility. Reports that
the terrorist organization has been neutralized quickly
dissipate when the television screen is filled with mangled
bodies.
Having suffered heavy losses against the military,
Boko Haram is finding attacking refugees and IDPs to
be significantly less costly. As for the refugees and IDPs,
they are finding Boko Haram’s relatively new strategy to
be quite costly. Without additional protection, these attacks
are likely to continue or even increase. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“While violence against civilians and refugees was previously
avoided, ‘legitimacy’ as a target has since been extended to
people who reject Boko Haram’s interpretation and application
of Sharia law.”

Refugees such as these are being targeted by Boko Haram.
Source: European Commission DGEcho/Flickr, https://goo.gl/K3uV2y, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

Source: Aimée-Noël Mbiyozo, “How Boko Haram specifically targets displaced
people,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 6 December 2017. https://
issafrica.org/research/policy-brief/how-boko-haram-specifically-targetsdisplaced-people
Boko Haram’s surge in attacks on soft targets, including displaced people,
in 2017 is clear. While violence against civilians and refugees was previously
avoided, ‘legitimacy’ as a target has since been extended to people who reject
Boko Haram’s interpretation and application of Sharia law. By this standard,
those who have fled its control are ‘infidels’ for leaving the purity of Sharia,
especially when fleeing to government land or protection, and are considered
both the enemy and illegitimate.
Most recently, in late 2017, Boko Haram activity has surged across the region.
Between May and August 2017, seven times more civilians were killed than in the
preceding four months.
Boko Haram militants have reportedly been infiltrating refugee flows and
camps… Additional reports have emerged of militants, attackers and wouldbe attackers disguising themselves as refugees so they can travel into towns to
purchase supplies.
...
Boko Haram could be strategically generating migration to overwhelm
governments in an attempt to force them to submit to its demands. It may be
trying to make the cost of mass migration higher than its demands or future
demands.

OE Watch | January 2018

38

AFRICA
Inside the Mind of Mali’s Mausoleum Destroyer
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted French-language article from
Jeune Afrique, a popular weekly pan-African magazine, reports on the
trial of a member of the Mali-based jihadist group Ansar al-Din at the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Ansar al-Din was aligned with al-Qaeda
in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) when they occupied most of northern Mali
in 2012. The report details the biography of the member, Ahmad al-Faqi alMahdi, including how he joined the group and became an international war
criminal for destroying historical Sufi shrines and mausoleums in Mali in
June and July 2012.
Al-Mahdi says he was a member of the Tuareg ethnic group, and grew
up in Tuareg refugee camps in Mauritania and Algeria. He was a teacher by
profession and later enrolled in the Libyan army. After the fall of Muammar
Qaddafi’s government in 2011, he joined the Tuareg nationalist militant
group that was opposed to the Malian state. However, when the AQIM-allied
Islamist group, Ansar al-Din, also led by a Tuareg, Iyad Ag Ghaly, ousted
the Tuareg nationalist group, al-Mahdi joined Ansar al-Din. He says that he
always exerts himself in whatever does, so that when he received orders to
destroy Sufi shrines because they were contrary to Islam, that is exactly what
he did.
He also admits, however, that from an ideological perspective, he also
believed that the shrines were impious. He said he was already familiar
with the Wahabbi beliefs of Ansar al-Din that encouraged the destruction of
Sufi shrines from his exposure to Saudi charities in Mali and neighboring
countries. Nonetheless, there was also a financial incentive behind his
actions. While Ansar al-Din did not provide him a salary, it cared for his
family, and this care would have ceased if he did not follow orders to destroy
the shrines.
The article stresses that al-Mahdi’s case shows the complex realities of
jihadism in Africa and the ways that local and national sentiments have
interacted with the broader international and regional political agendas of
groups like AQIM and Ansar al-Din. Al-Mahdi has expressed remorse for
his actions since his sentencing to nine years in prison. Despite this, Ansar
al-Din and AQIM both continue to launch attacks and spread their ideology
in Mali. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“It was his duty, as part of his job, to combat
practices considered contrary to the precepts of
Islam.”
Source: “Destruction des mausolées de Tombouctou : « Il était
de mon devoir de combattre les pratiques contraires à l’islam
(Destruction of the mausoleums of Timbuktu: “It was my duty
to combat practices contrary to Islam”),” jeuneafrique.com, 20
November 2017. http://www.jeuneafrique.com/493653/societe/
destruction-des-mausolees-de-tombouctou-il-etait-de-mondevoir-de-combattre-les-pratiques-contraires-a-lislam
Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi has been convicted by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) of war crimes for leading
the destruction of ten monuments in Timbuktu in June and
July 2012. This is the first time that the ICC has been faced
with a complaint about the destruction of cultural monuments,
which it describes as war crimes. How did a man educated and
educated in the precepts of Sufi Islam come to commit such a
crime against this school of African Islam?
Al-Mahdi was head of the Hisba, one of the four
administrative structures of the group Ansar al-Din, which
is associated with al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)
and occupied northern Mali in 2012 and had set up its
headquarters in Timbuktu in April 2012 after ejecting fighters
from the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad
(MNLA). In this Hisba, his mission was to promote virtue
and prevent vice and to combat all acts that contravene
the precepts of Islam. The mausoleums of Timbuktu were
considered as the incarnation of acts that were impious for the
faithful. It was his duty, as part of his job, to combat practices
considered contrary to the precepts of Islam.

Desolate street in Timbuktu, 2001.

Source: By upyernoz from Haverford, USA (Timbuktu Street) via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/12/Empty_street_in_Timbuktu.jpg, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

39

LATIN AMERICA
Argentinean Submariners Lost at Sea
OE Watch Commentary: Argentina mourned
the passing of 44 of her submariners in the loss of
the boat ARA San Juan. The rescue mission was
called off after two weeks of search efforts, despite
which, the wreck was not located. Thus, hope was
gone, but blame was still lingering. The loss of a
ship at sea, of its crew, but especially perhaps the
loss of a submarine crew is generally a subject
of universal empathy and was in this case. The
second accompanying reference, however, gave
one reasonable and timely strategic analysis of why
Argentina even had a submarine crew to loose, the
news apparently coming as a bit of a surprise to
some of the Argentinean citizenry. Rosendo Fraga
is a well-respected Argentinean political analyst.
He makes a broad-ranging commentary, to include
argument of why the protection of Argentinean
sovereignty depends in part on naval power, pointing
out that “Argentina is 50% territory, 25% sea and
25% Antarctica.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…Argentina is 50% territory, 25%
sea and 25% Antarctica…”

“…The submarine was in perfect condition…”
Source: “ARA San Juan: suspenden a un alto oficial en la Armada (ARA San Juan:
A senior Naval officer is suspended),” Diario Panorama, 12 December 2017. https://
www.diariopanorama.com/noticia/275615/ara-san-juan-suspenden-alto-oficial-armada
“To confirm this fact [that inspection protocols were followed and the boat was in
good condition] Aguad [Minister of Defense Oscar Aguad] spoke personally with petty
officer Humberto René Vilte, who got off in Ushuaia to return to Jujuy due to the grave
sickness of his mother. Aguad talked with ‘crew member 45’ [44 crew members were
lost on the boat] who assured him that ‘he participated in the first twenty-four hours of
the inspection and there was nothing reportable, except small gigs. There was nothing
in reference to the snorkel. The submarine was in perfect condition.’ These and other
indicators brought the Ministry of Defense to subscribe to the theory of ‘sudden and
uncontrollable crisis.’”
Source: Rosendo Fraga, “¿Por qué la Argentina necesita un submarino? (Why does
Argentina need a submarine),” La Nacion, 27 November 2017. http://www.lanacion.
com.ar/2086293-por-que-la-argentina-necesita-un-submarino
“The complete map of Argentina is 50% territory, 25% sea and 25% Antarctica. The
question of the sea is a constantly increasing issue in the world and today it is more
important due to the subsurface and for fishing. In the Malvinas they are extracting
oil and gas (…) States are constantly further advancing their sovereignty by way of the
sea, at the depths of the sea, he illustrated.”

ARA San Juan Submarine, May 2017.

Source: By Juan Kulichevsky from Argentina (Submarino ARA San Juan), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bb/Submarino_ARA_San_Juan_%2833866567363%29.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

40

LATIN AMERICA
Debating the Impeachment of Former Argentinean
President
OE Watch Commentary: An Argentinean federal judge is ready to
have former president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner (at times referred to
in regional press either as Fernández or as Kirchner) arrested for crimes
allegedly committed during her term in office. The judge delayed, however,
until the former president was sworn in as a senator, an office she won in
the last elections. Senators enjoy absolute immunity while in office, so the
delay shifted some of the political burden to the Senate, which would have
to impeach Fernández by a two-thirds vote in order to strip her of immunity
and allow a prosecution to proceed. The charges are serious. They relate to
a deal she is alleged to have made with the government of Iran to provide
impunity to Iranian officials in the bombing of a Jewish center in Buenos
Aires in 1994. The alleged cover-up may also have involved the murder of a
federal investigator who was looking at the events. The party that nominated
current Argentinean President Mauricio Macri (relatively conservative,
anti-progressive) is pushing Kirchner’s impeachment, but does not have the
votes to do so without votes from other parties. Meanwhile, a recent poll
sponsored by the coalition of political parties aligned with the progressive
former president indicates that many (but not a majority) of Argentineans
think that she might actually end up in jail. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“An Argentinean judge asked for the preventive

imprisonment of ex-president of Argentina, Cristina
Fernández accused of ‘treason against the country’...
Federal magistrate Claudio Bonadio also asked
for her impeachment in order to arrest her, given
that Fernández is a senator and has parliamentary
immunity.”

Then President Cristina Fernández at the CINAR naval complex, 2011. Behind
her is the Republic of Argentina Navy Submarine ARA San Juan.
Source: Casa Rosada (Argentina Presidency of the Nation) via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Submarino_ARA_
San_Juan.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0.

Source: Editors, “Traición a la patria: La acusación contra Cristina Fernández (Treason against the country: The accusation against Cristina
Fernández),” El Comercio (Lima) and AFP, 7 December 2017. https://elcomercio.pe/mundo/latinoamerica/traicion-patria-denuncia-cristinafernandez-noticia-479815
“An Argentinean judge asked for the preventive imprisonment of ex-president of Argentina, Cristina Fernández accused of ‘treason against
the country’ for orchestrating a plan to cover up for Iranians implicated in the 1994 attack against a Jewish center that left 85 dead. Federal
magistrate Claudio Bonadio also asked for her impeachment in order to arrest her, given that Fernández is a senator and has parliamentary
immunity.”
Source: Editors, “¿Cuántas causas judiciales tiene abiertas Cristina Fernández de Kirchner? (How many open legal actions does Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner have [against her]?),” ALD antilavadodedinero and Clarin, 12 December 2017. http://www.antilavadodedinero.com/
antilavadodedinero-noticias-articulo.php?id=20676&title=cuantas-causas-judiciales-tiene-abiertas-cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner
“…directors of Unidad Ciudadana [pro Kirchner coalition, several parties of which belong to the Forum of Sao Paulo] contracted an opinion
poll to measure the impact of the news. They did so with the consulting firm that surveyed for that entity during the last elections, Analogias.
The work, that is much to do with the ex-executive, includes a disconcerting question, ‘Do people think she might end up in jail?’ …with exactly
50% who think ‘no’, 27.6% think ‘yes’ and 22.4% don’t know.”
Source: Editors, “Cambiemos apura el debate por el desafuero de Cristina Kirchner (Cambiemos hurries the debate over the impeachment
of Cristina Kirchner),” Perfil, 12 December 2017. http://www.perfil.com/politica/cambiemos-apura-el-debate-por-el-desafuero-de-cristinafernandez.phtml
“The Senate has a period of 180 days to analyze the argument of Judge Bonadio in favor of the withdrawal of immunity and, finally, vote in
chamber for or against the requested measure….The impeachment of a senator requires the approval of a two-thirds majority of those present
in chamber, a number that Cambiemos cannot reach by itself.”
OE Watch | January 2018

41

LATIN AMERICA
Who Is the President of Honduras?
OE Watch Commentary: On 26 November, Honduras had its general election,
which included presidential elections. Following the election, both presidential
candidates claimed victory. As the first accompanying passage reports, the
Honduran Supreme Electoral Tribunal eventually declared the incumbent, Juan
Orlando Hernández as the winner, after a recount of the votes. As reflected in
the second of the attached references, the early announcements after the election
had leftist Salvador Nasralla as the winner, a result that came as a great surprise
to almost everyone. The fact that incumbent President was a candidate was itself
controversial, the national constitution having been amended (or reinterpreted)
so that he could run. Nine years ago, then President Mel Zelaya, a pro Chávez
Bolivarian Marxist, was deposed (in part) for trying to set himself up for
reelection. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“...the coup … or institutional change...of 2009… had
its origin…in the matter of reelection of the incumbent
president.”

President of Honduras Juan Orlando Hernández (circa 2016).

Source: Presidency of El Salvador via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Juan_Orlando_Hernandez_Alvarado.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Jacobo García , “El recuento de votos confirma
la victoria de Juan Orlando en Honduras (The recount of
votes confirms the victory of Juan Orlando in Honduras),”
El País, 12 December 2017. https://elpais.com/
internacional/2017/12/10/america/1512936486_999113.
html
“The President of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE)
David Matamoros, announced Sunday morning the end of
the special vote-by-vote scrutiny of the 4,753 voting tables,
whose results were not transmitted this past 26 November.
The count finished at 2:48 in the morning and gave 424,363
votes to Juan Orlando Hernández and 267,109 votes to
Salvador Nasralla.…For its part, the opposition of expresident Manuel Zelaya, ally of Nasralla, considered the
recount ‘spurious’…”
Source: Ricardo Angoso, “Inesperado giro a la izquierda
en Honduras (Unexpected turn to the left in Honduras),”
Periodismo Sin Fronteras, 29 November 2017. http://
www.periodismosinfronteras.org/inesperado-giro-a-laizquierda-en-honduras.html
“Nasralla’s partisans, it is worth remembering, are
political ‘children’ of ex-president Manuel Zelaya, who
was deposed eight years ago after... an endless stream of
monumental mistakes. As you will remember, the coup
d’Etat or institutional change, according to the description
that one wishes to apply to the events of 2009, in which
Zelaya was replaced in the presidency by Roberto
Micheletti -- then president of the Honduran parliament
-- had its origin, among other things, in the matter of
reelection of the incumbent president.”

New Old Chilean President Not Socialist
OE Watch Commentary: On 17 December, Chile elected a President, Sebastián Piñera, a
conservative and former president. Piñera promised to bring Chilean economic policies back to
the free-market model that Chile had followed for years, but that had been somewhat abandoned
by outgoing President Michelle Bachelet, a progressive and pro-Bolivarian. As the accompanying
article notes, Piñera’s sympathizers shouted, “We do not want communism, we do not want
socialism” before a speech, in which he promised Chile would return to “the pathway of progress
and development.” As with the recent election in Honduras, the result seems to indicate that the
hemisphere’s ideological pendulum is not quite moving to the left again, even while the left in Chile
did enjoy more support than some might have expected. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Federico Grünewald, “Chile gira a la derecha: Piñera vuelve al poder tras una amplia
victoria (Chile veers to the right: Piñera returns to power with an ample victory),”
La Nación, Buenos Aires, 18 December 2017.
http://www.lanacion.com.ar//2092405-chile-gira-a-la-derecha-pinera-vuelve-al-poder-tras-unaamplia-victoria?utm_source=n_tis_nota1&utm_medium=titularS&utm_campaign=NLExt
“Piñera sympathizers shouted, ‘We do not want communism, we do not want socialism’ before his
speech, in which he promised Chile would return to ‘the pathway of progress and development’.
In spite of surveys that anticipated a close finale, the ex president got more than 54% of the votes
against Guillier. After a very polarized campaign and passing aggressive moments, he promised to
respect differences and seek unity.”

President Elect of Chile, Sebastián Piñera.

Source: Government of Chile via Wikimedia,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fotograf%C3%ADa_oficial_del_
Presidente_Sebasti%C3%A1n_Pi%C3%B1era_-_2.jpg, CC BY SA 3.0.

“Chile would return to the
pathway of progress and
development…”

OE Watch | January 2018

42

LATIN AMERICA
Electric Substation Event in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The political crisis in
Venezuela may have settled, but the accompanying
reports highlight that the humanitarian and economic
crises have not. In late November, a major electric
substation experienced an explosion, leading to another
widespread blackout. The cause of the explosion is not
yet publicly clarified, but the Electric Energy Minister
Motta Dominguez quickly blamed it on sabotage. If it was
sabotage, then the Minister’s claim opens the specter that
the political crisis may not be over. The Minister was not
optimistic about stopping the saboteurs, either. There does
not seem, however, to be much corroborating evidence of
such. As likely, the Minister was giving the standard excuse,
a likelihood that should be no more comforting in terms
of Venezuelan prospects. Gathering from comments like
those following the second accompanying reference, many
Venezuelans did not receive his explanation as credible.
The power grid in Venezuela is not so redundant that it can
long withstand continuing deterioration in maintenance
investment, sabotage or not. The explosion should
remind that Venezuela’s basic services infrastructures
are precarious and monitoring them may be one key to
anticipating accelerations in material suffering in that
country. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…it is not known where Machiavellian
minds are going to attack…”

“It is certain that it was an act of sabotage.”
Source: Editors.“Explosión en subestación Guaparo deja a oscuras a Carabobo
(Explosion at the Guaparo substation left Carabobo in the dark),” El Interés,
30 November 2017. http://elestimulo.com/elinteres/explosion-en-subestacionguaparo-deja-sin-luz-a-varios-sectores-de-carabobo/
“An explosion in the Guaparo substation, in the Mañongo urban area in the
state of Carabobo (center) at about 10:00 PM Wednesday leaving six counties
of Carabobo without power, as well as at least two states of the country. The
Minister of Electric Energy, Motta Domínguez, blamed the opposition for this
incident which he classified as ‘sabotage’ and said that 90% of the electric
service in Valencia had been reestablished….
He said that the SEBIN political police arrived there and ‘ found at the site
tools that were completely burned, the cables they cut, the place where they got
in, the fence that they broke into.’…
“For Motta Dominguez, the ‘sabotage’ that the electric system of the country is
suffering, in the care of the State, ‘cannot be eliminated because it is not known
where Machiavellian minds are going to attack. The electric system is 140,000
kilometers of cable lines and there are hundreds and hundreds of towers and we
don’t know.’”
Source: Editors, “¿Y la Custodia Militar? Motta Domínguez, sobre explosión en
subestación Guáparo: Seguro que fue sabotaje (And the Military safekeeping?
Motta Dominguez, regarding the explosion at the Guáparo substation: I am
sure it was sabotage),” DolarToday and Noticioerp Digital, 30 November 2017,
https://dolartoday.com/y-la-custodia-militar-motta-dominguez-sobre-explosionen-subestacion-guaparo-seguro-que-fue-sabotaje/;http://www.noticierodigital.
com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=88197
“Yesterday at about 9:23 PM an explosion followed by the development of a
large fire occurred at the Guáparo substation, which is in Carabobo, Valencia.
It was added that once the fire was controlled by the firefighting units, some
tools were found among which were a hacksaw that was burned up, a pick-ax,
and some pliers….‘Considering what was found, it is certain that it was an act
of sabotage, emphasized Motta Dominguez, who considered that ‘Carabobo
is under siege, specifically Valencia. Valencia has four straight days been
suffering sabotage, cable cuttings.’”

Part of Venezuelan Electric Infrastructure circa 2013 (not the station that suffered the recent explosion in Guaparo).
Source: By Rjcastillo via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:L%C3%ADneas_de_transmisi%C3%B3n_de_energ%C3%ADa_el%C3%A9ctrica.jpg#filehistory, CC BY SA 3.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

43

LATIN AMERICA
The FARC’s Political Aspirations
OE Watch Commentary: Hundreds of former members of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC, per its Spanish
acronym) are trying to earn a legal living after the rebel movement
disarmed under a November 2016 peace deal with the Colombian
government. As part of the agreement, ex-guerrilla fighters have turned
in more than 8,000 weapons and are helping dismantle hundreds of
weapon caches. However, peace has not come easily to the country,
where for decades the FARC controlled key coca leaf and cocaine
production regions. Furthermore, the peace process is facing other
issues such as problems with the reinsertion process. As the first article
discusses, ex-combatants still face temptation to join dissident rebels,
keep their weapons, and traffic drugs instead of looking to earn a legal
living. Reinsertion is also difficult because demobilization zones are
located in rural areas which make it hard to teach ex-combatants new
skills, but some opens source channels claim the locations were chosen
based on FARC’s political aspirations, as discussed in the second
excerpt.
The process to support more than 10,000 combatants in their transition
to civilian livelihoods has been marred by confusion and delays. The
Colombian government has to transition ex-combatants into urban
settings where former guerrilla fighters are taught new skill sets to
help them successfully reintegrate into society. However, the new
reintegration process is occurring largely in rural areas as the FARC
seeks to keep their members together and away from government
influence. As the second excerpt discusses, this is due to the group’s
political aspirations, which requires them to maintain a political base
as well as effective control over its members. The FARC claims that the
rural model is important because it ensures a sense of belonging and
deters recruitment by other armed groups or criminal organizations,
given that many of the former combatants were recruited at young ages
as peasants and possess few skills beyond firing Kalashnikovs and
patching up the wounded.
At this point there are no guarantees that reintegration will work in
rural areas, but what is clear is that FARC leaders are looking beyond
bombs and kidnappings to something much more powerful: political
power. Prior to the signing of the Peace Accords, FARC members could
not run for public office, but they now have the right and have wasted no
time in exercising it. As the third passage discusses, Rodrigo Londoño
Echeverri (a key FARC leader) announced on 1 November that he would
run for the 2018 Presidential elections. It remains to be seen if the FARC
really wants to help its people succeed and reintegrate into society or if
they want to gain political clout. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Como reinsertar a la sociedad los ninos de la FARC (How
to Reintegrate Former FARC members into Society),” Notimerica,
27 February 2017. http://www.notimerica.com/politica/noticia25como-reinsertar-sociedad-ninos-farc-20170225090124.html
President Juan Manuel Santos hopes to incorporate thousands
of FARC ex-combatants back into society, but this may not be as
easy as it seems. Some like one young combatant named Jessica
has been traumatized by war. Others have spent most of their lives
fighting in the jungle and have few other skills, and Colombian
society might struggle to accept them. If the reinsertion policy fails,
there could be additional suffering for Colombia after 51 years of
conflict as former fighters struggle to find jobs and a new life. It
could also crimp growth in Latin America’s fourth-largest largest
economy. Crime gangs are already recruiting at safe houses, says
Jonathan Lucumi, 19, a former insurgent who has been approached
to sell drugs for good money. Others are enlisting, he says.
“They’re keen, they love their guns.”
Source: “¿Qué quieren las Farc con los Terrepaz? (What do the
FARC Want in Terrepaz?),” El Espectador, 15 September 2016.
http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/las-farc-los-territorios-depaz/452371-3
The FARC has selected their demobilization zones in rural areas;
likely because FARC leaders are looking to maintain their power
and influence in regions with little to no government presence. This
same move will help the group further their political aspirations as
they can continue to exert fear and intimidation amongst its people.
Source: “Colombia: las FARC confirman que su ex máximo
comandante, Rodrigo Londoño “Timochenko”, será candidato a la
presidencia (Colombia: FARC Confirms that Their Highest Ranking
Leader Rodrigo Londoño “Timochenko” Will Run for President),”
BBC Mundo, 1 November 2017. http://www.bbc.com/mundo/
noticias-america-latina-41836125
On Wednesday, November 1, the Revolutionary Common Alternative
Force (formerly known as the FARC) announced that Rodrigo
Londoño would run for president in the 2018 elections. This
announcement was made just 24 hours after the National Electoral
Council allowed it to become a political party.

“...the FARC [has] announced that Rodrigo Londoño [a key FARC leader] would run for president in the
2018 elections. This announcement was made just 24 hours after the National Electoral Council allowed it
to become a political party.”

OE Watch | January 2018

44

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia to Train 20,000 Police Officers in Central America
OE Watch Commentary: In recent years, the Colombian Armed
Forces have trained police and military personnel in over 60 countries.
They have been asked to do so because they have earned significant
respect for their effectiveness in battling drug cartels and paramilitary
organizations. Colombia has considerable experience in this, given
that paramilitary groups such as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC) have been operational in the country for over 51
years, while drug cartels have wreaked havoc on society since the early
1980s. Thus, as the first passage points out, criminal organizations
have forced the Colombian military and police to become experts in
counterterrorism operations, intelligence gathering, anti-kidnapping
tactics, and demobilization campaigns.
Although Colombia dealt with extreme instability for decades, the
experience they gained from it is extremely valuable; especially in
a region where drug cartels are expanding so rapidly that police and
military forces cannot adequately address the new challenges they
are facing because they have never received any type of training for
it. In an effort to begin knowledge sharing, Colombia created pilot
programs in 2012 to address training deficiencies, and since that time,
more than 17,000 Central American police officers have received
courses on conducting effective criminal investigations, combating
drug trafficking, and attacking rampant extortion and corruption. These
initial efforts have improved the quality of police forces in the region,
but there is still a need to train more police. This is why, as the second
excerpt discusses, Colombia is now committing itself to training over
20,000 police officers in Central America by 2020. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“In 2018, we plan on continuing this cooperation
and hope that by 2020, we will have trained more
than 20,000 police officers in Central America.”
Source: “Fuerzas Armadas colombianas entrenan a sus pares
de todo el mundo (Colombian Military Trains Armed Forces
throughout the World),” Dialogo, 15 July 2017. https://dialogoamericas.com/en/articles/colombian-military-trains-armed-forcesthroughout-world
The Colombian Military has the depth of experience and
knowledge to help security forces throughout the world thanks
to cooperation agreements they themselves have sustained with
partner nations to obtain expertise in counter terrorism operations,
intelligence gathering, anti-kidnapping tactics, and demobilization
campaigns.
Source: “Colombia sube hasta 20,000 la cifra de policías que
entrena en Centroamérica (Colombia to Train 20,000 Police
Officers in Central America),” El Nuevo Diario, 17 July 2017.
http://www.elnuevodiario.com.ni/internacionales/
centroamerica/431137-colombia-sube-20-000-cifra-policias-queentrena-ce/
We (Colombia) have made the decision to increase at least 90
different activities related to training and security cooperation in
2017. In 2018, we plan on continuing this cooperation and hope that
by 2020, we will have trained more than 20,000 police officers in
Central America.

Colombian National Police Vehicle, 2011.

Source: By National Police of Colombia via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/44/Veh%C3%ADculo_Polic%C3%ADa_Nacional_de_Colombia_%285558617915%29.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0,

OE Watch | January 2018

45

LATIN AMERICA
Military Cooperation in South America
OE Watch Commentary: Brazil is a military leader in South
America, and over the past few years, has begun reaching out
to neighboring countries to promote military cooperation. As
the first excerpt discusses, in 2012, Brazil and Argentina started
working together to develop a common military doctrine -- an
unprecedented initiative in the region. Then in 2016, Brazil
reached out to Colombia to share common experiences regarding
the operation and deployment of mechanized and armored
equipment. As the second passage discusses, during that exercise,
Brazilian General Joares Alves Pereira provided insight to the
Colombians regarding how Brazil conducts the same type of
activities.
Finally, in 2017, Chilean and Brazilian military leaders
conducted a formal visit in Brazil to share experiences and
lessons learned in the creation and implementation of military
doctrine. During the visit, military leaders from both countries
discussed internal processes and how to improve operational
doctrine. As the third excerpt notes, they also discussed the
organization of units and the implementation of new policies
regarding classroom and field training with the end goal of
strengthening the capacities of both militaries. It appears that
military cooperation is a growing trend in South America and
has the potential to promote stability and security throughout the
region. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Brazil y Argentina definen reglas para la elaboracion de una
doctrina militar comun (Brazil and Argentina Define Rules for the Creation
of Common Military Doctrine),” Infodefensa, 14 November 2012. http://
www.infodefensa.com/latam/2012/11/14/noticia-brasil-y-argentinadefinen-reglas-para-la-elaboracion-de-una-doctrina-militar-comun.html
Relations between Brazil and Argentina continue to grow in multiple
sectors to include defense as both countries work together to create
common military doctrine. This is of interest as it represents the first
instance in which an initiative of this nature has been promoted by Brazil.
Source: “Los ejercitos de Colombia and Brazil intercambian experiencias
sobre formacion (Colombian and Brazilian Militaries Exchange
Experiences Regarding Operations and Processes),” Infodefensa, 07
July 2017. http://www.infodefensa.com/latam/2016/07/07/noticiacolombiabrasil-ejercito-colombia-brasil-estrechan-lazos-cooperacion.html
Colombian and Brazilian military leaders are working together to expand
military and defense cooperation between the two countries. As part of the
cooperation, both countries’ are sharing common experiences regarding
the operation and deployment of mechanized and armored equipment. The
end goal of this cooperation is to combat cross-border crime, especially
along the Amazonian border, through the creation of an integrated system
for regional information exchange.
Source: “Los ejercitos de Brazil y Chile intercambian experiences en
procesos de generacion y actualizacion de doctrina (Brazilian and Chilean
Militaries Exchange Experiences Regarding Generational Processes and
the Creation of Military Doctrine),” Infodefensa, 11 November 2017.
http://www.infodefensa.com/latam/2017/08/11/noticia-ejercitos-brasilchile-intercambian-experiencias-procesos-generacion-actualizaciondoctrina.html
Chilean and Brazilian military leaders are working together to gain
a better understanding of the respective capabilities of both nations’
militaries. They are also looking to improve operational military doctrine
and share lessons learned with the end goal of improving the capabilities
of each nation’s military, and furthermore, to share training opportunities
and to strengthen ties which will ultimately lead to enhanced regional
security.

Brazilian Army soldiers during the 2003 Independence Day Parade in Brasília, Brazil.

Source: By Victor Soares/ABr (Agência Brasil [1]) via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ABrazilian_Army_Parade.jpeg, CC BY 3.0.

“Chilean and Brazilian military leaders are working together to... improve operational military doctrine and
share lessons learned with the end goal of improving the capabilities of each nation’s military, and... share
training opportunities and to strengthen ties which will ultimately lead to enhanced regional security.”
OE Watch | January 2018

46

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil Hosts First Ever Humanitarian-Logistics
Exercise in South America
OE Watch Commentary: Military cooperation in South America is
a growing trend with Brazil leading the way as it continues to reach out
to neighboring countries to exchange ideas and enhance collaboration.
A recent activity that demonstrates this is AMAZONLOG 2017; the
first ever interagency humanitarian-logistics exercise in South America,
hosted by Brazil. As the first accompanying passage notes, the exercise
took place along the shared borders of Brazil, Colombia, and Peru in the
Amazonian town of Tabatinga (Amazonas State) in early November.
AMAZONLOG 2017 was conducted by the Brazilian Army’s
Logistics Command, and interagency troops from Peru and Colombia.
Observers from 20 other nations also attended. In total, as the second
passage discusses, approximately 2,000 soldiers and many other entities
also participated in this exercise. The goal of the Brazilian based
exercise was to implement planning measures and create guidelines to
follow in the case of a disaster in the tri-border region between Brazil,
Peru, and Colombia. As part of the exercise, live simulations were
conducted to assist “victims” of forest fires, earthquakes, droughts,
floods and mass human displacement. In this scenario, the mass
displacement victims focused specifically on refugees from Haiti and
Venezuela. To best replicate challenges associated with responding
to a humanitarian crisis in an area of remote access, Brazil chose
challenging and hostile terrain in the Amazon rainforest where the
Brazilian Armed Forces built an international logistics base which
housed the Integrated Multinational Logistics Unit. Troops in this
location were trained by civilians and military personnel.
Logistically, this location also forced participants to overcome
challenges, given that large and cumbersome equipment needed to be
transported 750 miles from the state capital of Manaus to the remote
region of Tabatinga. According to the third excerpt, Brazilian Army
Logistics Commander, General Oliveira said, “We all know how
precarious infrastructure in the Amazon is and that there is a lack of
government presence in that region. Activities like this necessitate
solutions to overcome challenges and provide assistance to populations
affected by disasters.” The activity suggests that Latin American
countries may be willing to take on enhanced roles in improving their
own regional responses to humanitarian disasters. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“The AMAZONLOG military exercise was
sponsored by the Brazilian Army and brought
together 2,000 foreign and domestic military
personnel...”

Source: “Sobre o AMAZONLOG 2017 (About AMAZONLOG
2017),” Brazilian Army Public Affairs Office, 21 September 2017.
http://amazonlog.net/sobre-o-amazonlog-2017.html
The Multinational Logistics Exercise will be held from November
6th to 13th, 2017, in Tabatinga, Amazonas State, in the tri-border
area between Brazil, Colombia, and Peru. Throughout the region,
joint actions will be developed by multinational and interagency
troops from Brazil, Colombia, and Peru. The exercise will allow
the participation of military personnel from partner nations and
civilian personnel from related organizations.
Source: “AMAZONLOG reúne 500 militares estrangeiros em
Tabatinga (AMAZONLOG Gathered 500 Foreign Countries
Military Personnel in Tabatinga),” Defesa e Segurança, 6
November 2017. http://defesaeseguranca.com.br/amazonlog-reune500-militares-estrangeiros-em-tabatinga/
The Amazonlog military exercise was sponsored by the Brazilian
Army and brought together 2,000 foreign and domestic military
personnel in Tabatinga (AM) and other remote areas of the country.
Additionally, observers from more than 20 countries to include
to Germany, Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, France, United
Kingdom, Spain, Russia, and Venezuela attended. Other entities
that participated were reported as federal and state agencies such
as the Brazilian Airport Infrastructure Company (Infraero, per
its Portuguese acronym), the National Indian Foundation (Funai,
per its Portuguese acronym), the Federal Police, and the Internal
Revenue Service, amongst others.
Source: “Una brigada de operaciones humanitarias para actuar en
catástrofes” (A Humanitarian Operations Brigade to Act During
Public Emergencies),” Diálogo, 16 October 2017. https://dialogoamericas.com/es/articles/humanitarian-operations-brigade-actduring-public-emergencies
Brazilian Army General Guilherme Cals Theophilo Gaspar de
Oliveira talked about AMAZONLOG, an interagency humanitarianlogistics exercise held in the tri-border area between Brazil
(Tabatinga), Colombia (Leticia), and Peru (Santa Rosa). As
part of this discussion, he stressed the difficulty of precarious
infrastructure and lack of law enforcement in the region. General
Guilherme Cals Theophilo Gaspar de Oliveira further indicated
that the exercise was directed by the Brazilian Army’s Logistics
Command—currently led by Gen. Theophilo—and had observers
from 20 partner nations with experience in humanitarian
operations, including Germany, Canada, and the United Kingdom.

OE Watch | January 2018

47

ASIA-PACIFIC
ASEAN Leaders Discuss Security Challenges
OE Watch Commentary: The leaders of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) gathered for a series of meetings in Manila
in November, to discuss some of the top threats and challenges facing
the ten member nations. Common concerns around terrorism, maritime
issues, the North Korean nuclear and missile tests, and the Rohingya
crisis are bringing the ten nations closer in an effort to counter the
various threats.
According to the accompanying article, terrorism is a “serious, acute,
and continuing threat for the region.” Examples of terrorism include the
Marawi siege, which left over 1,000 people dead and displaced another
400,000 in the Philippines. The siege has since been brought under
control. However, there is concern that Southeast Asia will soon see an
increased flow of returning fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS), with the terror group having lost ground in the Middle East.
As the article mentions, the group is “calling on supporters to conduct
lone-wolf attacks.”
Maritime related issues brought up include piracy and drug trafficking.
According to Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, these maritime
issues “put a dent in our growth and disrupt the stability of both regional
and global commerce” and “continue to endanger the very fabric of our
society.”
Members of ASEAN are also concerned about the North Korean
nuclear and missile tests conducted in the South China Sea and the
crisis in which over 600,000 Rohingya have fled Myanmar’s Rakhine
state for Bangladesh. The leaders of the ASEAN nations agreed on the
need to stay united on key issues affecting the region. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“Piracy and armed robbery in the seas put a

dent in our growth and disrupt the stability of both
regional and global commerce.”
- Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte

Source: Raul Dancel, “ASEAN Seeks Greater Resolve to Tackle
Security Challenges,” The Straits Online, 14 November 2017.
http://www.straitstimes.com/asia/asean-seeks-greater-resolve-totackle-security-challenges
Fellow leaders, including Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien
Loong, called for greater collaboration to counter terrorism,
saying it “remains a serious, acute and continuing threat for the
region.”
As ISIS loses ground in the Middle East, it is calling on
supporters to conduct lone-wolf attacks, and South-east Asia will
soon see an increased flow of returning fighters.
The Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia are already holding
joint maritime and air patrols in the Sulu Sea, but experts have
said more needs to be done to stem the flow of militants and terror
funding by sharing intelligence and resources.
[Philippine President Rodrigo] Duterte also cited the problems of
piracy and drug trafficking, saying, “Piracy and armed robbery in
the seas put a dent in our growth and disrupt the stability of both
regional and global commerce.”
Touching on the “menace of the illegal drugs trade,” he said it
“continues to endanger the very fabric of our society.”
Leaders of Asean and China announced the start of talks on
a code of conduct in the South China Sea, calling for its early
conclusion.
The issue of North Korea’s recent nuclear and missile tests
was also raised, with PM Lee reiterating the need to continue
to call on Pyongyang to abide by international obligations and
commitments...
Also raised was the ongoing crisis in which over 600,000
Rohingya have fled Myanmar’s Rakhine state for Bangladesh. Mr
Duterte’s spokesman Harry Roque said two Asean members raised
the issue, and Myanmar welcomed offers of humanitarian aid for
the displaced.

Map showing ASEAN member states.

Source: By Sidney KH (Own work) via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6d/Khmerall.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

48

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Unveils World’s Fastest Amphibious Assault Vehicle
OE Watch Commentary: China claims to have built
the world’s fastest amphibious assault vehicle. The
accompanying article discusses a television video report
during which the vehicle-- the VN18-- was revealed,
showing it sailing at sea. The article notes that the
VN18 was produced by China’s weapons maker, the
Norinco Group, and claims that it can reach speeds up to
30 kilometers per hour (19 mph). It reportedly can reach
a maximum ground speed of 65 kilometers per hour (40
mph), carrying a cannon, a machine gun, and 14 people
onboard. It is made using light-weight aluminum alloys
and has an engine that produces 1,600 horsepower.
China has made indigenous innovation a top priority
and national policy. The country’s innovation tempo
has clearly picked up over the past decade. As the
article states, “the VN18 is another example of China’s
innovative power.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

Source: “Chinese Firm Builds ‘Fastest’ Amphibious Assault Vehicle,” China
Global Television Network (CGTN), 20 November 2017. http://english.chinamil.
com.cn/view/2017-11/20/content_7833563.htm
China’s weapons maker, Norinco Group, said its VN18 is the world fastest
amphibious assault vehicle…The report showed videos of the VN18 sailing at sea,
saying that it can sail at a speed up to 30 km/h, which is the fastest of its kind in the
world.
“On the waters, it’s like a car running at 120 km/h on a highway,” said Tan
Yongyao, manager of R&D at Norinco.
The vehicle’s maximum ground speed is 65 km/h, with a cannon, a machine gun
and 14 people on board, according to the report.
Aluminum alloys are employed to build the vehicle body. The metal is lightweight
compared to steel.
...Commentators said in the report that the VN18 is another example of China’s
innovative power.

“China’s weapons maker, Norinco Group, said its VN18 is
the world’s fastest amphibious assault vehicle…”

Chinese ZBD-05, a precursor to the VN-18, during Naval landing operation held within the Russian-Chinese exercise Naval Interaction-2015.
Source: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=24299@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

49

ASIA-PACIFIC
Rohingya Crisis: Will China’s Mediation Succeed?
by Sudha Ramachandran
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 15, dated 22 November 2017, Edited for OE
Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/rohingya-crisis-will-chinas-mediation-succeed/

OE Watch Commentary: During his visits to Dhaka, Bangladesh and Naypyitaw, Myanmar
on 18 and 19 November, China’s Foreign Minister Wang Yi put forward a three-phase plan to
resolve the Rohingya crisis. China’s plan has reportedly found acceptance in Naypyitaw and
Dhaka, and marks the start of a new phase in Beijing’s involvement in the Rohingya conflict.
China’s role has hitherto been limited to providing humanitarian aid to the Rohingya refugees
and protecting Myanmar from international censure. Why is China now adopting a mediatory
role in the conflict? And can it bringing peace to a restive region?
As the accompanying passage discusses, China’s plan entails a ceasefire in Myanmar’s
Rakhine state, which is at the center of the crisis. Aimed at restoring order and stability in the
Rakhine state, the ceasefire is expected to halt the flow of Rohingya refugees to Bangladesh.
China envisages that this will pave the way for the second stage: negotiations between
Myanmar and Bangladesh to address the refugee problem. The third and final stage will
involve the economic development of the Rakhine state to address the underlying causes of the
violence.
China’s interest in the Rakhine state stems from its strategic location and rich resources.
The Rakhine state plays a significant role in China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). The state
is located on the Bay of Bengal, which opens into the Indian Ocean. Like Pakistan’s Gwadar
port, which enables Beijing to transport West Asian oil, gas and other commodities through
a shorter route via Pakistan to underdeveloped western China, the long Rakhine coastline
provides southern China with access to the sea and eastern China with a shorter route to the
Indian Ocean. Ports and pipelines in Rakhine significantly free China’s trade with Africa and
West Asia, especially its oil imports, from dependence on the congested Straits of Malacca. As
a result, the stability of Rakhine is regarded as important to the success of the BRI.
Additionally, Rakhine is rich in natural resources. Large gas reserves were discovered in
the waters off its coast in 2004. Beginning in 2008, China has bought gas from the area and
transported it from Kyaukphyu on Rakhine’s coast to China’s Yunnan Province through
the Myanmar-China Gas Pipeline since 2013. This gas meets the needs of China’s Yunnan,
Guizhou and Guangxi provinces as well as that of other counties and cities. Since April this
year, oil from Rakhine is being transported to China through a pipeline running parallel to the
gas pipeline.

“China proposed a three-phase
solution to help settle the issue in
Myanmar’s Rakhine state.”
Source: “China proposes three-phase solution
to Rakhine issue in Myanmar: FM,” Global
Times (China), 20 November 2017. http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/1076114.shtml
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said on
Sunday that China proposed a three-phase
solution to help settle the issue in Myanmar’s
Rakhine state.
...
The first phase is to achieve a ceasefire
so that local residents can no longer be
displaced. Through joint efforts, the ceasefire
has been in place, Wang said.
Second, the international community should
encourage Myanmar and Bangladesh to keep
communication in a bid to find a feasible
solution to the issue, he said. The two
countries have reached an initial agreement
on repatriation of refugees fleeing to
Bangladesh from Myanmar.
The third phase is to find a long-term
solution. Stressing that poverty is the root
cause of turbulence and conflict, the Chinese
foreign minister called on the international
community to support poverty alleviation
efforts in Rakhine state.

In the past, China avoided playing mediator in conflicts beyond its borders, arguing that
this went against its principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign countries.
However, in recent years it has shown increasing willingness to mediate an end to conflicts. It has, for instance, been involved in efforts to
bring the Afghan government and the Taliban to the negotiation table; and undertook shuttle diplomacy between Afghanistan and Pakistan
to arrest spiraling tensions between the two neighbors. China appears to be taking on a mediatory role in regions where it has strong
economic and other interests, and this appears to be the primary motivation behind Beijing’s mediation in the Rohingya crisis as well.

However, China’s promotion of a military-economic development approach to the Rohingya crisis can be expected to worsen the conflict.
Development of a violent region by external actors rarely benefits locals, as seen in Pakistan’s Baluchistan province. China’s development
of Gwadar port in the region prompted militants to target outsiders. Projects in Rakhine are likely to benefit foreign investors, Rakhine
Buddhists and the Barmar majority, not the marginalized Rohingya. Development that does not result in economic inclusion of the Rohingya
will deepen existing grievances and generate new conflicts.
China may have significant political and economic influence in Bangladesh and Myanmar but it lacks other qualities that a mediator
would need to succeed in settling the Rohingya conflict. Notably, Bangladesh believes that China is biased towards Myanmar, and Beijing’s
substantial economic and other interests in Rakhine can be expected to fuel Myanmar’s suspicions of China’s intentions and actions. Thus,
Chinese mediation is unlikely to resolve the Rohingya conflict. At best, its intervention could keep a lid on the violence being unleashed by
the Myanmar military in the Rakhine state. This could usher in a measure of stability but not peace in Rakhine. In the future, China can be
expected to offer to mediate in conflicts within and between countries where it has significant interests, especially involving countries that
are part of BRI. End OE Watch Commentary (Ramachandran)

OE Watch | January 2018

50

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Relationship with Chile
by R. Evan Ellis
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 17, Issue 15, dated 22 November 2017, Edited for OE
Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-relationship-chile-struggle-future-regime-pacific/

OE Watch Commentary: During the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC)
leaders summit in November, China upgraded a free-trade agreement with Chile, building on
a free-trade deal first signed in 2005. The first accompanying passage from the China Daily
discusses the significance of this agreement, pointing out the strength of the economic and
political relationship that China has built with Chile, and the influential position Chile currently
occupies in shaping Chinese engagement with Latin America. China’s relationship with Chile
has multiple elements that distinguish it from its relationship with others in Latin America.
As the passage notes, Chile is the first Latin American country to sign a free trade agreement
with China, making it a key indicator of Chinese advancement into South America and the new
version of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, denoted as “TPP 2.”
Chile has been one of the most successful countries in the region in establishing a national
brand in China and positioning its products in the non-commodity goods segment of the
Chinese market. Chile last year replaced Vietnam as the principal supplier of fresh fruit
imported by China. It successfully positioned its cherries, table grapes, blueberries as luxury
goods in China. Chilean wines have achieved similar recognition in China, as consumption by
the Chinese middle class grows.
Despite such success, and Chile’s reputation for efficiency, security, and rule of law,
investment by Chinese companies in the country ranks among the lowest in the region. The
Chilean government has taken note of the contrast between its successes in exporting its
products to China, with its inability to attract significant Chinese investment. Ironically, the
lack of Chinese direct investment in the country partially reflects Chile’s relatively good
governance and strong institutions; Chinese companies often prefer to invest where they can
secure state-to-state deals on preferential terms. Chile, with its good access to capital markets
has not felt compelled to adapt its laws and regulations, such as those governing public
procurement, to attract Chinese loans or investors.
Chile’s stable and developed financial system and access to international capital markets
has limited the need for loans from Chinese policy banks such as China Development Bank
and China Export-Import bank, often tied to the use of Chinese companies and laborers in the
projects financed. Yet the same strength and sophistication of Chile’s financial system has also
allowed the country to become the regional hub for clearing transactions conducted in Chinese
renminbi (RMB). As the second accompanying passage discusses, the two countries have
invested $189 million to establish a clearing bank in Chile, tied to China Construction Bank, as
well a $3.5 billion currency swap agreement between the central bank of Chile and the People’s
Bank of China. Chile was one of the first Latin American companies to join the PRC-sponsored
Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), in May 2017.
Chinese activities in Chile’s defense sector have been minimal. Nonetheless, in June 2015,
Chile’s Minister of Defense Jose Antonio Gomez traveled to the PRC to meet with his Chinese
counterpart, Chang Wanquan to boost defense cooperation. A modest number of Chilean
officers regularly travel to China for professional military education programs, and Chinese
arms companies also had a significant presence at the Exponaval trade show in Santiago.
Ultimately, Chile’s relationship with China will be critical in shaping the dynamics of China’s
relationship with Latin America in general. As noted, Chile’s success in placing products in the
PRC has made its practices an important reference for the rest of the region. Reciprocally, its
insistence on not bending Chilean laws and contracting procedures to accommodate Chinese
companies, as occurred in many other countries across the region, provides an important
indication of whether it is possible to attract Chinese investment and maintain a healthy
business relationship within the framework of a nation’s existing laws and regulations.
Chile’s orientation toward China will also be important at the regional level. In the wake of
the US withdrawal from the TPP, the support of Chile will be instrumental in taking forward
the TPP 2, which would make an important contribution in defining a Trans-Pacific commercial
regime which addresses non-tariff barriers to trade, and which protects the intellectual property
of the participating nations far more than the alternative “Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific”
currently being promoted by China. End OE Watch Commentary (Ellis)

Source: “Xi, Bachelet witness upgrade of
China-Chile FTA,” China Daily, 13 November
2017. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
business/2017-11/13/content_34477605.htm
Chinese President Xi Jinping and his
Chilean counterpart, Michelle Bachelet,
on Saturday [11 November] witnessed the
signing of a bilateral deal on upgrading the
Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the two
countries.
Xi underlined that this is China’s first FTA
upgrade completed with a Latin American
country.
The upgraded agreement will unleash new
impetus for the practical cooperation between
China and Chile and set a new benchmark
for China’s cooperation with other Latin
American countries as well as a new role
model to the world, he said.
Bachelet congratulated Xi on the success
of the 19th National Congress of the
Communist Party of China and wished that
greater achievements would be made in
the implementation of the Belt and Road
Initiative.
The Chile-China relationship has made
many firsts in the course of developing
relations between Latin America and China,
said Bachelet, adding that her country will
carry forward the pioneering spirit and
advance the practical cooperation between
the two sides.
Chile is the first Latin American country to
sign a free trade agreement with China.
Source: “Spotlight: China opens first RMB
clearing bank in South America,” Xinhuanet.
com, 22 June 2016. http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2016-06/22/c_135457108.htm
“China Construction Bank (CCB)
has opened the first clearing bank for
transactions in renminbi (RMB) in South
America in Chile’s capital Santiago, the CCB
said on Tuesday.
...The South American branch of the CCB,
one of the world’s top 10 banks, will not only
help boost economic and trade exchanges
and financial collaboration between China
and Chile, but also help the bank expand its
services in Latin America, said Guo [Guo
You, president of the CCB’s Supervisory
Council].”
OE Watch | January 2018

51

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Considers “Defensive Mobilization” for
Potential War on Korean Peninsula
OE Watch Commentary: The 2018 Global Times Annual Conference was held in Beijing, China on 16 December. One of the panel
discussion topics was, “Will the condition in the [Korean] peninsula bring about severe military conflict?” As the first accompanying passage
from a Chinese newspaper points out, Yinhong Shi, international relations professor from Renmin University, stated that “current conditions
on the Korean peninsula now make for the biggest risk of a war in many years.” As the passage discusses, a common perception among the
conference guest speakers was “a peninsula war was imminent and could break out at any moment.” As the second passage notes, a former
deputy commander of the Nanjing Military Region predicted it could happen at any time before next March. As a result, he claimed that China,
especially the Northeast region that borders the peninsula, should mobilize “for defensive purposes” and be prepared for war. As the second
passage also notes, another military expert said that “military defense will be activated in the border area, deploying anti-missile weapons,
while humanitarian aid should be prepared for potential North Korean war refugees.” End OE Watch Commentary (Chen)

“...current conditions on the Korean peninsula now make for the biggest risk of a war in many years.”
Source: Changyin Lu, “时殷弘：目前是多年来半岛爆发战争可能性最大的时候 (Yinhong Shi: The peninsula now faces the biggest risk of
a war in years),” Global Times, 16 December 2017. http://world.huanqiu.com/exclusive/2017-12/11454121.html
During the 2018 Global Times Annual Conference, Yinhong Shi, international relations professor from Renmin University, stated that current
conditions on the Korean peninsula now make for the biggest risk of a war in many years.
Shi pointed out that historically the majority of the wars derived from interaction among the involving parties. Inspired by the progress
it made in nuclear technology, Pyongyang strives to make a last shot in possessing nuclear weapons. The threats of military strikes from
President Trump and US allies further convinced Pyongyang that its only option to ward off such military strikes is to seize the time in
developing nuclear weapons.
On the other hand, Shi portrayed Trump’s strategy toward Pyongyang as “two knives” One is unprecedented intensive threat of using
military force against the state, while the other is to frighten it economically by pressuring China and other U.N. members to cut their trade
ties with Pyongyang. Such strategy will inevitably cause Kim to expedite the nuclear program, which in turn compels Trump to use his two
knives more frequently.
Very complicated and imminent factors are at play right now as both parties wrestle against one another. As a result, the risk of a peninsula
war is at the highest in many years because of Trump and Kim. However, both Trump and Kim are concerned about the massive danger and
cost from the war. It will be an unprecedented disaster to the bordering countries should war break out.
Source: Deng Xiaoci, “China should prepare to defend against war in Korean Peninsula: expert,” Global Times (China), 17 December 2017.
http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1080722.shtml
China should prepare for war defensively and be mentally prepared for it anytime on the Korean Peninsula, a former senior military official
said on Saturday.
Lieutenant General Wang Hongguang, former deputy commander of the Nanjing Military Area Command, made the statement at an annual
Global Times forum on Saturday.
“The war on the Korean Peninsula might break out anytime between now and March next year,” Wang said, stressing that “China should be
psychologically prepared for a potential Korean war, and the Northeast China regions should be mobilized for that.”
“Such mobilization is not to launch a war, but for defensive purposes,” he added.
“Defensive mobilization” focuses mainly on the military, a passive coping mechanism in the country’s bordering regions which could be
affected by nearby battles, Song Zhongping, a military expert and a TV commentator, told the Global Times on Sunday.
The military defense will be activated in the border area, deploying anti-missile weapons, while humanitarian aid should be prepared for
potential North Korean war refugees, Song added.

“China should be psychologically prepared for a potential Korean war, and the Northeast China regions
should be mobilized for that.”

OE Watch | January 2018

52

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Kazakhstan’s New Military Doctrine
OE Watch Commentary: Kazakhstan’s Ministry of Defense (MoD) recently
published its new military doctrine. While it is similar to the previous version from
2011, the new doctrine has an important addition: the threat of hybrid war. The
accompanying passage by Dosym Satpayev, a well known political-security analyst,
discusses this addition in an article in Ratel, a Russian-language news website in
Kazakhstan.
The article looks at the addition of hybrid war and describes one of its main goals
as “undermin[ing] the legitimacy and authority of the existing regime, which can
then be replaced.” He also points out that the updated Russian military doctrine also
incorporated a new kind of threat defined as “a change of power or the emergence
of a hostile regime in a neighboring state” and that “the Kremlin very successfully
applied various methods of hybrid war during and after the annexation of Crimea.”
Satpayev questions “if [Kazakhstan] is ready for hybrid conflicts, especially in
conditions when a part of the population is under the influence of other states and
non-state actors, including extremist groups.”
As Russia became involved in Ukraine, there was concern in Kazakhstan about
the ethnic Russian population in northern Kazakhstan (bordering Russia); namely
that the situation would be a repeat of what happened in eastern Ukraine. The
Kazakh government has been concerned with the threat of the northern regions of
Kazakhstan breaking off from the country since before the conflict in Ukraine; but
this is the first time that it has incorporated it into the national military doctrine.
Satpayev notes that the new doctrine “is defensive in character” and how the 2011
doctrine stated that “defense spending in Kazakhstan must be no less than one
percent of the country’s GDP.” The new doctrine does not explicitly state that defense
spending must be one percent of the GDP, but it does it state that the militaryindustrial complex of Kazakhstan will continue to be developed.
Satpayev mentions that increased defense spending “is happening at the expense
of other spheres” and states: “The main guarantee of our security, in addition to
immunity from hybrid wars, is not our armed forces or even multiple international
agreements, but long-term political stability and real socio-economic development.”
While a number of other sources in Kazakhstan have made similar statements, the
government believes that the country’s military-industrial complex is becoming
an important sector of the economy and will likely continue to grow. The article
demonstrates that the Kazakh Armed Forces is looking more closely at hybrid
threats, but how it works to combat them is an ongoing debate. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“...it is unknown if the country is ready for
hybrid conflicts, especially in conditions
when a part of the population is under
the influence of other states and non-state
actors, including extremist groups.”
Source: Satpayev, Dosym. “Готов ли Казахстан к
гибридной войне? (Is Kazakhstan prepared for a
hybrid war?),” Ratel, 10 October 2017. http://www.
ratel.kz/outlook/gotov_li_kazahstan_k_gibridnoj_vojne
Four military doctrines have been written in
Kazakhstan during its period of independence, in 1993,
2000, 2007 and 2011…the world has undergone major
changes over the past six years…One of the main goals
of hybrid attacks is to undermine the legitimacy and
authority of the existing regime, which can then be
replaced. In the updated Russian military doctrine, a
change of power in a neighboring state or the emergence
of hostile regime was named as a new kind of threat…
As the Ukrainian conflict showed, the Kremlin very
successfully applied various methods of hybrid war
during and after the annexation of Crimea…
…it is unclear how the Ukrainian events influenced
the upgrade of the military doctrine of Kazakhstan,
with an emphasis on hybrid threats. Already in March
2015, during a meeting within the Ministry of Defense of
Kazakhstan, a statement was made that military training
in Kazakhstan would be carried out with consideration
of modern military conflicts. However, it is unknown if
the country is ready for hybrid conflicts, especially in
conditions when a part of the population is under the
influence of other states and non-state actors, including
extremist groups…
All of Kazakhstan’s military doctrines have a strictly
defensive character. This time as well stressed that
the “military doctrine is defensive in character and
reflects Kazakhstan’s commitment for defending national
interests”…the military doctrine of 2011 clearly states
that the goal of defense spending in Kazakhstan must be
no less than one percent of the country’s GDP. There
have been suggestions to increase it to 1.5 percent and
this has apparently begun. According to the Stockholm
Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), in 2015, Kazakhstan
had $1.9 billion, or 1.2 percent of GDP in military
spending…

…the growth of defense spending in Kazakhstan also
brings up questions, such as if this is happening at the
expense of other spheres…except for healthcare, other
social area areas – like education – expenditures are
falling, while defense is growing…The main guarantee of
our security, in addition to immunity from hybrid wars,
is not our armed forces or even multiple international
agreements, but long-term political stability and real
socio-economic development…In the end, if local
The percentage of Russians, Ukrainians, Germans, Poles by the regions and cities of Oblast level and authorities do not “fight” with their own people, any
republican subordination of Kazakhstan at the start of 2016.
external threats are not as awful.
Source: Sibom via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AKazakhstan_European_2016_Rus.png, CC BY-SA 4.0.
OE Watch | January 2018

53

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
India’s Reaction to Russian Security Cooperation
with Pakistan
OE Watch Commentary: India has maintained a good
relationship with Russia for a number of years, particularly through
security cooperation. The accompanying excerpted articles show
how Indian-Russian security cooperation may change over the next
several years, particularly given Russian security cooperation with
India’s rival, Pakistan.
The first article from the Times of India, an English language
newspaper, discusses Russia’s recent improvement of relations
with Pakistan and how the Russian government is working to
assuage India that it will not affect its relationship with it. The
article includes statements from Nikolay Kudashev, the Russian
Ambassador to India, that Russia’s recent “joint exercises with
Pakistan were focused only on antiterror operations.” This
statement came “after the first tri-Service “Indra” military exercise
between the Indian and Russian armed forces.” The “Indra”
military exercise has taken place annually since 2003 with the
Navies of Russia and India and this year expanded to include
ground forces and aircraft.
The second article from Newsline, a Pakistani English language
magazine, looks at the improvement of ties between Pakistan and
Russia and notes that they “have been warming up since 2014,
when Russia formally lifted an arms embargo against Pakistan, in
place since the Afghan war.” As the article also notes, the warming
up of relations has resulted in not only “a deal to for Pakistan to
purchase four Russian made MI 35M attack helicopters,” but also
the recent “joint military exercise between the two nations.” While
some in Pakistan think that this signifies “the emergence of a new
regional bloc,” the author believes that “there cannot be a regional
alliance in South Asia sans India.” Other sources in Pakistan note
that the relationship is still in an early stage.
The article from Business Standard, an English language Indian
daily newspaper, does not mention Russian-Pakistani relations,
but reports on India’s plans to procure new tanks and infantry
combat vehicles and this is one area where the Indian government
could move away from security cooperation with Russia. The
article mentions how the Indian Armed Forces are looking to
manufacture what it calls “Future Ready Combat Vehicles” to
“replace the ageing T-72 fleet.” According to Lieutenant General
M J S Kahlon, the Indian Army planning chief, the “process
involves identifying a mature, in-service tank in the world, which
can be tweaked to meet our requirements.” While General Kahlon
states that “this would be the first time indigenous production
would take care of our armoured requirements,” the article
mentions that India will “upgrade the existing T-72 tank fleet to
remain battle-worthy till the new platforms are inducted.” The
article also says that the “FRCV is intended to carry out roles
other than that of a tank.” India could turn to Russia to upgrade its
inventory of T-72s and Russia is in a position to bid for the FRCV
with its Armata platform, which could fulfill the multiple roles that
India is looking to get out of the FRCV. Whether India opts for this
option might depend on how far Russia pursues security cooperation
with Pakistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Since the FRCV [Future Ready Combat Vehicles] and
FICV [Future Infantry Combat Vehicles] projects are
time-consuming projects, the army will simultaneously
upgrade the existing T-72 tank fleet to remain battleworthy till the new platforms are inducted...”
Source: “Russia allays India’s fears, plays down drill with Pakistan,”
The Times of India, 2 November 2017. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.
com/india/russia-allays-indias-fears-plays-down-drill-with-pakistan/
articleshow/61428230.cms
Russia said on Wednesday that its relations with India were second
to none in the world to downplay its recent joint military exercise with
Pakistan, even as it stressed the need for “an open security architecture
with space for all”…”Our relations with India are a privileged strategic
partnership, second to no other country, while we have a normal interstate relationship with Pakistan,” said Russian ambassador Nikolay
Kudashev.
Talking to journalists after the first tri-Service “Indra” military exercise
between the Indian and Russian armed forces concluded in Vladivostok
on Sunday, Kudashev said his country’s joint exercises with Pakistan
were focused only on antiterror operations. Russia has begun to hold the
“Druzba” (friendship) military exercises with Pakistan since last year…
Source: Aasim Zafar Khan “The Moscow Tilt,” Newsline, 23 November
2017. http://newslinemagazine.com/magazine/the-moscow-tilt/
Foreign policy experts in Pakistan are a dime a dozen, especially when it
comes to the big four: Washington, New Delhi, Beijing and Kabul. Every
evening on prime time television, and every morning on the op-ed pages
of our newspapers, these experts help us commoners navigate the delicate
intricacies of our foreign policy. However, of late, they’re a little stumped,
because of the entry of a new kid on the block: Mother Russia.
Outreach efforts between the two countries have been warming up since
2014, when Russia formally lifted an arms embargo against Pakistan, in
place since the Afghan war. In 2016, during then Chief of Army Staff (COAS)
General (retd.) Raheel Sharif’s visit to Moscow, a deal to purchase four
Russian made MI 35M attack helicopters was inked, and the machines were
received two months ago.
Most recently, the current COAS, General Bajwa, also visited Russia, to
witness a joint military exercise between the two nations…local analysts/
strategists, who are professionally disposed against the workings of chance,
went into overdrive, hailing the emergence of a new regional bloc…there
is much talk about the new bloc in the region: Islamabad, Beijing and
Moscow. Or, if one looks at it in a certain light, a minus India bloc…There
cannot be a regional alliance in South Asia sans India…

(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

54

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Continued: India’s Reaction to Russian Security
Cooperation with Pakistan
Source: Shukla, Ajai “Army sets ball rolling for biggest-ever arms deal,” Business Standard, 16 November 2017.
http://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/army-sets-ball-rolling-for-biggest-ever-arms-deal-117111600075_1.html
Army Chief General Bipin Rawat and a battery of senior generals on Wednesday explained the details of India’s biggest-ever weapons
acquisition — the ongoing procurement of futuristic tanks and infantry combat vehicles (ICVs)…The generals told a defence industry
gathering that the mechanised forces would be boosted on three parallel tracks. The first is the manufacture of 1,770 advanced, 50-tonne
tanks — termed Future Ready Combat Vehicles (FRCVs) — under the “strategic partner” policy to replace the ageing T-72 fleet…”This
process involves identifying a mature, in-service tank in the world, which can be tweaked to meet our requirements,” said Lieutenant General
M J S Kahlon, the army’s planning chief…While the FRCV will be a derivative of an in-service tank, the “ future infantry combat vehicle”
(FICV) will be a brand-new, futuristic system…
Kahlon pointed out that this would be the first time indigenous production would take care of our armoured requirements. “So far, we bought
all our armour on a government-to-government basis — from the west till late 1960s and from the Soviet Union and Russia since then.”
That dependence forced the army to adapt its warfighting doctrines to platforms that had never been designed with India’s tactical needs,
geography and manpower in mind. “We bought what was available and adapted our doctrines onto that,” rued Kahlon. Since the FRCV and
FICV projects are time-consuming projects, the army will simultaneously upgrade the existing T-72 tank fleet to remain battle-worthy till the
new platforms are inducted. Shivane said T-72s would get more powerful engines, day- and night-vision thermal sights, and improved guns
and ammunition.
The FRCV is intended to carry out roles other than that of a tank. The RFI states it will be the base platform for a range of additional
armoured vehicles, including self-propelled artillery and air defence guns, mine trawls, bridge-layer tanks (BLTS), armoured engineering
vehicles, etc…

T-72 Ajeya.

Source: Vikramaadityasumbria via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AIndian_Army_T-72_Ajeya.JPG, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

55

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Georgia: A Counterterrorism Operation Raises Questions
OE Watch Commentary: When Georgian security forces
conducted an intense, 20-hour long special counterterrorism
operation in Tbilisi on 21-22 November, it generated a lot of
attention in the Georgian and international media, particularly
since this kind of incident rarely happens in Tbilisi. The
accompanying excerpted articles report on the operation,
which resulted in the death of a high-profile member of
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). As the excerpts
demonstrate, the operation has also raised important questions
about security in Georgia.
The first article from Civil Georgia, an English language
independent online news agency, reports that the Georgian
government confirmed the identity of one of the people
killed in the operation as Ahmed Chatayev. The article
briefly recounts the operation and notes that “one of the
main questions – how the group managed to enter Georgia
undetected – remains unanswered.” The article also notes how
“Chatayev was wounded and arrested by the Georgian police
following the Lopota gorge clash in late August 2012” and
that later “Georgian prosecutors dropped the case against him
in January 2013, citing absence of evidence.”
While Georgians might immediately associate Chatayev
with the Lopota incident in 2012, the article from Novaya
Gazeta, an independent Russian newspaper, recounts
Chatayev’s involvement in a number of conflicts, providing
some insight into the clash with Georgian security forces in
Tbilisi. The article reports that Chatayev “took part in the
second Chechen War,” later “fled to Europe with his family”
and “convinced Austria to grant him political asylum.” The
article also notes that “Over the past ten years (Chatayev) was
arrested five times: in Russia, Ukraine, Bulgaria, Sweden and
Georgia” and “released (every time) for lack of evidence.” The
article states that “there were always influential politicians
or international organizations that advocated for him – a
political refugee pursued by Russian authorities.” After
Georgian authorities dropped charges against Chatayev for
his involvement in the Lopota Gorge incident, the article
notes that “he went to Syria” and “led the “Yarmuk” battalion
– a unit of Chechens in ISIS [the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria].” Most notably, Chatayev “was believed to be the
organizer” of the 28 June 2016 attack on the Istanbul airport
and he reportedly threatened Georgian authorities from Syria.
Chatayev ultimately failed to carry out a terrorist attack, if
that was in fact his goal, but many in Georgia still question
how someone with such a high-profile (Chatayev was also
well-known for having lost his left leg and right hand in
various conflicts) and ties to terrorist groups could have made
it into the country. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“As a result of the 20-hour special
operation, two members of the criminal
group were killed, while one person
remaining in the apartment – Ahmed
Chatayev – detonated himself.”

Source: “Chatayev among Killed Suspects, Security Service Confirms,” Civil
Georgia, 1 December 2017. http://www.civil.ge/eng/article.php?id=30690
Georgian State Security Service issued a statement on December 1,
confirming that one of the three terrorism suspects killed during the antiterrorist operation in Tbilisi on November 21-22 was an ISIS member Ahmed
Chatayev. The SSS [State Security Service of Georgia] said Chatayev’s identity
has been confirmed “through investigative activities and examinations…
including DNA and finger prints analysis.”
…at the beginning of the operation, “ for several hours the SSS
Counterterrorist Department was conducting negotiations [with the suspects]
regarding their surrender.” The suspects, says the SSS, refused to do so,
opening fire and throwing hand grenades at the security forces members. “As
a result of the 20-hour special operation, two members of the criminal group
were killed, while one person remaining in the apartment – Ahmed Chatayev –
detonated himself…”
…One of the main questions – how the group managed to enter Georgia
undetected – remains unanswered…The operation claimed the life of one
security forces serviceman, with another four wounded…Chatayev was
wounded and arrested by the Georgian police following the Lopota gorge
clash in late August 2012, but was soon released from jail on bail. Georgian
prosecutors dropped the case against him in January 2013, citing absence of
evidence.”
Source: Gordienko, Irina. “Ловушка (A Trap),” Novaya Gazeta, 23 November
2017. https://www.novayagazeta.ru/articles/2017/11/23/74650-nomer-odin
…This kind of fighting has not been seen in usually quiet Tbilisi for some time…
On November 23, Georgian media, citing a number of sources in the Security
Council, reported that among those killed was Ahmed Chatayev, a close associate
of the leader of the Caucasus Emirate (an organization banned in Russia) Doku
Umarov, and an associate of the head of the Islamic State, al-Baghdadi…
…Chatayev was born in the Chechen village of Vedeno in 1980 and took part in
the second Chechen War, during which he lost his right hand…In the early 2000s
he fled to Europe with his family. Russia declared Chatayev wanted through
Interpol, but in 2003 he convinced Austria to grant him political asylum…Over
the past ten years, he was arrested five times: in Russia, Ukraine, Bulgaria,
Sweden and Georgia…He was released (every time) “ for lack of evidence”
and there were always influential politicians or international organizations that
advocated for him – a political refugee pursued by Russian authorities.
In August 2012 Chatayev was connected to the scandalous anti-terrorist
operation in the Georgian village of Lapankuri on the border with Dagestan.
According to the official version, a group of 20 well-armed men infiltrated
Georgia from Dagestan…As a result of a special operation, 11 men were
eliminated, all of them Kists who came from the Pankisi Gorge of Georgia…
During the operation, Chatayev was wounded and surrendered a few days later.
The newly elected government of Bidzina Ivanishvili freed Chataev because
of a new “Amnesty” law…Chatayev moved to Turkey after the amnesty and in
February 2015 it became known that he went to Syria, where he swore allegiance
to the head of ISIS…
Chatayev led the “Yarmuk” battalion – a unit of Chechens in ISIS. However,
he could not take part in the fighting: after the loss of his right hand, he lost his
left leg during the counter-terrorist operation in Georgia… In June 2016 a major
terrorist attack took place at the Istanbul International Airport, killing 43 people
and injuring 240…Chatayev was believed to be the organizer…In 2016 Chatayev
sent the Georgian authorities a threat from Syria. He demanded the release of
the former imam of a village in Pankisi, Ayub Borchashvili (serving a 14 year
sentence). If the demand was not met, Chatayev threatened terrorist attacks in
Georgia…
OE Watch | January 2018

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
The Wagner Private Military Company
OE Watch Commentary: Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the
Russian Federation has developed a burgeoning private security sector,
employing between 800,000-1,200,000 personnel, plus an estimated
200,000 people working in the industry without proper documentation.
(Russia’s gas conglomerate Gazprom’s security service alone employs
20,000.) Private security services cover a wide swath of activities
including personal protection, intelligence, counterintelligence, and
facility protection. Although private security forces are common in
today’s Russia, they have only been used for domestic purposes or for
safeguarding Russian industrial interests abroad. Where Russian private
security forces have traditionally not been found, is on the battlefield. In
the Russian system, the idea of contractors on the battlefield is a foreign
concept, and contractors have rarely been used as stand-ins for military
personnel or state employees. When private contractors are encountered
in the Russian military, they are usually found in technical support roles
and hired by a state controlled company.
The accompanying article from Novaya Gazeta discusses how
Russian military contractors are now being used on the battlefield.
Unlike in the West where Private Military Companies (PMCs) usually
provide personnel that fill combat support and combat service support
positions, the Russian PMC Wagner provides complete motorized
rifle, tank, and artillery units. The Wagner PMC is the informal
name of the private military company led by Dmitriy Utkin, a retired
lieutenant colonel and former commander of a unit in the 2nd GRU
(Main Intelligence Directorate) Spetsnaz Brigade. The Wagner PMC
first became widely known in 2014, during the height of fighting in the
Donbas, where it was actively engaged in fighting with the separatists
against the Ukrainian government. Reports of Wagner being involved
in the Syria campaign started to surface in October 2015. Since then,
Wagner has been involved in the liberation of Palmyra and Aleppo from
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Today, Wagner employs an
estimated 6,000 personnel, with approximately 2,500 of them currently
working in Syria.
The Wagner PMC forces in Syria are organized into four
reconnaissance and assault brigades, with each brigade having three
companies, and each company having up to 100 personnel. In addition,
there is an artillery battalion (three batteries, each with approximately
100 personnel); a tank company (50 personnel in three platoons, each
with four tanks); a sabotage and reconnaissance company (about 150
personnel); a signal company (about 100 personnel); staff and support
(about 200 personnel). Although there is no official relationship
between the Russian government and the Wagner PMC, it is obvious
that Wagner is at least supported, and likely partially funded by the
Russian government. Wagner reportedly trains its personnel at the 10th
Spetsnaz Brigade’s military training ranges and other facilities. The
personnel are equipped from government depots, and transported to
Syria on Russian Navy vessels and military aircraft.

“... the Defense Ministry has no formal responsibility
for the ‘Wagnerites’...”
Source: Irek Murtazin, “Сирийская кампания загадочной «ЧВК
Вагнера»: численный состав и вооружение, ключевые операции
и конфликт в верхушке Минобороны (Syrian Campaign of
Mysterious ‘Wagner Private Military Company’: Numerical Strength
and Weaponry and Key Operations and Conflict in Defense Ministry
Top Echelons),” Novaya Gazeta Online, 9 October 2017. https://
www.novayagazeta.ru/articles/2017/10/09/74125-ih-prosto-net
Twelve “cargo 200” units -- dead employees of the Wagner private
military company -- have been delivered to Rostov-on-the-Don. And
this is not the gravest news from Syria, where hundreds of Russian
citizens may or may not be fighting…Radio Liberty has spoken of
the 12 Russians to have died in Syria and who are presumed to have
been Wagner private military company combatants, citing a woman
acquainted with Roman Zabolotnyy, who had been taken prisoner
by ISIS. There is no official confirmation of this information. But
the specialists we questioned, including Defense Ministry officers
who had returned from a tour of duty in Syria and “Wagnerites’
who took part in the first liberation of Palmyra and later of Aleppo,
were not even slightly surprised by the 12 “cargo 200” units.
Colonel General Sergey Surovikin, commander of the Russian
Armed Forces Group of Troops in Syria, reported that in three
months, from May through August 2017, enemy losses “were over
8,000 militants and 1,500 weapons and military and other vehicles,
and that number is increasing with every day. “If the militants
lost 8,000 men killed in three months and their losses continued to
increase in September, then how many men killed and wounded did
al-Assad’s army and the Wagner private military company lose?
However, the Defense Ministry has no formal responsibility for the
“Wagnerites” and so to all appearances is not dissembling over the
absence of major losses in its own ranks. And that means just one
thing: We are scarcely likely to find out the precise figure for the
number of Russians who have died (even over the past month). But
it was obviously not the 12 men whose bodies were flown to Rostov.
Another interlocutor of mine -- a “Wagnerite” who took part
in the first liberation of Palmyra -- said that two air assault
companies, an armored company, and an artillery division took
part in the fighting to liberate the ancient city: “The armored
company was commanded by a guy with a leg missing, aged about
50. He had been in Syria since 2015. After a mine explosion his
leg was amputated, but he received treatment and returned. With
an artificial leg. They said he was a retired lieutenant colonel and
that before being discharged from the army he had commanded an
armored battalion. The armored company personnel -- even the
drivers and navigators -- consisted only of former armor officers...

Although the Russian government appears to be a fan of PMCs,
legislation fully legalizing their activities has not been forthcoming.
Apparently, various interest groups in the security services have
different ideas about the long-term security issues of legalizing military
forces that are not directly controlled by the state. In general, intelligence organs such as the Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff
(GRU) have championed the legalization of PMCs, while counterintelligence interests, such as the Federal Security Service (FSB), have opposed
such legalization. Russia has already loosened some restrictions on privatized security forces. In 2005, Russia passed the federal law 154-FZ
“On State Service of the Russian Cossacks,” to clarify the Cossacks’ legal status and allow them to form paramilitary units to fulfill limited
law enforcement duties. But the sensitive nature of PMCs and desire of the Russian government to maintain a modicum of plausible deniability
about their activities may keep the legal status of PMCs in limbo for the foreseeable future. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
OE Watch | January 2018
57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russia Ponders the Creation of a Russian STRATCOM
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation regularly
exercises the command and control of strategic weapons
platforms (mobile and silo missile launchers, strategic
bombers, and submarines), to include operational dispersal
and the launch operations, (obviously with dummy warheads)
before scheduled US strategic exercises. Russia has long been
concerned with the US’s Prompt Global Strike (PGS) concept,
which the Russians believe is a US program to use advanced
strike systems equipped with non-nuclear warheads to destroy
an adversary’s nuclear launch capabilities. (During the Cold
War, the Soviets believed this feat would only be possible with
the use of nuclear weapons, now, due to the advent of new and
more accurate conventional munitions and delivery systems, the
Russians believe this could eventually be accomplished by the
US without crossing the nuclear threshold.) President Putin told
the Federal Assembly in 2013: “We are carefully following the
so-called ‘Disarming Prompt Global Strike concept which can
have negative consequences. No one should have illusions about
capabilities to achieve military superiority over Russia. We will
never allow this.”

“…although the American exercise [Global Thunder]
was aimed at rehearsing the “Prompt Global Strike”
concept, our exercise was aimed at improving the system
of counteractions. According to Moskovskiy Komsomolets
sources, this relates to the creation of a single strategic
forces deterrence command in the Armed Forces”

In order to prevent the US from acquiring a capability to
deprive Russia of her strategic nuclear deterrence capabilities
(without the use of nuclear weapons), the Russian Federation
may be considering a reorganization of its nuclear command
and control system. The accompanying excerpted article from
Moskovsky Komsomolets claims that the Russian leadership has
plans to create “a single strategic forces deterrence command”
in the “very near future.” This would entail the creation of a
unified command for the command and control of strategic
nuclear assets, similar to the United States Strategic Command
(USSTRATCOM). The article explains that the Russian
exercise preceding the STRATCOM Global Thunder exercise
involved well-coordinated launch exercises executed by all
three legs of Russia’s nuclear triad (Strategic Missile Troops
(RVSN), nuclear submarines of the Northern and Pacific Fleets,
and the Long-Range Aviation of the Aerospace Forces). The
author proffers the idea that the command and control of these
forces may be improved by placing them under a single unified
command, thereby decreasing the likelihood of a successful
‘Prompt Global Strike” attack, and mentions how the idea has
previously been considered.
At present time it is difficult to ascertain the likelihood of
the Russian Federation executing such a reform to counter the
PGS. It seems unlikely, given that Russia just recently cancelled
plans to field the Barguzin rail-based ICBM missile system, as
described in the accompanying excerpted article from Interfax.
(The Barguzin system was reportedly intended to increase
the resiliency of Russia’s strategic nuclear deterrent, thereby
preventing a US PGS attack.) On the other hand, the Barguzin
cancellation could be due solely to financial reasons, or a belief
that organizational restructuring alone is sufficient to deter the
PGS threat. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Soviet RT-23 ICBM rail-based missile.

Source: Panther - Own work via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1403242, CC BY-SA 2.5.

(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Russia Ponders the Creation of a Russian
STRATCOM
Source: Oleg Bozhov, “В США начались ядерные учения: чем ответит Россия: В нашей армии может быть создано новое единое
стратегическое командование (The US Begins Nuclear Exercise: How Will Russia Respond? A New Single Strategic Command May Be
Created),” Moskovsky Komsomolets Online, 30 October 2017. http://www.mk.ru/politics/2017/10/30/v-ssha-nachalis-yadernye-ucheniya-chemotvetit-rossiya.html
On Monday [October 30, 2017] the United States began conducting Exercise Global Thunder, a large strategic nuclear forces exercise.
Washington officially notified Moscow about the exercise. Last week a similar training exercise of the nuclear triad, in which Supreme Commander
in Chief Vladimir Putin participated, was held in Russia. Russia also notified the United States about this exercise. And although the American
exercise [Global Thunder] was aimed at rehearsing the “Prompt Global Strike” concept, our exercise was aimed at improving the system of
counteractions. According to Moskovskiy Komsomolets sources, this relates to the creation of a single strategic forces deterrence command in the
Armed Forces.
…we recall that the United States has been working on the “Prompt Global Strike” concept for a long time. Under this concept advanced strike
systems equipped with non-nuclear warheads are able to resolve the same missions which today are assigned to the strategic nuclear forces of
the United States. Simultaneously, ballistic missile defense systems are developed and created which are yet another Prompt Global Strike factor
capable of destroying the currently existing balance of forces, and thereby ensuring the global strategic dominance of the United States…
In this respect it is altogether reasonable to view Russia’s recent nuclear triad exercise as a step in this direction. We recall that during the
maneuvers, interactions were practiced between the Strategic Missile Troops (RVSN), nuclear submarines of the Northern and Pacific Fleets, and
the Long-Range Aviation of the Aerospace Forces. And the Supreme Commander in Chief conducted a launch of four ballistic missiles…However,
one must assume that the main aspect here was not the launch of the missiles, but the rehearsal of the interaction of all of the nuclear forces. As
confirmed by a number of military specialists, the plans of the Russian leadership include the creation in the very near future of a single strategic
forces deterrence command. This unified command and control organization must coordinate all three elements of Russia’s strategic nuclear
forces: the RVSN, the submarine ballistic missiles, and the Long-Range Aviation aircraft carrying nuclear weapons. In addition, this same structure
must integrate assets of Russia’s ballistic missile defense, space defense, and missile attack warning systems…The idea of such a command was
formed as early as the time of Minister of Defense Marshal Sergeyev, a veteran of the RVSN. But at that time it was not actually implemented due to
political turmoil of every description and disagreements in the defense establishment (the generals seemed to be having a hard time coming to an
agreement on who would ultimately head this single structure). Now the situation has changed. Now there is the political will, strong institutional
leadership, and the military necessity to implement this idea.
Source: “Russia Needs ‘Nuclear Trains’ – Klintsevich,” Interfax, 6 December 2017.
“The topic is closed, at least in the short term. The design and experimental work on the Barguzin has been conducted. An experiment with a
pop-up launch was successful. If there is an urgent need, our missile train will be on the tracks promptly. But for now, let’s forget about it,” the
newspaper said, citing an informed source in the defense industry…”We need rail-based missile systems. This is one of the most serious elements
of deterrence. The existence of such a system is seriously balancing. It’s impossible to determine where it is located. The Americans are unable to
monitor it,” he said…

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | January 2018

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
New Artillery Rounds Will Extend Russian Artillery Range
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying excerpted article from Rossiyskaya Gazeta discusses Russia’s development of a new
technology that will extend the reach of Russia’s 152mm Msta howitzers to over 70 km. As the second passage from the same newspaper
reports, Russia is not only extending the ranges of artillery pieces, but also developing the associated C4ISR capabilities to accurately lay these
fires at extended ranges. If these developments prove successful and become widespread throughout the Russian armed forces, the Russian
Federation will greatly enhance its capabilities at not only fighting insurgencies, but also peer-level adversaries in high-intensity conflict
situations. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “Российский снаряд с реактивным
двигателем поразит противника за 70 км (Russian Round
with Rocket Engine Will Strike Enemy at Over 70 Kilometers),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 14 November 2017. https://
rg.ru/2017/11/14/rossijskij-snariad-s-raketnym-dvigatelem-porazitprotivnika-za-70-km.html

Source: Aleksey Moiseyev, “Видео: Новый российский дрон
наводит артудары по террористам в Сирии (Video: New
Russian Drone Guides Artillery Strikes Against Terrorists in
Syria),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 19 November 2017. https://
rg.ru/2017/11/19/video-novyj-rossijskij-dron-navodit-artudary-poterroristam-v-sirii.html

The latest Russian artillery round will exceed the firing range of
domestic self-propelled and towed artillery by more than two times…
When it is accepted into the inventory it will significantly surpass
munitions used at the present time, and its characteristics will be
at the level of the very best foreign advanced developments. It is
expected that the product will appear in two versions, one of which
will have a caliber of 152 millimeters. In the opinion of military
experts this will allow it to be used both in the advanced 2S35
Koalitsiya-SV howitzers, as well as in the Msta-S self-propelled and
Msta-B towed guns used at the present time…According to various
data there are also plans to create a 203-millimeter version of the
round for the Pion and Malka self-propelled cannons.

Artillery in Syria has begun the large-scale use of high-precision
munitions whose laser guidance is performed by UAVs. This can be
judged after watching a video posted on the Web on 18 November. The
action takes place in the Albu Kamal area and its environs. The very
effective operation against various targets is delightful. Terrorists’
vehicles, river-crossing equipment, fire points, and munition dumps
are destroyed…

The record firing range of 70 kilometers and beyond is achieved
by virtue of adding a ramjet rocket engine to the construction of the
munition, placed either in the forward section or at the base of the
round. The engine is turned on shortly after firing, after the fired
round has already stabilized its rotations and it is gaining speed on
its trajectory…Military experts are proposing to equip these rounds
with special satellite guidance modules to increase their accuracy
characteristics. This advanced development was demonstrated
during the Armiya-2017 Military Technical Forum.

“The latest Russian artillery round will exceed
the firing range of domestic self-propelled and
towed artillery by more than two times.”

Pinpoint targeting in an urban setting is worthy of the highest
assessments. Targets are knocked out with minimal damage to
surrounding buildings. That is the advantage of guided mines
and shells. For example, the mass of explosives in Krasnopoltype munitions ranges between 6.5 and 11 kg, depending on the
modification…Aircraft employ correctable bombs weighing 250-1,500
kg. Understandably, artillery strikes are pinpoint and more sparing.
What is noteworthy is that captions appear in the upper left corner
of the video recording: “Podsvet LTsD [laser target designator-range
finder],” “illumination,” and “cooling.” This attests that the drone is
equipped with a laser target designator. We do not yet know which
model of UAV we are talking about…This video is known to have
already caused great concern among servicemen of countries that are
not amicably inclined toward Russia…

“[Russian] Artillery in Syria has begun the largescale use of high-precision munitions whose laser
guidance is performed by UAVs…”

2S35 Koalitsia-SV frontview.

Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin (http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/?q=node/599) via Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/16/2S35_Koalitsia-SV_frontview.jpg , CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Schemes to Skirt Sanctions
OE Watch Commentary: Ever since Russia’s armed
aggression against Ukraine and the subsequent imposition
of Western sanctions, the Kremlin-directed media has
proclaimed that these foreign sanctions were actually
strengthening the Russian economy. They argued that
besides helping to consolidate Russian society, being cut
off from Western goods and financing encouraged Russian
domestic companies to fill this void or to find new business
partners not liable to the sanction regime. While there is
some truth to these assertions, overall, the Russian economy
has suffered from being partially cut off from Western
goods and financing. With the prospect of additional
penalties on the near-horizon, the Kremlin continues to
search for ways to bypass these sanctions.
The first excerpt from the business daily, Vedomosti,
describes a recent governmental change which would
release Russian “state-owned companies from the obligation
to disclose suppliers and contractors receiving contracts.”
This provision would make it next to impossible to track
the details regarding the customers of these state-owned
companies, what was ordered, and under what conditions
(e.g. price). The article goes on to claim that this change will
protect those companies and contractors under sanctions “so
as not to disclose schemes that allow these sanctions to be
bypassed.”
While this bookkeeping maneuver might appear to be
designed to permit those sanctioned Russian businesses to
operate and expand, the second excerpt from the liberal
weekly, Novoye Vremya, posits that this freedom from
reporting contractual data will only result in greater
corruption. With defense and security spending remaining
robust, the author points out that this change will give “a
dozen ministries and departments (the Ministry of Defense,
Rosgvardia, the FSB, the Ministry of Internal Affairs,
the Ministry for Emergency Situations and others) the
opportunity to secretly select participants in procurement
contests, conduct them on secret terms, and secretly
designate their winners.” This lack of public oversight
might help to avoid sanctions, but could also result in
massive corruption, or as the title of the article suggests, an
“indulgence for thieves.”
Prior to Russia’s armed aggression against Ukraine,
“corruption” was often cited as the country’s most pressing
national security threat. While concerns over “Western
hostility” are now prominent, domestic corruption remains
a serious problem and could grow worse under this change
in reporting requirements. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“... The resolution allows state-owned companies to
classify all data from suppliers and contractors receiving
contracts through the law enforcement agencies and the
defense industry - this is done to protect schemes for
circumvention of international sanctions imposed on
Russian companies…”
Source: Oleg Adamchuk, Elizabeth Bazanova, “Медведев разрешил
госкомпаниям засекретить данные поставщиков; Уход в тень
субподрядчиков должен защитить схемы обхода санкций (Medvedev
allowed state-owned companies to classify their suppliers; Departing into the
shadows should protect the schemes of subcontractors to circumvent sanctions),”
Vedomosti, 30 November 2017. https://www.vedomosti.ru/economics/
articles/2017/11/30/743604-goskompaniyam-zasekretit-postavschikov
Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, released state-owned companies from
the obligation to disclose suppliers and contractors receiving contracts. The
resolution signed on Monday allows state-owned companies to limit themselves
to publishing in the procurement register impersonal information about the
results, the method, the purchase price - without the data on the winner.
Contracts with subcontractors will go even further into the shadows - the search
for information about them is being closed. The measure is in effect until 1 July
2018….
…State companies are worried about the prospect of revealing information
about intra-group and financial transactions… and information about
contractors which deal with sanctioned companied must be protected, so as not
to disclose schemes that allow these sanctions to be bypassed.

Source: Alexander Goltz, “Индульгенция для воров (Indulgence for Thieves),”
Novoye Vremya, 1 December 2017. https://newtimes.ru/articles/detail/131924
… And on 30 November, Prime Minister Medvedev signed a government decree
allowing all contests for state purchases of the Defense Ministry, the FSB and
the SVR to be completed by 1 July 2018, in a closed regime. In addition, the
resolution allows state-owned companies to classify all data from suppliers
and contractors receiving contracts through the law enforcement agencies
and the defense industry - this is done to protect schemes for circumvention of
international sanctions imposed on Russian companies….
… So, our government proposes to change Russian laws - in such a way as
to close “electronic procurement procedures ... for federal executive bodies
engaged in the formulation, implementation of state defense policy and public
administration of measures to ensure the country’s security.” Consequently,
a dozen ministries and departments (the Ministry of Defense, Rosgvardia, the
FSB, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry for Emergency Situations
and others) have the opportunity to secretly select participants in procurement
contests, conduct them on secret terms again and secretly designate their
winners….

OE Watch | January 2018

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Can Russia Mobilize Military Medical Care?
OE Watch Commentary: Military modernization was a key platform when
Vladimir Putin was re-elected as the Russian leader in 2012. Considerable progress
has been made in improving the overall combat capabilities of Russia’s armed forces,
and military readiness remains a central focus in the current effort to retain Putin
as the top Russian leader. The first brief excerpt from the Russian official news
source TASS points out that this military preparedness is not just confined to those
in uniform; all aspects of Russian society should be prepared for future conflict.
The TASS report quotes President Putin, who stated that “the economy’s ability to
promptly increase the output of defense products and services in wartime is one of the
key conditions for ensuring the military security of the state. All strategic and large
enterprises regardless of the forms of business and ownership must be prepared for
President Putin visits the Kirov Military Clinic in St. Petersburg, July 2017.
Source: Russian Presiudency, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/55205. CCA By 4.0 Intl.
this.”
Source: “Putin calls for enhancing mobilization readiness
However, the ability of Russian business to transfer to wartime production is
after Zapad-2017 exercise,” TASS, 22 November 2017.
only one aspect of military mobilization. A more important factor may be the
http://tass.com/defense/976879
country’s ability to handle the increased medical demands which would stem from
Russian President Vladimir Putin has called for
any large-scale conflict. The second excerpt from the military weekly Военноscrutinizing the shortfalls exposed in the course of the
промышленный курьер (VPK-Military Industrial Courier) discusses Russia’s
Zapad-2017 exercise and taking extra measures for
current military medical system. The article begins by examining medical data from
enhancing mobilization readiness….
the Great Patriotic War (World War II), pointing out that “more than 22 million
“The economy’s ability to promptly increase the
people, soldiers and officers of the Red Army, were hospitalized with wounds and
output of defense products and services in wartime
illnesses” and “of this huge amount, 17 million returned to service, [and] continued
is one of the key conditions for ensuring the military
to fight on the fronts.” The article stresses that “not only the military medical
security of the state. All strategic and large enterprises
service, but also civilian health care institutions throughout the country” worked to
regardless of the forms of business and ownership must
help injured soldiers return to battle.
be prepared for this,” Putin said.
The article then proceeds to take an unsparing look at the current Russian medical
system, specifically at those medical facilities which would be activated in a possible
There are deficiencies in all medical
conflict. While the Kremlin continues to strengthen its raw military power “along the
areas…
western border of Russia,” with “three new motorized rifle divisions… and a tank
army,” there has been no corresponding increase in military medical facilities.

“

”

The authors also examine and diagnose the poor medical care for military retirees and the general population. Not only are there shortages
of trained personnel, equipment and medication, but wait times to see a doctor can be very long. They describe incidents where a patient died
because of lack of medical attention and/or necessary medicine. They point out that the situation is even worse outside of major Russian cities,
where medical facilities and personnel remain in short supply. Even within Crimea, the situation is critical, with “deficiencies in all medical
areas.” The article concludes with the observation that “a healthy nation is a strong state, and healthcare is a component of defense.” While the
current Kremlin leadership has improved military readiness and has raised defense awareness among the wider population, it has yet to develop
and fund a healthcare system to handle the rigors of war or peace. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: Oleg Falichev, Yuri Brygin, “Остаться в полуживых; Нынешняя отечественная медицина не в состоянии помочь большинству
раненых (Remaining half-alive; Current domestic medicine is not able to help most of the wounded),” Военно-промышленный курьер
(VPK-Military Industrial Courier), 27 November 2017. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/40126
The war against Russia is being conducted by economic, informational, diplomatic means, but the armed phase can begin at any moment. The
army and the navy are actively rearming in the new military-industrial complex, and are conducting exercises. The Supreme Commander-inChief personally supervised the training of SNF [strategic nuclear forces] with the launch of ballistic missiles. But are military medicine and
civil healthcare ready for mass acceptance of the wounded and sick?
During the Great Patriotic War, more than 22 million people, soldiers and officers of the Red Army, were hospitalized with wounds and illness.
Of this huge amount, 17 million returned to service, and continued to fight on the fronts. In the treatment of the wounded and sick, not only the
military medical service, but also civilian health care institutions throughout the country worked to help injured soldiers return to battle….
Today, along the western border of Russia, three new motorized rifle divisions have been deployed… and a tank army has been formed…
But there have not been reports of new military medical units and civilian medical institutions…. Each of us knows about the sores of our
healthcare, personally colliding with the system. On hearing many glaring cases of rendering poor-quality (to put it mildly) help, or the lack
of qualified doctors…. Moreover, in many clinics there has been a reduction in medical staff, and there is an acute shortage of qualified
personnel… On 14 August, in the famous Botkin Hospital, a Muscovite died in the waiting room after four hours of waiting for help….
…In Crimea, polyclinics and hospitals number only nine hundred specialists of different profiles - for a peninsula with a population of 2.3
million people, and this figure is inadequate. There is an urgent need for therapists, pediatricians, neurologists, cardiologists, oncologists,
diagnosticians, infectious disease specialists, gastroenterologists. There are deficiencies in all medical areas…. Our government and each of its
representatives at every level must realize the simple truth: a healthy nation is a strong state, and healthcare is a component of defense.
OE Watch | January 2018

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Strengthening Military and Historical Claims to Crimea
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin continues
to consolidate its control over the Crimean Peninsula.
Besides the continued construction of a rail/road bridge
from mainland Russia to Crimea and other infrastructure
projects (power stations, housing, roads), the Kremlin
has also significantly strengthened its military presence
on the peninsula. For instance, as the first excerpt from
the official news agency TASS points out, Russia has
recently deployed the advanced S-400 air defense system
to Crimea which will soon be operational. Some Russians
now refer to Crimea as their “permanent Black Sea
aircraft carrier.”
The Kremlin is also strengthening its historical claim
to Crimea. The second excerpt from the official Kremlin
website describes a recent ceremony where President
Putin unveiled a new statue in Crimea dedicated to
Tsar Alexander III. Just as Crimea belonged to Russia
under the Tsarist regime (indeed, Alexander III passed
away while living in Crimea), so today, according to
the Kremlin’s logic, the peninsula has returned to its
rightful (Russian) ownership. In his remarks at the
ceremony, President Putin made clear that Russia
enjoys solid historical claims to Crimea, adding that
“Alexander III loved Russia and believed in it, and by
unveiling this monument today we pay tribute to his
deeds, achievements and merits, we show our respect
for the continuous history of our country, for the people
of all ranks and social classes who earnestly served the
Fatherland.” From the Kremlin perspective (which is
shared by a large majority of the population of the Russian
Federation), Crimea belongs to Russia.
Perhaps drawing a comparison to his own reign,
President Putin described many of the achievements
attributed to Tsar Alexander III. Like this distant tsar who
“ensured the growth of Russia’s influence and authority
in the world,” so today’s Kremlin-sponsored media
continually portray Putin as the leader who has restored
Russian greatness after the humiliations of the 1990s.
Regaining control of Crimea has been the top achievement
of Putin’s latest term as president. And just as military
modernization was a major focus under Alexander III,
so today, under President Putin, the Russian military
continues to strengthen its combat capabilities.
The West imposed various economic sanctions
upon Russia after its annexation of Crimea and armed
aggression against Ukraine, hoping that financial burdens
would induce the Kremlin leadership to renounce their
claims to Ukrainian territory. While the Kremlin might be
willing to negotiate on their support for the rebel republics
in southwest Ukraine (though doubtful), there has been
zero indication that the Russian leadership will give up its
claim to Crimea. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…Alexander III loved Russia and believed in it, and by
unveiling this monument today we pay tribute to his deeds,
achievements and merits, we show our respect for the
continuous history of our country, for the people of all ranks
and social classes who earnestly served the Fatherland.”
- Russian President Vladimir Putin at the unveiling ceremony
for the Alexander III monument in Crimea.
Source: “Под Астраханью успешно прошли первые стрельбы систем С-400
для Крыма (The first launch of the S-400 designed to provide air defense
for Crimea, was successfully conducted in the Astrakhan region),” TASS, 30
November 2017. http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/4770833
The first firing of the S-400 “Triumph” anti-aircraft missile system (SIR),
designed to provide air defense of the Crimea, was successfully conducted in
the Astrakhan region. The head of the press service of the Southern Military
District Vadim Astafyev told TASS…. In the near future, the S-400 will take up
combat duty in the Crimea, Astafiev added…. Earlier it was reported that the
first S-400 systems were on alert duty on the peninsula in January 2017.
Source: “Unveiling of monument to Alexander III,” Russian Presidential
Website, 18 November 2017. http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56125
Vladimir Putin took part in the unveiling ceremony for the monument to the
Peacemaker tsar Alexander III. The monument has been erected in the Livadia
Palace park, Crimea.
Vladimir Putin: Friends,
Today here in Crimea, at the famous Livadia Palace, we are unveiling a
monument to Alexander III, an outstanding statesman and patriot, a man of
stamina, courage and unwavering will.
He always felt a tremendous personal responsibility for the country’s destiny:
he fought for Russia in battlefields, and after he became the ruler, he did
everything possible for the progress and strengthening of the nation, to protect it
from turmoil, internal and external threats.
Contemporaries called him the Peacemaker tsar. However, according to
Sergei Vitte, he gave Russia 13 years of peace not by yielding but by a fair
and unwavering firmness. Alexander III stood up for the country’s interests
directly and openly, and that policy ensured the growth of Russia’s influence and
authority in the world….
…Alexander III also began a major program for the army’s modernization.
Large-scale shipbuilding projects were implemented, including those for the
Black Sea Fleet.
He believed that a strong, sovereign and independent state should rely not
only on its economic and military power but also on traditions; that it is crucial
for a great nation to preserve its identity whereas any movement forward is
impossible without respect for one’s own history, culture and spiritual values….
…Alexander III loved Russia and believed in it, and by unveiling this monument
today we pay tribute to his deeds, achievements and merits, we show our respect
for the continuous history of our country, for the people of all ranks and social
classes who earnestly served the Fatherland.

OE Watch | January 2018

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Permanent Iskanders in Kaliningrad
OE Watch Commentary: There are doubts that Russia
and the US will commemorate the 30th anniversary of the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, in June
2018. The sense of mutual trust which undergirded the
original agreement has deteriorated over the past several
years, and both sides have accused the other of not only
violating the treaty, but of exacerbating mutual tensions.
A symptom of this growing distrust is reflected in the
Kremlin’s decision to permanently deploy the Iskander-M
missile complex to Kaliningrad. The accompanying
excerpt from the moderate Russian source, Kommersant
discusses this decision, which some have claimed could
violate the INF Treaty.
The article points out that “the Russian authorities
have been promising to do this since 2007, but to date,
have deployed the system “to this region only on an
interim basis.” Quoting a Russian military source,
the Kommersant article claims that the decision to
permanently deploy this system to Kaliningrad was
regarded by “the military-political leadership …as an
ace up its sleeve in the event of a dramatic deterioration
of relations.” This “occurred after the events of 2014,”
when Russia employed armed force against Ukraine
and “the US and its allies” levied sanctions and began
to reinforce their “military infrastructure on the border
with the Russian Federation.” Prior to this, the Kremlin
had threatened to move missiles into Kaliningrad “as
a counterweight to the deployment of elements of the
American Missile Defense System in Europe.” According
to the article, Moscow was “outraged” after the US
deployed “to Poland and the Baltic Region… additional
contingents and weapons.”
The article describes how the infrastructure where the
unit is deployed (Chernyakhovsk, Kaliningrad Oblast) has
been developed over the past two years to accommodate
“the acceptance of a brigade set of the Iskander complex.”
It also provides specific reference about the unit
designation and major equipment: “152nd Guards Missile
Brigade… 12 launchers, 12-transporter-loader vehicles,
11 command staff vehicles, 14 life support vehicles, one
information compilation facility,…” Unit crews will first
complete training “at the 60th Missile Troops Combat
Employment Training Center (Znamensk, Astrakhan
Oblast)” and once their proficiency is tested, “will be sent
via rail to the permanent deployment location.”
Regardless of whether the Iskander missile system
violates the INF Treaty, Russia’s permanent deployment
of this weapon system into the Kaliningrad enclave alters
the balance of power in this region. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Iskander-M operational-tactical missile

complexes (OTRK) will be deployed in
Kaliningrad Oblast on a permanent basis in
the very near future.”

Source: Ivan Safronov, Yelena Chernenko, and Galina Dudina, “Искандеры
тихо едут, но быстро заряжают: Под Калининградом развернут ракетные
комплексы земля-земля (The Iskanders Quietly Move, But Rapidly Load:
Surface-to-Surface Missile Complexes Have Been Deployed Near Kaliningrad),”
Kommersant Online, 2 December 2017. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3486110
Iskander-M operational-tactical missile complexes (OTRK) will be deployed in
Kaliningrad Oblast on a permanent basis in the very near future. The Russian
authorities have been promising to do this since 2007, however, the latest
operational-tactical missile complexes have been deployed to this region only on
an interim basis until now….
…A Kommersant source, who is close to the RF Armed Forces General Staff,
confirmed the fact of the brigade’s rearming from old Tochka-U tactical missile
complexes to the new Iskander OTRK, having clarified that they will be placed
on alert at the beginning of 2018. Prior to this, the 152nd Missile Brigade’s crews
will train to drive the OTRK at 60th Missile Troops Combat Employment Training
Center (Znamensk, Astrakhan Oblast) and then will conduct a tactical exercise
with actual missile launches, and already after that the formation’s personnel will
be sent via rail to the permanent deployment location.
Conversations about the permanent deployment of the Iskanders in Kaliningrad
Oblast have been conducted since July 2007: Having assumed the post of
First Deputy Prime Minister at that time, Sergey Ivanov stated that this step is
necessary as a counterweight to the deployment of elements of the American
Missile Defense System in Europe.
In November 2008, then RF President Dmitriy Medvedev also repeated this
thesis, having explained the step by the deployment of the US Missile Defense
System in Poland. However, the promised deployment didn’t occur for nearly
10 years, although the American intelligence services repeatedly announced the
deployment of precisely the Iskanders to Chernyakhovsk….
…In the words of a Kommersant military source, the temporary deployment of
the latest OTRKs to Chernyakhovsk was previously employed as a “demonstrative
response to the US’s unfriendly steps, in particular, and of NATO as a whole.”
The permanent deployment of the Iskanders was delayed for political reasons,
Kommersant’s interlocutor says: the military-political leadership kept this step “as
an ace up its sleeve in the event of a dramatic deterioration of relations”.
It occurred after the events of 2014: the US and its allies reacted to the inclusion
of the Crimea into Russia’s composition and Moscow’s support of the selfproclaimed republics of the Donbass through the introduction of sanctions and
the reinforcement of the military infrastructure on the border with the RF. Last
fall, the sides repeatedly pursued claims against each other in the escalation of the
situation in the region. NATO saw a threat in the large-scale Russo-Belarusian
Zapad-2017 exercises. And the deployment to Poland and the Baltic Region of
additional contingents and weapons from the US outraged Moscow.
“As a result of the situation that is being exacerbated in the region, a decision
was made in 2016 to begin the erection in Chernyakhovsk of mobile tent shelters
for the accommodation of the OTRK on a permanent basis – that storage system
will permit the reduction of equipment wear,” Kommersant’s interlocutor
continues. In his words, right now this work is practically completed and the
infrastructure has been prepared for the acceptance of a brigade set of the
Iskander complex.
In the words of Design Bureau of Machine building Chief Designer Vasiliy
Kashin, one such set consists of 12 launchers, 12-transporter-loader vehicles,
11 command staff vehicles, 14 life support vehicles, one information compilation
facility, one routine maintenance vehicle…
OE Watch | January 2018

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Deciphering Russian Weapon Developments
OE Watch Commentary: Despite economic challenges,
the current Kremlin leadership remains intent on military
modernization and rearmament. While genuine progress has been
made in improving the military’s combat capability, not every
proclamation describing the latest Russian wonder weapon should
be taken at face value. “Maskirovka” or deception operations may
be deployed within the information sphere by Russian journalists,
weapon manufacturers and uniformed officials. The accompanying
passages from Russian sources demonstrate the challenge in
deciphering Russian weapon developments.

Tsirkon hypersonic missiles and Skif missiles hiding at the ocean
bottom are part of the arsenal of the Russian Armed Forces, ex-Chief of
the Aerospace Force and Head of the Federation Council Defense and
Security Committee Viktor Bondarev said on Tuesday.

The first excerpt from Russia’s official news agency TASS includes
comments from Viktor Bondarev, a senior Russian official who
suggested that “Skif missiles hiding at the ocean bottom are part
of the arsenal of the Russian Armed Forces.” This weapon system
gained notoriety in November 2015 when its image was deliberately
leaked on Russian TV. The Status-6 underwater, nuclear-capable
drone could purportedly be secretly deployed and positioned along
the enemy’s coast and then launched on command. In explaining the
characteristics of this system, the TASS report refers to the system
as “the Skif experimental design work,” which appears to contradict
Bondarev’s assertion that the system had already been deployed.

…According to public data, the Skif experimental design work
envisages developing a transport and launching container for ballistic
missiles, which will make it possible to launch them from a great depth.

The second excerpt from the centrist daily, Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
describes the characteristics of Russia’s future Advanced Airborne
Early Warning and Control Aircraft, claiming that this “Russian
AWACS will track all stealth aircraft.” The details of the article,
however, point out that only a prototype of this aircraft has been
tested, and that the new aircraft equipped with “breakthrough
technologies and the latest components,” won’t “begin to be
serially delivered to the field” until 2020. Describing future weapon
capabilities as though they are already part of the current arsenal is
a common occurrence among Russian weapon manufacturers and
pundits.
The third excerpt from the government daily Rossiyskaya
Gazeta demonstrates another type of deception. It announces that
“the development of the new generation combat rail complexes
(BZhRK)” which had caused so much concern in the West over
the past two years “has been cancelled.” The article hints that this
decision may not be final, positing that “the case is closed, in any
event, for the foreseeable future,” but that since so much successful
testing has already occurred, “if it will be urgently required, our
missile train will rapidly get on the rails.” Given their penchant
for secrecy and deception, separating fact from fiction in Russian
weapon developments remains a challenge. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Source: “Hypersonic and bottom-based missiles make part of
Russian troops’ arsenal,” TASS, 21 November 2017. http://tass.com/
defense/976672

“As of today, we have in our arsenal unique strategic bombers (Tu160 aircraft), tactical missile systems with powerful ballistic and cruise
missiles (the Iskander family of missile systems), Sarmat heavy missile
complexes, air defense missile systems (S-400s), intercontinental
ballistic missiles, nuclear-powered missile cruisers with powerful antiship missiles (the Tsirkon hypersonic missile) and Skif bottom missiles,”
he said….

Source: Vladimir Shcherbakov, “Русский АВАКС поставит все
«самолеты-невидимки» на учет (Russian AWACS Will Track All
Stealth Aircraft),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 20 November 2017.
http://www.ng.ru/armies/2017-11-20/100_a100.html
…The A-100 prototype which made its debut flight on 18 November
this year is a new-generation radar patrol and guidance aircraft. It is
based on an ungraded Il-76MD-90A military transport aircraft which is
equipped with fuel-efficient PS-90A-76 engines and the latest avionics,
including a modern piloting and navigation system, automatic control
system, and communication system. The A-100’s main “weapon” is
the radio system, the design of which used breakthrough technologies
and the latest components and materials…. in 2020 the new aviation
long-range radar detection and control system will begin to be serially
delivered to the field.
Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “Разработка боевых железнодорожных
комплексов нового поколения прекращена (The Development of the
New Generation Combat Railroad Complexes Has Been Cancelled),”
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 2 December 2017. https://rg.ru/2017/12/02/
razrabotka-boevyh-zheleznodorozhnyh-kompleksov-novogopokoleniia-prekrashchena.html
The development of the new generation combat rail complexes
(BZhRK) has been cancelled. The case is closed, in any event, for the
foreseeable future. A well-informed Russian military industrial complex
representative has reported this….
…The experimental design work on the Barguzin has been conducted.
The experiment with the pop-up launch occurred successfully. If it will
be urgently required, our missile train will rapidly get on the rails. But
we will forget about it for the time being.

“The development of the new generation combat rail complexes (BZhRK) has been cancelled.”

OE Watch | January 2018

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
In the Rucksacks of the Sofrino Brigade: Snickers and
Pork Fat
OE Watch Commentary: Located 30 miles north of Moscow, Sofrino is home to the Sofrino National Guard Brigade- a military unit that
reports directly to President Putin and the National Security Council. The Sofrino Brigade is a former Internal Affairs unit that has subsumed
many of the functions and units of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It saw combat in Chechnya and is considered one of the better trained and
easily deployable units close to Moscow.
The accompanying article discusses some of the tactical field training of the reconnaissance troops of the Sofrino Brigade. The scouts are
considered an elite military force and experience rugged training, as provided in interesting details in the accompanying article. What Western
readers might find interesting is that “practically everyone carries.... Snickers and сало [salo] in their haversack.” The reference to сало (cured
pork fat) notes that “hunger and cold constantly plague scouts on their reconnaissance missions,” so high-caloric foods are essential for winter
combat. Cало is not lard since it is not rendered and it has too little meat to qualify as bacon. It is sliced and cured fatback which often has the
skin attached. It is popularly held that other uses for сало include waterproofing leather boots and baiting mousetraps.
The village of Sofrino is on a main rail line. Sofrino is also known for being home to the factory that produces about 95% of the ecclesiastical
vestments, icons, candles, candelabra, vessels and accessories for the Russian Orthodox Church. The Moscow Patriarch owns the factory. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Grigoriy Milenin, “Pork Fat is a Must: How Russian National Guard Troops train to destroy Terrorists”, Московский комсомолец
(Moscow Komsomolets), 6 November 2017. http://mk.ru
Four shadows glide silently between the trees. A forward patrol approaches a hidden “terrorist” base in a forest outside Moscow. The
remaining members of the reconnaissance group stealthily follow behind. The point man shows a hand signal and the team freezes. There is a
booby trap on the path. The point man cuts the trip wire to a mine.
The patrol begins to move again when fire erupts from a dugout position….The scouts scatter to encircle the dugout. The bulk of the team
pins down the “bandits” with fire, while two scouts approach the dugout from behind. They can see a covered entry behind the dugout, hidden
under dead leaves and needles. One scout throws a grappling hook onto the hatch cover and pulls it to one side, while the other throws a
couple of grenades into the … opening. The “terrorist base” is destroyed.
“Our main mission is to approach the enemy without being seen, to check how many people they have, what they are armed with, how their
camp is equipped, etc. They used to say: ‘As soon as shooting starts, the reconnaissance mission ends.’ But these days everything is different.
Reconnaissance groups often have to destroy the bandits. This was especially the case in the North Caucasus. This is why we constantly
rehearse such situations.”...
Before they find a terrorist base in the mountains, reconnaissance groups spend more than one day on a search mission. They often have to
sleep in the open. Carrying a tent is a luxury and scouts have to think hard about every extra gram of cargo that they carry. However, if they
can, scouts will build a hide, in which they can rest in relative warmth, even in freezing temperatures.
The guardsmen from the Sofrino Brigade showed journalists one such “dwelling.” When you pass it, all you see is a fallen tree, but there is
a small shelter behind it, which can accommodate three scouts. The floor is covered with branches of coniferous trees over which lay special
one-centimeter-thick mats. These are denser and hold warmth better than the foam mats used by campers. A smokeless campfire radiates heat
nearby, its flames hidden in a hole in the ground.
“We build a campfire very rarely,” Captain Igor says. “It can betray us. We only build one if the conditions are right: if there is a mist or if we
are near an inhabited village. But if we are on wild mountainous terrain, with no settlements around for tens of kilometers, a campfire is out of
the question.” ...For the same reason… scouts cannot always warm up their food or boil their tea using camping gas burners… The smell of hot
stew or tea can alert some starving “outlaw,” even if he is far away.
Counting Calories
Hunger and cold constantly plague scouts on their reconnaissance missions. In addition to not being able to eat properly, the scouts
constantly have to fight hypothermia. “One of the most dangerous situations is when you sweat in freezing temperatures. If you are drenched to
the bone, there is only one thing to do: take off all your wet clothes... and change into dry clothes. As a rule, we take with us two sets of clothes,
sometimes we are able to dry the damp clothes by a campfire. But we do not often manage to do that.”
Scouts from the Russian National Guard use chemical heating pads. Their uniforms even have special pockets for them. Medics carry a
supply of alcohol, which they use, if they have to, for rubbing down their colleagues. Scouts’ food is also rich in calories. Some use sports
snacks -- dry protein mixtures and bars. And practically everyone carries a supply of Snickers and pork fat in their haversack. “Pork fat is a
must,” Captain Igor says with a smile. “We never go on a mission without this source of calories.”
Nevertheless, it is scouts’ stamina and their endurance capacity that help them withstand low temperatures better than anything else. “Just
like military [Ministry of Defense] scouts, the focus in our fitness training is on raising our endurance capacity. For example, I forbid my
fighters to do body-building. Only running, CrossFit, and boxing.”

(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: In the Rucksacks of the Sofrino Brigade:
Snickers and Pork Fat
“Our main mission is to approach the enemy without being seen, to check how many people they have,

what they are armed with, how their camp is equipped, etc. They used to say: ‘As soon as shooting starts,
the reconnaissance mission ends.’ But these days everything is different. Reconnaissance groups often
have to destroy the bandits. This was especially the case in the North Caucasus. This is why we constantly
rehearse such situations.”
-Russian National Guard Captain Igor [National Guard scouts do not give their full names], Sofrino
National Guard Brigade

Russian NBC Arctic Training in 2017
OE Watch Commentary: Russian Nuclear-Biological-Chemical (NBC) troops conduct decontamination of areas, vehicles and personnel.
They are also in charge of flamethrowers and smoke screens. The Russian Army uses a lot of smoke screens with particulate smoke which
defeats visual and sensor detection. Smoke is particularly important- and often difficult to lay- when conducting amphibious landings and
riverine operations. The accompanying article describes mounting the TDA-3 smoke generator unit on a 61st Naval Infantry Brigade vessel to
lay a smoke screen to cover landings. The TDA-3 is a newer system that provides quicker and larger coverage than earlier systems. It uses an
aircraft engine to disperse an aerosol fog in a horizontal or vertical pattern. The experimental combination of smoke generator and fast boat for
laying smoke screens may become a regular feature of Arctic amphibious landings.
The article also describes Northern Fleet NBC exercises to mask garrison cities. It is unclear whether the smoke screens over the cities were
actually conducted. However, in September 2016, the closed port city of Severomorsk was actually concealed under smoke for three days. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The year 2017 marked a turning point in re-equipping the NBC Protection Troops’ units and subunits
with modern equipment -- the latest RKhM-6 NBC reconnaissance vehicles built on the of the BTR-80
armored personnel carrier, TDA-3 smoke vehicles mounted on the KamAZ truck chassis, and ARS14KM mobile decontamination stations, which can also be used for laying down smoke screens. The
new equipment significantly boosted the combat capabilities of the Northern Fleet’s NBC protection
subunits…”
- Captain First Class Sergey Mihaylyuk, the head of the Northern Fleet’s NBC protection service

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
(continued)
OE Watch | January 2018

67

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Russian NBC Arctic Training in 2017
Source: “The Northern Fleet’s NBC Protection Specialists Have Won Prizes at Different All-Army Competitions”, Northern Fleet Press
Service, 13 November 2017. http://www.mil.ru
The main training efforts focused on increasing the level of professional skills of the personnel of NBC protection units and subunits in order
to perform designated missions and on improving special tactical training for subunits.
The Northern Fleet conducted a selection for the field training competition for NBC protection subunits. Безопасная Среда-2017 [Safe
Environment-2017], was held during the winter training period. It involved 29 NBC protection crews (NBC reconnaissance, operators of
engine exhaust smoke systems) from the fleet’s formations and separate units.
A combined team was formed during the selection process. It consisted of servicemen from the Northern Fleet’s separate NBC protection
company and NBC protection specialists from the fleet’s motorized rifle brigades. The team performed well at the all-army competition….
A crew from the fleet’s separate NBC protection company came in third in the category “The best aerosol countermeasures crew” among
teams from military districts, branches and arms of service, and MOD-subordinated units.
At the International Arctic Forum, which was held in Arkhangelsk in March 2017, the fleet’s NBC protection specialists demonstrated a high
level of professional skills and cohesion in their actions while ensuring the safety of the forum’s participants. The Northern Fleet’s NBC
protection specialists provided continuous monitoring of the NBC environment. An NBC reconnaissance crew from the fleet’s separate NBC
protection company performed particularly well. This crew had been tasked with monitoring the NBC situation at secured sites. To reach those
sites, the crew travelled more than 3,500 kilometers over a winter road in an UAZ-469RKh (year of manufacture: 1978) without a single serious
breakdown. This year, modern NBC reconnaissance vehicles based on the BTR-80 arrived in the company to replace UAZ-469RKh vehicles.
Between 14 July and 10 August, the fleet’s NBC protection specialists held a training muster in a field camp outside Alakurtti military base.
The command and staff acquired the experience of commanding and controlling an NBC protection task force, which can be created in
peacetime to contain and manage the consequences of technogenic [nuclear leaks and toxic spills] accidents.
At the end of August 2017, the separate NBC protection company and NBC protection subunits from the Northern Fleet’s formations took part
in a special exercise for NBC protection troops, conducted under the leadership of the head of the NBC Protection Troops of the Russian Armed
Forces.
During the preparation stage of the exercise, a concept was devised to carry out an unconventional tactical maneuver which would involve
the joint use of the fleet’s technical capabilities and those of the NBC Protection Troops. The concept was to adapt a powerboat to lay smoke
screens. A landing craft provided by the Kola Flotilla’s assault ship formation was used as the vessel and the newest model TDA-3 smoke
generator, normally mounted on a KAMAZ-truck chassis, belonging to the naval infantry brigade, was used for smoke generation.
The TDA-3 was chosen because this smoke generator can place a raised smoke screen without covering the speedboat itself, which allows the
boat to maneuver safely. This combination was tested for the first time in the Gryaznaya Guba on 15 August 2017. It showed an exceptional
efficiency in laying a smoke screen to the shore.
During the exercises conducted by the Northern Fleet’s forces in September, they rehearsed missions for the aerosol concealment of the main
base at Severomorsk, as well as the garrisons of Polyarnyy, Gadzhiyevo, Zaozersk, and Vidyayevo. A large number of training exercises
depicted a notional deterioration in the NBC situation in the fleet’s area of responsibility. Specialists from the NBC Protection Troops
practiced decontamination of terrain, weapons, and military equipment.
Captain First Class Sergey Mihaylyuk, the head of the Northern Fleet’s NBC protection service, summarized this year’s performance.
“The year 2017 marked a turning point in re-equipping the NBC Protection Troops’ units and subunits with modern equipment -- the latest
RKhM-6 NBC reconnaissance vehicles built on the of the BTR-80 armored personnel carrier, TDA-3 smoke vehicles mounted on the KamAZ
truck chassis, and ARS-14KM mobile decontamination stations, which can also be used for laying down smoke screens. The new equipment
significantly boosted the combat capabilities of the Northern Fleet’s NBC protection subunits…”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

OE Watch | January 2018

68

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russian Military Vehicle Winterization Challenge
OE Watch Commentary: It is not news that it is
very cold in the Arctic. As the accompanying article
notes, temperatures where the Northern Fleet’s ground
and coastal defense troops are stationed on the Arctic
islands run routinely between minus 20 and minus 40
degrees Celsius. In fact, this year’s record on Kotelny
Island was minus 47 degrees Celsius. As the article
notes, among the latest vehicles entering service in this
severe environment is the new DT-10 PM: two-section
transport trucks that can operate in temperatures “as
low as minus 50 degrees Celsius.” To counter such
equipment operating challenges, the Russians note
that they are building garage structures equipped with
heating and high wind-resistance End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“This year the lowest temperature
recorded on Kotelny Island was minus
47 degrees Celsius [-52.6 degrees
Fahrenheit].”

Source: “Russian troops in Arctic region prepare equipment for extreme frosts,”
Interfax, 29 November 2017. http://www.interfax.com
The Northern Fleet’s ground and coastal defense troops stationed on the Arctic
islands and in the Far North have checked their equipment’s operability in super low
temperatures.
According to a spokesperson of the Northern Fleet “The average temperatures
during the winter months on the Arctic islands range between minus 20 and minus
40 degrees Celsius [-4 to -40 degrees Fahrenheit], depending on how far warm sea
currents extend. This year the lowest temperature recorded on Kotelny Island was
minus 47 degrees Celsius [-52.6 degrees Fahrenheit].
Special attention was given to caterpillar-track off-road vehicles which entered
service in 2017, in particular the new DT-10 PM two-section articulated transport
trucks with a ten-ton capacity, which can operate anywhere off-road in temperatures
as low as minus 50 degrees Celsius [-58 degrees Fahrenheit].
These machines, deployed with the Northern Fleet’s motor rifle brigades and naval
infantry units, are also serving as part of a tactical group on the Kotelny Island of
the New Siberian Islands archipelago in the Laptev Sea.
On the Arctic islands of Kotelny and Alexandra Land, where two modern
administrative and living compounds, Northern Clover and Arctic Trefoil, will be
built, stationary hermetic box structures, equipped with heating and high windresistance, have been erected to store equipment for use in super low temperatures.

DT-10PM tracked vehicle, Military-technical forum ARMY-2017.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Demonstration-p2/i-xbRsqXS/A, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | January 2018

69

