community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #6
June 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
14

Regional Friction Over Yemen’s Socotra Island
Is Iran Ready to Send Its Navy to Japan?
Iran Unveils New Unmanned Helicopter
Iran, Russia to Jointly Manufacture Helicopter
Russia and Iran Compete for Syria’s Phosphates
Turkey’s Upcoming Challenge on the Syrian Border
Tensions Between Anti-ISIS Allies in the Euphrates Valley
Iranianian Influence and Assassinations in the Kurdistan
Regional Government
A New Insurgency Group in Iraq: The White Flags
Turkish Armed Forces Hold the Ephesus 2018 Joined
Combined Live Fire Event

AFRICA
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

A Perspective on the UAE Base in the Horn of Africa
Ethiopia’s Somaliland Port Deal: a Step Towards the
Balkanization of Somalia?
Somalia and Somaliland Talks: Marriage or Divorce?
Somali National Army: Donors Demand Less Corruption,
Stronger Force
Ugandan Soldiers “Stranded” in Somalia
Herders and Farmers Clash in the Sahel with Increasing
Frequency and Firepower
De-radicalization in Niger’s Diffa Region
Terror Tactics in Burkina Faso
Nigeria’s Boko Haram Dilemma: Amnesty for Atrocities?
From Students to Separatists in Cameroon

LATIN AMERICA
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Examining Receita Federal’s Role in the Border Security of
Brazil
The Evolution of Brazil’s Defense Industry
How the Fragmentation of Drug Cartels Drives Violence in
Mexico
Three In One FARC
Colombian Military in Disarray?
ELN Flexing
About Catatumbo
Bolivarian Oil
Venezuela as a Major Topic of Discussion at VIII Summit of
the Americas Despite Its Absence
Nicaragua’s Turn

INDO-PACIFIC
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
45
47

EURASIA
48
51
52
53
54
55
55
56
57
59
60
61
63
65
67

The Russian Navy: Distributed Lethality Through Modularity
Beating Virtual War Drums
The Naval Infantry’s New Ride?
Defending the New Kerch Strait Bridge
“How I Spent My Summer Vacation”
The One Time in the Year We Get Bananas
Good Job For a Drifter-Must Enjoy Bracing Climes
Russian Robots on Parade
UAV Use in the Russian Armed Forces
Russian Praise of Syrian Air Defense
Russia Wants SCO Help in Syria
No End in Sight for Donbas Conflict
Russian Operational Reserve Developments
Investments in Kazakhstan’s Space Agency
The Outlook on Armenia’s Military Reforms

Singapore’s Anti-Terror Maritime Methods
The Modernization of Malaysia’s Armed Forces is Underway
India Looks at China’s Expansion in the Indian Ocean
Indonesia Steps up Military Presence in the Natuna Islands
Is China Changing the Game in Trans-Polar Shipping?
China Develops New Anti-Ship Cruise Missile
The Y-20 Participates in Airborne Training for the First Time
Civil-Military Fusion and the PLA’s Pursuit of Dominance in
Emerging Technologies
The Indian Government’s Efforts to Avoid Another Doklam
Standoff
Incidents in Indonesia Highlight Terrorism Trends

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 6

June | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gunduz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Visit, board, search and seizure (VBSS) team members from the guidedmissile cruiser USS Vella Gulf (CG 72) close in on rigid-hulled inflatable
boats to apprehend suspected pirates (Gulf of Aden, 2009); World map
blank without borders.

Image Source: By U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communications Specialist 2nd Class Jason R. Zalasky, http://www.navy.mil/view_
imagex.asp?id=68775&t=1, Public Domain; By Crates [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:World_map_
blank_without_borders.svg.

		
Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Lorand Laskai
Matt Schrader
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Matthew Stein

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Regional Friction Over Yemen’s Socotra Island
OE Watch Commentary: The Saudi-UAE alliance in Yemen, frayed by squabbling
between their Yemeni allies in Aden earlier this year, came under further strain in an
unlikely place: the remote island of Socotra. On 5 May the UAE deployed troops and
armored vehicles to Socotra, apparently in response to a surprise visit to the island by
members of the Saudi-backed Yemeni government, which is recognized internationally
but has only patchy control over sections of former South Yemen. In response, the Yemeni
government reportedly filed an official complaint with the UN Security Council, accusing
the UAE government of “unjustified military actions.” The accompanying excerpted
articles highlight some of the regional dimensions to the tensions in Socotra.
Poking out of the Arabian Sea, near the entrance to the Gulf of Aden, the island of
Socotra is in an important strategic location. Closer to the Horn of Africa’s tip than to
the Yemeni mainland, the island has traditionally maintained a degree of autonomy
from Yemen’s central government, whether it be in Sana’a or Aden. As noted in the first
Location of Socotra Archipelago, Indian Ocean, Yemen.
accompanying excerpt from the Qatari news website al-Araby al-Jadid, the UAE has
Source: www.demis.nl, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Socotra_Archipelago.PNG, Public Domain.
become the island’s key player over the past two years. In addition to controlling its air
and sea ports, the UAE has modernized Socotra’s infrastructure (including electricity, cellular network and health facilities) and bought up land
for development projects. The article adds that the island’s new governor, appointed in March 2018 following the sudden death of his predecessor,
is less welcoming of UAE influence in Socotra than were previous governors. As of mid-May, a high-level Saudi Arabian military delegation
appears to have eased tensions between the Saudi-backed government and the UAE, at least regarding Socotra.
The UAE and Saudi Arabia are to some degree following contradictory policies in Yemen. The 2015 Saudi-led military campaign’s stated
goal was to restore the Yemeni government’s control over the capital Sana’a, following its takeover by the Huthi Movement and its supporters.
According to the second accompanying excerpt, also from al-Araby al-Jadid, “Yemenis believed the coalition would intervene in a quick and
decisive manner to restore legitimate government and allow it to exercise its duties on the ground. Instead, it has worked to drag out the war to
the point of it becoming a burden and a disaster.” The author singles out the UAE as the main culprit for undermining Yemen’s internationally
recognized government, arguing that it has become an “actual adversary for the legitimate government” and has prevented it “from controlling
the country’s ports, islands and coastlines from Socotra to al-Khukha.” This in turn has “strengthened the Huthis and weakened the legitimacy
of President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi, the exact opposite of the coalition’s stated goals.”
Some of the most strident criticism of the UAE’s role in Socotra has come from Qatari publications. From the UAE’s perspective, this is
no coincidence. The early May flare-up, according to the accompanying passage from the UAE daily al-Bayan, is “nothing new in terms of
incitement by Qatar and its al-Jazeera channel.” Other key culprits, according to the article, include the Muslim Brotherhood and “a Turkish
faction.” With this in mind, UAE actions in Yemen - and Socotra in particular – can be understood as strategic moves to counter the influence
of the Turkey-Qatar-Muslim Brotherhood Axis, rather than actions aimed at helping Yemen’s Saudi-backed government reclaim Sana’a from
the Huthis and their allies. Turkish-UAE competition to project power in the Horn of Africa is on the uptick, with Turkey deepening economic
and military links with the Mogadishu government, while the UAE does the same with the government of the breakaway, self-declared state of
Somaliland. Although most countries were silent regarding recent events in Socotra, the Turkish Foreign Ministry issued a statement noting that
it was concerned about and “closely following” the events, which according to the statement, represent “a new threat to the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Yemen.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)
Source:
‫ واللجنة السعودية تتف ّرج‬...‫توحد اليمنيني‬
ّ ‫األطماع اإلماراتية في سقطرى‬
“UAE Ambitions in Socotra Unify Yemenis… as Saudi Delegation Looks On,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 6 May 2018. https://goo.gl/uNyvzf
The UAE wants to make up for its recent losses in Djibouti and Somalia, and all it has left is Yemen and specifically Socotra, a forward
center from which to oversee the Red Sea. Abu Dhabi’s rulers may be thinking they can benefit from the destruction in Yemen to deepen it and
snatch strategic Yemeni locations and bring them, whether officially or implicitly, under UAE sovereignty or at least influence… According to
Yemeni sources, the UAE’s military actions express that country’s displeasure with [prime minister] bin Dagher’s visit to Socotra… and the
popular reception he got there…
According to testimonies from Socotra to the Associated Press, the UAE is building factories and prisons on the island and recruiting its
residents to form new militias. It is also buying land in order to build. The report cited a government official who said the UAE controlled
all vital institutions on the island, including the airport and seaport, as well as the government headquarters, after establishing direct flights
between Abu Dhabi and Socotra…
According to analysts, the escalation is also linked to threats to undermine the authority of Soctora’s new governor Ramzi Mahrous, who
follows the 11 February popular revolution movement and who is known to oppose UAE activities on the island…
Most puzzling to those following the UAE’s military escalation in Socotra is the nebulous Saudi position toward what is happening, especially
as what is occurring on the island is an extension of similar events that occurred in Aden, Shabwa, and other provinces…

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2018

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Regional Friction Over Yemen’s Socotra Island
“…We are closely following the recent developments in Yemen’s Socotra Island…”
- Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Source:
‫حرب التحالف بنتائج عكسية تمكني الحوثيني وإضعاف الشرعية‬
“The Alliance’s War Yields Opposite Effects: Strengthening the Huthis and Weakening the Legitimate Government,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 25
March 2018. https://goo.gl/qqkGff
After 3 years of war, the balance on the ground shows that the intervention in Yemen of the Saudi-led Arab Coalition has strengthened the
Huthis and weakened the legitimacy of President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi, the exact opposite of the coalition’s stated goals. This also
appears to have taken place due to deliberate policies, rather than coincidence… Yemenis believed the coalition would intervene in a quick
and decisive manner to restore legitimate government and allow it to exercise its duties on the ground. Instead, it has worked to drag out the
war to the point of it becoming a burden and a disaster… why doesn’t [the government] carry out its executive duties on the ground, such as
security, education, health and other basic services provided by any leadership? Simply put, they are not allowed to by the coalition, which
does not want legitimate government to return and extend its writ on a territory under its control and not Huthi control. That is to say, the
coalition has become the actual adversary for the legitimate government and its presence, specifically the UAE, which has prevented the
government from controlling the country’s ports, islands and coastlines from Socotra to al-Khukha.
Source:
‫بن بريك فشل ذريع للمخطط القطري في سقطرى‬
“Ben Brik: Prompt Failure of Qatari Plans in Socotra,” al-Bayan, 12 May
2018. https://www.albayan.ae/one-world/arabs/2018-05-12-1.3262700
The campaigns that seek to mislead regarding the UAE’s stance in Yemen
are nothing but a continuation of Qatari-Iranian-Muslim Brotherhood
conspiracies… regarding Socotra, there is nothing new in terms of
incitement by Qatar and its al-Jazeera channel… al-Jazeera, the Muslim
Brotherhood, the Muslim Brotherhood author Tawakul Karman, and a Turkish
faction are behind what is happening in Socotra…

Source:
“Press Release Regarding the Developments in Yemen’s
Socotra Island,” Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 10 May
2018. http://www.mfa.gov.tr/no_-132_-yemen-in-sokotraadasi-ndaki-gelismeler-hk_en.en.mfa
We are closely following the recent developments in Yemen’s
Socotra Island. We are concerned about these developments
that pose a new threat to the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Yemen.

Dragon Blood Tree, Socotra Island.

Source: By Rod Waddington from Kergunyah, Australia, CC BY-SA 2.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dragon_Blood_Tree,_Socotra_Island_(10098980413).jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Is Iran Ready to Send Its Navy to Japan?
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian Navy has for the past decade been at
the forefront of Iranian force projection. In February 2013 Iran dispatched its first
naval flotilla to the Pacific Ocean since the tenth century, docking at Zhanjiang,
north of Shanghai. The Iranian Navy has not revisited the Pacific since that time,
but it has made multiple port calls in the Indian Ocean basin, including Colombo,
Sri Lanka; Cochin, Vishakhapatnam and Mumbai, India; Karachi, Pakistan; and
Salalah, Oman.
While the Iranian Navy often publicizes its deployments to depict Iran as a
pan-regional power on the rise, it has had consistent problems sustaining or
repeating them. While Iranian and Egyptian relations flourished during the short
reign of President Mohamed Morsi, who allowed Iranian ships to transit the Suez
Canal, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s ouster of Morsi ended that opportunity
as Egyptian Suez pilots have placed multiple impediments in the way of further
Iranian transits. Saudi Arabia has also apparently tied aid to the government of
Sudan as a way to end Sudan’s willingness to provide logistical support. When
Iranian ships tried to enter the Atlantic around the Cape of Good Hope, they
ended up floundering and having to make an emergency port call in Durban,
South Africa in January 2017, unable to continue on their journey or, for months,
to return to Iran.
It is against this backdrop that Rear Admiral Habibollah Sayyari, for years
the commander of the Iranian Navy, apparently surprised Rear Admiral Hiroshi
Yamamura, the vice chief of staff of Japan’s Maritime Self-Defense Force, at
a naval symposium in Tehran, with a proposal to exchange naval flotillas as
reported by the Fars News Agency in the accompanying excerpted article. While
Japan has little reason to send ships to Iran, an Iranian dispatch of ships to Japan
would be a major propaganda coup for Tehran.
While Sayyari’s proposal might have seemingly come out of the blue, it also
represents an Iranian fascination with Japan as an independent power and a
source of technology, which began after the Japanese victory in the 1904-1905
Russo-Japanese War. The Japanese government would likely not allow an
Iranian visit, despite the growing Japanese reliance on Persian Gulf oil after the
Fukushima nuclear disaster. Indeed, none of the other Iranian press accounts
mention a positive Japanese response. Should the Iranian Navy, however, be able
to reach Japan, then it could also reach North Korea, which may be less reticent
to deny Iran access. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Of course, in the field of naval exercises,
joint exercises between the two countries are
also possible.”
Source: “Amadeh ‘Azam Nav Garuheha-ye Irani beh
Zhapan Hastim” (“We are ready to Send an Iranian Naval
Flotilla to Japan”), Fars News Agency, 24 April 2018.
http://www.farsnews.com/13970204000667
Admiral Habibollah Sayyari, deputy chief of Iran’s army
for coordination, this morning met with Rear Admiral
Hiroshi Yamamura, the vice chief of staff of Japan’s
Maritime Self-Defense Force, on the sidelines of the
Indian Ocean Naval Symposium. Sayyari, in reference
to Iran’s very special strategic position, said, “We are
always looking for cooperation and we are able to make
progress based on our different capacities. Therefore, we
want to develop relations with friendly countries.”
He added, “Japan has a very sensitive position in East
Asia and we are inclined to have relations with this
independent state and have relations at different levels
but certainly this will be without the intervention of
foreigners.”
The deputy for coordination said, “Japan is a
maritime country and we are willing to do more with
you, especially with ties between the navies, but also
cooperation with air and ground forces would also be
welcome. Of course, in the field of naval exercises, joint
exercises between the two countries are also possible.”
Sayyari said, “In the field of technology, both Iran
and Japan are in good shape, but we can also bolster
cooperation in this regard and certainly it is also possible
to increase cooperation in the field of maritime exercises
and perhaps joint exercises can be held between the two
countries.”

An Iranian Naval Flotilla in the northern Indian Ocean.

Source: Tasnim News Agency, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, https://newsmedia.tasnimnews.com/Tasnim/Uploaded/Image/1394/11/08/139411081034025816984684.jpg

OE Watch | June 2018

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Unveils New Unmanned Helicopter
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian government has made development of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) a top priority. Iranian UAVs have become a
frequent presence in and around the Persian Gulf, and the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps and/or its proxy Hezbollah, have also deployed UAVs in Iraq,
Syria, Lebanon, and even over Israel.
Iran announces new models of UAVs several times per year; however, they
only appear to fly a few stalwarts frequently—the Karrar, the Shahed, and
the Mohajer. This suggests that many UAV models they unveil are not massproduced and are instead, meant as an influence operation to bolster the image
of their indigenous industries and military capabilities. The apparent lack of
UAV mass production might also indicate the existence of problems in various
systems after they are placed into service.
The new and, as-yet unnamed, unmanned prototype helicopter may be just
another UAV, but it is a fundamentally different shape than previous models
and, if it works, could signal a new development line. While news reports,
including the accompanying excerpted article from the Islamic Republic of
Iran Broadcasting, highlight the civilian nature of the technology, the fact that
the helicopter has been developed by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps’
research wing highlights the centrality of the IRGC in the Iranian UAV field.
That Sayyid Hesam Boustani (the director of the IRGC’s research department)
noted the new unmanned helicopter’s potential for surveillance and for carrying
weapons, indicates that its intentions are not fully benign.
Iranian press on the ceremony also credits academics from the Islam Azad
University, who worked in partnership with the IRGC’s research wing. This
demonstrates the continued close relationship between many Iranian universities
and the military. At the very least, the IRGC is considering new technologies
that could theoretically be pressed into service to suppress protests or identify
and arrest agitators. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Monitoring of protected areas…is among
the most important applications.”
Source: “Ravanma-ye az Nakhstin Balgard bidun
Sarnashin” (“Unveiling of the First Unmanned
Helicopter”), Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, 24
April 2018. https://goo.gl/eyvt1Y
Sayyid Hesam Boustani, the director of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps’ research department at
the Ahmad bin Musa zone in Shiraz, on the sidelines of
a ceremony unveiling the country’s first autonomous
helicopter, said, “Monitoring of protected areas and
identification of poachers in national parks are among the
most important applications of this helicopter.” Referring
to the installation of a camera on this helicopter, he
said, “Using this camera, if someone is detected in an
environmentally protected area and act in violation of
the law or are anticipated to do so, legal notices can be
given.” He said the helicopter had the ability to monitor
activities in different areas, and noted, “The gun mounts
are designed for the helicopter.”
The director of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps’
research department at Ahmad bin Musa further said,
“With the installation of 70 liter tanks and dispatching
helicopters to the zones, helicopters can also be used for
fire control.”
Boustani added, “If people have lost track of trails or have
had an accident, the capabilities of these helicopters for
search and rescue can also be used.”

Unveiling of the new unmanned helicopter.

Source: Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting, http://www.iribnews.ir/files/fa/news/1397/2/4/2130380_753.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran, Russia to Jointly Manufacture Helicopter
OE Watch Commentary: In the wake of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), many
European and Russian companies sought investment
opportunities inside Iran. In the accompanying
excerpted article posted on Parsine.com, Behzad
Etemadi, the deputy head of Iran’s Industrial
Development and Renovation Organization (IDRO),
announced the signing of an agreement between the
IDRO and Russian Helicopters to manufacture two
helicopter models inside Iran.
Etemadi explains that the Russian company,
a subsidiary of the Russian aerospace giant
Oboronprom, won the contract and beat out Airbus
and the Italian firm Leonardo largely because
they insisted on more controls than their Russian
counterpart. IDRO has also previously signed
an agreement with the Russian rail company
Transmashholding to manufacture in Iran.
While IDRO was founded in 1967 by the shah of
Iran, many of its almost 300 companies are today
owned or operated by the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC). The IRGC presence in such
companies highlights the difficulties of investing
in heavy manufacturing in Iran without investing
in or transferring technology to them. It also raises
questions about whether technology transfer from
ostensibly civilian projects will leak into military
platforms. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Mansour Moazzami, chairman of the board of investors of the IDROand Andrey Boginsky, chairman of
the board of directors of Russian Helicopters, exchange signed contracts.
Source: Tasnim News Agency, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, https://goo.gl/5qJEAL.

“… there were negotiations with the Russians, and with the company Russian Helicopters, and we have
completed [talks] for the manufacture of two models of helicopters.”
Source: “Iran ba Komak-e Rusha Balgerd Misazad” (“Iran to Build Helicopters with the help of Russians”), Parsine.com, 24 April 2018.
https://goo.gl/k2aqmk
Behzad Etemadi, today in a conversation with the Islamic Republic News Agency, said, in the past months, incidents like the Kermanshah
earthquake and the limited access to helicopters, as well as the need for helicopters in the maritime arena and for oil platforms, etc., led
IDRO [Industrial Development and Renovation Organization of Iran] to act to address those needs. According to him, in this context, we first
negotiated with Leonardo in Italy, and at the beginning, there was a promise, but for some reason, this wasn’t continued.
The official continued that a partnership with Airbus was then considered, but since the company was unwilling to send helicopters to Iran
even though their goal was sales, they didn’t fit with the IDRO agenda. He added, “Finally, there were negotiations with the Russians, and
with the company Russian Helicopters, and we have completed [talks] for the manufacture of two helicopter models.” Etemadi continued,
“If this contract is executed, helicopter construction for the Red Crescent, firefighting, emergencies, oil platforms—everything but military
purposes—will be on the agenda. Our country’s specialists will also be involved in after-sale servicing and recruitment.” He added, “The
Russian company has been very capable in the industry, and it has high international standards.”

OE Watch | June 2018

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia and Iran Compete for Syria’s Phosphates
OE Watch Commentary: Syria’s most important
phosphate reserves are found in the al-Khunayfis
and al-Sharqiyya (aka al-Sawwanah) deposits,
located approximately 50 kilometers southwest of
the city of Palmyra. For much of the Syrian conflict
these areas had been controlled by the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), but in March 2017
loyalist forces reclaimed them with critical military
assistance from Russia and Iran. Since then, Russia
and Iran have competed to control these deposits, as
described in the accompanying excerpted articles.
Similar friction may develop in other domains, as
the Assad government’s main backers compete with
one another for the rights to extract resources and
rebuild infrastructure in government-controlled
parts of Syria.
The first accompanying excerpt, from the Syrian
opposition news journal Ayn al-Madina, somewhat
hyperbolically characterizes Palmyra as an “Iranian
Settlement.” The article claims that Iran-backed
militiamen who helped seize Palmyra from ISIS
have settled there with their families, and at Iran’s
behest, Syrian government forces have prevented
Palmyra’s residents from returning. The article’s
author nonetheless claims that Russians ultimately
call the shots in Palmyra, through a military
presence numbering fewer than 300 and consisting
of Russian “generals and soldiers” alongside
“Ukrainian mercenaries” from the Russian private
military company Wagner.
The second accompanying excerpt, also from
Ayn al-Madina, explains how some weeks after
ISIS seized the area for a second time in December
2016, the Syrian government signed an agreement
granting Iran the right to extract, process, and
sell Syrian phosphates. This irked Russia, and
days later a high-level Russian delegation signed a
memorandum of intent with the Syrian government
for exploitation of the phosphate deposits. At
some point in 2017, once the Palmyra countryside
had been cleared of ISIS fighters, Iranian-backed
militias took control of the al-Sharqiyya deposits.
In March 2018, however, the Syrian newspaper
al-Watan reported that the Russian company
Stroytransgaz had been granted the rights to extract
phosphates from the al-Sharqiyya deposits. Shortly
before the agreement was announced, according
to the accompanying passage from the Syrian
opposition news website Orient News, Russia
dispatched fighters from Syria’s “Tiger Forces” to
seize the mine from Iranian-backed groups by force.
While infighting between Syrian loyalist militias is
fairly commonplace, clashes over natural resources
between clients of Russia and Iran is not. End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫تد ُمر مستوطنة إيرانية بزعامة روسية والنظام يمنع أهلها من العودة‬
Mohammed Hassan al-Aid. “Palmyra: Iranian Settlement Led by Russia; the Regime
Prevents its People from Returning,” Ayn al-Madina, 9 April 2018. https://goo.gl/duk6kp
Since controlling Palmyra in March 2017, Syrian regime forces have looted homes and
prevented local government and opposition supporters from returning to their homes,
apparently following directives from their Iranian allies who since entering the city have
sought to colonize it by settling the families of fighters in civilian homes and establishing
military bases in others. Russians, meanwhile, simply put some of their generals and
soldiers there to monitor the activities of the regime and the Iranians present in force
there, especially given that the area is rich in mineral resources (oil and phosphates),
as well as the city’s geographic and historical importance…The forces controlling
Palmyra currently are local and foreign militias of various loyalties, including loyalist
militias… and others who number twice as many as others and follow Shi’i ideology and
receive direct orders from the IRGC… these militias have taken over Palmyra’s norther
and western neighborhoods… Russian forces in Palmyra are fewer than 300, including
generals and soldiers as well as Ukrainian mercenaries working for the Wagner PMC.
Their aim is to contain Iranian influence in the city and control natural resources and
facilities… “Despite their small numbers vis-a-vis their Iranian allies, the Russians call
all the shots in the area.”
Source:
ُ‫روسيا تفوز بالفوسفات السوري والفتات املشع إليران‬
Fawaz al-Faris. “Russia Wins Syrian Phosphates and Iran Gets Radioactive Crumbs,”
Ayn al-Madina, 29 April 2018. https://goo.gl/mKuFvE
Due to ISIS’s control over the area, the Assad government… signed an agreement with
Iran on 16 January 2017 to invest in the Khunayfis phosphate mines in rural Homs.
The debt would be repaid by providing Iran with Syrian phosphates. A joint company
was formed to oversee the extraction and export to Iran, through a land route linking
Iran to the Syrian phosphate deposits via Iraq… Russia, Assad’s strongest ally, was not
pleased by the signing of an agreement with Iran and sent its deputy prime minister
Dmitry Rogozyn at the head of an economic delegation, only two days after Khamis’s
visit to Tehran. They went straight to Assad, after which Rogozyn told the Russian
Interfax agency, on 18 January 2017, that his country would help Syria rebuild its
energy infrastructure like no other… Russia has the lion’s share of these [phosphate]
agreements, which explains the quarrel between the two allies…
Source:
ُ‫النفط توقع عقد ًا الستخراج الفوسفات في تدمر مع شركة روسية‬
“Oil Ministry Signs Phosphate Extraction Contract for Palmyra with Russian Company,”
al-Watan, 24 March 2018. https://goo.gl/XQESVu
Al-Watan has learned from a source in the oil ministry that contract number 66 was
recently signed between Syria’s General Geological Institution and the Russian company
Stroytransgaz…
Source:
‫ روسيا تستحوذ على عقود مناجم الفوسفات في البادية‬..‫بعد طرد ميليشيات إيران‬
“After Expelling ‘Iranian Militias’… Russia Takes Control of Phosphate Deposit
Contracts in the Syrian Desert,” Orient News, 25 March 2018. https://goo.gl/SwfFbF
An anonymous source provided Orient.Net with new information on the Russia-Iran
conflict over phosphate mines in Syria, claiming that Iran had sent its militias to take
over the mines and carry out what was agreed to with Tehran. Russia, though, sent the
“Tiger Forces” into the battle, and they in turn threatened to strike any vehicle emerging
with cargo from the mine. He added that the “Tiger Forces” followed through on their
threat, striking a cargo vehicle that emerged from the mine. After that they carried out
an attack and seized control of the mine by force, expelling the Iranian militias. The
source said that following this attack and seizure of the mine, Russia rushed to sign a
contract with the regime through a Russian company… As Russian companies were able
to take over the development of the Khunayfis and al-Sharqiyya mines in rural Palmyra,
Iran hoped to take control of them and gain economically from them. This is part of a
broader economic struggle between Russia and Iran for control over Syrian phosphate
deposits…
OE Watch | June 2018

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Upcoming Challenge on the Syrian Border
OE Watch Commentary: The Syrian rebel
groups, including some “jihadi groups” who
were evacuated from the areas recaptured by the
Syrian regime, have been resettled in the Turkish
controlled northwestern province of Idlib. The
excerpted passage published in Al-Monitor and
written by a Turkish journalist, states that these
groups with extremist views could potentially pose
a serious security risk to Turkey, even though the
Turkish government does not seem to be alarmed.
The opposition fighters of Hayat Tahrir alSham, Ahrar al-Sham, and Faylaq al-Rahman
and Jaish al-Islam (from eastern Ghouta) were
evacuated to Idlib and Jarablus, while thousands
of civilians from Douma were resettled at a camp
in Jarablus. The article states that resettlement of
these “jihadi groups” in different areas of Idlib
has been considered by some observers “as a
Taliban/al-Qaeda ‘emirate’ in the making along
the Turkish border,” resembling what happened in
Pakistan. The author questions what the Turkish
government plans to do with these groups when
the Assad regime moves in to regain control of the
areas where these groups were resettled and if it
has learned from the experiences of other countries
who faced similar situations. At this point Turkey
claims these groups are under control.
The author of the article also points out another
issue with opposition groups. Besides fighting
the Syrian regime, these groups have engaged
in power struggles among themselves, forming
alliances in an attempt to consolidate power. The
author concludes the article with an explanation of
Turkey’s unsuccessful efforts to moderate some of
the radical groups and that overall, it seems this
is an endless game to play for Turkey. End OE
Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: Fehim Taştekin, “Trouble brews as militants amass on Turkey’s border,” almonitor.com, 20 April 2018. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/04/
turkey-syria-fear-of-anarchy-along-border-areas.html
With the evacuation of opposition forces from areas reoccupied by the Syrian army,
the areas Turkey had taken control of with Operation Euphrates Shield… have become
jihadi reserves…Ankara doesn’t seem to be too perturbed by this situation, which poses
serious risks to Turkey…
Since March 9, about 70,000 Syrians — including fighters and their families — have
evacuated from eastern Ghouta to al-Bab, Azaz and the Jarablus triangle…Evacuations
from eastern Ghouta were first made under agreements reached with jihadi groups
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) and Ahrar al-Sham and opposition group Faylaq alRahman; they peaked with the departure from Douma of Jaish al-Islam’s 48,000 people,
which included 8,000 fighters.
Over the past year and a half, tens of thousands of fighters… were settled in different
parts of Idlib. Settlements of these jihadi groups… are viewed by some as a Taliban/alQaeda “emirate” in the making along the Turkish border. Some observers say Turkey’s
border provinces are becoming Turkey’s Peshawar (Pakistan)…
So what was Turkey planning to do with these groups? But so far, nobody has really
addressed a very touchy question: Turkey is managing the situation with its military
operations, but when Assad’s army moves to recover these areas, where will the tens
of thousands of fighters go? … Turkey said that there’s no need to worry about these
groups because it controls them.
The ambiguity of the jihadis’ potential massing on Turkey’s border continues as
Ankara vacillates, but a new risk is emerging from the evacuation of eastern Ghouta.
Tensions among rival jihadi groups in the north could escalate as new outfits arrive.
That in itself would be a major headache for Turkey.
Many of the groups evacuated from eastern Ghouta were already fighting each other.
In several clashes after 2016, Faylaq al-Rahman and HTS jointly fought Jaish al-Islam,
which controlled the sole corridor with access to eastern Ghouta. Meanwhile, Faylaq
al-Rahman and Ahrar al-Sham occasionally clash….Now, the Idlib branches of Ahrar
al-Sham and HTS are fighting each other in Idlib. To challenge HTS, which is the
dominating force there, groups led by Ahrar al-Sham, Nureddin Zengi Brigade and
Shuqur al-Sham united to form the Syrian Freedom Front. Clashes between this new
group and HTS at Maarat al-Numan, Jabal al-Zawiya and Hon Seyhun have reached
unprecedented levels.

“Turkey is managing the situation with its military operations, but when Assad’s army moves to recover
these areas, where will the tens of thousands of fighters go?”

by LUCAS WINTER, FMSO

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/228773
OE Watch | June 2018

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Tensions Between Anti-ISIS Allies in the Euphrates Valley
OE Watch Commentary: According to local reports from eastern Syria,
tensions are on the rise between the US-backed, Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF), on the one hand, and the Syrian Elite Forces (SEF), the armed
wing of the Saudi and UAE-backed Syria’s Tomorrow Movement, on the other.
Although nominal allies against ISIS, the groups have had fraught relations
since the Battle of Raqqa last year. With ISIS nearly eliminated from eastern
Syria and local factions reassessing the strategic landscape, the accompanying
excerpted articles and statements explain how competition for control on the
ground is likely to intensify in this strategically delicate region.
The latest tensions revolve around what, under different circumstances,
might have remained a local affair: an argument and shootout in the village of
Abu Hammam between a patrol from the SDF and an armed group linked to
the SEF. Abu Hammam is part of the Shaitat tribal areas and is located along
the Euphrates River Valley, about halfway between the city of Deir Ezzor and
the Syria-Iraq border. It was the site of one of the Syrian conflict’s bloodiest
single events, the 2014 massacre of hundreds of males at the hands of ISIS
fighters. Divisions and resentments are acute, given that many ISIS members
were residents of nearby communities.
The SDF’s version of events, excerpted in the accompanying official
statement, holds that local residents called in a group of troublemakers,
accusing them of stealing and selling weapons. The SDF patrol sent
to investigate came under fire from a group labelled as an example of
“irresponsible factions” who use the SEF name, but whose true aim is “to
create strife and instability in the area.” Whenever asked by local residents, the
statement adds, the SDF will “act against those who carry out illicit activities
as well as against ISIS sleeper cells.” According to the excerpted passage from
the Saudi daily al-Sharq al-Awsat, a SDF member threatened an envoy seeking
to mediate the clashes in Abu Hammam with “[telling] the Americans to
bomb” the home of the suspect involved in the shootout and “saying he was
in thrall to ISIS.” As the only non-loyalist force to have defeated ISIS on the
Syrian battlefield, the SDF benefits from raising the specter of chaos and an
ISIS resurgence in Arab-majority areas under its control.
The “Arab Council in the Jazeera and Euphrates,” an influential body linked
to the SEF’s parent organization (The Syria’s Tomorrow Movement), issued
a statement of its own regarding events in Abu Hammam. The statement
makes clear that the group involved is affiliated with the SEF and asks “the
SDF to clarify the reasons for which it launched an attack on the only Arab
formation east of the Euphrates that is not part of the SDF.” The SDF’s actions,
the statement continues, threaten “strife between Arabs and Kurds and further
Syrian bloodshed” while also “[opening] the door to many doubts and questions
regarding malicious intent toward Arabs in their own lands and territory.” The
emphasis on ethnic difference should come as no surprise, given that this is one
of Syria’s more homogenous Sunni Arab regions. Continued SDF control over
nearby oil fields would give this narrative further traction, as the SEF and related
organizations tout their local roots and magnify the threat of outsider Kurdish
hegemony over the Sunni Arab-majority Euphrates River Valley.
Local feuds, the legacy of ISIS, control over resources, and ethnic divisions
are not the only factors driving potential conflict in this part of Syria. The fourth
accompanying article, from the Syrian opposition news site Orient News, argues
that expectations of a reconfigured strategic landscape may be driving the
actions of both the SDF and the SEF, whether they be the expectation of Turkish
deployments along Kurdish-controlled border areas with Syria, expectation of
a Saudi-led “Arab Force” being deployed to the region, or a combination of the
two. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…likely ethnic, tribal and political
complications in the coming stage among
Washington’s allies east of the Euphrates…”
Source:
‫تصريح حول االحداث التي حصلت في قرية أبو حمام في ريف دير الزور‬
“Statements Regarding Events in Abu Hammam Village in
Rural Deir Ezzor,” SDF Website, 4 May 2018. https://goo.
gl/8AP8UT
Yesterday 3 May 2018, SDF forces received information
from residents of Abu Hammam village of a group of thieves
and weapons dealers in the area. Based on this a patrol was
dispatched to the village to investigate. When it arrived to
the village entrance it was fired upon and responded, with
one of the patrol members injured. The patrol retreated
and the next morning at 0530 a larger patrol was deployed
to arrest five of the gang members who had fired. They
appear to have used the name of the Syria Elite Forces
(SEF) in their weapons dealing and theft… We in the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) assert that there is no reason
for us to target the Syrian Elite Forces (SEF)… We also
call on leaders of the SEF to follow up on cases in which
their name is used by irresponsible factions whose aim is
to create strife and instability in the area, especially given
that some tribal leaders in the area have called on the SDF
to act against those who carry out illicit activities as well as
against ISIS sleeper cells.
Source:
‫اقتتال بني حلفاء واشنطن يكشف ألغام شرق نهر الفرات‬
“Infighting between Washington’s Allies Demonstrates the
‘Landmines’ East of the Euphrates River,” al-Sharq alAwsat, 6 May 2018. https://goo.gl/zzSU5w
(translation via: http://syrianobserver.com/EN/
Features/34198/Fighting_Between_U_S_Allies_Reveals_
Mines_East_the_Euphrates)
… many indicators of the likely ethnic, tribal and political
complications in the coming stage among Washington’s
allies east of the Euphrates – especially as the US
administration searches for measures to fill the vacuum
after its forces pull out once the Islamic State (ISIS) is
eliminated. The possibility of deploying Arab forces in the
corner between Syria, Turkey and Iraq has been raised…
“The following day, one of the Arab notables went and
delivered the car to the leaders [in the SDF] but one of them
threatened the mediator that he would tell the Americans to
bomb Abu Emad’s headquarters, saying he was in thrall to
ISIS”…
The German Press Agency quoted a member of the Arab
council as saying that “the main reason for the dispute
was that the Kurdish units that control the decision-making
rejected the presence of any Arab faction in the area
because they comprise a danger for them, especially in light
of the Arab tribal members refusing to join the SDF, and
heading toward the Elite Forces in an area where there are
no Kurds at all.”

OE Watch | June 2018

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Tensions Between Anti-ISIS Allies in the
Euphrates Valley
Source:

Source:

… in light of the unfortunate actions of a patrol group made
up of more than 50 members of the SDF, in which they attacked
the home of a members of the Syrian Elite Forces (SEF) on the
evening of Thursday 5 May in the village of Abu Hammam,
eastern rural Deir Ezzor, requesting that the SEF group hand
over all their weapons, which led to injuries on both sides…
hold the SDF responsible for these dangerous actions that
threatened strife between Arabs and Kurds and further Syrian
bloodshed, leaving the Jazeera and Euphrates area open to
many different possibilities. The Arab Council calls on the
powers on the ground, primarily the United States and Russia, to
halt the danger of what is happening in a region where there are
only Arabs… The Arab Council in the Jazeera and Euphrates
strongly condemns this attack and also asks the SDF to clarify
the reasons for which it launched an attack on the only Arab
formation east of the Euphrates that is not part of the SDF, given
that this escalation opens the door to many doubts and questions
regarding malicious intent toward Arabs in their own lands and
territory.

The SDF’s main fear comes from talk of a “preliminary” agreement
between the US and Turkey for the Turkish Army and Free Syrian Army
to enter 30 kilometers inside of Syrian territory east of the Euphrates,
from the city of Tal Abyad all the way to the border with Iraq. Based on
this, the SDF hopes to eliminate any Arab formation that may threaten
it… the SDF’s current goal is to control the oil fields of Deir Ezzor
without being challenged by local residents, for whom the SEF is the
sole military force capable of challenging the SDF… “Jarba has misread
the message regarding talk about Arab forces coming to the area. He
is trying to pre-empt events by opening a front with the SDF, so that
the forces that are eventually deployed will side with him and hence he
will reap the benefits of starting this conflict. It is here that Jarba has
misunderstood the message, since the Arab forces that are to be deployed
would do so based on a decision by the US and should not be expected to
clash with the US’s SDF allies… Here we must ask whether Jarba, who
is known neither for the clarity of his alliances nor his clear political
stances, may use these clashes as a maneuver to bring Arab forces to the
area and thus gain the lion’s share and put himself in a top position. Or
is he preparing to be an alternative to the regime in the area based on
future alliances made by agreement and coordination with Moscow?”

‫املجلس العربي في الجزيرة والفرات يدين إعتداء  قسد  على قوات النخبة‬
“The Arab Council in the Jazeera and Euphrates Condemns the
SDF’s Attack on the Elite Forces,” Tomorrow’s Syria
Movement, 4 May 2018. https://goo.gl/ittaVN

‫هل بدأت قسد بتصفية وجود حليفها الجربا في دير الزور؟‬
“Has the SDF Begun to Eliminate the Presence of its Ally Jarba in Deir
Ezzor?” Orient News, 8 May 2018. https://goo.gl/KHuFze

A Guardian Armored Personnel Carrier of the SDF during the Raqqa offensive (02/17).
Source: By Zana Omar [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SDF_Guardian_Armored_Personnel_Carrier_2.png.

OE Watch | June 2018

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranianian Influence and Assassinations in the
Kurdistan Regional Government
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying article
excerpted from the Turkish daily Karar, Iran has gradually increased its
presence and influence in the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)
following the Kurdish independence referendum and has increased the
number of assassinations against the Kurdistan Democratic Party
of Iran’s (KDPI) leaders based in the region. The article mentions a
bit of the history and it is worth remembering that the KDPI waged
a bloody conflict in the 1980s against the Iranian regime. When the
Kurds of Iraq gained autonomy in 1991, it enabled the KDPI to set up
bases in the new autonomous region. From the 1990s until early 2015,
Iranian Kurdish forces stationed in the Kurdish region refrained from
launching attacks on Iran in consideration of the interests of the KRG.
However, as the KRG gained more confidence over their fight against
ISIS, they relaxed their grip on the KDPI to deploy their Peshmergas
to border areas where they engaged in fighting Iranian border guards
and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). Iran considers
these attacks as existential threats and has engaged in assassinations
of members of the KDPI to silence Kurdish dissent domestically and
internationally.
The article states that Iran killed 153 Iranian Kurds in the KRG in
the 1990s and has once again launched its campaign of assassination in
Sulaymaniyah and Erbil. It notes that Iran has allegedly been involved
in the following killings in the KRG: On 26 December 2016 the KDPI
headquarters in Erbil’s Koya district was the target of twin bombings
killing seven members of the party, while people were celebrating the
birthday of Abdul Rahman Ghassemlou, the KDPI leader who was
assassinated by the Iranian agents in Austria in 1989; on 1 March
2018 the KDPI commander Salah Rahmani’s car exploded, killing
his son and injuring him in Banislawa, a town near Erbil; on 7 March
another KDPI commander, Qader Qaderi, was killed in the district of
Balisan with 20 bullets found in his body. The latest attack targeted the
Kurdistan Freedom Party leader Hussein Yazdanpanah, but he survived
without sustaining injuries.
The authors conclude the article with a discussion of why Iran has
escalated attacks against the KDPI. Besides the KRG’s lax policy
towards the KDPI in the past three years, which led to the KDPI
engaging in armed conflict with the Islamic Republic, Iran still
remembers what a strong KDPI would be capable of, referring to the
short-live independent Mahabad Kurdish Republic that was established
by the KDPI in 1946 in Iran’s Kurdish region. A strong KDPI would
add another problem to the multitude of conflicts involving Iran in
the Middle East. Additionally, the Kurdish independence referendum
damaged the KRG’s relations with the regional and global powers that
balanced Iranian aggression. Using the 2017 independence referendum
as pretext, Iran has increased its influence and assassinations in the
KRG and will likely continue to do so. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

“Iran… whose influence has increased after the
referendum has been plotting assassinations and
attack against Iranian Kurdish leaders in Erbil.”
Source: Bekir Aydogan and Mehmet Alaca, “İran’ın Suikast
Politikası Altında Kürtler” (Kurds Under Iran’s Assassination
Policy),” Karar, 28 April 2018. http://www.karar.com/gorusler/
iranin-suikast-politikasi-altinda-kurtler-833949#
After the independence referendum of the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG), Iran has been increasing its influence within
KRG borders, supporting Iraq’s sanctions against the KRG
and taking control of a significant part of Kirkuk and disputed
territories.
Iran… whose influence has increased after the referendum has
been plotting assassinations and attacks against Iranian Kurdish
leaders in Erbil. This indicates that Iran, using the opportunity
after the referendum to put intense pressure on [the Government
of] Iraq and the KRG, has returned to its assassinations policy that
reached its peak in the 1990s. Iran historically had influence over
the regional parties the PUK [(the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan)]
and the Goran [Movement] and its neighboring city Sulaymaniyah.
In the 1990s, besides the assassinations carried out by the
[Iranian] regime against Kurdish dissent in the European capitals,
it has been said Iran killed 153 members of the KDPI, who were
Iranian Kurds and active in the KRG which achieved its de facto
autonomy in the same period… it is believed that Iran has its hands
in the twin bombs that went off in front of the KDPI’s headquarters
and killed 7 people on 20 December 2016 in Erbil’s Koya district
... Also, in the first of two assassinations that happened in March of
this year, on March 1, in the Binaslava district of Erbil as a result
of the explosion of a bomb placed in the KDPI commander Salah
Rahmani’s car, his son was killed while Rahmani himself survived
with injuries. The second assassination on March 7… in the district
of Balisan resulted in the death of another KDPI commander,
Qader Qaderi… Finally, on April 12 in Erbil when the convoy of
Hussein Yazdanpanah who is the leader of the Kurdistan Freedom
Party which operates in Iran was attacked by two people with
motorcycles, again fingers were pointing to Iran…
The main reasons for Iran to intimidate and suppress the members
of KDPI within and outside the country are KDPI’s establishment
of the Mahabad State in Iran in 1946, its historical roots, its
influence over people…
[The Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP)] also gave the Iranian
Kurds the opportunity to organize and establish a base against the
[Iranian] regime in the KRG and this explains why Iran supports
the PKK, the PUK and the Goran, against the KDP.
… after the referendum, the damaged relations of the KDP, which
governed Erbil with the regional and global powers, created the
power vacuum that enabled Iran to reactivate its assassination
policy of the 90s against the KDPI…

OE Watch | June 2018

12

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
A New Insurgency Group in Iraq: The White Flags
OE Watch Commentary: While the black flags of the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) are no longer flying over Iraqi cities,
new terrorist groups are already emerging from the ashes of ISIS.
A group called “the White Flags” could be replacing ISIS’s black
flags with white ones. This group is primarily operating in areas of
northwestern and central Iraq and its headquarters seem to be the
Hamreen Mountains near Kirkuk. Its commander, Hiwa Kiwer, has
had long-standing problems with ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
Once the ISIS presence weakened, he decided to form his own group.
The accompanying article from Arbil-based ZerNews profiles this new
terrorist group.
As Al-Qaeda in Iraq mutated into ISIS, it seems ISIS is now set to
mutate into different terrorist groups. According to the article, the retreat
of Kurdish forces from the area, in order to avoid a confrontation with
the Federal Government of Iraq right after the Kurdish independence
referendum, created a vacuum for the insurgents due to the absence
of forces with ties to the local communities. While Kurdish and Iraqi
security forces still surround the mountains, they do not communicate
with each other and blame one another for supporting the White Flags.
The article states that according to information provided by the
Kurdistan Regional Government Ministry of Peshmerga Affairs, when
ISIS was defeated, the surviving fighters gathered in these mountains.
While members of the White Flags number between 500 and 1200, the
only difference between them and ISIS is their name. The members of
this group receive training in the Hamreen Mountains about seven miles
away from Tuz Khurmatu, as these mountains provide some protection
from air and ground attacks. The article notes that the White Flags
have excavated tunnels to move around between Kurdish and Arab
settlements. Their familiarity with the mountainous region and their use
of tunnels to move around poses a challenge for locating them.
So far, they have not engaged in suicide attacks. However, they have
engaged in combat with the Iraqi Popular Mobilization Units (Iraqi
militia), Iraqi Security Forces and Kurdish Peshmerga forces. According
to the accompanying article, their current primary objectives are
recruitment, obtaining weapons and promoting their propaganda among
local communities until they find conducive grounds to launch largescale attacks. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: Zêrîn Bêjih, “Işid Yerine Beyaz Bayraklılar Geliyor (The
White Flags Replacing ISIS),” ZerNews, 13 April 2018. https://
tr.zer.news/2018/04/isid-yerine-beyaz-bayraklilar-orgutu.html
ISIS’s black flags are no longer flying over Iraq and the Kurdish
Regional Government. However, new armed groups have already
started emerging post-ISIS. ISIS’s black flags may be replaced by
the “the White Flags”.
Especially when [Federal government of] Iraq, Turkey’s Turkmen
militias, Iran, Hezbollah and Popular Mobilization Units occupied
Kurdistan Region’s cities, and when these foreign forces and police
without roots to the local communities entered these cities, it
created chaos and a vacuum.
The headquarters of the White Flags Organization that is
replacing ISIS is in Kerkuk’s Hamreen mountains. Hîwa Kiwêr
who is in his 40s leads this organization…
As of now the members of the organization fluctuates between 500
and 1200.
According to the information given by the Ministry of Peshmerga,
ISIS gathered in this area after they were defeated. They changed
their name to “the White Flags”, but the change is in name only…
They train in the Hamreen Mountains and they are on the move in
that area. The area has protection against air and ground attacks.
They excavated tunnels there. Thanks to the tunnels, they move
between Kurdish and Arab inhabited areas.
Their military camps are 7 miles away from Tuz Khurmatu.
According to the information provided by the Iraqi Army officials
they move the around in the mountainous areas. Therefore, to
locate their hideouts and tunnels is very hard. They are very
experienced and have expertise with the geography if this region…
So far the White Flags have not staged a suicide attack, but they
have engaged in combat with the Popular Mobilization Units, Iraqi
Army, and Peshmerga Forces.
Now they recruit new militants and put forth great efforts to
obtain more weapons. They tell people “we struggle to rescue and
protect you.”
Who is one eye leader Hîwa Kiwêr?
In 2002, Hîwa Kiwêr drew the attention of the Iraqi and Kurdish
governments to himself… He was with the Ansar Al-Islam…later
on pledged allegiances to the leader of Al-Qaeda Abu Musab alZarqawi.

“Their purpose for now is to preserve their connections and networks until they they find conducive
ground to launch large scale attacks.”

Hamrin Mountain Range during Operation Bulldog Hammer (2007), cropped.

Source: By Spc. Rick Rzepka [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:101st%2BAirborne%2BDivision%2BIron%2BHammer.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Armed Forces Hold the Ephesus 2018
Joined Combined Live Fire Event
OE Watch Commentary: According to an article from Al-Monitor, a news
website with analysts from the Middle East states, from May 7 to 11 Turkey
held one of its biggest military exercises in the past couple of years (Ephesus
2018 joint combined exercise), with participants from 23 countries and the
objective of developing and maintaining the combat readiness of the Turkish
armed forces. According to the article’s author, Turkey wanted to prove that
despite the purges after the coup, its military is still strong and well-equipped
with its locally made, and growing, arsenal. Additional indigenous articles also
provided perspectives on the event.
The article from Al-Monitor states that the exercise “should reveal important
data on the operational effectiveness and conventional capabilities” of the
Turkish armed forces. In addition to all the elements of the armed forces, the
exercise included “the emergency relief services, the postal department, the
Ministry of Health, local municipalities and Turkey’s official media, as well as
civilian companies that specialize in telecommunications, cybersecurity and
information technology.” The author states that the reason these non-military
elements were included is to improve military-civilian sector integration. The
article also provides some information about the Ephesus 2016 exercises and
states that a comparison will help with an assessment of the TAF’s “pre- and
post-July 2016 operational effectiveness at the conventional level.” The author
points out that because of the high number of purges of staff with planning
skills, the armed forces will face challenges emphasizing “complex operational
planning in Ephesus 2018.” Therefore, it will likely focus on “coordinated air,
sea and land maneuvers and, as a public relations effort, displays of Turkishmade military equipment and systems.”
Sure enough, the Turkish defense industry displayed some of its local
military hardware during the exercises, especially for the benefit of foreign
observers. The accompanying passage entitled “National Technologies made
a strong impression at Ephesus 2018” from the Turkish State-run Anadolu
Agency, focuses on “made in Turkey” military equipment that was showcased
at the exercise. The article states that 35 Turkish defense industry companies
displayed military equipment made in Turkey. One piece of equipment, the
Bayraktar TB2 UAV, was used for the first time in live fire. While some of
the new Turkish-made products were tried for the first time, the overall future
ability of their technology was showcased. The article also notes that the
exhibitions of the defense companies drew the most attention this year.
The third passage, from the Turkish website kokpit.aero, provides a detailed
account of the distinguished observer day exercises with pictures shared by the
Turkish General Staff. The article states that 65 observers from 38 countries
were present to watch a war game scenario in which the United Nations
puts together a peace mission under the leadership of Turkey to intervene
in a war between two fictitious nations. The exercises not only combined
conventional warfare tactics, but also included “the hybrid warfare that wages
counterterrorism, cyber warfare and psychological warfare tactics.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: Metin Gurcan, “Turkey gears up military might to
host live-fire war games,” Al-Monitor, 4 May 2018. https://
www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/05/turkeymilitary-displays-show-of-forces-in-new-exercise.html
The Ephesus 2018 Joint Combined Live Fire event, set
for May 7-11 in Izmir, will be Turkey’s first high-profile
conventional international exercise since the July 2016
attempted coup. The display should reveal important
data on the operational effectiveness and conventional
capabilities of the Turkish Armed Forces (TSK)…
The exercise calls for the cooperation of numerous
entities…Turkey’s public bodies … emergency relief
services, the postal department, the Ministry of Health,
local municipalities and Turkey’s official media, as well as
civilian companies that specialize in telecommunications,
cybersecurity and information technology will take part in
the exercises. The TSK seriously felt the lack of civilianmilitary integration during its Operation Euphrates Shield
(August 2016-March 2017) and Operation Olive Branch
(January-March 2018), and this time it will coordinate with
the civilian sector to improve the situation.
…in May 2016, Turkey conducted Ephesus 2016, which
was described as the most sophisticated military exercises
Turkey had staged, with complex operations and civilianmilitary integration.
Ephesus 2016 was designed to improve joint and combined
combat operations, including amphibious, air assault and
counterterrorism. Along with Turkey’s land, air, naval and
gendarmerie forces, some 900 military staff participated
from Turkey’s major allies…
The scenarios required a dynamic mission set to meet
the challenges of a multi-domain battle that included
cyberspace…
But after the coup attempt, the government conducted
mass purges of the TSK, discharging some 1,400 of 1,800
staff officers who are usually tasked with planning and
headquarters duties. It will not be easy to emphasize
complex operational planning in Ephesus 2018.
Instead, the emphasis is likely to be on coordinated air,
sea and land maneuvers and, as a public relations effort,
displays of Turkish-made military equipment and systems.
It appears Turkey will use Ephesus 2018 to show that its
military is still strong and well-equipped with weapons,
particularly with systems manufactured by local firms.

“The exercise calls for the cooperation of numerous entities…Turkey’s public bodies … emergency relief
services, the postal department, the Ministry of Health, local municipalities and Turkey’s official media, as
well as civilian companies that specialize in telecommunications, cybersecurity and information technology
will take part in the exercises.”

(continued)

OE Watch | June 2018

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkish Armed Forces Hold the Ephesus 2018
Joined Combined Live Fire Event
Source: Tolga Albay, “Milli teknolojiler EFES-2018’de göz
doldurdu (National Technologies made a strong impression
at Ephesus 2018,” Anadolu Agency, 10 May 2018. https://
www.aa.com.tr/tr/turkiye/milli-teknolojiler-efes-2018de-gozdoldurdu/1141335

Source: “Efes 2018 Tatbikatı’nın gündüz bölümü nefes kesti (Ephesus
2018 daytime section of Exercises was breathless),” kokpit.aero, 10
May 2018. http://www.kokpit.aero/efes-2018-gunduz
The daytime part of the distinguished observer day of the Ephesus
2018 Joint Combined Live Fire event that was organized by the Turkish
Armed Forces on the international scale was successfully accomplished
in Izmir…

This year’s Ephesus-2018 Live Fire Event took place with
high international participation. Turkey tested its national
war technology and products and also it displayed its future
technologies.
[The exercise] displayed some of the national and local weaponry
and the systems that TAF has in its inventory some of which were
used in Operation Euphrates Shield and Operation Olive Branch…
For the first time TCG Bayraktar Class Landing Ship Tanks, the
Turkish Navy Corvette TCG Büyükada (F-512), unmanned aerial
vehicles, air defence system Korkut, laser guided missile Cirit, laser
guided long range anti-tank missile Umtas, modern infantry rifle
MPT-76, Kunduz Amphibious Armored Combat Earthmover, CH-47
Chinook heavy-lift helicopter, and 203 mm howitzer participated
and successfully completed their missions in the exercises.

In this part…the soldiers wounded in the battle… were also rescued
by helicopters…At this time, before the amphibious units took off, air
bombardment was carried out with F4 fighter planes…The mined area
on the fictitious land was cleared by the AKSAR
(Right of Destruction Shipping with Rocket) and IYGAS (Explosive
Footer Crossing System) systems. After the operation with 70 boots, the
second extraction of the amphibious units began. The TCG Bayraktar
ship was overcast and the SAT commandos sniped. Armored vehicles
and howitzer were brought into the country…
The Ephesus 2018 Joint Combined Live Fire event not only combined
conventional warfare, but also [included] the hybrid warfare that fights
terrorism, cyber warfare and psychological warfare…

Turkish AF F-16D.

Source: By Jerry Gunner from Lincoln, CC BY 2.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turkish_AF_F-16D_(5808444013).jpg

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | June 2018

15

AFRICA
A Perspective on the UAE Base in the Horn of Africa
OE Watch Commentary: On 14 May the accompanying excerpted article in the
Kenyan publication, The Star, included a commentary on the decision of the United
Arab Emirates (UAE) to build a military base in Berbera, Somaliland that is also
referred to as a port. The author of the article, like the Federal Government of Somalia,
considers Somaliland to be a breakaway region of Somalia.
The author notes the UAE’s decision to open the military base in Berbera is a result
of Somalia’s neutral position on the Gulf crisis, in which the UAE and other allies,
including Saudi Arabia, are at odds with Qatar. The author argues that the UAE’s
building of a base is an infringement on Somalia’s territorial integrity and that this
change in UAE policy is likely to have devastating results. According to the article,
the UAE will no longer provide financial support to Somalia’s security forces or for
humanitarian purposes in Somalia, which has led to the shutting down of a hospital.
This could also have an impact on the effectiveness of The African Union Mission in
Somalia (Amisom), which is combating al-Shabab.
There is another important geopolitical angle to this development. Ethiopia
is landlocked, but is part of the deal with the UAE and the breakaway region
of Somaliland for the base in Berbera, and is a geopolitical rival of the Federal
Government of Somalia. Ultimately, the article’s author sees the UAE and Ethiopia
teaming up to prevent what the Federal Government of Somalia at least hopes in the
future is a unified Somalia, including Somaliland or even simply long-term stability.
Though the author laments the UAE’s divide-and-rule approach, there is little that the
author proposes to counteract the UAE’s plans. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “UAE, Somalia need to reconcile,” The
Star, 14 May 2018. https://www.the-star.co.ke/
news/2018/05/14/uae-somalia-need-to-reconcile_
c1756879
There is no doubt that the UAE has been a key
ally of Somalia ever since the country descended
into chaos. Since 2014, the UAE has trained
and equipped thousands of forces in Somalia to
help the country take control of its own security
and decrease dependency on African Union
peacekeepers. But the relationship between the
two countries, both members of the Arab League,
has deteriorated. The bone of contention is the
controversial Berbera Port deal. While the UAE has
it is own agenda in intervening in Somalia, respect
for the country’s territorial integrity is paramount.
As a result of the escalating dispute, the UAE this
month halted its support for Somalia’s security
forces and humanitarian support, closing down
a hospital that used to treat 300 patients daily.
According to security analysts, this will hamper the
transfer of Somalia’s security to the country’s armed
forces.

“As a result of the escalating dispute, the UAE this month halted its support for Somalia’s security
forces.”

A fisherman’s camp in Somaliland.

Source: YoTuT, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Berbera#/media/File:A_fisherman%27s_camp_in_Somaliland.jpg, CC-BY-2.0.

OE Watch | June 2018

16

AFRICA
Ethiopia’s Somaliland Port Deal: a Step Towards the
Balkanization of Somalia?
OE Watch Commentary: Ethiopia lost more than just a sizable chunk of
land when Eritrea gained independence in 1993; it also lost its only direct access
to the sea. Since that time, as the accompanying article from the South African
publication The Conversation points out, landlocked Ethiopia has been dependent
on its neighbors, particularly Djibouti, for a port and the access to international
markets one provides. However, that near monopolistic situation does not sit
well with the Ethiopians, so they have been busy trying to interest partners in
the development or refurbishment of other ports, including Port Sudan in Sudan,
Mombasa in Kenya, and Berbera in the Somaliland region of Somalia. It is that
last one that will most radically alter the region’s power dynamics, not just by
breaking the near stranglehold Djibouti has on Ethiopia’s maritime imports and
exports, but by bypassing the Somali government, it hopes to give additional
credence to Somaliland’s claim that it is an independent nation.
Somaliland has been trying to break away for decades from Somalia, while
the government of Somalia wants to keep the breakaway republic in its fold,
but lacks the military capability to force it to obey government rulings. In what
could be described as an end-run, Ethiopia is dealing directly with Somaliland to
establish the Berbera port. Ethiopia is not the only nation involved with the port’s
development: the UAE, which is establishing a military base in Berbera to help
tighten its blockade of Yemen, is also a major investor in the port.

Source: Brendan Cannon and Ash Rossiter, “How an
Ethiopia-backed port is changing power dynamics in
the Horn of Africa,” The Conversation, 18 March 2018.
https://theconversation.com/how-an-ethiopia-backed-portis-changing-power-dynamics-in-the-horn-of-africa-93308
When Eritrea gained its independence from Ethiopia in
1993, Ethiopia became landlocked and therefore dependent
on its neighbours – especially Djibouti – for access to
international markets. This dependency has hampered
Ethiopia’s aspiration to emerge as the uncontested
regional power in the Horn of Africa.
Ethiopia’s ambitions for Berbera have been hampered by
two problems. Firstly the Republic of Somaliland – a defacto independent state since 1991 – still isn’t recognized
internationally. This makes engagement a political and
legal headache. Secondly, Ethiopia, doesn’t have the
critical resources needed to invest and build a port.
But it is Berbera, in particular, that will prove the
most radical in terms of challenging regional power
dynamics as well as international law. This is because a
port deal involving Somaliland will challenge Djibouti’s
virtual monopoly over maritime trade. In addition, it
may entrench the de-facto Balkanization of Somalia and
increase the prospects of Ethiopia becoming the regional
hegemon.

The article claims additional geopolitical interests on behalf of Ethiopia in
strengthening the Berbera Port. First, it weakens Eritrea, with Ethiopia hoping
that country implodes, eventually leading to reunification of the two nations.
Second is that it keeps Somalia weak and fractured, enabling Ethiopia to focus
its attention elsewhere. Third, through a combination of material incentives
and pressure, Ethiopia can increasingly meddle in Somaliland’s internal affairs.
It is that last point that has been a conundrum for Somaliland; it wants the
investments but does not appreciate the interference. Meanwhile, as the article’s
authors describe, Somaliland has partially “broken the glass ceiling of international recognition” by entering into these agreements. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“In addition, [a port deal between Ethiopia and Somaliland] may entrench the de-facto Balkanization of
Somalia and increase the prospects of Ethiopia becoming the regional hegemon.”

Berbera Port (2016).

Source: By Lakmi00 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Berbera_Port2.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

17

AFRICA
Somalia and Somaliland Talks: Marriage or Divorce?
OE Watch Commentary: Talks between Somalia and Somaliland,
the self-declared nation which no foreign government recognizes as a
sovereign state, are planned for later this year. Optimism, however, for
any sort of agreement between the two does not appear to be running
particularly high. This is because, as the accompanying article from
the British website Pambazuka News notes, the two sides have opposite
goals. The Somali government wants to keep Somaliland as part of
Somalia whereas Somaliland wants to be independent.
Talks between both parties first started in London in 2012 with the
subsequent nine talks also taking place away from Somali soil. None
of these brought about any considerable change in the situation, and
with both parties still hewing to their original demands, it is unclear if
there is a path forward that would result in a different outcome for this
set of upcoming talks. There are several factors working against any
progress for these reconciliation talks, with perhaps the biggest that
the drive for them did not come from the principal parties, but instead
was engineered by outside forces, particularly from the international
community. The result was that both sides accepted the proposals to talk
in order to placate big donors, but never had significant buy-in to the
idea.
Memories of the last time Somaliland formed a union with Somalia
are also a negative factor towards reconciliation. That merger, back
in 1960, was done by elites who made deals for themselves with
purportedly little concern for the people. Brutality under the Siad Barre
regime and the Somali Civil War led to Somaliland breaking away.
The striking difference in stability between the two entities is also
a major factor as to why there is such pessimism that Somaliland
would once again be willing to answer to Somalia. While Somaliland
has had a succession of democratically elected presidents and is
relatively stable, Somalia has been in chaos for several decades. To
its credit, Somalia’s nascent government is making some progress
with international support, but there is concern that when AMISOM
troops leave in the next few years, Somalia’s security forces may find
it difficult to hold territory previously captured from al-Shabaab.
Somaliland has looked at Somalia’s past and present and now questions
whether it wants to be a part of its future.
Besides giving pause to Somaliland, Somalia’s chaos is also
hampering the Somali government’s own efforts to bring Somaliland
into the fold. Severely distracted by the ongoing violence, Somalia
cannot devote its full energy to trying to preserve the union. Thus,
Somaliland’s desire for the talks to result in an amicable divorce
and Somalia’s desire for them to keep the nation united face great
obstacles with regards to the likelihood of a compromise breakthrough
agreement. Even the ability to settle lesser issues, such as who controls
the air space, remains hostage to the two parties who lack the incentive
and/or inclination to resolve them. However, while there is pessimism
with regards to the outcome, there are also two bright spots: both
parties are talking and the status quo, which has largely been peaceful
between the two entities in recent years, remains. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

Somalia map states regions districts.

Source: By Ingoman (James Dahl) [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somalia_map_states_regions_districts.png.

Source: Abdikadir Dayib Askar, “The Somalia-Somaliland talks: A
crossroads or a dead end?” Pambazuka News, 4 May 2018.
http://www.pambazuka.org/human-security/somalia-somalilandtalks-crossroads-or-dead-end
Somaliland’s government perceives the talks as an opportunity to
gain recognition; Somalia’s federal government, on the other hand,
envisages recognition as a process of tearing the “Somali Republic”
apart. Whatever the myths surrounding any rational decision, the
world is watching to see whether Somalis mend or break the fence
that has divided them for decades.
Critics believe that the drive for the dialogue did not come from
Somalis themselves. Like previous reconciliation meetings, the
endeavor was engineered outside of Somali circles. Thus they lacked
the ownership from the onset, and as such, it is believed, that the
political architect did not reflect the fundamental priorities on the
ground.
Unfortunately, the international community has not paid attention
to Somaliland’s remarkable home-grown accomplishments other
than a polite diplomatic nod.
Neither side has given the talks the essential weight they deserved.
Their lack of sincerity and seriousness made the past negotiations
bear no fruits. Although it is understood they are both struggling
with the economic and political predicaments at the moment, the
Federal Government of Somalia does not appear to have any
particular enthusiasm for the talks as the security challenges have
overwhelmed them.

“Somaliland’s government perceives the talks as an opportunity to gain recognition; Somalia’s federal
government, on the other hand, envisages recognition as a process of tearing the ‘Somali Republic’ apart.”
OE Watch | June 2018

18

AFRICA
Somali National Army: Donors Demand Less Corruption,
Stronger Force
OE Watch Commentary: Foreign backers of Somalia’s army are indicating frustration. The accompanying excerpted article from Shabelle
News, a Somali news site, notes that following a summit in Brussels, donors urged Somalia to address the problems identified in a report by
the Somali government, the African Union, and the United Nations. That report, published last year, pulled no punches, referring to the Somali
National Army (SNA) as fragile and describing its command and control structure as extremely weak.
Interestingly, despite such little progress having been made so far in the SNA, the donors seem to expect that a quicker pace of reform is
possible. Indeed, with the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) potentially withdrawing completely in a few years (if their present
drawdown schedule remains unaltered), the SNA will need to be ready to defend the Somali government against an existential threat from alShabaab.
One recurring problem mentioned with the SNA is corruption. To help curb it donors have said the military should create biometric
registration and electronic payroll systems. These donors are not the only ones who recognize that corruption is extremely harmful to the
country. The International Monetary Fund has been pressuring the country to implement better management of public finances. So far, the
nascent government has adopted a single public finance account as opposed to multiple ones that, because of divided oversight, are more prone
to corruption. The government has also become more serious at raising revenue, including implementing a sales tax at the Mogadishu Port and
a set of taxes for telecommunications, which is one of the country’s most lucrative sectors. As a result of these moves the federal government
has quadrupled its revenues since 2012. The country might actually make a payment on its debt service, something it has not done since 1991.
Against this backdrop of higher government revenues, the SNA’s capabilities,
or lack thereof, remain a deterrent to even bigger foreign investment in the
country’s businesses. At one time European tourists vacationed in Somalia,
enjoying the beautiful beaches along the extensive coastline. The country’s
civil war put an end to that. Now, however, there are those who are thinking
the country can eventually once again have a vibrant tourist scene, but not if
the SNA is unable to provide adequate security and stability. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“Somalia should accelerate reforms of its army, its main

foreign backers said on Wednesday after discussing slow
progress in transforming the graft-ridden force into one
capable of fighting al Qaeda-linked al Shabaab militants.”

Source: “Somalia must speed overhaul of fragile army to
face militants, say donors,” Shabelle News, 2 May 2018.
http://radioshabelle.com/somalia-must-speed-overhaul-offragile-army-to-face-militants-say-donors/
Somalia should accelerate reforms of its army, its main
foreign backers said on Wednesday after discussing slow
progress in transforming the graft-ridden force into one
capable of fighting al Qaeda-linked al Shabaab militants.
The AU force began drawing down last year. It does most
of the fighting against Shabaab insurgents who launch
attacks in Mogadishu and elsewhere. Without strong Somali
forces, Shabaab could be reinvigorated, analysts say.
Tensions between the federal government and provincial
administrations have escalated this year amid a row
involving Gulf nations whose problems have spilled
into Somalia. The United Arab Emirates and allies have
imposed sanctions on Qatar in the standoff – and both
sides have backed rival camps in Somalia with money and
investments.

A Somali National Army (SNA) soldier takes up a defensive position 17 March 2012 during a live-fire exercise.
Source: By AMISOM Public Information (Flickr) [CC0],https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somali_National_Army_Training_Pass-out_Parade_08_(7092793865).jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

19

AFRICA
Ugandan Soldiers “Stranded” in Somalia
OE Watch Commentary: During a military
campaign there are words – mired, standoff,
or bogged down – one hopes not to speak or
hear when describing your own side. In the
accompanying excerpted article from the
Ugandan newspaper Daily Monitor, General
David Muhoozi, the Chief of Defense Forces of
the Ugandan military, recently used another word
in reference to his country’s soldiers fighting in
Somalia…“stranded.” He gave three reasons for
this situation: underfunding, logistical deficits,
and a Somali national force he calls “challenged,”
but that has been described by others in far worse
terms.
That Somali military is supposed to be able to
provide security for the country when the African
Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM), of which
the Ugandan soldiers are the largest contingent of
the 22,000 strong force, completes its drawdown
over the next few years. The idea was that before
leaving, AMISOM would help vanquish the
terrorist group al-Shabaab, providing the country
with a relatively stable situation that the nascent
Somali military could handle; however, the
situation on the ground and General Muhoozi’s
recent comments call into question whether
AMISOM forces will be able to complete their
mission before departing. Should AMISOM leave
while al-Shabaab is still strong and the Somali
military weak, the Somali government will be
faced with not only a very difficult situation, but
an existential threat.

Soldiers from the Ugandan contingent of AMISOM, patrol through the town of Qoryooley, Somalia.
Source: AMISOM Public Information, https://www.flickr.com/photos/au_unistphotostream/13894467038/, CCO 1.0 Universal, Public Domain.

Source: Risdel Kasasira, “We’re Stuck in Somalia, Says Army Chief,” Daily Monitor,
23 April 2018. http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/We-re-stuck-Somalia-Armychief/688334-4493940-dt07w5z/index.html
Asked if this meant that the UPDF is stuck in Somalia, Gen Muhoozi spoke of a
“mismatch between what we want to do and what we have.”
In an interview with this newspaper last Thursday, Gen Muhoozi said UPDF has as a
result collapsed some of its forward operating bases to consolidate defensive strength and
cannot launch attacks against al-Shabaab.
“Our ambition was bigger than the troops we had,” he said, “you find that you have
moved forward but your rear is insecure; it is vulnerable because there are no holding
forces which ideally should be coming from the Somalis.”

“

General Muhoozi goes on to further describe
Asked if this meant that the UPDF is stuck in Somalia, Gen
the untenable situation his forces face, particularly
Muhoozi spoke of a ‘mismatch between what we want to do and
that they are unable to sufficiently degrade alShabaab’s capacity or effectively defend what
what we have.’
they have already won. When the Ugandans do
move forward, their rear is vulnerable because
the Somali forces they were entrusting to secure it are unable to do so. The enemy’s use of IEDs compounds the problems of both AMISOM
and the Somali army by causing a steady stream of casualties, a chronic attrition these forces can ill afford. To avoid IEDs, General Muhoozi
said taking to the air would be advantageous for mobile troops, and if attack helicopters were also provided, they would be a significant force
multiplier. However, following a recent meeting of presidents, military leaders, and donors in Kampala, it does not look like any large increase
in funding that would enable such air assets to be purchased will be forthcoming. Indeed, the already underfunded mission may lose even more
funds.

”

As General Muhoozi explains in the article, there is a mismatch between what AMISOM wants to do and what they have the capability
of doing. Discussions such as the one in Kampala attempt to find solutions – often an appeal for more donor funding that increasingly
goes unheeded – but also involve finger pointing as participants look to apportion blame for the situation. Meanwhile, many believe this
mission overreach has resulted in the Ugandan troops finding themselves in a position they do not want to be in…stranded. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | June 2018

20

AFRICA
Herders and Farmers Clash in the Sahel with Increasing
Frequency and Firepower
OE Watch Commentary: In scenes reminiscent of America’s
Wild West, or at least how it was depicted in movies, violent clashes
occur between farmers and herders as the latter’s cattle crosses into
the former’s farmland. This however, is not America’s Wild West
and it also is not a movie. As the accompanying article from the
South African news site The Conversation describes, these clashes
are in the Sahel and they are happening with both greater frequency
and firepower.
Clashes between farmers and nomadic herders in the Sahel are
not new, occurring even during the pre-colonial period. However,
over the past few years their numbers have risen precipitously.
The 2017 Global Terrorism Report found that while there were 67
clashes between farmers and herders between 2007 and 2011 in
Nigeria, the Sahelian nation with traditionally the most number
of clashes, that number rose more than tenfold, to 716 clashes,
between 2012 and 2018.
The reasons for the clashes are many, including access to land
and water, grazing paths, drought, desertification, and as often
happens when one ethnic group is mobile and finds itself on land
occupied by another ethnic group, interethnic tensions. Another
possible reason for these clashes, and perhaps helping to explain
why they are dramatically increasing, is that the numerous conflicts
in the region might be fueling them. Examples described in the
accompanying article include the six year long conflict in Mali
and the continuing unrest in Libya since Gaddafi was toppled in
2011, which led to a massive proliferation of weapons across a large
portion of the Sahel as unguarded Libyan armories were looted.

“Herdsmen argue that they now carry weapons
to protect themselves and their cattle due to the
increased threats they face. For their part, farmers
have started forming armed vigilante groups to protect
themselves from attacks by herdsmen. The result has
been a rising cycle of violence.”
Source: “Why clashes are on the rise between farmers and herdsmen in
the Sahel,” The Conversation, 2 May 2018. https://theconversation.com/
why-clashes-are-on-the-rise-between-farmers-and-herdsmen-in-thesahel-95554
There’s growing evidence that conflicts in the region are contributing
to the dramatic rise in the number of attacks as well as casualties. For
example, violence is being fuelled by the unrest in Libya – which has
been on going since 2011 – as well as the six-year long conflict in Mali.
These regional conflicts have resulted in proliferation of weapons –
for example herdsmen are often armed with weapons, including some
sourced from Libya, as well as new trends in cattle rustling and animal
trafficking in the entire region.
The growing illegal weapons market in the region has coincided with
a tremendous increase in cattle rustling in the region since 2011. This is
being driven by what has come to called neo-pastoralism, a trend that
involves cartels using illegally acquired wealth to arm young men to
steal cattle from nomads.

Herdsmen argue that they now carry weapons to protect themselves
Coinciding with the arms market being flooded in 2011 was a
and their cattle due to the increased threats they face. For their
tremendous growth in cattle rustling. In what has been called “neo- part, farmers have started forming armed vigilante groups to protect
pastoralism,” cartels, driven by high beef prices, provide weapons
themselves from attacks by herdsmen. The result has been a rising cycle
to young men to steal cattle from nomadic herders. These cattle
of violence.
are then moved to large ranches or across several national borders
to eventually be sold. Nomadic herders have armed themselves
to protect against neo-pastoralism, but the weapons they use to fight off the marauding young men are sometimes turned on farmers for the
slightest of provocations. Not unexpectedly, the farmers in turn are arming themselves against the herders, and the cycle of violence further
escalates. Thus, disputes that previously might have been settled diplomatically are often now settled with gunfire.
Government responses to the escalating violence have, as the article notes, been mixed. The Nigerian government, criticized for what was
described as a lackadaisical approach, decided to show its seriousness about the matter and had its air force launch several attacks on villages,
reportedly resulting in innocent civilians being killed. Ghana is trying things differently, considering the herders as aggressors and telling
its police to shoot encroaching cattle on sight. In yet still a different approach, Niger is using Islamic teachings to warn people that there are
consequences to cattle rustling and murder. Meanwhile, many are recognizing the need to search for multiregional solutions to the problem,
with a great deal of emphasis on curbing arms trafficking across porous borders. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Herders on camelback moving cattle in Niger.

Source: Leonardo A. Villalón, http://minerva.defense.gov/Media/Images/igphoto/2001690115/, Public Domain.
,

OE Watch | June 2018

21

AFRICA
De-radicalization in Niger’s Diffa Region
OE Watch Commentary: On 17 April the accompanying excerpted article
from Le Point Afrique, a French-language publication, posted an article about
ongoing de-radicalization programs for Boko Haram members in Diffa, Niger.
Diffa has experienced more Boko Haram violence than any other part of
Niger and has been subject to a number of cross-border raids by Boko Haram
coming from Borno State, Nigeria. As a result of Boko Haram’s activity in the
Diffa, the region also has seen a number of its residents join the group.
According to the article, there are 218 individuals in the de-radicalization
camp in Diffa, which was first opened in December 2016 and was announced
through radio broadcast and leaflet drops. The camp is located in a center
that was intended for refugees of Boko Haram violence, but because it was
too far from the locations of attacks, it stood empty and later converted into
the camp. Many of the Boko Haram members in the camp report various
illnesses, such as malaria or parasites.
A number of the Boko Haram members also report having been forced to
join the group when it came to their villages and threatened to kill those did
not join. Considering that the members at the camp do not appear to be the
most ideologically motivated of fighters, the theory of change, according to an
officer interviewed in the article, is to simply keep them demobilized for as
long as possible so they lose interest or are too removed from the fighting to
return to Boko Haram. That being said, the fighters do also receive training
on Islamic interpretations that promote peace instead of what Boko Haram
teaches and they receive a certificate if they pass the religious training.
According to the article the program thus far seems to be a success. One
fighter, for example, who was interviewed for the article expressed remorse
and regret for having joined the group; however, the officers recognize one
day the members of the camp will leave and what opportunities they will have
thereafter remain unclear. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The idea was to weaken [Boko Haram] by
demobilizing them.”
Source: “Au Niger, dans le repaire des repentis de Boko
Haram (In Niger, in the den of repentant Boko Haram
members),” Le Point Afrique, 17 April 2018. http://afrique.
lepoint.fr/actualites/au-niger-dans-le-repaire-des-repentis-deboko-haram-17-04-2018-2211182_2365.php
Ali Mele, 26, is a former Boko Haram fighter. He has
just arrived at the Goudoumaria repentance center, 200
kilometers from Diffa. “I would like to sleep,” he sighs. The
medical examination reveals blood in his urine. “They have
edema, high blood pressure, malaria, and parasites,” says the
doctor. A man asks, “How is it in the bush?” “We’ve become
thieves,” says Ali.
They are 218 in the camp, whose creation was announced
in December 2016. The radio broadcast the message, and
planes threw leaflets. “The idea was to weaken [Boko Haram]
by demobilizing them,” says Ibrahim Hassan, prefect of
Goudoumaria.
“We learned a lot, I regret what I did, we were lied to,” said
Abdoullaye Moustapha, 25. Boko Haram encircled his village
and threatened to kill those who would not enlist.
For the government, everyone says misery and
unemployment grow in the arms of Boko Haram. “The most
important thing is the professional training we will give them
and the opportunities for afterwards.”

Marché de la ville de Diffa.

Source: By Mab.black [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diffa_1.JPG.

OE Watch | June 2018

22

AFRICA
Terror Tactics in Burkina Faso
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 May Agence d’Information du
Burkina published the accompanying excerpted French-language
article detailing an attack by one of the terrorist groups operating in
the north of Burkina Faso. Though no group name was mentioned in
the article, it probably referred to the group Ansaroul Islam, which is
a Burkina Faso-based, primarily Fulani breakaway group from the
al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) coalition in Mali called
Jama’at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin. According to the article, the
group targets mostly what the militants consider to be social vices.
For example, the article says the militants first went to a teacher’s
home and torched it. They then went to another district and set fire
to the home of the director of a school. While they were burning
the house of the director, other militants went to a market where
they burned down a liquor store and the headquarters of a local
vigilante group that has emerged to counter the militants. This set the
entire town into a panic. The militants finally stole two motorcycles
belonging to teachers of a school.
The article mentions that the security situation has deteriorated
in the last three years and many schools have been shut down.
Evidently, the militants’ tactics are allowing them to not only target
their enemies, but also enforce a new social order. Among other
things, their desire to prevent education—specifically Western
education—appears to be having an impact to the detriment of
schoolchildren in the region. Their ideology, therefore, is seen as
similar to that of Boko Haram further south in Nigeria. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Le président burkinabè décrète un deuil national de 48 heures.

Source: VOA Afrique, https://www.voaafrique.com/a/vives-recations-apres-l-attaque-d-un-cafe-a-ouagadougou/3984559.html, (CC-by-2.0).

Source: “Sanmatenga: des assaillants incendient le logement d’un
enseignant et sèment la panique dans un marché (Sanmatenga:
Assailants torch a teacher’s home and spread panic in a market)”
Agence d’Information du Burkina, 2 May 2018. http://www.aib.bf/m12910-.html
Eight assailants burned a teacher’s home in Bafina before creating
panic in the Guenbila market. About 75km from Kaya in Sanmentenga
Province four of them set fire to the house of the director of a school
under a straw hut. A teacher was tied up during the package and lost
everything in the fire and is still in shock. The security situation in
Burkina Faso has deteriorated in the last three years with the rise of
terrorism, mainly in the north where hundreds of classes have been
closed.

“The security situation in Burkina Faso has deteriorated in the last three years with the rise of terrorism,
mainly in the north where hundreds of classes have been closed.”

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | June 2018

23

AFRICA
Nigeria’s Boko Haram Dilemma: Amnesty for Atrocities?
OE Watch Commentary: The offer of amnesty by Nigeria’s president,
Muhammadu Buhari, to members of Boko Haram, besides catching many off
guard, is proving to be extremely controversial. The terrorist group has been
responsible for numerous kidnappings, murders, rapes, and other atrocities,
making such an offer anathema to a large number of Nigerians. Still, as the
accompanying article from the Nigerian newspaper The Guardian explains,
despite numerous military attempts to eradicate Boko Haram, the group is still
capable of mounting horrific attacks, and that amnesty, while likely not to be
successful, is probably worth trying.
There have been attempts with other African terrorist groups by governments
to, if not eliminate, at least reduce the intensity and frequency of their
attacks. One particular effort not mentioned in this article was the Ugandan
government’s attempt to rein in the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). The LRA’s
leader, Joseph Kony, had high-profile meetings with government officials, and
while he never accepted amnesty and is still at large, many of his followers
defected. Thus, there is precedence for an amnesty program to make a dent in
terrorist operations.
There actually is already an amnesty program for a group of militants in the
oil rich Niger Delta of Nigeria. However, as the article points out, the two groups
have vastly different objectives. The Niger Delta militants fight for increased
economic benefits to their region, whereas Boko Haram is waging a religious
war against the Nigerian people. Because of Boko Haram’s greater scale of
atrocities compared to the Niger Delta militants, the group’s philosophy, and its
international connections, many are doubtful that an amnesty offer will result in
the end of its armed campaign.

Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari.

Source: By U.S. Department of State [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
Not all are onboard with offering Boko Haram amnesty. Emotions run high
File:Muhammadu_Buhari_with_John_Kerry_(cropped).jpg.
when it is suggested that the perpetrators of so many heinous crimes be allowed to
walk free. Some organizations are pushing for justice for its victims, which essentially means capturing Boko Haram members, trying them,
and then if found guilty meting out an appropriate punishment. These are measures that sound reasonable and fair, but might be unrealistic in
the present environment. Despite repeated claims by the government that Boko Haram is defeated, the terrorist organization still manages to
pull-off large-scale operations, such as abducting over 100 Dapchi schoolgirls this past March, a feat reminiscent of its infamous abduction of
over 250 Chibok schoolgirls. Thus, it is a group still to be reckoned with, and any attempts at bringing them all to justice will be difficult. The
author of the article favors the amnesty offer. This reasoning could perhaps be summarized as follows: It is not a perfect solution and it might
not even be accepted, but since so many other attempts to eliminate Boko Haram have fallen short, it is perhaps worth a try. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“The announcement the other day from the presidency that Boko Haram members willing to surrender
their arms could be granted amnesty should be treated as a national security issue that should not be
politicized.”
Source: “Amnesty for Boko Haram,” The Guardian (Nigeria), 20 April 2018. http://guardian.ng/opinion/amnesty-for-boko-haram/
The announcement the other day from the presidency that Boko Haram members willing to surrender their arms could be granted amnesty
should be treated as a national security issue that should not be politicized.
It is now apparent that despite repeated claims that the insurgency had been degraded and technically defeated, the Dapchi schoolgirls’
abduction has obviously put a lie to the claim. It is obvious that government, in calling for a comprehensive amnesty for the insurgents as
the only means to end the insurgency, would seem to have accepted to widen the options. This should be supported with a caveat that the
insurgents would renounce wickedness, surrender their arms and embrace re-orientation so that Nigeria can face other development efforts.
As it was then, so it is today when most critics of the amnesty proposal for Boko Haram seem to be saying that amnesty should not be
granted, for Boko Haram’s crimes are too many. However, proponents have even dangerously sought to draw a parallel between amnesty for
Niger Delta militants and this proposal.

OE Watch | June 2018

24

AFRICA
From Students to Separatists in Cameroon
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 May the French-language website
Africa News published the accompanying excerpted article about the
lingering crisis in the Anglophone region of Cameroon. The article
exemplified how people who once lived fairly ordinary lives can, in
the heat of conflict, all of a sudden take on new, more militaristic
roles that they would have probably never imagined. The article, for
example, discusses members of a more than two decade-old student
union at the University of Buea in the core of the Anglophone region.
The students had always felt grievances because in the country’s
capital, Yaounde, English speakers were not as welcome as French
speakers, so their opportunities for advancement were limited. This
was despite the fact that Cameroon has an official quota system to
ensure there are places for Anglophones.
According to the article, when the most recent protests broke
out in 2016 and a broader violent conflict with authorities took
place, the police entered the campus and arrested people in their
homes and abused women. The separatists responded in kind with
violence against the security forces. This, according to the article,
opened a Pandora’s Box, after which the students at the university
in general began to identify themselves as separatists and they
made the university a symbol of their own fantasized state. From
an ideological perspective, the article suggests that the university
is where much of the Anglophone movement developed its new
ideas and gained momentum. In addition, a number of leaders of
the militant separatist groups that have emerged outside of the
university’s confines at one time or another passed through the
university and especially the student unions there. The article notes
that the situation in the country has calmed in recent months. Now,
however, the students at the university do not see themselves as
in a war through violence, but through acquiring knowledge that
will provide them the opportunities to achieve their political and
professional aims in the future. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

Source: “Cameroun anglophone: à Buea, une fac aux racines de la
guerre (Anglophone Cameroon: in Buea, a college at the roots of the
war),” Africa News, 6 May 2018. http://fr.africanews.com/2018/05/06/
cameroun-anglophone-a-buea-une-fac-aux-racines-de-la-guerre/
With the creation of a student union in 1995 at the University of
Buea, capital of the South West region, no one could have believed
that its founders would become leaders of the armed struggle in the
Anglophone regions of Cameroon. Leaders of the armed separatist
movement, who are fighting against the Cameroonian army, have
passed through Buea University. A professor of political science, on
condition of anonymity, listed their “problems”: the omnipresence
of Francophones in positions of responsibility, the non-respect of
a referendum of self-determination in 1961, and the contempt of
Francophones towards Anglophones. For several months, the crisis
has turned into an armed conflict in the two English-speaking regions,
with the separatists attacking the symbols of the state and even killing
members of the security forces, and the army responding with strength.
Despite a stated quota policy to avoid the marginalization of the
English-speaking minority, “Yaoundé has never really wanted English
speakers,” according to John, a masters student of political science.
Marginalization, “we see it everywhere, in every trade”. “At the
University as everywhere in Buea, many positions of responsibility are
held by Francophones, who are often members of the ruling party,”
said the professor of political science.
In 2016, new events at the university triggered the current crisis. In
late November, a peaceful march to demand the payment of a bonus
promised by President Biya and the reinstatement of a student union
banned in 2012 was violently repressed by the authorities. For the
separatists, the university has become a symbol of their fantasized
state, of which Buea would be the capital. But today, the huge campus
is quiet.

“For the separatists, the university has become a symbol of their fantasized state, of which
Buea would be the capital.”

University of Buea campus, Cameroon.

Source: User: (WT-shared) Arthur Danilov at wts wikivoyage [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:University_of_Buea_campus.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

25

LATIN AMERICA
Examining Receita Federal’s Role in the Border Security
of Brazil
OE Watch Commentary: At first glance this article from Agora Parana highlighting the civilian use of drones in the Brazilian state of Paraná
does not seem particularly notable. However Paraná sits squarely in the middle of phase one of Brazil’s multi-year effort to build a virtual fence
on its frontier. Known as SISFRON (Integrated Border Monitoring System), the project is a massive strategic effort intended to give Brazilian
security forces the necessary information to maintain control of its borders.
The drones, of which there were 19 according to the article, appear to be off the shelf technology, and will be used to detect environmental
threats—other security related applications were not discussed. However, the drones were given to local civil defense forces from Brazil’s Federal
Revenue Agency or Receita Federal, an organization with the mandate to collect tax revenue and the firepower and legitimate authority to use
force to accomplish its mission. Receita Federal can work alone or with other agencies to hunt down and prosecute tax evaders, smugglers and
traffickers. As a result, Receita Federal agents are on the front lines of Brazil’s security issues on its border.
Receita Federal has a presence all along Brazil’s vast border (it is less active in the Amazon, where the Brazilian military is the primary federal
security force on the border simply due to the massive logistical requirement that only the military can manage and cross border smuggling is
more likely to be guns and drugs) and is particularly active in the state of Paraná and the border crossing at Iguazu Falls. The Friendship Bridge
separating the Brazilian city of Iguazu Falls from Cuidad del Este in Paraguay is the central legal crossing point between the two countries.
Smuggling across the border in this region is robust. The Paraná River separating the two countries is patrolled by Brazilian Navy boats during
the daylight hours, but hostile fire from Paraguay has led to the up-armoring of the riverine boats and an almost a complete absence of Brazilian
Naval patrols during the night.
Receita Federal agents, in conjunction with the military and other agencies, operate in a border zone area many kilometers into Brazilian
territory. Helicopter surveillance is an integral part of operations to thwart illegal crossings, but Brazil’s military and security forces are always
in a budget crises and drones like the ones discussed in the article are just the kind of low cost solution the federal agencies are utilizing to
conduct operations. On any given night during operations like the annual Operation Agata, unmarked Receita Federal vehicles lay wait in
roadside pullouts, corn fields and highway intersections. Using radios and knowledge of the terrain, they track vehicles and individuals considered
suspicious in addition to conducting random searches.
As the article points out, while the drones will assist in natural disasters by providing more accurate information and therefore reducing the
response time of first responders, they will also continue to provide government services with a tactical, real time surveillance weapon in the war
against illicit activity in the state of Paraná. Giving up those 19 drones and sharing the data collection load just may make Receit Federal’s job
easier. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)
Source: “Defesa Civil usará drones para mapear áreas de risco (Civil Defense Uses Drones to Map Areas of Risk),” Agora Parana, May 17,
2018. http://agoraparana.uol.com.br/noticia/defesa-civil-usara-drones-para-mapear-areas-de-risco
…The State Coordination of Protection and Civil Defense will adopt the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA), known as drones, to map
risk areas of Paraná. There are 19 equipment donated by the Federal Revenue Service and will be for all regional coordinators in Paraná…
Using drones is more practical and cheaper than a conventional aircraft.

Receita Federal agent inspects contraband clothing confiscated at a checkpoint during Operation Agatha near Iguazu Falls in the state of Paraná.
Source: Image is a photo/screen grab from the documentary film Fronteira da Grandeza. Author’s own photo. Author grants permission by to use this photograph/screengrab

OE Watch | June 2018

26

LATIN AMERICA
The Evolution of Brazil’s Defense Industry
OE Watch Commentary: For the past two decades, Brazil has led the
way in developing an indigenous defense industry that aims to create
equipment for itself and for export. At first, Brazil began developing its
own weapons and equipment to address security concerns in the region,
but more importantly, to cut down on costs of importing equipment as
discussed in the accompanying excerpted article from La Vanguardia. In
its quest to produce its own military equipment, Brazil has proven itself
to be adept in producing high quality equipment at lower costs, which has
caught the attention of countries to include Angola, Burkina Faso, Chile,
Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Mauritania and Senegal; all of which have purchased equipment from the
South American giant.
At present, Brazil produces a wide variety of products such as the A-29
Super Tucano attack aircraft and the Engesa EE–11 Urutu, a six-wheeled
armored personnel carrier that can be outfitted for peace-keeping, civil
disturbance, and combat roles and is particularly popular in tropical
nations because of its capabilities to operate in this type of terrain. At
present, the Engesa is used in more than 20 countries.
As discussed in the accompanying excerpted article from Es Global,
part of Brazil’s success in exporting military equipment is their
willingness to accommodate the needs of their customers, the fact that
they are building equipment specifically designed for tropical climates,
and their willingness to offer off-site technical support and training.
Brazil is also willing to sell its equipment with no strings attached,
meaning it has no qualms in selling to countries that most Western
governments would not due to human rights violations or democracy
issues.
As past commentary has alluded, Brazil has plans to continue the
production of military equipment and will launch its first ever cruise
missile in 2020, which is known as the MTC-300. According to the
accompanying excerpted article from Sputnik News, this missile is
capable of acquiring targets 300km away and has a 50 meter accuracy
range. This source further indicates that the new missile is the result of 13
years of improvement and that the design is different from other missiles
for multiple reasons.
At present, there is a major international demand for this product. In
fact, a survey conducted by AVIBRAS (the company responsible for
building the missile in Brazil), countries such as Saudi Arabia, Malaysia,
Indonesia and Qatar, and three new, but unidentified interested parties
- indicated a potential business deal of between $2.5 billion and $3.5
billion, to be defined by 2025. Time will tell, but it looks like Brazil’s
new cruise missile will not only be popular domestically, but also
internationally. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Brasil reafirma apuesta por industria bélica y ofrece
financiación a países (Brazil Reaffirms its Dedication to
Military Industry and Offers Financing to Other Countries),”
La Vanguardia, 5 April 2018. http://www.lavanguardia.com/
politica/20170405/421456640547/brasil-reafirma-apuesta-porindustria-belica-y-ofrece-financiacion-a-paises.html
While most Latin American nations possess an indigenous
military production sector, none is as substantial as Brazil’s.
With [projected 2018] defense expenditures totaling $65.3 billion,
as well as many established public, private, and public-private
defense manufacturers, Brazil’s export of defense technology is
set to increase. Brazil’s National Defense Strategy also aims to
continue this production with the hopes of ruling out the need to
purchase imported defense services or equipment.
Source: “Brasil impulsa su sector armamentístico a costa de
Yemen (Brasil Grows its Military Industry through Yemen),” Es
Global, 17 September 2017. https://www.esglobal.org/brasilimpulsa-sector-armamentistico-costa-yemen/
In a complaint filed in a federal court, authorities alleged
that “Phantom Secure’s networks were specifically designed
to prevent law enforcement from intercepting and monitoring
communications on the network,” and that the company
provided services intended to aid transnational drug trafficking
organizations. The company allegedly sold Blackberry phones
that had their cameras, microphones, and standard internet and
text messaging removed. Instead, the devices came pre-loaded
with encrypted email platforms.
Source: “Míssil de cruzeiro brasileiro caminha para se tornar
operacional até 2020 (New Brazilian Cruise Missle to be Finished
by 2020),” Sputnik News, 27 March 2018. https://br.sputniknews.
com/brasil/2018032710838707-mtc-300-missil-cruzeirobrasileiro/
Brazil’s MTC-300 missile is slated to be ready by 2020. The
significance of this missile is that it is the result of 13 years of
improvement. The end result is that the new design is modern,
compact, and uses retractable wings that open after firing from
the pod carried by a carriage. The acceleration engine uses solid
fuel and is only activated at launch. So far, 16 test flights have
been carried out. There are at least four more in the scheduling
phase before the start of pre-series production.

“With [projected 2018] defense expenditures totaling $65.3 billion, as well as many established public,
private, and public-private defense manufacturers, Brazil’s export of defense technology is set to
increase.”

OE Watch | June 2018

27

LATIN AMERICA
How the Fragmentation of Drug Cartels Drives Violence
in Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: The Mexican government’s
campaign against transnational organized criminal groups,
conducted with particular intensity during the governments of
Felipe Calderón and Enrique Peña Nieto and with the active
participation of the Mexican Army and Navy, has followed
a consistent strategy. This strategy has consisted of drug
interdiction, arrests of high profile traffickers, the dismantling
of organizational structures, and the targeting of corrupt
government officials. What was never anticipated is that
this strategy would produce the undesirable side effect of
fragmenting large cartels into much smaller groups, which in
turn has exacerbated violence and crime in Mexico. This idea
is highlighted in the accompanying excerpted article from
Insight Crime and discusses how Los Zetas, one of Mexico’s
notorious criminal groups, is today nothing more than multiple
smaller groups that fight each other and rivals. Although this
source only mentions Los Zetas, fragmentation is occurring in
criminal organizations throughout Mexico.
The fragmentation of Mexico’s criminal landscape drives
violence in multiple ways. The replacement of larger groups
with a greater number of smaller ones creates incentives for
gangs to fight for territory, key drug routes, “plazas” (strategic
geographies along those routes) and any other realm in which
they can conduct criminal activity. The fragmentation also
creates an atmosphere of uncertainty in which new leaders are
often less experienced and more disposed to prove themselves
or gain attention by committing murders in a particularly
gruesome fashion, and in record numbers, as discussed in the
accompanying excerpted article from El Sol de Mexico. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The Zetas and the Gulf Cartel once worked side by
side. However, after The Gulf Cartel killed an important
Los Zetas leader (known as Lazcano), the group
gradually separated as their leadership structure was
significantly impacted.”
Source: “Los Zetas: De poderoso cartel de México a agrupación fragmentada
(Mexico’s Zetas: From Criminal Powerhouse to Fragmented Remnants),”
Insight Crime, 10 April 2018. https://es.insightcrime.org/noticias/analisis/loszetas-de-poderoso-cartel-de-mexico-a-agrupacion-fragmentada/
The Zetas and the Gulf Cartel once worked side by side. However, after The
Gulf Cartel killed an important Los Zetas leader (known as Lazcano), the
group gradually separated as their leadership structure was significantly
impacted. In the months and years following his death, the group continued
to fragment and is now a shadow of its former self. When these things happen
you see a lot of instability and a desire from others to take these leadership
roles.
Source: “Homicidios en México se disparan en primer trimestre de 2018
con 7 mil 667 casos (Homicides in Mexico Skyrocket during First Trimester
of 2018 with 7,667 Cases),” El Sol de Mexico, 22 April 2018. https://www.
elsoldemexico.com.mx/mexico/justicia/homicidios-en-mexico-se-disparan-enprimer-trimestre-de-2018-con-7-mil-667-casos-1632927.html
Violence by drug cartels, which has materialized into increasingly horrifying
acts against rival factions, civilians and journalists has intensified in recent
years. This idea is not only indicated by heinous violence, but also by the fact
that during the first trimester of 2018, 20% more deaths were reported than in
the previous year. This source cites the fragmentation of cartels as one of the
main reasons of increased violence in the country.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | June 2018

28

LATIN AMERICA
Three In One FARC
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpted reference from Kienyke points out how recent
events, including recent indictments of FARC leaders
on drug charges, show that the FARC has not stopped or
slowed its drug enterprise. The article asserts that there
are three FARC: the FARC political party, the FARC in
the field that is disingenuously called “dissident,” and the
FARC that is camouflaged within the ELN. Together they
are, according to the author, in a single drug trafficking
enterprise under the same hierarchy. The article is highly
critical of the recent FARC-Government accords, pointing
out that they not only did not reduce drug trafficking,
they have increased it, in part because the accord
lends impunity by conflating drug trafficking crimes
with political crimes. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: Diego Molano, “Un solo narcotráfico con tres Farc (A single drugtraffic
with three FARC),” Kienyke, 18 April 2018. https://www.kienyke.com/kienescribe/un-solo-narcotrafico-con-tres-farc-opinion-de-diego-molano
“With the capture last week of Jesus Santrich, accused of drug trafficking,
it became evident that the Peace Accord left the country with a single narcotrafficking business and three FARC. One FARC as a political party, which
has not abandoned the business…Another FARC as dissidents that continue
to manage all the cultivations, routes and attack the population. And another
that camouflages itself within the ELN in order to continue with the business….
Everything began badly with the Accord negotiations because the FARC never
admitted that it managed any narco-trafficking, [while] being one of the largest
cartels in the world….The reality is overwhelming, neither before nor during nor
after the negotiations of the Peace Accord has the FARC left the drug trafficking
business…”

“…the FARC never admitted that it managed any narco-trafficking…”

Coca Plants Growing in Colombia.

Source: By Hoyosmunosyolanda, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cultivos_de_la_planta_de_coca_al_fondo_un_bosque_premontano.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

29

LATIN AMERICA
Colombian Military in Disarray?
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpted reference from Periodico Debate is a brief
opinion piece lamenting what its author claims is low
morale and diminished readiness of the Colombian
armed forces. It references a recent article in the
pro-administration daily newspaper El Tiempo
(see accompanying reference), pointing out that the
country is at war in four theatres, each along the
country’s international borders, and that the warfare
is directly related to increased drug trafficking. In
part of that El Tiempo piece, the Commander of the
Armed Forces, General Mejía, is directly quoted.
He presents a decidedly more optimistic perspective
than the author of the first reference. General Mejía
notes how much better it is that the war zones are
at the borders, and not around Bogotá, as they had
been. Still, the unchallenged observation that the
country is supporting four war zones does little for
the notion of a “postconflict” Colombia. There is also
no disagreement that the profits of drug trafficking
are a key fuel. There might be some good news we
can interpret from the El Tiempo piece, however. A
number of new, named guerrilla criminal or hybrid
organizations have appeared on the scene, but perhaps
that bespeaks the breaking up, or maybe intramural
conflict among, illegal actors. These divisions may
weigh to the advantage of government forces. Also,
the El Tiempo article reports on a major, joint military
operation involving Colombian and Ecuadoran
soldiers. Maybe this fact hints to a potential
realignment of the Ecuadoran government away
from the Bolivarians. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: John Marulanda, “Colombia: Herencia de guerra y moral de combate
(Colombia: A heritage of war and will to fight),” Periodico Debate, 3 May 2018.
http://periodicodebate.com/index.php/opinion/columnistas-nacionales/item/18946herencia-de-guerra-y-moral-de-combate
“From the Santos administration we have inherited a disastrous Public Security…A
pro-administration daily recognizes that currently there exist four war fronts in
the country: Nariño (border with Ecuador), Catatumbo (border with Venezuela),
Guaviare (border with Venezuela y Brasil) y Bajo Cauca antioqueño (border
with Panamá)….These four theaters of operation will not abate as long as illicit
cultivations and production of cocaine continues to feed the powerful network of
international organized crime…this government will turn over a weakened public
force, with its moral fiber roused to the level of mutiny, which will bring disastrous
consequences unless drastic measures are taken….”
Source: Investigative Unit, “Estos son los cuatro frentes de guerra que tiene abiertos
el país (These are the four war fronts that the country has open),” El Tiempo, 29
April 2018. http://www.eltiempo.com/justicia/conflicto-y-narcotrafico/los-frentes-deguerra-que-tiene-abiertos-colombia-211206
“…taking advantage of the cocaine bonanza, those organizations [a new variety
of illegal groups] have expanded to Guaviare, Meta, Nariño and North Santander.
In fact, the effects are being felt in Medellín, where this week Comuna 13 was
militarized…The war just won’t give up and go away, since the exit of the FARC has
impelled the entry of other illegal armed actors…that try to impose their conditions
by blood and fire…But General Alberto Mejía, Commander of the Armed Forces,
assured the Senate that things have changed. ‘Fifteen years ago we had 22 FARC
fronts around Bogotá. Today we have expelled the enemy, by blood and fire, to that
periphery: to the Catatumbo, to Nariño, to Chocó, to the jungles of Guaviare and
the Guinía [sic]”…For now, 11,000 uniformed Colombians of Operation Atlas are
pursuing him [Guacho, an emerging drug lord] together with 10,000 Ecuadoran
soldiers. Also they are after the ‘United Pacific Guerrillas’ and the ‘Campesino
Resistance’.”

“…this government will turn over a weakened public force…”

Members of the Colombian Compañía Jungla Antinarcóticos participate in “Glass House Drills” on Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., Nov. 20, 2015.
Source: U.S. Army photo by Maj. Thomas Cieslak, https://www.defense.gov/Photos/Photo-Gallery/igphoto/2001321678/, Public Domain.

OE Watch | June 2018

30

LATIN AMERICA
ELN Flexing
OE Watch Commentary: The Colombian ELN,
according to the accompanying excerpted reference from
Panam Post, is responsible for the mass murder of gold
miners at various informal mining sites in Bolivar State,
Venezuela (in Roscio Municipio, apparently). The article
notes that the mining sites are perpetually the venue of
inter-gang and guerrilla rivalries. Not asked in the article
is where the ELN unit came from. Bolivar State is in the
southeast of the country. ELN elements are commonly
reported in Maracaibo or Zulia states in the west, and
occasionally, as reported by El Tiempo in a short video
posted on its YouTube channel, Apure State to the south. To
be reported in force in eastern Bolivar State, however, is
to suggest the ELN has grown in its ability to reach away
from its base areas deep into Venezuela. That brings up
another question not asked in the Panam Post article: Who
ordered the unit’s presence in Bolivar and where does that
more senior commander reside? It seems unlikely that
the immediate chieftain of the ELN unit responsible for
the killing decided on his own to pack up and go out to
eastern Venezuela to do some work. Also, against what
group did the ELN decide to present an example, or to
simply wipe out? The article is clear that Venezuelan
military units are always complicit, so it may be that
the ELN presence is another indicator that the ELN
command structure is being allowed or told to assume
some territorial responsibilities that belonged formerly to
the FARC or to some other Bolivarian-associated gang.
The accompanying excerpted article from Radio Santafé
seems also to present evidence of an increased ELN
profile within the Bolivarian structure of armed elements.
A number of ex- or demobilized FARC members have
been killed since the signing of the FARC-Santos
Administration power sharing agreement. The article
does not make the motives of the killings clear, but in
any case, according to the article, Colombia’s Attorney
General claims that a number of cases have been solved
and that the ELN is directly responsible for several of
them. The accompanying excerpted reference from a
leading weekly magazine, Semana, highlights the ELN
as an enemy of Colombia, describes its counter-economy
strategic extortion attacks into Colombia, its basing
in Venezuela, and its organizational positioning as a
significant Bolivarian ally. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…ELN is responsible for the murders
of four ex-members of the FARC…”

Map of Roscio District, Bolívar (Venezuela).

Source: Par Shadowxfox, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Venezuela_-_Bol%C3%ADvar_-_Roscio.svg.

Source: Sabrina Martín, “Culpan al ELN por masacre de 20 mineros en Venezuela
(ELN blamed for the massacre of 20 miners in Venezuela),” Panam Post, 10
May 2018. https://es.panampost.com/sabrina-martin/2018/05/10/venezuela-elnmineria-asesinato-estado-bolivar/
“A new massacre occurred in Venezuela, 20 persons were murdered in Bolivar,
the mining state in the south of the country, and this time all indications are
that the responsible is the Colombian guerrilla the Army of National Liberation
(ELN)….Following the collapse of oil production, {Bolivar State] has turned
into the scene of massacres perpetrated by guerrillas and gangs that try to make
themselves the owners of Venezuelan gold….Ebus [Bram Ebus, Dutch journalist]
explains that the Venezuelan military is clandestinely involved in the illegal gold
industry, supporting the gangs in exchange for part of the earnings….”
Source: El Tiempo, “Campamentos del ELN en Venezuela (Encampments of
the ELN in Venezuela),” YouTube, 10 May 2018. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=hIm4U_IMQi8
“…According to the testimony, the encampment was in Venezuela. This is not
new. It is known that alias ‘Pablito’ chief of the Guerra Oriental front, has been
harbored for more than five years in Apure State…”
Source: Ariel Cabrera, “Eln y clan del golfo detrás de asesinatos de exintegrantes
de las Farc: Fiscalía (ELN and gulf cartel are behind the murders of ex-members
of the FARC: Attorney General),” Radio Santafé, 9 May 2018. http://www.
radiosantafe.com/2018/05/09/eln-y-clan-del-golfo-detras-de-asesinatos-deexintegrantes-de-las-farc/
“The Attorney General of the Nation affirmed that and evidence collected have
indicated that the ELN is responsible for the murders of four ex-members of the
FARC…Only one of the cases [out of 22] did not have connection with armed
groups….”

Source: Editors, “ELN, el nuevo enemigo (ELN, the new enemy),” Semana, 17 February 2018. https://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/elnen-venezuela-el-nuevo-enemigo/557445
“…The presence of the ELN in Venezuela is seen extending itself beyond the borderlines of Arauca, North Santander and La Guajira…There
was a time when the most sought members of the FARC walked around calmly in the Fort Tiuna installations, the most important military
complex in Venezuela, headquarters of the Defense Ministry and General Command of the Army and National Guard. The phenomenon
today is similar, but with the ELN as protagonist…”
OE Watch | June 2018

31

LATIN AMERICA
About Catatumbo
OE Watch Commentary: Several past OE Watch
articles have highlighted conflict in the Catatumbo area
of Colombia (see: “Spatial Coincidence and Colombia’s
War,” August 2013 p. 22; “Colombian-Venezuelan Border
Continues to Simmer,” December 2014, p. 21; and “The
Colombian-Venezuelan Border,” August 2015, p. 32).
The Catatumbo is natural smuggling geography with
rugged terrain, illegal mining, coca fields, oil pipelines
and an international border with a country where gasoline
can be bought for less than a tenth of what it can be
sold for in Colombia. That country, Venezuela, is also a
major continental embarkation country for illicit drugs
and minerals. This suitability for smugglers, combined
with a less-than-peaceful geostrategic environment, has
resulted in the Catatumbo being for decades the venue
of organized violence, even including numerous major
massacre events. La Gabarra, for instance, located near
where the Gold River, Catatumbo River and Venezuelan
border meet, has been the scene of multiple mass murders
over the years. The agreement reached between the
FARC and the government administration of President
Santos has apparently not brought greater peace to the
region. Now the federal government is sending in a large
contingent of soldiers, as reported in the accompanying
excerpted article from Radio La FM, but doing so under
a “state of emergency” decree. This has caused a wave
of criticism, as expressed in the excerpted accompanying
reference from Periodico Debate, because the decree
does not give much authority to military personnel for the
use of force, but only addresses economic suffering and
humanitarian aid activity. This, according to the critics,
places the military contingents in a difficult legal and
professional position, considering that the reasons for
the region’s suffering appears to be directly associated
with illegal activities by armed organizations that the
police are insufficiently equipped to handle. Part of the
accusation, exemplified by the Periodico Debate article,
is that the government orders play into the left’s use of
lawfare against the armed forces. Another criticism, as
expressed in the reference from Contexto Ganadero, is
that the government is trying to paint over the situation
for political reasons. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…down the road they can be prosecuted and convicted for
excessive use of force…”
Source: Radio La FM, “Dos mil uniformados más de la Fuerza Pública llegan al
Catatumbo a afrontar la crisis (Two thousand more uniformed personnel of the
Public Force arrive in Catatumbo to confront the crisis),” Radio La FM, Bogotá,
22 April 2018, https://www.lafm.com.co/orden-publico/dos-mil-uniformadosmas-de-la-fuerza-publica-llegan-al-catatumbo-afrontar-la-crisis/
“This new contingent will join the more than eight thousand uniformed personnel
that are found in the region. The order of President Juan Manuel Santos was
to reinforce security and [government] presence in the Catatumbo, in view
of constant confrontations between illegal armed groups that commit crimes
there; ELN and EPL.…According to… [The Electoral Observation Mission],
the Catatumbo is a territory with illicit economies, without the presence of the
State, with threatened social leaders and a limited citizen participation. ‘There,
illegality imposes itself over democracy. State presence is urgent.’.”
Source: Rafael Arturo Plazas Vega, “La situación en el Catatumbo. ¿Legalidad
en las Operaciones Militares? (The situation in Catatumbo. Legality of Military
Operations?),” Periodico Debate, 24 April 2018. www.periodicodebate.com/
index.php/nacion/politica/item/18833-cnews
“A great deal of worry and uncertainty is being generated in the affected
population because with these measures only temporary economic actions can
be applied in order to overcome the ‘humanitarian crisis’ which is also likely
to manifest itself in the military ranks given that down the road they can be
prosecuted and convicted for excessive use of force if they act against those
criminals who, according to the applicable regulations, can only be confronted
by Police authorities…It is quite possible that there they are weaving a new trap
against the Armed Forces when Minister of Defense orders are published that they
should operate knowing he has no authority nor operational responsibility over
the same….”
Source: José Félix Lafaurie Rivera, “Colombia: Fronteras incendiadas
(Colombia: Borders aflame),” Contexto Ganadero, 20 April 2018. http://www.
contextoganadero.com/columna/fronteras-incendiadas
“In view of the EPL’s armed strike and its fight to the death with the ELN for
control of drug trafficking in the Catatumbo, Norte de Santander, bordering on
Venezuela, the affable Minister of Defense dares to report of peace in the midst
of a heartbreaking atmosphere in which one can feel the terror of the people, and
even goes on to express his surprise at the decision of the Department to suspend
classes in the zone’s high schools.…”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

OE Watch | June 2018

32

LATIN AMERICA
Bolivarian Oil
OE Watch Commentary: The regime in Caracas held a presidential
election-like event on Sunday, May 20th. (see: “Venezuelan Elections
Worth Anything?,” OE Watch, May 2018). The date chosen is Cuban
Independence Day, which might be a coincidence. In any case, the
accompanying excerpted reference from Revista Inteligencia Petrolera
highlights the relationship between the rulers in Caracas and the Cuban
regime. The government oil company in Venezuela, PDVSA, is buying
oil on the international market and selling it to the Cubans. According
to the article, the deliveries don’t go to Venezuela and are probably paid
for in kind rather than in currency. It may be that some of the accounting
may be worked through the new Petro cryptocurrency system (see
“Venezuela’s New Crypto-Oil Money,” OE Watch, January 2018). The
accompanying reference does note that domestic production in Venezuela
has reached a 33-year low, a 28 percent decrease in 12 months. Also, the
Cuban regime is not the only beneficiary of the subsidies. Governments
in several other small countries in Central America and the Caribbean
are beneficiaries, as the reference notes. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

Source: Marianna Párraga and Jeanne Liendo, “Venezuela compra
petróleo extranjero para subsidiar a Cuba (Venezuela buys foreign
to subsidize Cuba),” Revista Inteligencia Petrolera, 16 May 2018.
http://inteligenciapetrolera.com.co/inicio/medio-crisis-internavenezuela-compra-petroleo-extranjero-subsidiar-cuba-mariannaparraga-jeanne-liendo/
“The purchases happen as the production of Venezuelan crude
touches a 33 year minimum in the first trimester, a decrease of
28% in 12 months. The refineries of the nation operate in this
lapse at a third of their capacity and the workers have quit by
the thousands in recent months…The subsidized deliveries seek
to maintain the political support of Cuba, part of the waning
group of Venezuelan allies, according to diplomats, politicians
and executives at PDVSA…‘Our country is very thankful…the
government of El Salvador of course is a friend and ally of the
government of Venezuela.’”

“The subsidized deliveries seek to maintain the political support of Cuba,
part of the waning group of Venezuelan allies...”

An Oil Refinery near Havana.

Source: By Marcel601, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Oil-refinery-cuba-1.jpg.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | June 2018

33

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela as a Major Topic of Discussion at VIII
Summit of the Americas Despite Its Absence
OE Watch Commentary: On 13 April leaders
from across the Western Hemisphere came together
in Lima, Peru for the VIII Summit of the Americas,
but Venezuela’s absence was obvious. Peru withdrew
Venezuela’s invitation to the summit, an act supported
by 12 of the 14 participating nations. These same
countries are currently pushing for a return to
democracy in the country, with only Cuba and
Bolivia opposing the decision, as discussed in the
accompanying excerpted article from El Nacional.
However, as demonstrated in the accompanying
excerpted article from La Vanguardia, even without
an official representative present at the event, and with
the Summit’s official agenda centered on joint efforts
to combat corruption, the most important talks took
place in private meetings during which the crisis in
Venezuela was a topic of interest to all parties present.
The topic is so important that 15 countries have
already signed statements indicating that they will not
recognize the results of Venezuelan President Nicolás
Maduro’s elections on 20 May.
Addressing the crisis in Venezuela, and taking a
strong stance against the Maduro regime’s violation
of its own constitution and democratic norms,
are of true importance in the region for multiple
reasons. First, the Venezuelan humanitarian crisis
has become a destabilizing force in Central America
and the Caribbean. However, as discussed in the
accompanying excerpted article from Notimex,
Colombia and Brazil are the countries bearing the
brunt of the issue as thousands of Venezuelan citizens
flee the country into the aforementioned locations
to look for food, work, medicine and other basic
necessities on a daily basis. This has been occurring
since early 2017.
In closing, a number of articles report that the VIII
Summit of the Americas was a success, but lament
that the focus on Venezuela shifted focus from a
major problem in the region, which is corruption.
This idea is presented in the accompanying excerpted
article from El Nacional, which discusses how
the Peruvian President could not even attend the
entire summit as he was required to attend hearings
regarding his involvement with the Obredecht
construction bribery scheme that has rocked
the region over recent months. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“Many countries have already signed statements indicating
that they will not recognize the results of Venezuelan President
Nicolás Maduro’s elections on May 20th.”
Source: “La Cumbre de las Américas excluye a Venezuela tras incorporar a Cuba
(Summit of the Americas Excludes Venezuela, and Invites Cuba),” El Nacional, 17
February, 2018. http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/mundo/cumbre-las-americasexcluye-venezuela-tras-incorporar-cuba_223500
A bloc of nations that amounts to more than 90 percent of the population in the
Americas decided to exclude Venezuela (for the first time in history) from the VIII
Summit of the Americas; a meeting that gathers Heads of State from Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, and the United States; amongst others. All of these countries, with
the exception of Bolivia and Cuba, are pushing for a return to democracy in the
region.
Source: “La Cumbre de las Américas refuerza el aislamiento de Venezuela (The
Summit of the Americas Reinforces the Isolation of Venezuela),” La Vanguardia, 14
April, 2018. http://www.lavanguardia.com/internacional/20180414/442569215635/
cumbre-de-las-americas-aislamiento-venezuela.html
Many conversations held behind closed doors by key leaders present at the VIII
Summit of the Americas concerned Venezuela and the Maduro regime. Of significant
importance is that many countries have already signed statements indicating that they
will not recognize the results of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro’s elections on
May 20th.
Source: “Aseguran que crisis humanitaria en Venezuela afecta a países vecinos
(Humanitarian Crisis in Venezuela Affects Nighboring Countries),” Notimex, 18
April, 2017. https://www.20minutos.com.mx/noticia/210721/0/aseguran-que-crisishumanitaria-en-venezuela-afecta-a-paises-vecinos/
The Human Rights Watch (HRW) is reporting mass migration from Venezuela to
both Colombia and Brazil as citizens lack basic necessities such as food, medicine,
shelter and medical care. This migration in turn is putting added stress on the
aforementioned countries as they lack the resources to deal with the situation which
has been ongoing since early 2017.
Source: “Congreso de Perú aprueba la renuncia del president Kuczynski (Congress of
Peru Approves Resignation of President Kuczynski),” El Nacional, 23 March, 2018.
http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/bbc-mundo/congreso-peru-aprueba-renuncia-delpresidente-kuczynski_228085
On Friday, the Peruvian Congress approved the resignation of President Pedro
Pablo Kuczynski. This decision was reported during the second week of March
during a Congressional hearing that touched on subjects including vote-buying
and corruption. In closing, the votes were reported as follows: 105 approved the
resignation, 11 were against, and 4 were abstentious.

OE Watch | June 2018

34

LATIN AMERICA
Nicaragua’s Turn
OE Watch Commentary: Nicaragua is apparently beginning to suffer violent internal stress. It is one of the five most prominent members of
the Bolivarian Alliance along with Cuba, Ecuador, Bolivia and Venezuela. The Nicaraguan government and much of the economy having fallen
under the control of what Daniel Ortega turned into a family dynasty. Given what is happening in Venezuela, the uprising there has apparently
come as no surprise to the analysts in the accompanying excerpted articles. Ortega’s Sandinista party shared the iconography and rhetoric of the
Marxist-Leninist grouping of political parties identified within the hemisphere’s Forum of Sao Paulo. The Sandinistas also adopted the pragmatic
gangster capitalism common to the Bolivarian partner parties, especially the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV). The dismal prospects
in Venezuela may be one factor, at least psychologically, behind the unrest in Nicaragua. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Ian Vásquez, “Nicaragua,”
Frente Patriótico, 3 May 2018.
http://www.frentepatriotico.com/
inicio/2018/05/03/63653/
“Now it is Nicaragua’s turn. There have
already been 42 deaths in the popular
protests against the regime of Daniel
Ortega….Ortega was democratically
elected. As son as he got to power in 2007
he allied Nicaragua to the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples of America
(ALBA) and exercised a populist rhetoric
and style. He criticized capitalism
and Yankee imperialism….The Ortega
family controls large businesses in the
country and Ortega put his wife in as vice
president….”

Source: “Gobierno de Nicaragua acepta dialogar
tras violencia que causó 10 muertos (Government of
Nicaragua accepts dialogue after violence causes 10
deaths),” Radio La FM, 21 April 2018. https://www.
lafm.com.co/internacional/gobierno-de-nicaraguaacepta-dialogar-tras-violencia-que-causo-10muertos/

Source: EFE, “Daniel Ortega pidió un
alto a la violencia en Nicaragua (Daniel
Ortega asked for a stop to the violence
in Nicaragua),” El Nacional, 13 May
2018. http://www.el-nacional.com/
noticias/latinoamerica/daniel-ortegapidio-alto-violencia-nicaragua_234915

“The citizen protest against the new social
security measures have left 10 dead and dozens
wounded. The Government of Nicaragua agreed to
return to dialog with the private sector to discuss
the new measures…Although the social security
reforms served as the triggering mechanism for the
demonstrations, a rebellious atmosphere against the
Ortega government was already notable since the
final months of last year…”

“Daniel Ortega, President of
Nicaragua, asked the deaths generated
by protests in the Central American
country cease…This Saturday
Nicaragua completed 25 days of
protests for and against Ortega, which
began as a rejection of the social
security reforms and continued due to
the fatality victims of the repression.”

“…Now it is Nicaragua’s turn…”

2017 Countries Recognizing the Pro-Maduro Constituent Assembly in Venezuela. Conspicuously, these are the ALBA governments, among them Nicaragua’s.
Source: By JayCoop, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2017_Constituent_Assembly_of_Venezuela_recognition_map.svg.

OE Watch | June 2018

35

INDO-PACIFIC
Singapore’s Anti-Terror Maritime Methods
OE Watch Commentary: On 19 April Singapore’s The Straits Times, in the
accompanying excerpted article, profiled some of the methods of the country’s
anti-terror maritime forces. Their training is focused especially for close combat
and they carry, among other items, a semi-automatic weapon, a pistol, a baton and
pepper spray. They decide whether to board a ship based on a number factors, such
as the ship’s cargo, crew and its previous port of call. In addition, tankers carrying
oil, chemicals and gas tend to be subject to closer scrutiny because of the sensitivity
of their content. However, they also randomize their inspections of ships to prevent
against them becoming too predictable.
Each inspection lasts from two to six hours. One of the largest barriers that the
anti-terror maritime forces encounter is, in fact, fairly basic: language. Often the
forces need to use what they call a form of sign language with the ship captains.
As the size of the force is only 50 members, they can only conduct around 600
inspections per year, or about two per day.
According to the data in the article, there were 101 incidents in the Straits of
Malacca and the South China Sea in 2017, which was an uptick of 16 percent from
the year before. The stakes are high, according to the article, as any incident can
undermine confidence in maritime trade and have an impact on the country’s and
the region’s economy. For a country like Singapore that has few natural resources,
the uninterrupted flow of capital is crucial and the anti-terror maritime force plays
an important role, notwithstanding that its force size is still relatively small. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“When we are on board ships, we have nowhere to run and
we have to defend ourselves before reinforcements arrive.”

Source: “Singapore Navy’s 180 Squadron keeps
maritime terror at bay,” The Straits Times, 19 April
2018. https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/navys180-squadron-keeps-maritime-terror-at-bay
They are the foot soldiers of Singapore’s efforts to keep
its waters safe, boarding ships in small teams to check
that they have not been seized by pirates or terrorists,
for example. In their full gear, the sea marshals of the
Navy’s 180 Squadron are “armed to the teeth”, said the
squadron’s commanding officer…When we are on board
ships, we have nowhere to run and we have to defend
ourselves before reinforcements arrive…
Last year, the squadron, which has a strength of about
50 people, conducted 585 checks on vessels that entered
Singapore’s waters. The Maritime Security Taskforce,
which coordinates security operations at sea, would
first identify which vessels need to be checked. This is
based on factors such as the vessel’s cargo, crew and
its last port of call. For example, tankers carrying oil,
chemicals and gas may be subject to closer scrutiny.
Data from a regional cooperation effort to fight piracy
showed that there were 101 armed robbery and piracy
incidents last year in the region, including the Straits
of Malacca and the South China Sea. It is a 16 per cent
increase from 2016.

Strait of Malacca Singapur Singapore Luftbild aerial.

Source: By dronepicr (Strait of Malacca) [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Strait_of_Malacca_(36759635615).jpg.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | June 2018

36

INDO-PACIFIC
The Modernization of Malaysia’s Armed Forces
is Underway
OE Watch Commentary: Malaysia’s military has recently
been undergoing a push to modernize its equipment. The
accompanying articles, both published in China Press, offer
some of the details of the country’s modernization efforts.
Both articles indicate that the Royal Malaysian Navy (RMN)
is planning to undergo a massive transformation program,
consolidating and replacing its aging 15 classes of ships
into five upgraded ones. Littoral Combat Ships (LCS) and a
second batch of New-Generation Patrol Vessels (NGPV) will
form the core of Malaysia’s naval fleets in the future. They
will be supplemented by submarines, Multi-Role Support
Ships (MRSS), and Littoral Mission Ships (LMS). The RMN
also plans to purchase new aircraft-based helicopters for the
navy’s air wing to support the combat missions of the force’s
surface vessels.

Source: Qiu Ren Jie, “司令：提升航空兵戰力 擬購直升機支援海軍
(Navy Chief: Boosting Combat Capabilities of Navy’s Air Wing; Plans to
Buy Helicopters to Support Navy),” China Press, 26 April 2018. http://www.
chinapress.com.my/20180426/%E5%8F%B8%E4%BB%A4%EF%BC%9A%E
6%8F%90%E5%8D%87%E8%88%AA%E7%A9%BA%E5%85%B5%E6%88
%B0%E5%8A%9B-%E6%93%AC%E8%B3%BC%E7%9B%B4%E5%8D%8
7%E6%A9%9F%E6%94%AF%E6%8F%B4%E6%B5%B7%E8%BB%8D/

In phase one of the RMN’s transformation program, which
is expected to take place from 2021 through 2030, it plans to
build another 14 LMSs and six patrol ships and acquire two
new MRSSs. These new MRSS’s will replace an aging fleet
of Multi-Purpose Common Support Ships (MPCSS) and will
be equipped to carry out humanitarian aid missions.

He pointed out that the effects of the RMN Transformation program that has
been implemented since 2015 have been seen. The transformation program
has gotten the government’s approval. It is now going on a solid track, and the
government has thrown positive support behind the program

DRB-HICOM Defence Technologies Pte Ltd (DefTech)
is a Malaysian company that manufactures military and
commercial vehicles, equipment, and spare parts for
domestic use and export. Among other things, one article
reports how DefTech is expected to work with Turkish
Aerospace Industries Incorporation (TAI) to promote
ANKA reconnaissance and surveillance unmanned aerial
vehicles and the T-129 attack helicopter to the Malaysian Air
Force.
The article also mentions that Malaysia reportedly struck
a deal to import 18 units of a new variant of the Frenchproduced LG1 105mm howitzer during the recent Defense
Services Asia Exhibition. The LG1 105mm howitzer has
a firing range of 10.5 miles and is ideal for use by rapid
deployment units. It can be towed by a military vehicle or
transported by air. The first six LG1 howitzers are scheduled
to be delivered in 2019 and the last in February 2020. End
OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The (military) transformation program has
gotten the government’s approval. It is now
going on a solid track, and the government
has thrown positive support behind the
program.”

In addition to implementing the navy’s transformation program, the Royal
Malaysian Navy (RMN) also plans to boost the combat capabilities of its air
wing. RMN plans to buy new aircraft-based helicopters for the navy’s air wing
to support combat missions of the force’s surface vessels.
RMN Chief Admiral Ahmad Kamarulzaman Ahmad Badaruddin stated that
the navy has made their plan to enhance the combat capabilities of the navy’s
air wing so that the navy can handle routine and non-routine tasks in a more
efficient manner.

He said that RMN plans to acquire two new multi role support ships (MRSS)
under the first phase of the transformation program (2021 - 2030). At the same
time, RMN will also build another 14 LMSs and 6 patrol ships. According to
him, the LCSs and LMSs under construction are being built as scheduled. RMN
will start to receive these new military vessels from 2020 to 2023.
Source: Qiu Ren Jie, “DEFTECH生產具出口能力 裝甲車沙地測試|中
國報 (DefTech’s Products Have Export Potential, Armored Car Tested in
Saudi Arabia),” China Press, 21 April 2018. http://www.chinapress.com.
my/20180421/deftech%E7%94%9F%E7%94%A2%E5%85%B7%E5%87%B
A%E5%8F%A3%E8%83%BD%E5%8A%9B-%E8%A3%9D%E7%94%B2%
E8%BB%8A%E6%B2%99%E5%9C%B0%E6%B8%AC%E8%A9%A6/
TNI [Indonesian Defense Forces] Chief Air Marshall Hadi Tjahjanto will
deploy around two thousand troops from Java to the Natuna area, Riau Islands
Province. The deployment is meant to fill positions in the facilities that have
been built there.
“The deployment of personnel and combat troops is part of the command
and control transfer,” the TNI Chief said after visiting Sekatung Island and
a number of military facilities that are under construction in Natuna Islands,
Monday (23 Apr).
“The troops range from those of Army field artillery batteries, radar units to
the Marine Corps,” Tjahjanto said.
At the same occasion, DPR [People’s Representatives Council] Speaker
Bambang Soesatyo reaffirmed that the construction of a military and defense
base in the Natuna area, Riau Islands, must be reinforced to safeguards the
integrity of the Unitary Republic of Indonesia (NKR) from foreign intervention.
According to Soesatyo, the Natuna area, which is near the South China Sea
(SCS), had been targeted by the United States and China, which want to control
the SCS, so reinforcement to the national defense was needed in the Natuna
area.

OE Watch | June 2018

37

INDO-PACIFIC
India Looks at China’s Expansion in the Indian Ocean
OE Watch Commentary: India continues to carefully monitor
the Chinese People’s Liberation Army’s (PLA) growing role in
the Indian Ocean. The accompanying excerpted article from the
Hindustan Times discuss some of India’s concerns. According to
Navy Chief Admiral Sunil Lanba, India’s senior most military
commander, China has “deeper pockets” than India and is
systematically increasing its presence and investments in the
region. Lanba drives home the concept of smaller countries
becoming “debt-dependent,” in which they end up giving “control
of territories, which are of strategic significance, to China.” These
countries include Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Pakistan, and Djibouti,
where China has built its first military base allowing it to sustain
its naval units in the Indian Ocean. In order to try to counter the
growing military might of the PLA Navy, according to Sudarshan
Shrikhande, a retired rear admiral, “India would have to do a lot
more to sharpen its naval edge. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

“At any given time, they (China) have six to
seven warships deployed in the region. Also, they
send two conventional submarines to the area
every year.”

Source: Rahul Singh, “China here to Stay in Indian Ocean, Keeping
Eye: Navy Chief,” Hindustan Times, 7 May 2018. https://www.
hindustantimes.com/india-news/china-here-to-stay-in-indian-ocean-itsmilitary-movement-cause-for-concern-navy-chief-sunil-lanba/story9lXNkSBEhTOetMPEx3qZ8I.html
Navy chief Admiral Sunil Lanba said the Navy is keeping a sharp eye
on “the pattern and periodicity of extra-regional deployments” in the
Indian Ocean Region. A fleet of 50 combat-ready Indian warships is
carrying out round-the-clock surveillance, he said. “Their (PLAN)
headquarters is now used to handling forward deployments.
The navy chief said China had “deeper pockets” than India and it was
“going about systematically” increasing its presence and investments in
the region. “There is a degree of debt-dependence of countries such as
Djibouti on China,” Lanba said.
Mounting debts have led countries such as Sri Lanka, the Maldives
and Pakistan to give control of territories, which are of strategic
significance, to China.
The base in Djibouti has shored up China’s capabilities to sustain naval
units in the Indian Ocean.
Lanba said the pattern of deployment of Chinese warships in the IOR
was being mapped. “At any given time, they (China) have six to seven
warships deployed in the region. Also, they send two conventional
submarines to the area every year.

Gwadar Port: In late 2015, the port was officially leased to China for 43 years, until 2059.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gwadar_Port.jpg , CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | June 2018

38

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia Steps up Military Presence in the Natuna Islands
OE Watch Commentary: Indonesia is stepping up its military
presence in the Natuna Area, Riau Islands Province, on the edge of
the South China Sea. The accompanying two article excerpts from
the Japan Times and Republika, an Indonesian news source, discuss
some of the updates over the past couple of years. In 2016 reports
began to emerge about Indonesia’s plans to upgrade its military base
in the Natuna Islands as demonstrated by the Japan Times article. The
article states that a bigger, more sophisticated air base would be built
on the islands and Indonesia would purchase three frigates and a jet
fighter to be stationed there. Justifying its upgrades, the article goes
on to describe scenes that involved Chinese fishing vessels operating
illegally within Indonesia’s exclusive economic zone. While China
recognizes Indonesia’s sovereignty over the Natuna Islands and
Indonesia is not a claimant state in any disputes over islands and reefs
in the South China Sea, the issue lies within overlapping claims for
maritime rights and interests falling within China’s “nine-dash line”
claim to nearly the entire South China Sea.
Indonesia reportedly had about 800 military personnel stationed in
the Natuna region in 2016. That number was expected to rise to 2,000
that same year. The second, and more recent article from Republika,
states that about two thousand personnel are going to be deployed
from Java to the Natuna area. It is not clear if they will replace
2,000 military personnel already there, provided they had actually
transferred as reported in the 2016 article, or if they will be supporting
them. The Republika article reports that, “the deployment is meant to
fill positions in the facilities that have been built there.
As of the April 2018 article, there were a “number of military
facilities... under construction in Natuna Islands,” and the deployment
of military forces was part of the “command and control transfer.” The
2,000 personnel will reportedly range from Indonesian Army field
artillery batteries and radar units to the Marine Corps. Infrastructure
built, or being built, includes a command post and supporting facility
and residential compounds in the field artillery; a pier in the Lampa
Strait; a hangar for three helicopters; a seaport; and a hospital. The
current military base is also expected to be “reinforced,” perhaps
meaning upgraded. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“TNI [Indonesian Defense Forces] Chief Air
Marshall Hadi Tjahjanto will deploy around two
thousand troops from Java to the Natuna area, Riau
Islands Province. The deployment is meant to fill
positions in the facilities that have been built there.”
Source: “Indonesia Set to Upgrade Military Base in Islands Perched
on Edge of South China Sea,” Japan Times, 29 June 2016. https://
www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/06/29/asia-pacific/indonesia-setupgrade-military-base-islands-perched-edge-south-china-sea
According to [Defense Minister] Ryamizard [Ryacuda], a bigger,
more sophisticated air base will be built in the [Natuna]islands.
Indonesia will also buy three frigates and a jet fighter to be stationed
at the base.
Two weeks ago, an Indonesian warship fired warning shots at
escaping Chinese fishermen accused of fishing illegally in Indonesia’s
exclusive economic zone, before finally managing to stop their boat
and arrest them.
In March, an Indonesian patrol boat intercepted a Chinese fishing
vessel inside the EEZ and detained eight crew members, but a
Chinese coast guard vessel physically intervened and forced its
release.
Indonesia currently has about 800 military personnel in the Natuna
region. This year, the number will rise to about 2,000.
Although Indonesia is not a claimant state in the disputes over
islands and reefs in the South China Sea, it has been warily
monitoring China’s activities there, including its reclaiming of land
on features it occupies, its building of military infrastructure there,
and its surveying and fishing activities.
Source: Nidia Zuraya, “TNI akan Geser Pasukan ke Wilayah Natuna
(TNI to Move Troops to Natuna Area),” Republika Online, 24 April
2018. http://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/umum/18/04/23/
p7n49p383-tni-akan-geser-pasukan-ke-wilayah-natuna
TNI [Indonesian Defense Forces] Chief Air Marshall Hadi Tjahjanto
will deploy around two thousand troops from Java to the Natuna
area, Riau Islands Province. The deployment is meant to fill positions
in the facilities that have been built there.
“The deployment of personnel and combat troops is part of the
command and control transfer,” the TNI Chief said after visiting
Sekatung Island and a number of military facilities that are under
construction in Natuna Islands, Monday (23 Apr).
“The troops range from those of Army field artillery batteries, radar
units to the Marine Corps,” Tjahjanto said.
At the same occasion, DPR [People’s Representatives Council]
Speaker Bambang Soesatyo reaffirmed that the construction of a
military and defense base in the Natuna area, Riau Islands, must
be reinforced to safeguards the integrity of the Unitary Republic of
Indonesia (NKR) from foreign intervention.

China’s nine-dash-line overlaps Indonesia’s exclusive economic zone,
prompting Indonesia to beef up its military presence on the Natuna Islands.
Source: Author, based on By Goran tek-en, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:South_China_Sea_vector.svg, CC 3.0.

According to Soesatyo, the Natuna area, which is near the South
China Sea (SCS), had been targeted by the United States and China,
which want to control the SCS, so reinforcement to the national
defense was needed in the Natuna area.
OE Watch | June 2018

39

INDO-PACIFIC
Is China Changing the Game in Trans-Polar Shipping?
by Matt Schrader
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 7, dated 24 April 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/is-china-changing-the-game-in-trans-polar-shipping/

OE Watch Commentary: For more than a decade, Russian policymakers have fruitlessly tried to turn the Northern Sea Route (NSR), which
connects Asia and Europe along Russia’s northern coastline, into a viable commercial shipping route. The People’s Republic of China financial
muscle might finally be able to make their long-sought dream a reality. The idea has appeal for Chinese shipping companies, since it would
cut between 1,370 and 4,600 kilometers off the trip between ports in China and Western Europe, theoretically saving both time and money by
bypassing the Suez Canal. It also has appeal for Chinese policymakers; opening the NSR could secure access to natural resources and ease China’s
“Malacca dilemma.”
At the moment the NSR is passable by normal cargo ships for only a few weeks each year, and transit speeds are lower than the Suez route
because of ice in the water. Writing in Jamestown’s Eurasia Daily Monitor in 2016, Dr. Vladislav Inozemtsev was scathing about the route’s
present economic viability: “There are no repair or fueling facilities suitable for modern ocean vessels anywhere along the entire route. Moreover,
the icebreakers now in use are able to produce a 25-meter-wide ice-free passage, which me¬ans the NSR cannot be used by either Suezmax
or Panamax container ships. To make it appealing to the world’s largest shipping companies, the Russian leadership will need to invest tens of
billions of dollars in a new generation of icebreakers and local infrastructure. But to do this, transit tariffs will have to skyrocket, thus leaving the
southern route [through the Suez Canal] as the best possible option for shippers…”
China’s entry onto the scene could be a game-changer. Where Russia lacks the political will and financial muscle to make the scheme
commercially viable, the PRC may have the deep pockets, and the economic and strategic rationales needed to see things through to completion.
In a July 2017 meeting with Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, Chinese Communist Party (CCP) General Secretary Xi Jinping declared
Russia and China should “develop their cooperation on arctic shipping routes, jointly building a ‘silk road on ice’”.
The PRC’s policymaking apparatus has responded to this signal from its top leader: China’s State Council issued the country’s first “Arctic
White Paper” in January; ministerial working groups from both countries are negotiating the outlines of potential cooperation; and PRC think
tanks have been set to work expounding upon the potential benefits of the project. The PRC analyses produced so far tend to frame new shipping
routes as the most important outcome of Sino-Russian polar cooperation, followed closely by the potential for new natural resource extraction.
The CCP clearly believes in the long-term gains that can be reaped from financing polar infrastructure projects that are otherwise economically
unviable, particularly when strategic justifications exist, such as securing access to natural resources, or cargo routes that ease the Malacca
dilemma. PRC financial institutions provided $12 billion of the $27 billion necessary to bring Russia’s massive new Yamal LNG project online.
Prior to the PRC’s involvement, the project was floundering.
Among the things to follow closely, observers wanting to gauge the progress of the Sino-Russian joint effort should keep an eye on three
indicators:
•

PRC investment in shipping infrastructure on Russia’s northern coast

•

PRC investment in Northern European transport infrastructure

•

Sino-Russian joint development of extra-wide next-generation icebreakers

PRC media reports indicate that the first two are in the exploratory phase. The last is speculative, but not entirely implausible. Much like the rest
of its Arctic agenda, it is unclear whether Russia can afford the $2 billion-per ship price tag of its recently announced Lider-Class icebreakers—
which could open paths wide enough for Panamax cargo ships—without PRC financial assistance. End OE Watch Commentary (Schrader)

“China’s policy goals on the Arctic are: to understand, protect, develop and participate in the governance
of the Arctic, so as to safeguard the common interests of all countries and the international community in the
Arctic, and promote sustainable development of the Arctic.”
Source: “China’s Arctic Policy,” The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, 26 January 2018. http://english.gov.cn/
archive/white_paper/2018/01/26/content_281476026660336.htm
China is an important stakeholder in Arctic affairs. Geographically, China is a “Near-Arctic State”, one of the continental States that are closest
to the Arctic Circle…China enjoys the freedom or rights of scientific research, navigation, overflight, fishing, laying of submarine cables and
pipelines, and resource exploration and exploitation in the high seas, the Area and other relevant sea areas, and certain special areas in the Arctic
Ocean, as stipulated in treaties such as the UNCLOS and the Spitsbergen Treaty, and general international law.
China’s policy goals on the Arctic are: to understand, protect, develop and participate in the governance of the Arctic, so as to safeguard the
common interests of all countries and the international community in the Arctic, and promote sustainable development of the Arctic…
To develop the Arctic, China will improve the capacity and capability in using applied Arctic technology, strengthen technological innovation,
environmental protection, resource utilization, and development of shipping routes in the Arctic, and contribute to the economic and social
development of the Arctic…
OE Watch | June 2018

40

INDO-PACIFIC
China Develops New Anti-Ship Cruise Missile
OE Watch Commentary: An unidentified aviation regiment
recently participated in live-fire exercises in the South China Sea
with a new type of anti-ship cruise missile and the accompanying
excerpted articles provide insight into China’s development of new
missiles. The ship-borne Z-9 helicopters, which typically perform
anti-submarine warfare and logistical roles for China’s fleet, were
specially equipped to be able to attack high-speed targets. Adding
the anti-ship role to the helicopters will help ships better protect
themselves against neighboring countries, which are increasingly
adopting stealth, speed and swarming tactics to attack larger
warships.
Photos of the missile tests accompanying reports of the exercise
appear to show a missile similar to the CJ-18 anti-ship cruise
missile. China continues to make important advancements in
its domestic missile industry, improving their capabilities while
reducing reliance on foreign designs and technologies. In January,
the China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporations’ Third
Academy—the primary designer of China’s anti-ship missiles—
received a top award for National Science and Technology
Advancement for its latest anti-ship cruise missile design. While
the designation of the cruise missile was not given, the leader of
the design team noted that “it was smaller in size but stronger in
capability” than similar foreign designs.
The PLA is expanding the roles of shipborne helicopters. In
2016, images of a Z-10 attack helicopter landing on a Type 072
landing ship were released as part of a report on a joint exercise
between the Navy and Army. The Z-10 and Z-19 classes of attack
helicopters are currently all operated by the Army. End OE
Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “Anti-ship cruise missile wins award,” China Daily,
10 January 2018. http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201801/10/
WS5a556a83a3102e5b17371c1d.html
The missile, developed by the China Aerospace Science and Industry
Corp’s Third Academy in Beijing, the biggest maker of anti-ship
missiles in China, won the top-grade prize in the National Science
and Technology Advancement Awards…The release did not specify the
missile’s designation.
It said the new weapon, which can be launched from a ship or a
submarine, is a milestone in the academy’s development and will
exponentially improve the Chinese Navy’s anti-ship capability…
Source: “南海舰队航空兵某团新型直升机开展海上导弹实射训练
(New Type Helicopters of a Certain Naval Aviation Regiment of the
South Sea Fleet Carry Out Maritime Live-Fire Tests),” PLA Daily, 5 May
2018. http://nb.81.cn/content/2018-05/11/content_8029252_2.htm
PLA Navy Aviation Regiment Commander Shao Jingshan [邵景山] “In
past experience, it takes more than three years for new equipment to be
ready to be used operationally. However, in less than two years this new
variant of helicopter [capable of launching anti-ship missiles] has already
carried out more than 20 important missions.”
Source: “PLA navy tests ship-borne choppers in S.China Sea targets,”
Global Times, 16 May 2018. http://english.pladaily.com.cn/view/201805/16/content_8033124.htm
Flight Group Chief Chen Jingguang [陈景光], “This live-fire exercise
tested our ability to detect targets on the sea. It also allowed us to figure
out issues and deficiencies, laying a foundation for further realistic
training.”

“In past experience, it takes more than three years for new equipment to be ready to be used
operationally. However, in less than two years this new variant of helicopter [capable of launching antiship missiles] has already carried out more than 20 important missions.”

Chinese Helicopter Lands on HMS Cornwall MOD.

Source: by Owen King, OGL (Open Government License), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese_Helicopter_Lands_on_HMS_Cornwall_MOD_45150752.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

41

INDO-PACIFIC
The Y-20 Participates in Airborne Training for the First Time
OE Watch Commentary: As China modernizes its military, new equipment is
being deployed to units across all services and branches. While new fighter jets
and ships tend to receive the spotlight, new capabilities are rapidly enhancing other
parts of the Chinese military. The accompanying excerpts from Chinese sources
show how the PLA Air Force is attempting to transform itself into a “strategic
service” (战略性军种) and a core part of this is improving its power projection
capabilities, particularly strategic airlift and airborne operations.
China’s Airborne Corps has been reorganized, shifting from three divisionlevel units into a number of brigades. The airborne force has also begun receiving
important upgrades, such as China’s domestically produced heavy lift aircraft,
the Y-20. While the Y-20 formally entered service with the PLA in July 2016,
and participated in the 2017 Military Review held to commemorate the 90th
Anniversary of the founding of the PLA, this is the first time it has participated in
airborne training. Though exact numbers are unclear, the Y-20 can carry upwards
of 100 paratroopers and has roughly double the range of China’s other mainstay
military transport aircraft, the Y-9.
During crises in Libya, Yemen and Kyrgyzstan when China needed to evacuate
its citizens, it relied on chartered flights to bring them home, although available
naval forces participated when possible. With a range over 10,000 kilometers,
the Y-20 gives China a truly global lift capability. As more Y-20s are produced
and join transport units, they can be expected to begin supporting Chinese forces
operating abroad, filling an important gap in China’s strategic power projection
capabilities. Additionally, the Y-20 is expected to supplement the Y-9 and imported
Russian Il-76 aircraft and be used as the basis for a range of other aircraft types,
including airborne early warning and control. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wood)

Source: “战略空军来了！6架运20运输机扎堆机场停
机坪, (Strategic Airforce Has Arrived! 6 Y-20 Transports
Gather Around the Tarmac),” Global Times, 14 May
2018. https://3w.huanqiu.com/a/a-XDHTCGD1145CFF5
4A89AC7?p=3&agt=8
PLA Air Force Y-20 Pilot Teng Hui [腾辉]: For this
training, our unit transited unfamiliar airspace, and set
up systematic coordinated training with other transport
aircraft and airborne units. We set up a difficult set of
exercises to strengthen our ability to conduct airborne
operations under different conditions and in different
environments. By doing so, we improve our aerial
“3-Dimenionsal” force projection.
Source: “运 20飞机与空降兵首次 ‘实战’ ((Y-20 Aircraft
Conducts First ‘Actual Combat’ Training With Airborne
Troops),” CCTV, 9 May 2018. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=XzUmOX7_P8k
PLA Air Force Senior Colonel Wang Mingzhi [王明志]:
The Y-20 is a large, strategic transport aircraft, and can
carry out long distance power projection and high speed,
nonstop airborne operations such as parachute and
aerial resupply missions. The Y-20 can quickly transport
airborne forces to a strategic area, seize an area or for
example carry out large-scale airborne operations in the
enemy’s rear.

“The Y-20 can quickly transport airborne forces to a strategic area, seize an area or for example carry
out large-scale airborne operations in the enemy’s rear.”

China - Air Force - Xian Y-20.

Source: By L.G.Liao, CC BY-SA 3.0GFDL 1.2, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/75/China_-_Air_Force_-_Xian_Y-20.jpg

OE Watch | June 2018

42

INDO-PACIFIC
Civil-Military Fusion and the PLA’s Pursuit of Dominance
in Emerging Technologies
by Lorand Laskai
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 6, dated 9 April 2018, Edited for OE Watch. For
the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/civil-military-fusion-and-the-plas-pursuit-of-dominance-in-emerging-technologies/

OE Watch Commentary: China is intensifying its nearly two-decade push to meld
together the civil and defense economies through what officials term “civil-military fusion”.
On March 2, 2018, CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping chaired the third meeting of the
recently formed Central Commission for Integrated Military and Civilian Development
(CCIMCD), where he emphasized the strategic importance of “unifying” national power
through reducing barriers between the commercial economy and defense industrial base.
Days later, speaking to a delegation from the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) and armed
police at the 13th National People’s Congress, Xi called civil-military fusion (CMF) a
“prerequisite” for realizing the goal of building a strong military.
China’s efforts to become a dominant “science and tech superpower” in technologies like
artificial intelligence, quantum communications, robotics and smart manufacturing are well
documented. Less is known about how China plans to use CMF to convert its technological
push into a long-term military advantage. Although the push is, in some ways, similar to
previous efforts to leverage the private sector, there are signs that this iteration is both more
serious and better resourced than past attempts.
Rather than waiting for emerging technologies like AI to mature before encouraging
Emblem of People’s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force.
Source: By 解放的高加索 [Public domain or CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
collaboration with the defense industrial base, China’s leadership is determined to bake CMF
File:PLASSF.svg.
into the overall design of emerging sectors through top-level planning. CMF is a prominent
component of a number of key government initiatives, including the Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan (2017), Made in
China 2025 (2015), and Promotion of a National IC Industry Development Guidelines (2014). The Next-Generation AI Development Plan, released
last June, for instance, named CMF as one of the “six main duties” for AI development and called for establishing an “all-element, multi-domain,
highly efficient new pattern of civil-military integrated development.”
Because of its scale and institutional background, the PLA has traditionally dealt with large, state-owned enterprises for procurement and
R&D needs. It’s clear that the PLA is trying to change that. In October 2017, the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) Logistics Department signed strategic
cooperation agreements with JD.com and SF Express—one of China’s largest e-commerce outlets and logistic companies, respectively—to create
an intelligent logistics system, including the use of transportation UAVs to maintain supply chains.
In a further demonstration of the PLA’s genuine desire to engage the private sector, in April 2017, the Central Military Commission’s Equipment
Development Department opened tenders on more than 2,000 projects to private companies. A month prior, the CMC’s National Defense
Intellectual Property Office of the Equipment Development Department announced it would declassify over 3,000 defense patents for private
sector use, marking the first time the PLA declassified patents in the thirty years since the PRC military patent system was created.
The Strategic Support Force (SSF), the branch of the PLA with primary responsibility for space, electronic, and cyber warfare, has been
particularly forward-leaning, especially in R&D. In July 2017, the SSF signed talent and research cooperation agreements with nine research
institutions and laboratories, including the Harbin Institute of Technology and Shanghai Jiaotong University, two of the country’s leading research
universities.
Analysts evaluating these efforts should keep in mind the fact that China’s previous attempts to invigorate its sclerotic state-owned defense
industrial base through market forces met with only limited success. China’s leaders have been trying to implement some iteration of civil-military
fusion since Deng Xiaoping. But there are reasons to believe this time is different.
First, Xi Jinping has consolidated control over the CMC, placing loyalists in key positions to push forward reform of the defense industrial
base. Xi has also centralized control over the implementation of CMF through the recently established CCIMCD. In a sign of the commission’s
significance, last year Xi appointed then member of the Central Politburo and Vice Premier Zhang Gaoli to run the commission’s daily affairs, a
role usually reserved for a lower ranking official.
Second, the inclusion of CMF in major strategic initiatives like Made in China 2025 and the Next Generation AI Development Plan all but
guarantees high-visibility and financial support for enterprises working on dual-use technology of interest to the PLA. Analysts need only look to
successful Chinese ‘national champions’ to appreciate the powerful nexus between commercial technology and government power. Companies
like Huawei and ZTE stand out in the telecommunication space, as do with Hikvision and a handful of rising AI companies like iFlytek in the
surveillance space. In both cases, these enterprises succeeded in large part because they offered a private sector solution to a Chinese government
need and in exchange received lucrative government contracts.
Whether Xi can open private emerging technology sectors to the PLA remains to be seen, though the effort has the potential to energize Xi’s
attempt to turn the PLA into a hi-tech, modern fighting force. End OE Watch Commentary (Laskai)
OE Watch | June 2018

43

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Civil-Military Fusion and the PLA’s Pursuit of
Dominance in Emerging Technologies
Source: Zhou, Laura. “China opens military contracts worth billions of yuan to private companies,” South China Morning Post, 20 April 2017.
http://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/2088998/china-opens-military-contracts-worth-billions-yuan
China’s military further opened its research and development programmes to private companies, inviting them to take part in projects worth an
estimated 6 billion yuan (US$870 million), state media reported on Wednesday…The contracting is overseen by the PLA’s arms procurement wing,
the Equipment Development Department, which released information for more than 2,000 projects on its website, according to the PLA Daily...
Retired PLA major general Xu Guangyu said new laws were needed to clarify obligations of businesses handling classified work, as well as to
define the commercial benefits they could reap from cooperation with the military. Xu, a senior researcher at Beijing-based research group the
China Arms Control and Disarmament Association, said although the PLA had previously invited companies to take part in R&D, the latest round
of projects was announced in a high-profile way…

“Xu, a senior researcher at Beijing-based research group the China Arms Control and Disarmament
Association, said although the PLA had previously invited companies to take part in R&D, the latest round of
projects was announced in a high-profile way.”

Main gate of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Xuhui campus.

Source: By Nrwt1999 - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=58101184.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | June 2018

44

INDO-PACIFIC
The Indian Government’s Efforts to Avoid Another
Doklam Standoff
OE Watch Commentary: The 2017 Doklam
standoff between the armed forces of India and
China caused the Indian government to see China
as a more immediate threat than before and to
reassess its forces posted on the Chinese-Indian
border. The accompanying excerpted articles report
on a couple of recent developments with the Indian
armed forces related to the border and meetings
between Indian and Chinese officials as part of an
effort to reduce the chances of another standoff
from taking place. The articles from the Times of
India and Daily News and Analysis (the latter dated
29 April), both widely-read English-language news
sources, report on meetings between Indian Prime
Minister Modi and Chinese President Jinping as
well as a meeting between the commanders of
Indian and Chinese border detachments in late
April/early May. Based on statements in both
articles, it appears that the two sides will continue
joint work to avoid another incident.
While the meetings indicate one way the Indian
government is working to resolve the border issues
with China, the other article from Daily News and
Analysis (dated 1 April) and the article from The
Quint report on how the Indian armed forces took
steps to strengthen the border before either meeting
took place. Daily News and Analysis reports on
the transportation infrastructure improvements to
reduce the time it takes for units to travel around
the border region near Doklam. The article notes
how the “deadline for the project is 2024, but with
the work expedited in the wake of the need for
better infrastructure in the post Doklam scenario,
sources say they are targeting 2022 to complete
the project.” The Quint article mentions how the
Indian government “has deployed more troops
and significantly increased patrolling” in areas
near Doklam. Overall, the articles demonstrate
that while the Indian government is putting efforts
on diplomacy to avoid another Doklam standoff,
the Indian armed forces continue to take steps
to prepare for another incident. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

Map showing Dolkam Plateau.

Source: By Nilesh shukla, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tensions-between-india-and-china.jpg.

Source: “India, China hold border personnel meet at Chusul in Ladakh,” The Times of
India, 1 May 2018. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/india-china-hold-borderpersonnel-meet-at-chusul-in-ladakh/articleshow/63990171.cms
Armies of India and China on Tuesday held a Border Personnel Meeting (BPM) during
which both sides resolved to maintain peace and tranquillity along the Line of Actual
Control, besides agreeing to work on additional confidence building measures. It was
the first such meeting after Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chinese President Xi
Jinping held an informal summit last week…The BPM took place in Chusul, Ladakh…
Sources said both sides were also working on setting up a long-delayed hotline
between the Indian Army’s Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) and the
Chinese officer holding a similar position…According to government data, the number
of transgressions by the Chinese army into the Indian territory rose to 426 in 2017 from
the 273 in 2016. India and China share a nearly 4,000 km-long border…
Source: “Narendra Modi and Xi Jinping Agree to Avoid Military Dispute on Tense
Border,” Daily News and Analysis, 29 April 2018. http://www.dnaindia.com/india/
report-narendra-modi-and-xi-jinping-agree-to-avoid-military-dispute-on-tenseborder-2609695
After spending 24 hours in Wuhan, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chinese
President Xi Jinping ended their informal meetings on Saturday with a promise to
reduce border tensions after a high-altitude standoff in Doklam last year. Xi and Modi
discussed how to mend maintain peace in the region and mend ties…
Indian’s foreign ministry said in a statement after the meeting. “They issued strategic
guidance to their respective militaries to strengthen communication in order to build
trust and mutual understanding and enhance predictability and effectiveness in the
management of border affairs”…

“The deadline for the project is 2024, but with the work expedited in the wake of the need for better

infrastructure in the post Doklam scenario, sources say they are targeting 2022 to complete the project.”

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2018

45

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: The Indian Government’s Efforts to
Avoid Another Doklam Standoff
Source: Bhalla, Abhishek. “Dragon in mind, Centre plans to connect Lohith with Devang Valley,” Daily News and Analysis, 1 April 2018.
http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-dragon-in-mind-centre-plans-to-connect-lohith-with-devang-valley-2599868
In the harsh terrain prone to landslides, from the Dinjan garrison — the headquarters of the 2 Mountain Division of the Indian Army — to
Kibithu on the LAC, troop movement along a distance of 375 km can take up to three days. A mega project to connect the Lohith and Devang
Valley is underway, which will connect Hayuliang, an army cantonment around 100 km from the LAC to Hunli.
The deadline for the project is 2024, but with the work expedited in the wake of the need for better infrastructure in the post Doklam
scenario, sources say they are targeting 2022 to complete the project…Another problem is the connectivity to the west and east banks of the
Lohith River that allows only once approach road to Kibithu at the LAC. With only one concrete class 70 bridge on the river that can take the
load of a 70-tonne vehicle, movement of troops and heavy armaments can be a challenge. This landslide-prone route can be cut off for days,
leaving troops stranded…
Work on two more class 70 bridges across the Lohith, which is currently in the pipeline, is expected to start by the end of this year…Trans
Arunachal Highway that will have better road connections is expected to be a game changer in the region…
Source: Manash Pratim Bhuyan. “India Increases Troops Deployed Along Border With China Near Tibet,” The Quint, 31 March 2018. https://
www.thequint.com/news/india/troops-along-border-with-china-near-tibetan-region-increased
India has deployed more troops and significantly increased patrolling in the mountainous terrains of Dibang, Dau-Delai and Lohit valleys
along the borders with China in the Tibetan region in Arunachal sector following the Doklam face-off…Military officials said India is also
strengthening its surveillance mechanism to keep an eye on Chinese activities along the borders in the strategically sensitive Tibetan region
and has even been regularly deploying choppers to carry out recce…
The official said China has been ramping up its infrastructure development along India’s border, particularly in the Tibetan region and
there was a need for India to enhance its road network for quick movement of troops…a senior official of the Border Roads Organisation
said a number of roads including one to connect the Dibang Valley with Lohit Valley has been finalised which will improve the inter-valley
connectivity in Arunachal…
In January, Army Chief Gen Bipin Rawat had said the time had come for India to shift its focus from borders with Pakistan to the frontier
with China…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | June 2018

46

INDO-PACIFIC
Incidents in Indonesia Highlight Terrorism Trends
OE Watch Commentary: On 13 May the two accompanying
excerpted Indonesian language websites, aceh.tribunnews.com and
jabar.tribunnews.com, published articles detailing two separate
instances of women involved in militant activities. This was not
necessarily a first for Indonesia, because women have previously
been groomed to be, although not operationalized as, suicide bombers
in the country. The notable aspect about the aceh.tribunnews.com
article is that a woman carried out a suicide bombing with a vest by
detonating it in a church’s entrance in Surabaya, which killed not only
the worshippers, but her husband and children, who may also have worn
suicide vests. In the other article, women were involved in a stabbing
incident outside of a prison during a riot in Pekanbaru. Some of the
rioters in the prison had been convicted on terrorism charges.
Both articles were written in the immediate aftermath of these
attacks, but serve as reminders of the evolving nature of terrorism in
Indonesia – and globally – that stereotypes of women not participating
in terrorism are increasingly becoming outdated, if not flat out
incorrect. Indeed, since the articles were published, the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has claimed responsibility for the church
attack, while the family was reported to have been in Syria prior to
returning to Indonesia. Some officials also suspect the prison riot and
the ISIS-claimed attack may be related since they occurred so close
together in time. Indeed, the security situation in Indonesia is becoming
increasingly complex and the two incidents highlighted in these articles
are evidence of that. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Wanita Ini Akan Melakukan Penusukan Di Mako
Brimob: Ada Tiga Perempuan Pakai Rompi” (“Seconds of the
Church Bombed in Surabaya: Three Womans Wear Vests”),
aceh.tribunnews.com, 13 May 2018. http://aceh.tribunnews.
com/2018/05/13/wanita-ini-akan-melakukan-penusukan-di-makobrimob-isi-surat-yang-dibawa-jadi-perbincangan
Eyewitnesses recounted the seconds before a bomb explosion
at the Indonesian Christian Church in Surabaya. According to
residents, there were two bombs that exploded with the second
explosion only about five minutes from the first explosion. There
were three women in the parking lot wearing vests and there was a
security guard who came and initially prevented the bombing but
then the bomb exploded. The guards were sprayed with the bomb
shrapnel, with wounds on their thighs and their mouths.
Source: “Detik-detik Gereja Dibom di Surabaya: Ada Tiga
Perempuan Pakai Rompi” (“This Woman Performed a Stabbing At
Mako Brimob”), jabar.tribunnews.com, 13 May 2018. http://jabar.
tribunnews.com/2018/05/13/detik-detik-gereja-dibom-di-surabayaada-tiga-perempuan-pakai-rompi
Two women were suspected of stabbing members of Mako Brimob.
Police confiscated some of their luggage, their ID cards, two mobile
units, and one pair of scissors. Police interrogation found they that
were attempting to conduct stabbings against members of Brimob
(Mobile Brigade). Many photos of them have circulated on social
media.

“There were three women in the parking lot wearing vests and there was a security guard who came and
initially prevented the bombing but then the bomb exploded.”

The headquarter of Indonesian Mobile Brigade, Pekanbaru (2013).

Source: By Ramzy Muliawan [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Markas_Brimob_Pekanbaru.JPG.

OE Watch | June 2018

47

EURASIA
The Russian Navy: Distributed Lethality Through
Modularity
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation has made great efforts to enforce the principle of modularity throughout her Armed Forces.
In tandem with the modularity push, the Russian Navy is implementing its own “Distributed Lethality” concept, which envisions one universal
launch container system that is capable of firing a variety of anti-ship, land attack, air defense, and antisubmarine missiles. These launching
containers will be installed on Russian submarines, cruisers, destroyers, frigates, and even corvettes.
The three accompanying excerpted articles describe another facet of the Russian Navy’s modularity push, the “shipping containerization”
of military capabilities. Although these developments are relatively recent, Russia has long been interested in using shipping containers for
military purposes. Russia sells the Club-K “shipping container” missile system on the export market. The Club-K is essentially the same system
as the road-mobile Bal coastal defense system equipped with Kh-35 missiles (with a 300km range), except it is transportable in a few shipping
containers. Russia has touted modular shipping container-based solutions for several reasons. The first is their ability to be rapidly moved to
different ships, or if necessary, used at fixed shore sites or on trucks. Military capabilities will be able to be surged from one fleet to another, not
by moving the ship itself, but simply by transporting the shipping containers by whatever means available (air, truck, rail, etc.). This is extremely
advantageous for Russia’s auxiliary naval fleet and other state vessels that may be pressed into service in the event of hostilities. The second
reason is the targeting difficulties that arise from rapidly transferable modular capabilities. At present time, if the class of vessel is known,
it is fairly easy to determine what capabilities the ship possesses. In the future, with the advent of universal launch containers and shipping
container-based military capabilities, extremely precise, and ongoing, intelligence will be required of each ship to know what it is capable of at
any given time. The articles from Izvestiya describe shipping container-based solutions for underwater drones, sonar, and UAVs. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“The Russian Navy is now actively implementing the concept of modularity, which makes it possible to
expand the functionality of warships while reducing costs.”
- Dr. Vadim Kozyulin, director of the new technologies and international security project
at the Russian Center for Policy Studies

Container missile system Club-K in 20-feet variant with Kh-35UE missile.
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/IMDS-2011/i-hwrK7DR, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | June 2018

(continued)
48

EURASIA
Continued: The Russian Navy: Distributed Lethality
Through Modularity
Source: Nikolay Surkov, Aleksey Ramm, Yevgeniy Dmitriyev. “Подводного разведчика спрячут в контейнер (They Will Conceal the
Underwater Reconnaissance Drone in a Shipping Container),” Izvestiya, 20 April 2018. https://iz.ru/722017/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-rammevgenii-dmitriev/podvodnogo-razvedchika-spriachut-v-konteiner
A system to conduct underwater work, which will fit into a standard shipping container, is being developed for Russian military seamen. The
complex will consist of an unmanned submersible and operator workstations for its remote control. One will be able to install that shipping
container on any ship (including the latest modular corvettes) or simply on shore. In the experts’ opinion, the appearance of these complexes
will significantly expand the employment of underwater unmanned vehicles in the Russian Navy. In particular, the effectiveness of the
exploration of the bottom and the search for mines will increase.
A Ministry of Defense spokesman told Izvestiya that the development of the “container” complex is being conducted in support of the
military department. It will consist of an autonomous unmanned underwater drone (ANPA) and the equipment to command and control it. The
system is designed for installation on the Navy’s combat and auxiliary ships.
The “Klavesin” ANPA family, which was developed by Rubin Maritime Equipment Central Design Bureau jointly with the Russian Academy
of Sciences Far Eastern Department Institute of the Problems of Maritime Technologies, will constitute the foundation of the complex. This
will most likely be the Klavesin-IR, which is designed for use with surface ships.
One can install the shipping container with the Klavesin directly on a ship’s deck – for example, an icebreaker or rescue vessel. Upon arrival
in the operational area, a standard ship crane will lower the unmanned vehicle into the water and it will begin to work. The ANPA can be
used for search work, the exploration of bottom objects – both point and also extended searches – photography and seabed mapping, and
remote reconnaissance of the bottom. Various equipment is installed on the drone to do this – side-looking sonars, an electromagnetic hunter,
a digital video system, an acoustic profilograph to search for objects on the bottom, and temperature and conductivity sensors.
Outwardly, the Klavesin-1R resembles a yellow torpedo with a length of approximately six meters and a diameter of a little less than a meter.
Its weight reaches two and a half tonnes. The drone’s operating range is up to 300 kilometers, and operational endurance - 120 hours. The
operational diving depth totals up to 6,000 meters…

Container missile system Club-K in 20-feet variant with Kh-35UE missile.
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/IMDS-2011/i-hwrK7DR, CC 4.0.

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2018

49

EURASIA
Continued: The Russian Navy: Distributed Lethality
Through Modularity
Source: Nikolay Surkov, Aleksey Ramm, Yevgeniy Dmitriyev.
“Систему обнаружения субмарин спрятали в обычный контейнер
(Submarine Detection System Hidden in Ordinary Shipping
Container),” Izvestiya, 6 April 2018. https://iz.ru/719118/nikolaisurkov-aleksei-ramm-evgenii-dmitriev/sistemu-obnaruzheniiasubmarin-spriatali-v-obychnyi-konteiner
A compact system for detecting enemy submarines has been
developed for the Russian Navy. The data-processing apparatus
and the operator can fit into a virtually autonomous module the
size of a standard shipping container. This kind of sonar station
can be placed on practically any ship or support vessel. In expert
opinion, having systems like this in service will expand the navy’s
operational capabilities -- specifically by enabling a rapid increase in
antisubmarine forces when they are needed.
The Minotaur-ISPB-M.2 “shipping container” sonar was developed
for the fleet and is already undergoing trials, the Navy High
Command said to Izvestiya. It is planned to complete them in the near
future. The sonar is designed to be installed on the Project 22160
modular patrol ships and also on auxiliary ships and civilian vessels
mobilized in times of threat.
It amounts to a “shipping container” version of the Russian
Minotaur-M sonar, which equips small frigates (corvettes) of the
Project 20380 design. Thanks to its compactness, the station and
all its elements fit inside a module the size of an ordinary sea cargo
container…
The Russian Navy is now actively implementing the concept of
modularity, which makes it possible to expand the functionality of
warships while reducing costs, Izvestiya was told by Vadim Kozyulin,
director of the new technologies and international security project
at the Russian Center for Policy Studies. According to him, the
Zelenodol’sk yard is already building a whole series of modular ships
that should enter service in the early 2020s and “shipping container”
weapons systems are being developed for them in parallel.
“Having compact sonar systems means that at a time of threat
(immediately prior to the opening of hostilities -- Izvestiya) the
navy’s antisubmarine capabilities can be rapidly grown by ‘retuning’
warship modules and also by reequipping merchant ships,” Kozyulin
commented. “The ‘shipping container’ system could have another
interesting application, for covert information gathering on the
underwater situation in various regions of the world’s oceans.
Because this new sonar can if desired be concealed on an ordinary
container ship.”
In conditions of large-scale conflict, multirole submarines are the
main enemy for the navy’s coastal forces. Having a large number
of ASW ships makes it possible to push the adversary out of littoral
waters and ensure defense of the coastline. The navy also needs
antisubmarine assets in the Arctic and Pacific Oceans to provide
cover for deployment of Russia’s nuclear weapons platforms.

Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm., “«Стелс-патрульные»
получат дронов-разведчиков: Для корветов проекта 22160 создан
контейнерный комплекс с двумя беспилотниками (Stealth Patrol
Ships Will Get Reconnaissance Drones: Containerized Complex With
Two Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Has Been Created for Project 22160
Corvettes),” Izvestiya, 3 May 2018. https://iz.ru/736124/nikolaisurkov-aleksei-ramm/stels-patrulnye-poluchat-dronov-razvedchikov
Project 22160 patrol ships (corvettes) will use unmanned aerial
vehicles UAVs to hunt submarines and inspect vessels and the
shoreline. Because of their comparatively small dimensions and
displacement, however, there is no hangar on these corvettes, only a
landing pad on the stern. Therefore permanent basing of helicopters
on them is impossible, which limits combat capabilities. The
containerized UAVs can solve this problem…
Izvestiya was told in the Main Naval Command that a modular
unmanned aerial complex for equipping Project 22160 patrol ships
has been developed and is being readied for tests. It is equipped
with two UAVs capable of conducting reconnaissance using electrooptical equipment and a radar. All equipment, including the
operator workstation, fits in one or two standard containers that can
be set up on a ship’s deck.
The complex includes two BPV-500 unmanned helicopters with
a coaxial configuration. Their Army version was presented at the
International Naval Salon in 2017 and tests began in the fall of that
same year. This UAV’s maximum takeoff weight is 500 kilograms,
hull length is a little under 5 meters, and the payload is up to 150
kilograms. The vehicle can be in the air for up to five and one-half
hours and can operate at a distance of up to 320 kilometers from the
platform.
The complex is designed for monitoring large areas from the
air, including for ice reconnaissance, support to search and
rescue operations, security patrol, and counterterrorist measures.
Subsequently the UAVs can be armed with missiles and bombs, which
will allow them to perform attack missions as well. The coaxial
configuration gives the BPV-500 high precision of hovering and
makes them less sensitive to wind gusts, which is important when
landing on the deck of a small ship…An electro-optical system and
onboard radar are used to collect data, which are transmitted to the
ship in real time. The UAV can perform missions both autonomously
(flight along a designated route) as well as under operator control…
UAV expert Denis Fedutinov believes that the UAVs are capable
of suitably replacing conventional helicopters on small ships in
conducting reconnaissance. “The use of such systems on Project
22160 patrol ships is dictated by the need for effective collection of
data without risk to the crew,” the expert explained. “The use of
unmanned equipment will permit a considerable expansion in the
observed horizon. One ship will be able to monitor an enormously
larger water area.”…

OE Watch | June 2018

50

EURASIA
Beating Virtual War Drums
OE Watch Commentary: Despite its relative economic weakness,
the current Kremlin leadership remains determined to restore Russia’s
superpower status. Military rearmament and modernization were
key strategic objectives during President Putin’s previous term (201218). However, reduced fossil fuel revenues and Western economic
sanctions, combined with growing demands in other social sectors
(healthcare, education, domestic infrastructure) have apparently
forced the Kremlin leadership to reduce military spending. The
accompanying excerpted article from the official Russian news agency,
TASS points out, “Russia’s military spending fell by 20 per cent to
$66.3 billion… The fall in spending in 2017 brought the military
burden down to 4.3 per cent of GDP, from 5.5 per cent in 2016.”
Curiously, this overall reduction in military spending has yet to
diminish the Kremlin’s bellicose rhetoric. For those plugged into
the Kremlin-sponsored media, the country remains surrounded by
dangerous enemies, requiring ever stronger and combat-ready military
and security forces. To illustrate that the country’s leadership remains
focused on military readiness, even when facing economic challenges,
some media are repackaging old news with new headlines and an
optimistic spin. The accompanying excerpt from the main government
newspaper, Rossiyskaya Gazeta, which purportedly describes the plan
to build a new Russian aircraft carrier, is a good example of this type
of reporting.
Over the past decade, Russian military authorities have repeatedly
announced their intention to construct modern aircraft carriers,
equipped with the latest naval armaments and technology. To date,
however, not a single carrier has been built. Despite this record, the
article claims that “the future Russian Shtorm project aircraft carrier
will be the world’s first sea-based carrier of fifth-generation aircraft,
which will give the Russian Navy a strategic advantage over any other
navy.” The article goes on to describe how this new Russian ship will
“substantially alter the balance of forces in the three regions of the
planet,” and that it “will be able to take on board up to 90 aircraft
and helicopters.” It also asserts that the “future Shtorm multipurpose
aircraft carrier project was first demonstrated at the Saint Petersburg
naval show in 2013,” failing to mention, however, that only a smallscale model of the ship was shown.

Model aircraft carrier project 23000E (Shtorm).
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_23000E CC BY 4.0.

Source: “Russia cuts military spending for first time over past 19
years,” TASS, 2 May 2018. http://tass.com/defense/1002650
…“Russia’s military spending fell by 20 per cent to $66.3 billion,
making it the fourth largest spender,” the document said. “The
Russian economy has suffered a number of setbacks since 2014,
including a significant drop in oil export revenues, and government
spending has been falling since then…. “The fall in spending in 2017
brought the military burden down to 4.3 per cent of GDP, from 5.5
per cent in 2016.
Source: Marina Yesina, “Авианосец ‘Шторм’ изменит баланс в
трех регионах мира, (Aircraft Carrier ‘Shtorm’ Will Change Balance
in Three Regions of The World),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 5 May 2018.
https://rg.ru/2018/05/05/avianosec-shtorm-izmenit-balans-v-trehregionah-mira.html

The future Russian Shtorm project aircraft carrier will be the
world’s first sea-based carrier of fifth-generation aircraft, which will
Increased military readiness was a chief platform of President Putin’s give the Russian Federation Navy a strategic advantage over any
previous term, where the Kremlin allocated trillions of rubles toward
other navy. In addition the presence of a Russian ship of this class
the modernization of Russia’s armed forces. This military build-up was could substantially alter the balance of forces in the three regions of
the planet where the attention of leading world powers is currently
partially predicated on the assertion that since Russia was threatened
focused: the Arctic, the Mediterranean, and Southeast Asia.
by foreign enemies, increased defense expenditures were justified.
Even though military funding has apparently been reduced, the
“Should Russia’s military-political ties across the Persian Gulf
Kremlin-sponsored media continues to strike a belligerent tone, while
continue to grow, deployment of a supercarrier in the Mediterranean
boasting about armaments which have never been produced. End OE
will be a symbol of support to its regional partners and will insure
Watch Commentary (Finch)
the safety of the delivery of freight to them,” the authors of an article
published in the magazine Military Watch believe….

“The future Russian Shtorm project aircraft

carrier will be the world’s first sea-based carrier
of fifth-generation aircraft, which will give the
Russian Federation Navy a strategic advantage
over any other navy.”

…The future Shtorm multipurpose aircraft carrier project was first
demonstrated at the Saint Petersburg naval show in 2013. A ship
with a displacement of 100,000 tons developed by the Krylov Center
will be able to take on board up to 90 aircraft and helicopters. The
nuclear power plant will do away with restrictions on its cruising
range, while its ice class will allow the ship to enter the Arctic. The
flight deck will have two ski jump ramps and four electromagnetic
catapults. An arresting gear will insure the landing of aircraft.
OE Watch | June 2018

51

EURASIA
The Naval Infantry’s New Ride?
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
Moscow Zvezda TV discusses the prospects of building a family of naval
infantry fighting vehicle (боевой машины морской пехоты БММП, or
BMMP) and support vehicles. The BMMP was designed by the Bauman
Moscow State Technical University after winning the state tender
“Research on the Development of an Advanced Combat Vehicle for Naval
Infantry Subunits.” Although almost all Russian Infantry Fighting Vehicles
(BMPs) and Armored Personnel Carriers (BTRs) are amphibious, and
hence can be used in the Naval Infantry for amphibious operations, the
unique mission of the Naval Infantry to conduct amphibious assaults for
the Russian Armed Forces brings certain limitations of existing BMPs
and BTRs to light. Standard BMPs and BTRs of the Ground Forces and
Airborne Troops are amphibious, but spending prolonged periods in
seawater causes electronics to fail and surfaces to corrode, the Naval
Infantry requires a better platform. A related problem is over-the-horizon
operations, as existing platforms were only designed to cross small
bodies of water (rivers, lakes, etc.) and were not intended for prolonged
amphibious operations, such as those conducted when landing ship docks
launch amphibious vehicles for over-the-horizon operations.
The concept of operations for Russian over-the-horizon amphibious
assaults involve the launching of amphibious vehicles from landing ship
docks 15-40 km from shore, and then having the amphibious vehicles
provide heavy covering fire while rapidly reaching the beach. To meet
these requirements, the amphibious vehicles must be capable of water
speeds of approximately 40 km/h (most Russian BMPs and BTRs are only
capable of water speeds of around 10 km/h) and capable of overcoming
waves up to one and a half meters. They must also have large cannons to
suppress enemy coastal defenses.
The accompanying excerpted article from Moscow Zvezda TV discusses
the capabilities of the BMMP. It will weigh approximately 35 tons and have
a maximum speed of 75 km/h on the ground and 37 km/h in the water.
It will be able to transport up to three crewmen and 10 naval infantry
dismounts. In terms of armament, the BMMP would be equipped with
modular Bakhcha-class or remote controlled Kinzhal-class turrets and
protected by the Arena-M active-protection system, which would provide
a defense against antitank guided missiles and antitank rocket-propelled
grenades.
Although the BMMP has been designed, its prospects for full scale
production are speculative at best. Russia is also experimenting with
a naval infantry variant of the Bumerang BTR, which is somewhat
less capable, but very close to serial production. A likely explanation
for BMMP marketing materials now surfacing in the media deals
with the manufacturers. The BMMP would be manufactured by the
UralVagonZavod (of the ROSTEC Concern and Armata fame), while
the Bumerang is manufactured by (occasional) competitor the Arzamas
Machine Company. Russia is unlikely to field two systems with such
similar capabilities, so it is likely that UralVagonZavod is trying to
compete with Arzamas for the Russian Naval Infantry’s business, or is
attempting to gain visibility of the platform on the export market. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Wheeled IFV BMP-K K-17 VPK-7829 on unified wheeled combat platform
Bumerang.
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/April-29th-rehearsal-of-2015/i-BwvtvNb, CC 4.0.

“The BMMP will weigh approximately 35 tons
and have a speed of 75 kph highway and 37 kph
in passage by water. It will be able to transport up
to 10 naval infantrymen with a three-man crew.”
Source: Aleksandr Peshkov. “Первые изображения новой
российской боевой машины морской пехоты появились в
Сети (First Images of the New Russian Naval Infantry Combat
Vehicle Have Appeared Online),” Moscow Zvezda TV, 3 May
2018. https://tvzvezda.ru/news/opk/content/201805031632-q39y.
htm
A sales pitch developed in the Uralvagonzavod corporation
indicates that one version of the development of the naval
infantry fighting vehicle (BMMP) [боевой машины морской
пехоты БММП] concept will be the building of a family of naval
infantry combat and support vehicles.
The first presumptive depictions of the naval infantry combat
vehicle have been published online, Rossiyskaya Gazeta reports
with reference to a sales pitch developed, presumably, in the
UralVagonZavod corporation…It is anticipated that it will be
possible with the vehicles to debark naval infantry elements at
the time of a landing operation, an over-the-horizon landing on
an austere shore included.
The BMMP will weigh approximately 35 tons and have a speed
of 75 kph highway and 37 kph in passage by water. It will be able
to transport up to 10 naval infantrymen with a three-man crew.
It is contemplated installing on the item Bakhcha-class modules
or the more modern 57-millimeter remote-controlled Kinzhal
modules.
It is proposed equipping the future vehicle also with the
Arena-M active-protection package, which will protect the
BMMP against antitank guided missiles and antitank rocketpropelled grenades…We recall that it was reported in April of
last year that a skimming vehicle for an over-the-horizon landing
would be built in the Bauman Moscow State Technical University
Special Machine Building Research and Production Center
(NPTs SM)…

OE Watch | June 2018

52

EURASIA
Defending the New Kerch Strait Bridge
OE Watch Commentary: With the opening of a
new bridge linking Crimea to mainland Russia, the
Kremlin continues to solidify its claim to this territory.
As the excerpted article from the official Russian news
agency TASS points out, on 15 May President Putin,
after “opening the automobile part of the Crimean
Bridge,” congratulated workers and said that “the Kerch
Strait Bridge opening was ‘an historic event.’” He went
on to call “the construction of the Crimean Bridge ‘a
remarkable result that makes Crimea and legendary
Sevastopol even stronger and all of us closer to each
other.’”
While the construction of this bridge will allow
for greater transport and trade, it has yet to sway the
international community’s assertion that Russia’s
annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in March 2014 was
legitimate. To date, only a handful of countries have
recognized Russia’s claim. Russia’s disputed ownership
has raised security concerns with defense officials
over how to best protect this new bridge. As reported
earlier, Russian National Guard units will be responsible
for protecting the bridge from maritime threats
(See OE Watch, Dec 2017, Russia’s National Guard
Expanding Mission). The second excerpted article from
a specialized Russian military journal dealing with
air-space defense (Воздушно-космическая оборона),
provides a detailed plan on how to protect the bridge
from aerial (particularly UAV) attacks.
The author suggests that the most likely form of
Ukrainian attack will be armed UAVs, and therefore,
recommends that Russia counter this threat by using
“the Buk-M2 short-range ZRS and Tor-M2 mediumrange ZRK as traditional air-missile defense weapons
in the system of active protection of the Crimean
bridge.” He also points out that these new air defense
assets “must support coordination with missile-air
defense systems and weapons deployed in Crimea and
Krasnodarskiy Kray.” He concludes by asserting that
“the expenditures (for these new AD assets) will be
considerably less than the possible averted damage.”
The construction of a 19km bridge from mainland
Russia, across the Kerch Straight to Crimea is a
significant engineering accomplishment. The bridge
symbolizes the Kremlin’s firm intention to maintain
the Crimean Peninsula under Russian ownership. Even
before this bridge is fully operational, protecting this
vital transport link has become a top Kremlin priority.
End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: “Putin lauds Kerch Strait Bridge’s ‘historic’ opening as ‘a miracle come
true,’” TASS, 15 May 2018. http://tass.com/politics/1004392
Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that the Kerch Strait Bridge
opening was ‘an historic event.’ …Putin called the construction of the Crimean
Bridge “a remarkable result that makes Crimea and legendary Sevastopol even
stronger and all of us closer to each other.”
Source: “Lieutenant General (Retired) Aleksandr Grigoryevich Luzan, Система
активной защиты Крымского моста (Active Protection System of the Crimean
Bridge),” Воздушно-космическая оборона, 2 April 2018 No 1 (94), pp 32-40.
…The Crimean bridge unquestionably is a colossal economic event, the country’s
grandiose infrastructure project. It represents a strategic artery by which
Russia will ensure Crimea’s economic growth as well as the supply of its own
military grouping on the peninsula. But at the same time the Crimean bridge is a
strategically important facility, and from a military standpoint it is a potential target
of strikes by offensive aerospace weapons (SVKN)….
…The delivery of strikes against the Crimean bridge from Ukrainian territory
using Grom-2 operational-tactical ballistic missiles or KRs [cruise missiles] such as
the Korshun is possible, however, essentially only in a period of large-scale combat
operations unfolding against the Russian Federation, i.e., war, which in itself is
unlikely.
The delivery of strikes against the Crimean bridge using unmanned aerial vehicles
(BLAs [UAVs]) -- combat drones -- is more likely. The Ukrainian leadership can
easily attribute such strikes to “illegal” terrorist groupings or pseudo-patriots
allegedly not subordinate to central authorities, as was the case, for example, with
Crimea being disconnected from power or with the railroad blockade….
…In connection with what has been stated above, it is the attack UAVs, including
in the form of swarms, that should be considered the main potential means of
delivering strikes against the Crimean bridge from Ukrainian territory.
…Construction of the Crimean bridge is indeed an event, the importance of
which is difficult to overestimate. Ukraine understands that with the placement in
operation of a bridge across the Kerch’ Strait, the economic connection of Crimea
with Russia’s other regions will be reinforced by many times, only [Ukraine] cannot
be reconciled with this and threats from radical nationalist groupings and even
Ukrainian officials are only growing.
…It is proposed to use the Buk-M2 short-range ZRS and Tor-M2 medium-range
ZRK as traditional air-missile defense weapons in the system of active protection
of the Crimean bridge. In this connection it is advisable to consider the question of
expanding the series production of these weapons.
…Being autonomous and self-sufficient, the system of active protection of the
Crimean bridge must support coordination with missile-air defense systems and
weapons deployed in Crimea and Krasnodarskiy Kray, and it is one element of the
overall VKS [Aerospace forces] missile-air defense system.
…The proposed system of active protection of the Crimean bridge is oriented
toward the use of series-produced armament and its creation does not require great
outlays. Most likely the expenditures will be considerably less than the possible
averted damage….

“…It is proposed to use the Buk-M2 short-range ZRS and Tor-M2 medium-range ZRK as traditional airmissile defense weapons in the system of active protection of the Crimean bridge.”
OE Watch | June 2018

53

EURASIA
“How I Spent My Summer Vacation”
OE Watch Commentary: As the
Northern Sea route becomes more
navigable, the need for icebreakers
falls off during the summer months.
Summer is traditionally the time for
icebreaker maintenance and crew
leave, though some consider it a shame
to have the fleet idle when it could
be earning some cash and spreading
good will. As many as 600 well-heeled
tourists will have the opportunity to
crunch their way to the North Pole
this summer on the most-powerful
icebreaker ever built. Arctic and
Antarctic cruises are becoming more
popular and Russia has been providing
icebreaker cruises to the North Pole
since 1991. This 14-day cruise even
offers an optional hot-air balloon ride
over the North Pole. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Russia’s fleet of nuclearpowered icebreakers
is state-owned and
operated by Rosatomflot in
Murmansk.”

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Five nuclear-powered voyages to melting North Pole,” The Independent
Barents Sea Observer, 18 April 2018. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/travel/2018/04/five-nuclearpowered-voyages-north-pole
50 Лет Победу [50 Years of Victory] - the most powerful icebreaker ever built will serve as a
cruise-ship for some of the best-paying travelers this summer. Embarking in Murmansk, the nuclearpowered giant sails towards the North Pole five times during June to August. Each tour takes 120
passengers….
The sea ice is currently melting away at record speed. Arctic sea ice gets thinner and younger,
making it move faster and breaking up more easily…. Russia’s fleet of nuclear-powered icebreakers
is state-owned and operated by Rosatomflot in Murmansk. Director of the fleet, Vyacheslav Ruksha,
says bringing tourists to the North Pole in the summer season isn’t among the most profitable
voyages that the icebreakers make. “Such tours are far from being of a main economic interest. We
are interested in this as a school, a kind of free advertising of our work.”
The icebreakers are normally opening the way for vessels sailing along the Northern Sea Route,
from the Kara Sea to the eastern northern shores of Siberia. In summer, however, most icebreakers
are in port at Murmansk for maintenance.
The first North Pole tourist cruise was arranged in 1991. The first time a Soviet icebreaker reached
the geographical North Polewas in 1977 when Артика [Arctic] became the first surface vessel
to make it all the way to the top. Last year, in a 40th Anniversary trip, an icebreaker sailed the
same route as Артика did. That voyage managed to set a new record for the route, sailing from
Murmansk to the North Pole in just 79 hours, less than half the time it took in 1977….
Tickets for passage and a berth onboard the North Pole Cruises starts at $27,295 and you share a
cabin. The spacious Arktika suite, on the top deck of the icebreaker, runs $42,990 per person.
Russian nuclear icebreaker “50 Years of Victory”.

Source: By Kiselev d [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:50letPob_pole.JPG.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | June 2018

54

EURASIA
The One Time in the Year We Get Bananas
OE Watch Commentary: Bootlaces,
printer toner, ammunition, batteries,
toothpaste – the list of expendables goes on
and on. In some bases in the Arctic, there
is one big shipment a year and hopefully,
the logistician or the packer did not forget
anything. The pack ice may be getting thinner,
but there are places in the Arctic that are only
accessible during limited seasonal windows.
Ice breakers are helpful, but it is considerably
easier to let the seasons assist the effort.
Moving the goods ship-to-shore is also an
exercise in patience and seamanship and the
ships do not sail away empty. The garbage
and containers do not stay in a dump on the
island. Fuel drums are flattened and loaded
and all the detritus is returned to Murmansk
for further processing. It is not a glamorous
mission, but essential to maintaining control
in the Arctic. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Ships loaded with goods and military equipment soon on their
way to new Arctic bases,” The Independent Barents Sea Observer, 15 May 2018. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2018/05/ships-loaded-goods-and-military-equipmentsoon-their-way-new-arctic-bases
…The goods include winter supplies, much of it fuel. The first shipments will be made
in early summer to military posts along the coast of the Kola Peninsula and the White
Sea. Later, when the ice retreats, the bases in the Novaya Zemlya, Franz Josef Land and
Severnaya Zemlya will be supplied. The remote base of Kotelny in the New Siberian Islands
will get the shipments only in August-September…
Military supply vessels are capable of delivering major amounts of goods to Arctic coastlines
without infrastructure [wharfs, piers and cranes]. Occasionally, smaller vessels are used
to bring the goods from big supply ships to the coast. Also aircraft are used in the supply
effort... Russia has, over the last few years, invested heavily in the development of new and
upgraded Arctic bases. Among the biggest projects are the new facilities at Kotelny in the
New Siberian Island. The base was reportedly ready to be handed over to the Northern Fleet
in mid-December 2016. Included in that project is the upgraded Temp airfield and the 12,000
square meter big trefoil-shaped Severny Klever housing and administration complex.
In April 2017, the 14,000 square meters military complex at the Nagurskoye base on
Aleksandra Land, the northernmost of the islands of Franz Josef Land, was completed and
ready for use.

“The first shipments will be made in early summer to military posts along the coast of the Kola Peninsula and
the White Sea. Later, when the ice retreats, the bases in the Novaya Zemlya, Franz Josef Land and Severnaya
Zemlya will be supplied.”

Good Job For a Drifter-Must Enjoy Bracing Climes
OE Watch Commentary: The Soviets
established drifting ice stations on large Arctic
ice floes starting in the 1930s. Their purpose
was to monitor the weather and conduct
experiments on the Arctic Ocean. The first
drifting ice station was the SS Chelyuskin,
which was a Soviet steamship that was trapped
in Arctic ice in 1934. In addition to keeping
the 111 sailors and passengers alive, and
building and rebuilding airfields, the stranded
Chelyuskinites kept radio contact with the
authorities and conducted meteorological
observations and studies. The ship was crushed
by pack ice, but the survivors became national
heroes. In 1937, the Soviets established North
Pole 1, the first intentional drifting station to
conduct year-round research in oceanology,
meteorology, aerology, hydrochemistry, ice
studies, hydro-physics, geo-magnetic studies
and marine biology. In 1954, they began posting
multiple ice stations in the Arctic. These stations
amassed a body of scientific knowledge about
the Arctic. The new base will not be built on
ice islands, but will drift, or move, to continue
the scientific exploration of the Arctic. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The floating base will be 67.8 meters long and 22.5 meters wide…with
a deadweight of 7,500 tons. The top speed will be ‘at least 10 knots.’”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “This is Russia’s new North Pole base,” The Independent Barents
Sea Observer, 24 April 2018. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/arctic/2018/04/russias-newnorth-pole-base
During the signing ceremony, Roshhydromet leader Maksim Yakovenko stated “Today’s
event marks the start of a principally new and comprehensive phase in the battle for
scientific knowledge in the Arctic under condition of melting ice…. We are proud that
Russia is here in the lead. The new Arctic platform is made for year-round complex
scientific studies in high altitudes in the Arctic Ocean.”
Project preparations for the mobile base has been on-going for the last two years. The
Admiralty Yard has built several of Russia’s polar research vessels, among them the
Academician Treshnikov in 2012.
The floating base will be 67.8 meters long and 22.5 meters wide…with a deadweight of
7,500 tons. The top speed will be “at least 10 knots.” The preliminary investment costs
amount to $116 million. The North Pole platform will replace Arctic research stations
based on drifting ice floes.
The Soviet Union and later Russia has had floating research stations in the Arctic since
1937, with a break in the years 1991-2003. During the last couple of years, it has become
more and more difficult to find ice floes solid enough to hold a station. The last “real” ice
station, “North Pole-40”, was established in October 2012 and had to be evacuated in May
2013, because the ice floe that the base was placed on, started to break apart.
OE Watch | June 2018

55

EURASIA
Russian Robots on Parade
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past decade the Kremlin leadership has used the Victory Day parade on 9 May both to recall the
country’s tremendous sacrifice during the Great Patriotic War (WW II) and to impress upon the nation that today’s Russia is fully prepared to
defend against any possible aggressor. Since 2008, the parade has included models of the country’s latest weapon systems. The 2018 parade
was no exception and as the brief excerpt from the normally centrist, Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye (Independent Military Review)
asserts, this year’s parade will include “the Uran-9 multifunction robot engineering combat system (and) the Uran-6 multifunction robot
engineering demining system….”
The article’s author claims that the decision to include these new robotic systems in the parade has caused “a fit of panic in Western experts”
since not only have these Russian robots “already been tested in war,” but that the equivalent Western technology has “failed spectacularly.”
The article goes on to list some of the specifications of the Uran-6 and Uran-9 systems, asserting that these “multifunction combat systems”
are “capable of doing everything.” The article ends on a belligerent note, pointing out that Russia and the West are not “playing on the same
side anymore,” and that given Russia’s advanced robotic technology, in the future, “stars-and-stripes Marines (will) surrender unconditionally
to ‘red’ robots.”
As in many matters related to Russia’s defense industry, the elaborate rhetoric does not always match the commonplace reality. Russia
did indeed include the robotic Uran-6 and Uran-9 systems during the Victory Day parade on 9 May, but instead of being remotely piloted
through the streets of Moscow and across Red Square, they were merely secured to the back of a Kamaz military truck. Russia continues to
make advances in robotic technology and their involvement in Syria provides a demanding testing site for these new systems. However, these
technological advances, despite what their media parades, will continue to be hampered by larger systemic weaknesses within the Russian
economy, society and political system. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“For if the Russians are showing a multifunction combat system – to put it more simply, a system ‘capable
of doing everything’ – at the parade in honor of the Great Victory, then this means that they have far from
just one model of it, and that it has already been tested in war.”

Source: Vladimir Shcherbakov, “Американцы в шоке от новых роботов Шойгу; Решение Москвы включить в парадный расчет на 9
мая боевых роботов вызвало приступ паники на Западе (Americans Shocked by Shoygu’s New Robots: Moscow’s Decision To Include
Combat Robots in 9 May Parade Detail Occasions Fit of Panic in West,)” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 27 April 2018. http://nvo.ng.ru/
armament/2018-04-27/100_uran9.html
When making the decision to include the latest robot engineering systems in the parade detail to participate in the 9 May Victory Parade,
General of the Army Sergey Shoygu, Russian Federation Defense Minister, probably did not presume that it would occasion a fit of panic in
Western experts….
…What, then, occasioned such unfeigned interest, bordering on fright, among Western analysts? By all accounts, the cause lies in just which
models will be shown in the parade. Let us recall that the Defense Minister said on 18 April, Unified Military Acceptance Day, that the Uran-9
multifunction robot engineering combat system, the Uran-6 multifunction robot engineering demining system, and Korsar short-range UAVs
would participate in the parade.
…the Uran-9 multifunction robot engineering combat system has been designed: to conduct reconnaissance and give fire support to forward
and reconnaissance subunits of tactical-link combined-arms formations; to enhance the efficiency of the fulfillment of combat tasks and
reduce subunit personnel losses when conducting combat operations, including on urbanized terrain and under urban conditions.
At the same time the Uran-9 system is not just a single robot but several at once: Each system incorporates four reconnaissance and fire
support robots, each of which is armed with a 2A72 30-mm automatic cannon, a PKTM 7.62-mm machine gun, an Ataka antitank missile
system, and RPO PDM-A Shmel-M infantry incendiary rocket launchers.
…According to the developer, the system is capable of destroying stationary and moving “tank”-type targets with antitank missiles at ranges
of up to 5,000 meters by day and 3,500 meters by night, as well as destroying various stationary and moving targets with cannon and small
arms at any time of day or night.
…Even a cursory glance at the fine Uran-9 multifunction robot engineering combat system and superficial familiarization with its
specifications are sufficient to understand why General of the Army Sergey Shoygu’s words caused such a commotion abroad. For if the
Russians are showing a multifunction combat system – to put it more simply, a system “capable of doing everything” – at the parade in honor
of the Great Victory, then this means that they have far from just one model of it, and that it has already been tested in war.
…At the same time the attempts of American generals to use ground robots armed with small arms to resolve combat tasks – according to
some information, the simplest tasks, like guarding the perimeter – have failed spectacularly…
…General of the Army Shoygu has quite a few “inhuman” models of arms in reserve that will repeatedly present Western politicians, military
people, and analysts with surprises. What did you want? We will not be playing on the same side anymore….
…It is hard to contemplate what title he will now be able to think up for his new work on Russian combat robots. However, it could well be
this: “Stars-and-stripes Marines surrender unconditionally to ‘red’ robots.” This is by no means even a fantastical supposition.
OE Watch | June 2018

56

EURASIA
UAV Use in the Russian Armed Forces
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from the 24 April 2018 edition of Izvestiya discusses how UAVs are being
used in the Russian Armed Forces. Of particular note, the Russian Armed Forces has established 67 UAV companies and likely has over 2000
UAVs of various sizes. These UAVs perform a variety of tasks, including: target acquisition, search and rescue, patrolling, signal retransmission,
electronic warfare, and artillery spotting. There are reports that Russia has operationally tested weapon-carrying UAVs in Syria. The
accompanying excerpted article from Zvezda TV discusses Russia’s Orlan-10 UAV, which is classified by the Russians as a ‘medium-class’ UAV
with a 120km operating radius, 14 hour aloft time, and 5000 meter flight ceiling. The Orlan-10s work in teams of 2-3. While one UAV conducts
reconnaissance at an altitude of 1000-1,500 meters, the second carries electronic warfare systems and the third functions as a retransmission
platform, flying at an altitude of 4,000-5,000 meters, to connect forward flying UAVs to control stations. Russia has demonstrated no known
SATCOM capability to control UAVs, so they regularly employ retransmission stations to support beyond line-of-site operations. Russia has
produced over 1000 Orlan-10s with 11 different modifications, accounting for approximately half of the Ministry of Defense’s UAV fleet. The
accompanying excerpted article from the 13 April 2018 edition of Izvestiya describes how Russia is developing Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) technologies for use in UAVs and other autonomous vehicles in order to alleviate dependencies upon GPS/GLONASS
navigation in electromagnetically challenged environments. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Bogdan Stepovoy. “Безлюдный флот: Россия стала второй
по числу военных беспилотников (The Unmanned Navy: Russia Has Become Second
Based Upon the Number of Military Unmanned Aerial Vehicles),” Izvestiya, 24 April
2018. https://iz.ru/732935/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/bezliudnyi-flot
The Ministry of Defense has decided to form new unmanned aerial vehicle regiments in
the Navy’s composition. Already right now the Russian Armed Forces are in second place
in the world based upon the number of drones. Since 2011, the number of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) in the RF Army has increased by more than a factor of 10. These devices
are involved with reconnaissance, target designation, adjust artillery and air strikes in the
online mode, and help to assess losses, which have been inflicted on the enemy. The UAV
fleet has changed the tactics of the use of the Armed Forces on the ground, at sea, and in
the air.
A Navy Main Staff spokesman told Izvestiya that the first UAV regiment was created in the
Northern Fleet as an experiment. Then a fundamental decision was made on the formation
of similar formations in all of the country’s fleets. UAV detachments have been created on
Kamchatka, at Severomorsk, and in the Crimea. They were transformed into squadrons in
2015. Now they will enlarge these formations and reform them into regiments…
In 2011, there were 180 UAVs in the Russian Army, a portion of which was still Soviet
made. There were more than 1,700 new drones in the troops in 2015. Their number
reached 1,980 by the end of 2016. There are 67 UAV companies in the Navy, Aerospace
Forces, and Ground Troops right now. Based upon expert assessments, the number of
UAVs in the Russian Army and Navy significantly surpasses 2,000. Their number will only
increase in the future…
Primarily reconnaissance missions were assigned to military unmanned aerial vehicles
10 years ago. Right now they find targets, participate in search and rescue operations,
patrolling, maintain communications, and adjust artillery and air strikes in the online
mode…
Several types of UAVs are used in the Armed Forces. The most widespread are the
Orlan-10…The Orlan UAVs are usually employed in groups of 2-3 aircraft. One of the
aircraft conducts reconnaissance at a distance of 1-1.5 kilometers from the ground, the
second carries electronic warfare systems, while located at a bit higher altitude, and
the third – relays video to base from an altitude of 4.5-5 kilometers…UAV companies of
battalion and brigade subordination have been created in the Ground Troops. They are
primarily equipped with Orlan-10 UAVs. As a rule, the drones accomplish reconnaissance
missions in motorized rifle and tank units…
The Russian unmanned aerial vehicle fleet lags behind the American fleet based upon
its strength. However, foreign experts think that domestic UAVs with electronic warfare
hardware will surpass the NATO countries’ similar aircraft. It is precisely those aircraft,
in their opinion, that are the main threat to the Western armies. Russia will have to make
one more step forward in the development of military unmanned aerial vehicles – to accept
heavy strike drones into the inventory.

Source: Pavel Kutarenko. “Уникальная
отечественная разработка: эксклюзивные
кадры с испытаний «Орланов» под
Петербургом (Unique Russian Development:
Exclusive Footage of Orlan Tests Near Saint
Petersburg),” Zvezda TV, 9 March 2018. https://
tvzvezda.ru/news/opk/content/201803090933un7x.htm
The Orlan can not only reconnoiter from
the air but also destroy enemy electronic
warfare assets, suppress communications or,
conversely, provide them via an interceptionproof channel” No modern-day army can now
manage without UAVs. Drones in the sky can
spend hours reconnoitering and guiding fire for
artillery and aviation -- the enemy has nowhere
to hide from the “all-seeing eye” even at night
and in bad weather.
After assembly, each Orlan multirole UAV
complex is dispatched to a testing ground near
Saint Petersburg. During a three-hour flight
the operation of all its systems are checked
-- from the infrared camera to the positioning
modules…
There is plenty that is secret in how it is
produced, because it differs radically from
civilian models. The Orlan can not only
reconnoiter from the air but also destroy
enemy electronic warfare assets, suppress
communications or, conversely, provide them
via an interception-proof channel. Since
starting work the maker has turned out more
than 1,000 Orlan-10 UAV complexes. Eleven
modifications of this aircraft are now in service
with our army but the developers are not
leaving it at that. Tests are already under way of
an advanced combat quadcopter -- its range is
a little less but it is much more mobile. Its main
advantage is that it is virtually silent, which is
crucial for reconnaissance.

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2018

57

EURASIA
Continued: UAV Use in the Russian Armed Forces
Source: Yevgeniy Devyatyarov and Aleksandr Kruglov. “Беспилотники научатся ориентироваться на местности (UAVs Learn to
Take Their Own Bearings),” Izvestiya, 13 April 2018. https://iz.ru/727459/evgenii-deviatiarov-aleksandr-kruglov/bespilotniki-nauchatsiaorientirovatsia-na-mestnosti
Combat robots are to learn to take their own bearings without using satellite navigation, to enable them to operate effectively even if GPS
and GLONASS signals are jammed. Russian specialists are developing an autonomous navigation system for airborne, terrestrial, and
underwater unmanned vehicles, to order for the Defense Ministry. The plan is that the new technology, which is based on machine vision
principles, will be implemented in the course of three years.
The Central Scientific Research and Development Institute for Robotic and Cybernetic Engineering (TsNII RTK) is developing autonomous
terrain mapping for airborne, terrestrial, and submarine drones, to order for the Russian Ministry of Defense. The institute’s specialists have
already begun trialing this kind of technology.
A machine vision system comparable in its functionality to a human eye will be used for autonomous navigation, Izvestiya was told at TsNII
RTK. It is also planned to use photographs of locations from popular online services such as Google and Yandex. In addition, unmanned
vehicles will themselves photograph terrain…The main goal is to refine the machine vision system and supplement it with elements of artificial
intelligence. This will enable an unmanned vehicle to navigate in a locality it has not surveyed, by using the publicly available photography of
Google and Yandex.
As part of the project, an algorithm is being developed to enable drones to operate as a team. In the area of its assigned mission a drone
will navigate by existing photographs, make its own photographs of the terrain, and transfer the data onto a map that is accessible to all the
drones. With each new flight over an area, its three-dimensional map becomes more detailed…

“There are 67 UAV companies in the Navy, Aerospace Forces, and Ground Troops right now. Based
upon expert assessments, the number of UAVs in the Russian Army and Navy significantly surpasses 2,000.
Their number will only increase in the future….”

Airborne Reconnaissance Units using Orlan-10, ZAPAD 2017.

Source:Mil.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zapad-2017_-_Airborne_exercise_11.jpg.

OE Watch | June 2018

58

EURASIA
Russian Praise of Syrian Air Defense
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin’s decision
to intervene militarily in Syria in September 2015 was
ostensibly predicated upon a request from the Syrian
government to help destroy terrorist formations within
the country. Since then, the Kremlin has largely adopted
the Syrian government’s perspective, whereby any group
which opposes the Assad government has been labeled as
“terrorist.” Not surprisingly, the Russian military mission
has morphed into supporting the Assad government,
regardless of the weapons employed by Syrian government
forces.
Since US coalition forces struck Syrian targets with
cruise missiles on 14 April, there has been considerable
debate over how many of these coalition cruise missiles
were shot down by Syrian Air Defense forces. The brief
excerpted article from the moderately pro-Kremlin source,
Vzglyad, discusses why the Russian Ministry of Defense
(MoD) has recently revised its calculations regarding
how many coalition missiles were destroyed by Syrian air
defense.
Initially the Russian MoD “stated that 71 enemy
missiles (of the 103 launched) were shot down, now only
46 are mentioned.” According to General Staff Main
Operational Directorate Chief Colonel-General Sergey
Rudskoy, this claim is based on “reconnaissance data
and the data recordings from the PVO complexes that we
have obtained, work on the terrain, and the interviews of
witnesses attest that 46 cruise missiles were destroyed by
the Pantsir, Osa, Strela-10, Buk, Kvadrat, and S-125 air
defense missile systems.” The initial boast of destroying
“71 enemy missiles” was predicated on the MoD’s “rush
to conclusions.” Curiously, the paper notes that the new
revised number of 46 downed missiles coincides with
Defense Minister Shoygu’s assertion “that 35 percent of
the missiles had been shot down.” The article describes
how Russian military experts have displayed cruise missile
fragments proving the effectiveness of the Syrian air
defense systems, concluding that Western military leaders
“have embellished their ‘victory’ of 14 April.”
The Kremlin-sponsored media not only provides wide
coverage of the Russian military exploits in Syria, but
also depicts the conflict from a pro-Assad perspective.
While the exact number of coalition missiles launched
on 14 April destroyed by Syrian air defense may never
be known, there’s no question which side the Kremlin
leadership supports, regardless of the means which the
Assad government employs. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

Source: Aleksey Nechayev and Yuriy Zaynashev, “Почему Генштаб изменил
количество сбитых в Сирии крылатых ракет (Why the General Staff Changed
the Number of Cruise Missiles That Were Shot Down in Syria),” Vzglyad, 25
April 2018. https://vz.ru/politics/2018/4/25/873329.html
The RF General Staff has reduced the assessment of the Syrian air defense
achievements in the duel with the Western Coalition on 14 April. If it was
initially stated that 71 enemy missiles (of the 103 launched) were shot down,
now only 46 are mentioned. Why does the fate of dozens of other missiles
remains unexplained and why did the Russian Military Department make these
corrections?
On Wednesday, the General Staff displayed to the public fragments of the cruise
missiles, which were launched against Syria on 14 April. These are fragments of
the US-manufactured Tomahawk sea-launched cruise missiles and of the SCALP
and Storm Shadow air-launched cruise missiles that were manufactured by
England and France….
…The fragments of the downed missiles have serial numbers, which will
permit us to easily determine the ownership of the weapons, General Staff
Main Operational Directorate Chief Colonel-General Sergey Rudskoy added.
Furthermore, Rudskoy stated new data on the operation’s results. The difference
between the new numbers and those, which that same General cited on the
morning of the 14th, immediately aroused attention.
“The reconnaissance data and the data recordings from the PVO complexes
that we have obtained, work on the terrain, and the interviews of witnesses
attest that 46 cruise missiles were destroyed by the Pantsir, Osa, Strela-10,
Buk, Kvadrat, and S-125 air defense missile systems, which cover the Syrian
capital and the Syrian Air Forces’ nearby airfields of Dyuvali, Dumeir, Bley, and
Mezze,” the General pointed out.
However, immediately after the strike, Rudskoy said: 71 missiles were shot
down, in other words, more than 70 percent of the more than 100 that were
launched against Syria….
…In any case, the Ministry of Defense essentially acknowledged that they
had rushed to the conclusions, which were made public immediately after the
bombardment.
According to Vzglyad Newspaper’s data, [Defense] Department Head Sergey
Shoygu had calculated at an internal meeting already a week ago that 35 percent
of the missiles had been shot down. This coincides with Rudskoy’s new data…
…Both Donald Trump and the Pentagon confirmed that the Syrian PVO in
general did not show itself and the defenders of the Syrian skies did not manage
to shoot down a single missile. Our General Staff’s summarized data, and
also the missile fragments that have been displayed to the press now indicate
the obvious deception, which the US President and his generals permitted
themselves.
Let’s point out that two of the 105 missiles, and precisely a Tomahawk and
an aircraft precision-guided missile, have already been delivered to Moscow.
Experts are studying them right now. The fact of their delivery to the Russian
capital irrefutably proves that Trump and the Pentagon, putting it mildly, have
embellished their “victory” of 14 April.

“The RF General Staff has reduced the assessment of the Syrian air defense achievements in the duel
with the Western Coalition on 14 April. If it was initially stated that 71 enemy missiles (of the 103 launched)
were shot down, now only 46 are mentioned.”
OE Watch | June 2018

59

EURASIA
Russia Wants SCO Help in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past 15 years, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) has hosted joint
military exercises among member countries where the nominal
enemy has usually been defined as an international terrorist
group. From the Kremlin’s perspective, besides helping to
streamline C2 procedures, these exercises have demonstrated
that Russia has important allies within Eurasia in the fight
against terrorism. In the brief accompanying excerpt from
the centrist daily, Nezavisimaya Gazeta, the author questions
why Russia’s SCO partners are willing to partake in training
exercises against terrorists, yet do not see the need to assist
Russia in its ongoing fight against actual terrorists in Syria.
The article begins by briefly describing the results of the
23 April SCO summit in Beijing, where defense and foreign
ministers discussed the agenda “for the summit meeting of
SCO member states’ heads to be held in China at the beginning
of June 2018,” and where the fight against terrorism will be a
major topic. The author then points out that Russia is not the
only SCO member which “clearly has a certain interest in this
conflict-ridden region” of Syria, and since “the countries united
around the SCO are seen by Russia as partners and allies which
basically share and support its foreign policy steps,” it begs the
question as to why these “partners and allies” are not doing
more to help Russia in Syria.
The article goes on to describe the proposed scenario for the
SCO “Peace Mission-2018 joint exercise on Russian territory”
which will be conducted in August, and which will include
the “new weapons and means of fighting bandit formations
currently in use by Russian and Syrian subunits in Syria.”
The article quotes a Russian general who bluntly points out
that while “the SCO countries organize joint maneuvers and
collaborate with each other in resolving combat training tasks…
so far not a single SCO country has supported Russia in real
combat operations on Syrian territory.”
In September 2015, when the Kremlin intervened militarily
in Syria, it asserted that the Assad government had requested
Russian aid in fighting international terrorism on Syrian soil.
All indications suggest that this decision was made without the
approval and/or coordination with the SCO. For Russian leaders
to now complain of the SCO’s lack of support reveals both the
weak integration of this organization and Russia’s parochial
decision-making process. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“It is something else that is unclear to me.
The SCO countries organize joint maneuvers
and collaborate with each other in resolving
combat training tasks. But so far not a single
SCO country has supported Russia in real
combat operations on Syrian territory…”

Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “ШОС готовит ‘Мирную миссию’ против
террористов (SCO Prepares ‘Peace Mission’ Against Terrorists,)”
Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 24 April 2018. http://www.ng.ru/
politics/2018-04-24/2_7219_shos.html
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization [SCO] countries will continue
to boost the level of their collaboration in the defense sphere. And Russia
continues to play the leading role in the SCO in the field of the practical
dissemination of combat experience of the fight against terrorists acquired
in Syria. That experience will be demonstrated in particular at the Peace
Mission joint military maneuvers which will be held this year on Russian
Federation territory.
The summit of SCO states’ defense ministers was held in Beijing 23 April
at the same time as the conference of foreign ministers of the countries
belonging to the organization. These summits of the leaders of the military
and diplomatic departments are seen as the main stage in preparing for
the summit meeting of SCO member states’ heads to be held in China at the
beginning of June 2018. And topics connected to the fight against terrorism
and the consolidation of common security in the SCO’s zone of responsibility
should be among the main ones at the meeting.
But each country also has tasks of its own. For Russia they are also
connected to the fact that so far it is the only SCO country to be taking part
in the protracted military conflict in the Middle East, seeking to implement
its own geopolitical and economic objectives. The other SCO countries
clearly have a certain interest in this conflict-ridden region too….
…The countries united around the SCO are seen by Russia as partners and
allies which basically share and support its foreign policy steps…Especially
as in implementing its geopolitical and military-economic objectives, Russia
is taking part in the Syrian conflict as the main player, as the state from
which many other countries want to borrow military experience.
Addressing his counterparts 23 April, Russian Defense Minister Sergey
Shoygu stated that “the time has come to activate the cooperation between
the SCO’s defense departments and to pool our efforts to safeguard our
common security...He observed that the Russian Federation Defense
Ministry is proposing “to fully consider Russian combat experience
acquired in Syria when conducting the Peace Mission-2018 joint exercise on
Russian territory in August.”
…The new Peace Mission-2018 military exercises will take place a long
way from conflict regions. They will take place in Chelyabinskaya Oblast at
the Chebarkul’ training area…
Military expert Lieutenant General Yuriy Netkachev is convinced that
new weapons and means of fighting bandit formations currently in use by
Russian and Syrian subunits in Syria will be on display at the maneuvers….
The general told Nezavisimaya Gazeta that on the military plane the concept
of the exercises in fighting terrorists is clear to him. “It is something else
that is unclear to me. The SCO countries organize joint maneuvers and
collaborate with each other in resolving combat training tasks. But so far
not a single SCO country has supported Russia in real combat operations
on Syrian territory…But in reality Russia is the only country from that
organization to be fighting in Syria. Why is that happening?” Netkachev
asks.

OE Watch | June 2018

60

EURASIA
No End in Sight for Donbas Conflict
OE Watch Commentary: The conflict between
pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian forces in
the Donbas region of Ukraine grinds on into its
fifth year. While the front-line has become largely
static, sporadic fighting continues with destruction
and casualty counts mounting ever higher. The
February 2015 Minsk II peace plan has long
become moribund with none of the warring
sides willing to compromise or constructively
work toward a peaceful resolution. Moreover, as
the accompanying excerpted articles indicate,
there are increasing signs which suggest that the
fighting could escalate.
The first excerpt from the independent
Ukrainian news source, Apostrof, describes the
recent decision by the Ukrainian government
to rename the conflict, from calling it an antiterrorist operation (ATO) to a Joint Forces
Operation (JFO) where Russia has been
specifically labeled as an aggressor. Under this
new format, the Ukrainian “military body will
control all law enforcers in the conflict zone: the
National Police, the Interior Ministry, the Armed
Forces and the Emergencies Ministry.” The article
goes on to posit that this change of operational
control may be predicated on the Ukrainian
hope that it will help “to prepare the ground for
the deployment of (international) peacekeeping
forces” throughout the entire conflict region.
The excerpt asserts however, that such a move is
highly unlikely, since the Kremlin sees no point in
giving “Poroshenko a victory in the form of some
agreements on peacekeepers” prior to the next
presidential election in Ukraine (June 2019).

Deputy Defense Minister of the Donetsk People’s Republic Eduard Basurin, 2015.
Source: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%A4%D0%B0%D0%B9%D0%BB:Eduard_basurin.jpg CCA BY 3.0

“Why would the Kremlin give Poroshenko a victory in the form of
some agreements on peacekeepers?”
Source: Artur Hor, “Украина начинает новую операцию на Донбассе: что изменится
для людей (Ukraine is commencing a new operation in Donbas: what will change for
people),” Apostrof, 30 April 2018. https://apostrophe.ua/article/society/2018-04-30/
ukraina-nachinaet-novuyu-operatsiyu-na-donbasse-chto-izmenitsya-dlya-lyudey/18150
On the last day of April, the antiterrorist operation in the conflict zone in Donbas
officially ends and Ukraine moves on to a new defense format - the Joint Forces Operation
(JFO). Apostrof has found out what is actually going to change on the frontline as the ATO
[antiterrorist operation] is replaced with the JFO. …The law’s central military element
is the creation of the Joint Operation Headquarters of the Armed Forces of Ukraine to
control all functions relating to the country’s defense in the east of Ukraine. This military
body will control all law enforcers in the conflict zone: the National Police, the Interior
Ministry, the Armed Forces and the Emergencies Ministry.

The second excerpt comes from the popular
pro-Kremlin Russian daily news source,
Komsomolskaya Pravda, where the author
…Apparently, the ultimate goal of recent steps to legalize the existing state of affairs
interviews one of the separatist commanders in
in the zone of the Donbas military conflict is to prepare ground for the deployment of
the Donetsk region. According to this commander, peacekeeping forces.
even under the new Ukrainian format “nothing
“I think that there was such a consideration,” Andrusiv agreed. “However, today,
has changed” with regard to the conflict. Shelling
in my opinion, the issue of a peacekeeping mission is dead…. Apparently, Russia has
“intensity remains the same” within the separatist
simply decided to wait until the presidential election. There is no much sense for the
regions and civilians continue to suffer. Similarly,
Russian Federation in taking any steps before the presidential election. Why would the
this separatist commander claims that the
Kremlin give Poroshenko a victory in the form of some agreements on peacekeepers?” he
recently delivered Javelin antitank system will
wondered….
“make virtually no difference.” He continues,
however, by asserting that “based on intelligence
information… the probability of escalation is high.” He concludes the interview by thanking his Russian audience “for not giving up, and for
supporting us both morally and physically.”

Russia continues to strengthen its military presence near the Ukrainian border, while supplying the separatist regions with all forms of
support. Ukraine has also solidified its military presence along the borders of the separatist regions. These articles suggest that this conflict is a
long way from being resolved. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

OE Watch | June 2018

61

EURASIA
Continued: No End in Sight for Donbas Conflict
Source: Aleksandr Gamov, “Aмериканских ‘Джавелин’ мы не боимся (We Are Not Afraid of American ‘Javelins’),” Komsomolskaya Pravda,
2 May 2018. https://www.kp.ru/daily/26825.7/3863586/
This is what the “Deputy Commander” of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic [DPR] Eduard Basurin said on air to
Komsomolskaya Pravda Radio.
- Colonel, 1 May was the first day that the Armed Forces of Ukraine (AFU) tried to conduct operations in Donbass in a new format – that is,
as they claim in Kyiv, no longer as “an antiterrorist operation” (АТО) as before, but, as they say, a tactical and a military one. What do you
think, what has changed?
- Nothing has changed.
- Tell us, what about the shelling of Donetsk, DPR…
- It continues. Civilians suffer as well….
- How intensive is the shelling? Is it at the same level as it used to be when the so-called ATO was in place?
- No, the intensity remains the same….
- Ukrainian war dogs are boasting that they have new antitank weapons systems – US-made ones, and that they are already beginning to
become familiar with them and to prepare them for practical application.
- These Javelins make virtually no difference….
- What are your predictions, Eduard Aleksandrovich [Basurin]? What prospects can there be?... How far can [Ukraine President Petro]
Poroshenko go? Can he venture to escalate? …
- Let us put it this way. The probability of escalation is high.
- And on what grounds do you determine this? Or is it based on intelligence reports?
- Yes, it is [based] on intelligence information. On the accumulation of manpower, technology; on what they do, what rotations take place.
[Our determination is] based on this….
- What would you like to say to those who are cheering for you, who worry about Donbass and its people? There are very many people who
believe in you.
- [We would like to express] words of gratitude to people for believing in us, for not giving up, and for supporting us both morally and
physically.
- Hang in there! Good luck!

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | June 2018

62

EURASIA
Russian Operational Reserve Developments
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Ministry of Defense has been tinkering with wide-scale reforms of the military reserve system for
several years. The current reserve system was inherited from the Soviet Union and designed for supporting a doctrine that required maintaining
a large strategic reserve of troops that could be mobilized in the event of large-scale warfare. It was composed of conscripts and officers who had
completed their mandatory service obligation and had been discharged from active service, with rare and infrequent call-ups to test mobilization
capabilities. A consequence of the Soviet Union’s mass mobilization doctrine was the necessity to maintain units and equipment for these
mobilized reservists. These units were/are manned by small full-time cadres that would keep the equipment serviceable and maintain enough
institutional knowledge to bring the mobilized reserve up to some level of combat readiness before deployment. Many of these “skeleton units”
were disbanded after the 2009 “New Look” reforms, as there was a belief that resources were being wasted on maintaining a mass mobilization
capability to the detriment of bringing active units up to full levels of operational readiness. There has been some debate about whether Russia
needs to maintain a large strategic reserve or should switch to more of an operational reserve. Opinions vary between two major camps, the
reformers saying that an operational reserve would do far more to enhance security because it would be smaller, better trained, more able to
quickly become combat ready in a national emergency, and more likely to called in an emergency, while older retired senior officers that believe
that the capability to mass mobilize should be maintained at all costs. Debate on this issue appears to be settled, as Russia is increasing both
capabilities.
The large strategic reserve will be developed by maintaining the universal conscription system and increasing the size and scope of Volunteer
Society for Cooperation with the Army, Aviation, and Navy (DOSAAF) programs that provides military training and militarily useful skills
to Russian youth. The accompanying excerpted articles explain how Russia is implementing the operational side of its reserve development.
As explained in the accompanying article from the 17 April 2018 edition of Izvestiya, Russia has now enacted legislation to govern reserve
promotions. Reservists that are regularly engaged in military training will be eligible for promotion up to the rank of Colonel (O6/NATO OF-5),
providing appropriate time-in-grade and military education requirements have been met. The article from Guarding the Arctic explains a new
operational reserve system (мобилизационных людских ресурсов, or mobilization human resources) that is being implemented in the North
Sea Fleet, which controls most military forces in the Northern Joint Strategic Command. Russian reservists reportedly serve up to three days a
month and conduct one 30 day training period per year, requirements that are very similar to the U.S. National Guard and Reserve. Reservists
receive 12 percent of their rank and positional pay (with incentive pay for being in the north) most of the time, but receive full allowances during
their 30 day training period. If this new system proves effective, it could well be implemented throughout the rest of the Russian military. The
article from the 3 April 2018 edition of Izvestiya explains how the Russian Navy will use an operational reserve. The Russian Navy envisages
forming a reserve crew for approximately 4-5 ships of a given class. This development is intended to relieve the burden upon active duty
crews which have been far more active in recent years, and in some cases, are spending significant time at sea. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov, “Военнослужащий запаса сможет дослужиться до полковника: Минобороны создало специальные
аттестационные комиссии для присвоения званий «запасникам» (A Reserve Serviceman Will Be Able to Serve Until Colonel: The
Ministry of Defense Has Created Special Evaluation Boards to Promote Reservists),” Izvestiya, 17 April 2018. https://iz.ru/731102/aleksandrkruglov/voennosluzhashchii-zapasa-smozhet-dosluzhitsia-do-polkovnika
A reserve serviceman will be able of serving until the rank of colonel.’ For the first time in the history of the native Ministry of Defense,
special evaluation boards have been created under the military commissariats. It is they who will decide whether a candidate is worthy of
receiving a promotion. In the process, the board will take into account the candidate’s military education, state of health, ethical qualities and
professional aptitude. In the experts’ opinion, the new approach will stimulate reserve servicemen to increase their qualifications. A Military
Department spokesman told Izvestiya that the Defense Minister’s Order “On The Procedures for the Conduct of the Evaluation for the Award
of Military Ranks to Citizens, Who Are in the Russian Federation Armed Forces Reserve” is already in force. The new document consolidated
and streamlined the requirements for reserve officers, who are seeking to obtain a promotion.
The evaluation boards will appear under the republic, kray, and oblast military commissariats. Their sessions will be conducted once per
quarter. Four employees of the corresponding commissariat and one government official will be part of each board. They will divide all
reserve officers into two categories – those assigned to a military unit and those who are on the general list at the military commissariat.
They will automatically place the former on a list of candidates for promotion. In the event of the declaration of a mobilization, these officers
must appear at a definite military unit, where a position has already been reserved for them…
It will be easiest of all to become a senior lieutenant. It is adequate to receive the evaluation board’s favorable endorsement and to undergo
a medical examination in order to do this. The promotion procedure is significantly complicated from captain and higher. The candidate
will have to complete training assemblies and retraining. He will have to pass tests based upon their results…The minimum intervals of time
between promotion to the next military rank are specified in the legislation. So, a senior lieutenant will be able to become a captain in four
years. A major will have to wait five years for promotion to lieutenant colonel. A reserve officer will be able to service for no more than to
colonel.
In the process, they will now award a below-the-zone promotion to a reserve serviceman. Thus the department intends to provide them an
incentive to increase their qualifications. The defense minister will make a personal decision on each officer here…Officers, who are not on
active military service, will be included in the reserve. The state’s mobilization capabilities are increased by the “reservists” in the event of a
large-scale war.
(continued)
OE Watch | June 2018

63

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Operational Reserve Developments
“The innovation is connected with the growing complexity of the tasks facing the Navy. The Russian
Fleet is returning to the World’s Oceans.”
Source: Olesya Frantsiskevich, “Гражданские Военные [Civilian
Servicemen],” Guarding the Arctic, 30 March 2018.
…The Northern Fleet has been taking part, for the third year
running, in an experiment conducted in the Russian Armed Forces
in line with the Russian President’s decree to test a new system
for training and building mobilization human resources (MHR)
[мобилизационных людских ресурсов (МЛР)].
…The essence of the experiment is that the Ministry of Defense
concludes, through the Northern Fleet command, a contract with
reservists on their inclusion in a mobilization human resource. “This
system of manning reserve subunits is being used in our country
for the first time,” Captain First Class Vladimir Kondratov, head of
the organizational-mobilization department of the Northern Fleet
headquarters, explains. “Military commissariats select reservists
using the same system as when they recruit contract servicemen:
Candidates undergo compulsory medical examinations, pass fitness
tests, and appear before a certification commission.”…
Those included in the mobilization human reserve are entitled to a
monthly monetary allowance, consisting of 12 percent of the salary
for the military position in which they are registered as reservists
in their military unit, 12 percent of the salary for the military rank,
additional pay for serving in extreme-north conditions, and a monthly
pro rata premium for continuous service in the reserve…Once a year,
reservists are mobilized for 30-day training camps, for operational,
mobilization, and combat training activities. For the duration of
that training, reservists receive 100 percent of a serviceman’s pay
and allowances. According to Vladimir Kondratov, it is during this
period that the greatest effect is achieved. They also attend monthly
training sessions lasting up to three days depending on the level of
their skills.
Captain First Class Vladimir Kondratov notes that the heads of
the organizations and enterprises whose employees are enrolled in
the MHR provide great support to the experiment. They understand
the importance of their subordinates’ military and mobilization
training and the need for them to attend reserve training camps…
In Murmanskaya Oblast, reserve training camps are organized in
one of the military units stationed in the town of Polyarnyy. The
participants in the experiment from all over the region arrive here
on the appointed day and are confined to barracks. They receive
pay and allowances in line with their position and rank, as well
as food, uniforms, and medical assistance. The camps include
the full program of combat training, including such disciplines as
communications, radiation, chemical, and biological protection,
special tactical training, fire, and physical training…

Source: Nikolay Surkov, Aleksey Ramm, and Yevgeniy Dmitriyev,
“Российский флот пополнится резервами: Сменные экипажи
обеспечат боевым надводным кораблям непрерывное
присутствие в дальней морской зоне (The Russian Fleet Will Be
Supplemented by Reserves: Rotating Crews Will Ensure Continuous
Presence of Combat Surface Ships in Distant Seas),” Izvestiya,
3 April 2018. https://iz.ru/725828/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-rammevgenii-dmitriev/rossiiskii-flot-popolnitsia-rezervami
The Russian Fleet will get rotating crews. They will, if necessary, be
sent to ships serving in a distant sea and ocean zone. This will make
it possible to ensure the Russian Navy’s constant presence in key
areas of the World Ocean. In the opinion of experts, the innovation
will increase the efficiency of the surface fleet’s utilization. The
Navy High Command told Izvestiya that the military department
will start forming additional reserve crews for the surface fleet this
year. The innovation will affect first- and second-rank ships. The
former include the largest combat units (with a displacement in
excess of 5,000 tons) – aircraft carriers, general-purpose amphibious
warfare ships, cruisers, and destroyers. The second rank are frigates,
corvettes, and large amphibious warfare ships, which are in great
demand now…It is planned that one reserve crew will be created for
four or five ships of every project in each fleet. Reservists, among
other things, will be used for this purpose in the future.
The innovation is connected with the growing complexity of the
tasks facing the Navy. The Russian Fleet is returning to the World’s
Oceans. Seamen are having to serve off the coasts of Syria and
Somalia and perform long voyages for the purpose of showing the
flag. At the same time, in connection with the objective shortage of
surface ships of the main classes, the task is being set of ensuring
the practically continuous operation of the available hardware.
However, no machine, not even the most sophisticated one, can
function without people. Involving reservists will make it possible to
let seamen rest. At the same time ships will be able to remain in the
Mediterranean or the Indian Ocean and to continue fulfilling tasks.
In addition, it will be possible to involve additional combat crews
if corresponding specialists in the regular crews fall ill or suffer
traumas.
It is proposed that for most of the year reservists will undergo
intensive training ashore, using the latest simulators. Training
sessions are also being planned for some reserve combat crews as
understudies on board ships, taking turns with the regular crews.
Upon completion of onshore instruction, the reserve crew will board
one of the ships of the corresponding project and, after completing
the reception and handover procedures, will begin tackling training
and combat tasks…

OE Watch | June 2018

64

EURASIA
Investments in Kazakhstan’s Space Agency
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Kazakhstan has been working to develop the country’s space agency, KazCosmos, since its
creation in 2007. While it has been slow to develop, the accompanying excerpted article reports on an agreement between the governments of
Kazakhstan, Russia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) that could make significant changes to the agency. The article comes from Central
Asia Monitor, a Russian-language website based in Kazakhstan, and includes a report on how the UAE government will be investing in the
Baikonur Cosmodrome (in southern Kazakhstan) and an interview with an expert on the Kazakh space industry on the impact that the UAE’s
investments could have on the development of KazCosmos.
The article notes how a “lack of funds” caused “the delay with the construction of the Bayterek space rocket complex.” The governments of
Kazakhstan and Russia started work on Bayterek a number of years ago as a project to refurbish an unused launch site at Baikonur. Bayterek
is slated to be KazCosmos’ own launch site as Russia reduces its presence at Baikonur. The statement on Bayterek that “stacks of money were
channeled into nowhere” reflects the perspective many in Kazakhstan have of the project, even if expectations of it have not been very high. It
is unknown if the UAE’s investments will be channeled into Bayterek or another project, but the article notes that some see it as “an excellent
opportunity for Kazakhstan to rejuvenate its space programs.” KazCosmos’ successes to date include three communications satellites and the
Kazakh government has indicated that future projects could have military applications. While this is not likely to take place for at least a few
years, how the government of the UAE invests in Baikonur will be worth watching. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“...it is a real chance to adapt the new project to production of Kazakh satellites. As is known, the Soyuz-2
rocket is capable of putting about eight tonnes of cargo into orbit, whereas our assembly testing center in
Astana is designed to produce space vehicles weighing up to six tonnes…it will serve as a certain cushion
for the Bayterek project, just in a more modest and less risky way…”

Soyuz TMA-10M spacecraft at the Baikonur Cosmodrome launch pad (2013).

Source: By NASA/Carla Cioffi [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Soyuz_TMA-10M_spacecraft_at_the_Baikonur_Cosmodrome_launch_pad_(4).jpg.

(continued)
OE Watch | June 2018

65

EURASIA
Continued: Investments in Kazakhstan’s Space Agency
Source: Isabayeva, Saule. “Зачем Эмиратам казахский Байконур? И что от этого получим мы? (What is Kazakhstan’s Baikonur to the
Emirates? What do we get from this?),” Central Asia Monitor, 15 April 2018. https://camonitor.kz/30987-zachem-emiratam-kazahskiybaykonur-i-chto-ot-etogo-poluchim-my.html
A turning point in Baikonur’s fate may be coming soon…a protocol signed by representatives of the relevant agencies of Kazakhstan, Russia
and the UAE on 21 March envisaging expansion of trilateral cooperation in the field of space exploration…It is not known yet what specific
projects it might involve. Today we will attempt to slightly remove the veil of secrecy and speculate on how realistic it is to breathe a new life
into Baikonur and whether the Emirates have the capacity to do that…
As is known, so far the country (UAE) has not been able to celebrate any serious achievements in the sphere of space exploration…By the
way, in terms of investments in space research, the UAE ranks among the leading nations of the world…The lack of funds was indeed one of
the main reasons behind the delay with the construction of the Bayterek space rocket complex, which actually was meant to open the door for
Kazakhstan to the club of space powers…
One of our specialists, who was involved in the origins of Kazakhstan’s space program, noted that for the UAE this was nothing more than
a purely prestige project…“Just look at how skillfully Russia ‘tricked’ the Kazakhs with Bayterek. It gave numerous promises, even laid the
foundation stone…Stacks of money were channeled into nowhere. In fact, our money helped to finish the purely Russian project Angara - these
rocket carriers will be flying from Plesetsk and Vostochnyy, but not from Baikonur”…“Therefore, we need to find our own place in the space
industry, while taking into account our real capabilities. A bright example is Sweden. It does not have its own cosmodrome, its budget is fairly
modest, but the country actually assembles its own satellites for both civil and military use, which are aimed at solving specific issues, and it
generates a multiplicative effect affecting everything around,” our interlocutor concluded…
Another expert, editor-in-chief of the Space Research and Technologies magazine Nurlan Aselkan, holds to a fairly different point of view.
In his opinion, the UAE’s coming to Baikonur is an excellent opportunity for Kazakhstan to rejuvenate its space programs and even receive
commercial benefits…
(Isabayeva) Nurlan, which specific projects are we talking about? Could it be the Bayterek complex, considering the fact that the UAE had
earlier expressed interest in it?
(Nurlan Aselkan) The meeting on 21 March discussed prospects for the creation of joint space programs on a commercial footing. The UAE
voiced readiness to invest quite serious financial resources in the Baikonur cosmodrome’s infrastructure…Kazakhstan itself is still not sure
entirely whether the Bayterek program, which is being carried out together with the Russian Federation, will be completed as planned. As
you know, they have been trying to implement the project for nearly 15 years now, and over this period of time it has gone through a lot…
Especially considering the fact that the (current economic) crisis resulted in serious budget cuts for Roskosmos (Russian Space Agency), and
it is planning further cost reductions on the maintenance of facilities at Baikonur…
(Isabayeva) How is it going to look technically?
(Aselkan) The scheme will probably be as follows. Kazakhstan, as the owner of the land and the complex (Gagarin’s start) itself, will
terminate the latter’s lease to the Russian Federation and hand it over to a joint venture, which will use the UAE money to implement a
trilateral project on the modernization of the launch pad to adapt it for the new Soyuz-2 rocket…For its part, Roskosmos daughter company,
Glavkosmos, may perform commercial launches, the revenue from which will be divided between the three parties. It will also operate as the
supplier of the rocket…The development of such a huge project as Bayterek might keep getting postponed for years…Especially considering
the fact that it will be under the complete control of those who invest big money, and these people do not like protracted and uncertain
scenarios.
(Isabayeva) What exactly Kazakhstan is going to gain from that?
(Aselkan) …it is a real chance to adapt the new project to production of Kazakh satellites. As is known, the Soyuz-2 rocket is capable of
putting about eight tonnes of cargo into orbit, whereas our assembly testing center in Astana is designed to produce space vehicles weighing
up to six tonnes…it will serve as a certain cushion for the Bayterek project, just in a more modest and less risky way…
(Isabayeva) Everything is clear with Russia and Kazakhstan. What benefits the UAE?
(Aselkan) The Emirates are keen to obtain access to space in the shortest possible period, and not to spend decades to this end. Furthermore,
they will not be satisfied with simply buying and launching a satellite, let us say, on a European rocket. They strive to become co-owners,
a regulating side and operator and want to be able to make money from that. That is why the Arabs decided to invest in the already tested
Russian rocket on a reliable Kazakh cosmodrome…

OE Watch | June 2018

66

EURASIA
The Outlook on Armenia’s Military Reforms
OE Watch Commentary: The recent protests in
Armenia that led to the resignation of Prime Minister
Serge Sargsian on 23 April significantly impacted
the country’s political establishment, but as the
accompanying excerpted articles demonstrate, the
impact it will have on the armed forces has yet to
be fully felt. The articles from News Armenia, an
independent news agency, report on the transition
from Defense Minister Vigen Sargsian (no relation to
the former prime minister) to David Tonoyan. As the
article published on 11 May mentions, Tonoyan was
First Deputy Minister of Defense for a couple of years
starting in 2010 and was most recently Minister for
Emergency Situations. While there is no assessment
of his performance in previous posts, he has some
experience in the Ministry of Defense.
The article from Panorama, an independent news
website, reports on a development in the Armenian
armed forces that took place before Vigen Sargsian
stepped down. The article notes how the Armenian
government recently implemented the fourth step in the
“Nation-Army” concept, a series of reforms Sargsian
helped create over a year ago. As the article notes, the
series of reforms included efforts to strengthen “the
connection between the army and society” and a “7 year
army modernization program.” It is worth noting that
the April 2016 clashes in Nagorny-Karabakh influenced
some of the reforms. The fourth step consisted of new
“conditions for granting conscripts a deferment of
military service in the framework of targeted training”
and updates to the “organization and procedures of
the medical commission during conscription,” both of
which proved to be controversial.
Under this step, the granting of a deferment of service
would take place for university students, but it forced
them to sign up for a three year term after graduation,
the “targeted training,” or be conscripted immediately
for two years. Some in Armenia believed the changes to
the medical commission did little to address corruption
during conscription periods. It could be some time
before new Defense Minister Tonoyan makes any
major policy changes, but the “Nation-Army” concept
could be one area to undergo changes. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

Source: “Виген Саркисян продолжит исполнять обязанности министра
обороны Армении до назначения нового главы ведомства (Vigen Sargsian
will continue to carry out the duties of Minister of Defense of Armenia until the
appointment of a new minister),” News Armenia, 9 May 2018. https://news.am/rus/
news/450392.html
“…Nothing can stop me from fulfilling my duties until I know that a new minister
has been appointed.” Vigen Sargsian explained…At the same time, he ruled out the
possibility of working in the new government. “The minister is not an employee.
This is a political post, there is a question of teamwork, unity…,” Sargsian said…
According to him (Sargsian), they intend to have a 10 hour briefing to inform the
new minister with the work of the department…
Source: “Давид Тоноян назначен министром обороны Армении (David Tonoyan
has been named Minister of Defense of Armenia),” News Armenia, 11 May 2018.
https://news.am/rus/news/450805.html
The Minister for Emergency Situations, David Tonoyan, has been appointed
Minister of Defense of Armenia…
…in 2010 by decree of the President of Armenia (Tonoyan) was appointed
First Deputy Minister of Defense…in 2017, appointed Minister for Emergency
Situations…
Source: “Правительство Армении предприняло «4-й шаг» для реализации
концепции «Нация-армия»: решения по отсрочкам и медкомиссиям (The
government of Armenia undertook the ‘4 step’ for the implementation of the
‘Nation-Army’ concept: decisions on deferment and medical commissions),”
Panorama, 12 April 2018. https://www.panorama.am/ru/news/2018/04/12/
Концепция-Нация-армия-по-отсрочки-медкомиссии/1932849
…Vigen Sargsian, Minister of Defense of the Republic of Armenia, noted that
the fourth important step in implementing the “Nation-Army” concept was being
finalized today…
According to Sargsian the first step was ideological…related to the construction
of the army, strengthening the connection between the army and society. The
second step was legal…The third important step was the 7 year army modernization
program…
The fourth important step was taken today…The government thereby established
conditions for granting conscripts a deferment of military service in the framework
of targeted training…The government also made a decision on the organization and
procedures of the medical commission during conscription…
…on 20 April 2017, Sargsian presented two new projects in the framework of
the “Nation-Army” concept – “I have honor” and “This is me”...“I have honor”
connects academic deferment with future officers’ service. The project “This is me”
is made for conscripts who want to serve on the front line (this will be an immediate
contract for three years of service with conditions)…

“The government thereby established conditions for granting conscripts a deferment of military service in
the framework of targeted training.”

OE Watch | June 2018

67

