community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #5
May 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

china’s reach

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA

LATIN AMERICA

3
4

24

6
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Tension between Greece and Turkey in the Aegean Sea
Disputes over Natural Gas Exploration in the Eastern
Mediterranean
Iran and Russia Compete for Influence in Syria
“Turkey-Russia Rapprochement” Continues
Turkish Defense Companies Reach Agreements with
Qatar’s Armed Forces
A New Striking Power for the Turkish Armed Forces
Will Iran Interfere in Kashmir?
Rouhani Speaks about the Internet
Why Did the Mayor of Tehran Resign?
Former Governor: ISIS May Reemerge in Kirkuk
The Tunnels of Ghouta
Online “Suicide Challenge” Draws Attention in Egypt and
Beyond

21
22
23

26
27
29
30
31
31
32
33
34
35
36

AFRICA
17
18
19
20

25

Kenya: “You Don’t Look Like a Terrorist”
Climate Change as a Conflict Driver in Somalia
Black Gold Helps Fund Al-Shabaab in Kenya
Still Deadly: Al-Shabaab Attacks Ugandan AMISOM
Contingent
A French General Discusses Challenges in Mali
Nigeria Recovering 300 Million Dollars from Corrupt
General’s Foreign Account
Multiple Sources of Trafficked Weapons

Colombia and Brazil Look for Solutions to Deal with
Massive Venezuelan Migration
Brazil’s Federal Government Open Border Policy
Challenges Frontier States
Colombian-Venezuelan Border Ills
Bolivarians Gain Influence over Colombian Resources
Venezuelan Elections Worth Anything?
Regarding the Colombian Elections
Archbishop of Bogotá Confesses Left
Peruvian President Resigns, Replaced
Brazilians Send Former President to Jail
Cuban Media Praises Putin’s Victory
Criminal Organizations and the Use of Encrypted
Communication Devices in Latin America
Private Jets as a Viable Option for Trans-Atlantic Cocaine
Shipments
The Price of Chinese Investment in Latin America

ASIA-PACIFIC
37
38
39
41
42
43

China Lauds Its Model of Development Cooperation in
Africa
PLA Dispatches First Military Medical Team to
Mozambique
Retired PLA Lieutenant General Outlines Scenario in
which China Could Take Taiwan by Force in Three Days
China in Greenland: Mines, Science, and Nods to
Independence
China Gaining Momentum in Quantum Technologies That
Can be Used in Military Applications
China is Beefing Up Its Intelligence Curriculum for Military
Personnel

44
45
46
47
48
49

China Holds Naval Review in the South China Sea
China’s Carrier Aviation Unit Improves Training
Relocation in Southern Xinjiang: China Expands the Program
Perspectives on the Future of Marawi
Indonesia Brings Terrorists and Victims Together
Thailand and Malaysia Build Border Wall

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
50
51
52
53
54

India’s Red Line for China
The Future of Indian-Russian Security Cooperation
The Goals of the Tashkent Security Conference
Armenia Gears Up for ‘Future Wars’
Russian Military Police Deploy to Armenia

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
55
56
58
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
68
68
69
70

Considering No-Fly Zones in Russian Military Science
The Douhet Doctrine, Russian Style
Gerasimov on Future War and Modernization Priorities
The Kremlin’s Media Strategy
Keeping Russian Troops Informed and Inspired
Cleaning Up the Professional Ranks
Additional Compensation for Remote Assignments
Reasons for Caspian Flotilla Headquarters Relocation
Chechen Special Troops Retake Nuclear-Powered Icebreaker in
Exercise
The Russian Yasen-M Class Submarines Examined
Russian Robot Ships in the Arctic
UAV Support for Military Mountaineering
New Fuel Bladders for Improved Mobility
Is Catalonia an Irregular Warfare Battleground?

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 5

May | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gunduz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Zach Kelsay
		
Asia-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Miguel Martin
Spencer Shanks
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

		
Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Eduard Abrahamyan
Matthew Stein
Jacob Zenn

Russia, Ukraine, Europe

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Kaitlyn Johnson
Boris Vainer
Tom Wilhelm

ON THE COVER:
Chinese President Xi Jinping inspects the military guard of honour during
his state visit to South Africa at the Union Buildings in Pretoria (12/2015).
Image Source: GovernmentZA Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/governmentza/23147989839, CC 2.0.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Tension between Greece and Turkey in the Aegean Sea
OE Watch Commentary: The tension between Greece and Turkey
continues to escalate with increasing military activities of these two
neighboring nations in the Aegean Sea. Politicians have been a major
contributor to this tension. The major area of the dispute has been the
Aegean Sea, and the accompanying excerpted article from the Turkish daily
newspaper Hurriyet sheds light on this tension.

“In Turkey’s relations with Greece most of the
time one needs to deal with the negative effects of
history and geography [on these relations].”

On 2 March, two Greek soldiers were taken into custody after entering
a Turkish military zone in the Edirne Province. First, the article notes that
this development gave Greek Defense Minister Panos Kommenos a reason
or an excuse to act. As a result, he gave a speech on Icaria Island, which
is close to Turkey, stating he has the capacity to go to Turkey himself
and forcefully take the two Greek soldiers back. According to the author,
to support his threats, Greece has spread the news of deploying 3,500
soldiers to the Turkish-Greek border. In response, Turkey advised Minister
Kommenos to look at recent history to recall the outcomes of Greek
adventures into Anatolia, referring to the Turkish War of Independence.
According to the author, Turkish and Greek relations have been under
the influence of their historical experiences with each other and the
geographical future of the Aegean Sea.
However, the article states that the reason behind recent tension is
Athens’ refusal to extradite eight alleged Turkish putschists and members
of the terrorist outfit DHKP-C, who were accused of plotting to assassinate
Turkish President Recep Erdogan during his visit to Greece in December
2017. Additionally, instead of keeping the disputed issues between Turkey
and Greece in the Aegean frozen until reaching a resolution, Athens started
exploiting these areas. The author notes that since 1970, Turkey and Greece
have faced a series of problems linked to the Aegean Sea. These problems
Aegean Sea Map.
Source: Created by NormanEinstein, January 12, 2006, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aegean_Sea_map.png, CC 3.0.
have included the disputed widths of territorial waters in the Aegean
Sea, sharing of the continental shelf and airspace, and responsibilities of the flight information region over the Aegean Sea. On the issue of
arming the Aegean islands, Greece and Turkey advocate different policies. In essence, Ankara and Athens have very different attitudes about
how to share and cooperate in the Aegean Sea. The author suggests that Turkey and Greece should engage in a constructive dialogue at the
negotiating table to solve these problems, but considering the recent dispute in the Edirne Province, it is difficult to see how far this will go.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)
Source: Oguz Celikkol, “Türkiye-Yunanistan İlişkilerinde Gerginleşme (Turkish-Greece Relations becoming Strained),” Hurriyet, 12 April
2018. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/oguz-celikkol/turkiye-yunanistan-iliskilerinde-gerginlesme-40802272
Something has not been going well in the Turkey-Greece relations for a while. The tensions in the relations between the two countries are
reflected in the media. In this case, Greek politicians such as Panes Kammenos have also contributed to the escalation of tension.
But Kammenos is not just any Greek politician. At the moment he is the Greek Minister of Defense. When as a Greek Minister of Defense,
Kammenos talks about the possibility of a hot conflict between Greece and Turkey, he is taken seriously. The threats and insults that he throws
out there will be picked up by the media…
Greek courts continue making decisions to prevent the extradition of Turkish putschists, Turkish citizens and members of the terrorist outfit,
[DHKP-C]. This strains Ankara-Athens relations. The Greek government defends these decisions regarding the putschists and terrorists with
judicial independence and argues that it should not negatively impact Turkish-Greek relations.
Ankara finds the reaction of Greece to the arrest of the two Greek soldiers in March incomprehensible. The two Greek soldiers who crossed
the border were arrested on charges of military espionage and intrusion into the military territory. Greece wants the two soldiers to be
released immediately despite the court decision. Greece … does not want to accept the Turkish court decision that was given under judicial
independence.
The Greek Minister of Defense Kommenos naturally took this opportunity … To support his threats, Kommenos has leaked the news of
deploying 3,500 soldiers to the Turkish-Greek land border…Turkish-Greek relations have been affected by the long history between [them].
Geography contributed to this because of the characteristics of the Aegean Sea. In Turkey’s relations with Greece, it is often dealing with the
negative effects of history and geography [on these relations].
…In the Aegean the disputed widths of territorial waters, sharing of the continental shelf and airspace, responsibilities of the flight
information region over the Aegean Sea, and in the issue of arming the Aegean islands, Greece and Turkey defend different policies.
OE Watch | May 2018

3

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Disputes over Natural Gas Exploration in the Eastern
Mediterranean
OE Watch Commentary: The discovery of hydrocarbon reserves
and drilling in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea has escalated tensions
between Turkey, Greek Cypriots and other coastal governments.
On 9 February 2018 the Turkish Navy halted the work of a drilling
ship which was licensed by the Greek Cypriot administration to
explore hydrocarbon reserves south of Cyprus. The accompanying
passages from Turkish and Middle Eastern sources shed light on this
rising tension, especially between Turkey and Cyprus in the Eastern
Mediterranean Sea.
The first passage from Al-Monitor, a news website with analysts
from the Middle East, states that the Turkish General Staff issued a
statement on 14 February saying they are conducting surveillance
missions in the Eastern Mediterranean as part of Turkey’s ongoing
maritime security protocol to provide safety for oil transportation and
to deter potential threats. According to the author, the day before the
Turkish standoff, ENI--the Italian drilling company which the Greek
Cypriot government had contracted, announced the discovery of lean
gas in Block 6, off the coast of Cyprus. The article claims that there
is a natural gas alliance between Greece, Cyprus, Israel and Egypt
in the Eastern Mediterranean and that Turkey perceives members of
the alliance being aware of the limits of its military. Those perceived
limits are due to purges following the July 2016 coup attempt,
Turkey’s military engagement in Syria, and its increasing isolation
in the region. ENI ceased its exploration and moved its drilling ship
from the Eastern Mediterranean. According to the author, escalation
of the situation will depend on whether Turkey will deploy its
recently purchased Deepsea Metro II drilling ship to the Eastern
Mediterranean accompanied by the Turkish Navy, which will be an
indicator “that Ankara defines the crisis as a military problem.”
The second passage is also from Al-Monitor and written by the
same author as a follow-up on the issue. In his article entitled,
“Eastern Mediterranean starting to resemble disputed South China
Sea,” the author argues that natural gas drilling is impacting power
dynamics in the Eastern Mediterranean not only between Turkey and
Cyprus, but also among coastal neighbors such as Lebanon, Israel,
and Egypt. It states that while the crisis between Turkey and Cyprus
is becoming militarized, there are also growing tensions between
Egypt and Turkey over the disputed Exclusive Economic Zone.
The third passage, from the Turkish-language daily newspaper
Milliyet, notes that natural gas reserves have become a source of
tension and dispute not only between “Turkish Cyprus” and “Greek
Cyprus,” but also between Turkey, Greece and even the European
Union. Turkey is the only country in the world that recognizes
sovereignty of “Turkish Cyprus.” According to the author, tension
has escalated to the level of risking a conflict. The article states that
the reason for this situation is the Greek administration disregarding
the views and wishes of Turkish Cypriots and bringing in foreign
companies and countries for exploration, while ignoring Turkish
Cypriots when declaring an exclusive economic zone. This attitude
has led Turkey to take military measures to prevent the drilling
activities initiated by Cyprus. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

Source: Metin Gurcan, “Tempers flare over gas exploration in
Mediterranean,” Al-Monitor, 15 February 2018. https://www.almonitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/02/turkey-major-crisis-in-easternmediterranean-is-nearing.html
[T]he first hot military standoff of 2018 started Feb. 9 between the
Turkish navy and the Saipem 12000 drilling ship of Italy’s ENI SpA,
which is licensed by the Greek Cypriot administration to explore
hydrocarbon reserves south of the island. As the Saipem 12000
was sailing from the area known as Block 6 southwest of the island
toward Block 3, Turkish naval vessels approached within 5 miles of it.
The Saipem 12000 halted some 15 nautical miles from its destination
in Block 3, an area 70 kilometers (43 miles) off the coast of Cape
Greco on the southeastern tip of the island.
On Feb. 8, just a day before the reported standoff, ENI announced
it had made a lean (residual) gas discovery in Block 6 off Cyprus.
According to ENI, the well — which was drilled in water 2,074 meters
(1.3 miles) deep, reaching a final total depth of 3,827 meters (2.4
miles) — has excellent reservoir characteristics.
The Turkish naval detachment that blocked Saipem 12000 has been
in the region for about three months...
...Ankara feels the natural gas alliance of Greece, Greek Cypriots,
Israel and Egypt — being aware of the Turkish military’s capacity
shortcomings since the July 2016 coup attempt, its military
involvement in Syria and its increasing isolation — is scheming for
diplomatic, economic and military faits accomplis...
Actually, to understand whether Ankara will escalate the situation,
we also have to keep an eye on the Diliskelesi Port near Istanbul,
where Turkey’s recently purchased Deepsea Metro II drilling ship is
still moored after arriving at the beginning of January... If Turkish
naval elements accompany the ship to the eastern Mediterranean
Sea, that will be a strong indicator that Ankara defines the crisis as a
military problem.
Source: Metin Gurcan, “Eastern Mediterranean starting to resemble
disputed South China Sea,” Al-Monitor, 13 March 2018. https://
www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/03/turkey-mediterraneanresembling-south-china-sea.html
The eastern Mediterranean Sea has become a very busy place, and
pressure abounds among coastal neighbors there. Governments
are declaring exclusive economic zones (EEZs), but they overlap.
States are granting duplicate licenses for natural gas exploration
and drilling. Mammoth energy corporations and coastal states
are signing hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of hydrocarbon
agreements. Frequent maritime safety broadcasts are informing of
endless military exercises.
Israel and Lebanon are on edge over hydrocarbon reserves.
Lebanon awarded bids last month to France’s Total SA, Italy’s Eni
SpA and Russia’s Novatek to drill for oil and gas in Blocks 4 and 9
within Lebanon EEZ Israel doesn’t recognize these bids and claims
that all of Block 9 is within its EEZ.
Then there is the crisis between Turkey and Greek Cyprus, which is
becoming progressively militarized.

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2018

4

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Disputes over Natural Gas Exploration in the
Eastern Mediterranean
“The Turkish naval detachment that blocked Saipem 12000 has been in the region for about three
months.”
Source: Sami Kohen, “Dogu Akdeniz Krizi ve AB (Eastern Mediterranean Crisis and EU),” Milliyet, 27 March 2018. http://www.milliyet.
com.tr/yazarlar/sami-kohen/dogu-akdeniz-krizi-ve-ab-2635144/
The energy reserves in the waters have become a source of tension and dispute between the parties.
Recently, this issue not only has brought two communities on the island, the Greeks and Turks into tension, but has also caused a European
Union and Turkish face off. So much so that the escalating tension has now created the danger of a hot battle on the open sea…
The most important reason leading to this situation is undoubtedly the one-sided act of the Greek Cypriot administration, without taking into
consideration the views and wishes of the Turkish side, reaching agreements with foreign companies and countries for search activity, and
ignoring the Turkish side when declaring an exclusive economic zone.
This attitude has resulted in the Turkish military interfering to prevent Greek drilling activities. Therefore, the sudden warming of the waters
in the Eastern Mediterranean has led to this issue becoming international.

Eastern Mediterranean Basins’ Oil and Gas Fields.

Source: By U.S. Energy Information Administration (eia) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eastern_Mediterranean_
basins_including_Levent_basin_and_oil_and_gas_fields.png.

OE Watch | May 2018

5

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran and Russia Compete for Influence in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: It should come as no
surprise that a growing number of Syrians are studying
the Russian and Farsi languages. Interest in learning
Russian has proliferated in the coastal provinces of
Lattakia and Tartous, where the Russian military
presence is strongest. The expansion of Farsi, meanwhile,
has been most notable in areas in and around Damascus.
Ultimately, both countries seek to deepen their influence
in Syria by soft-power means such as language education,
as the following articles from Arabic-language media
suggest.
According to the first accompanying article, from the
Syrian government daily Tishreen, over 15,000 Syrians
currently study Russian in 170 different schools. The
push to learn Russian is directly connected to Russian
military efforts in Syria and is in large part driven by the
Syrian government, which has become largely dependent
on its Russian benefactor. Private and non-governmental
institutions are also increasingly offering Russian
language classes. For example the second accompanying
article, from the Arabic-language website for Russia’s
Sputnik news agency, cites a recent initiative by a Syrian
charitable foundation to offer free Russian language
classes in the city of Aleppo, in order to “strengthen
friendship between the two peoples.”
In contrast to the recent spike in Russian language
instruction, the spread of Farsi learning in Syria
precedes the current conflict and is woven into an
Iranian regional policy aimed at spreading ideology
through culture, religion and language. Syrian cultural
and religious affinities are closer to Iran than to Russia,
making it easier to wrap language into a broader
cultural package. As noted in the third accompanying
excerpt, from the Syrian opposition’s Orient News, Farsi
instruction is often attached to cultural and religious
centers established with assistance from the Iranian
Embassy in Damascus. The article further notes that
the number of such centers is proliferating, including in
coastal areas where Russian influence is strongest.
The expansion of Russian and Iranian language
teaching and cultural exchange is part of a broader
competition for influence in Syria. The competition has
yet to produce any noteworthy friction, but according to
the fourth accompanying article, from Qatar’s al-Jazeera,
the leadership of both countries expects a return on
their investment in the Syrian arena. At the moment, the
article’s author claims, neither country is fully satisfied
with their return, hence both will seek to benefit from the
reconstruction period and in the meantime “will continue
seeking to further deepen their presence in Syria in many
fields.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…As Iran seeks to expand the presence of Farsi on the
coast, Russia is offering scholarship for study in Russia…”

TOP: Calligraphic Rendition of the word “Farsi” BOTTOM: “Russia” in Cyrillic Script.

Source: TOP: By Jahongard (from Image:Farsi.jpg), CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)], via Wikimedia Commons
BOTTOM: By Peter J. Acklam - Own work, Public Domain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=4406519

Source:
‫ مدرسة‬170 ‫ طالب يدرسون اللغة الروسية في‬١٥،٠٠٠
“15,000 Students Study Russian in 170 Schools,” Tishreen, 21 March 2018. http://
tishreen.news.sy/?p=144536 (translation via: http://syrianobserver.com/EN/
News/33987/Students_Study_Russian_17_Schools/)
The director of professional and technical education in the Education Ministry,
Dr. Radwan Rahal, said that the number of students learning the Russian language
in classes from seventh to 10th grades had reached about 15,000, in 170 schools
across the areas in which the course has been adopted… The Russian language
was entered by the Education Ministry into secondary education’s academic
curriculum in the 2014-2015 academic year, starting with the seventh grade as a
test. In the following year, it was introduced for the eighth grade classes, which
could choose between Russian, French and English, and take the subject further,
studying its scientific and literary courses as well.
Source:
‫انطالق دورات مجانية لتعليم اللغة الروسية في حلب السورية‬
Tarek Basmaje. “Free Russian Language Courses in Aleppo,” Sputnik, 20 March
2018. https://goo.gl/Rko2ob
Parting from deep-rooted friendship between Syria and Russia and a history of
cooperation, the Wafa Charitable Foundation has launched a cultural initiative
aimed at strengthening friendship between the two peoples… This initiative
seeks to teach Russian language to all segments of Aleppo’s population, as well
as Russian culture… The initiative was launched by Emad Kawka, the Secretary
General for the Wafa Foundation, who in a press statement said that this effort
aims to strengthen friendship between the two peoples by facilitating direct
communication without the need for a translator, as well as teaching about
Russian culture…

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2018

6

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran and Russia Compete for Influence in Syria
“…Tehran and Moscow will continue seeking to further deepen their presence in Syria in many
fields…”
Source:‫أورينت تفتح ملف الصراع الروسي اإليراني في الساحل السوري‬
“Orient Looks at Russia-Iran Conflict on the Syrian
Coast,” Orient News, 19 March 2018. https://goo.gl/
a2w6bT
At a time when Russia seeks to gain additional
concessions in Syria, with a particular focus on the
Syrian coast, Iran is expanding its influence in Damascus
and Aleppo under a variety of guises, most notably to
support “religious tourism.” The conflict is still present
between these two countries in the aforementioned areas.
On the Syrian coast, Shi’i schools are proliferating…
as are Farsi language institutes…. The Russian-Iranian
educational competition on the Syrian coast has affected
educational institutions, and there are now courses in
both languages. As Iran seeks to expand the presence
of Farsi on the coast, Russia is offering scholarship
for study in Russia… According to local reports, there
are Farsi language centers in many provinces such as
Lattakia and Damascus, with help from the Iranian
Embassy’s Cultural Attache’s Office in Damascus.

Source:
‫ يتقاسمها الروسي واإليراني‬..‫سوريا‬
“Syria… Divided between Russia and Iran,” al-Jazeera, 3 March 2018. https://goo.
gl/ik6K9e
In return [for its support of the Syrian government], Iran obtained economic
contracts in Syrian agriculture, oil, industry, livestock and ports. Iran also has
steady exports to Syria, especially after receiving tax exemption in 2012. Iran also
worked to establish its cultural and religious presence in Syria over the past years,
with the unprecedented expansion of Shi’i religious expressions, particularly in
Damascus, in addition to work to establish a branch of the Iranian Islamic Azad
University” and the expansion of Farsi language instruction in several Syrian
cities… In parallel, Russia has until now obtained an agreement to explore for oil
and gas in Syrian regional waters, as well as projects in the gas, grain mills, feed,
electricity and wheat and agreements allowing Russian military bases in Syria to
remain for the next 49 years.
These agreements do not appear to fully satisfy either side, hence Tehran and
Moscow will continue seeking to further deepen their presence in Syria in many
fields… According to economist Yunis al-Karim… both countries seek to put their
hands on Syria’s energy sources in the Mediterranean, considering it a suitable
pathway for transporting oil and gas. They also both seek to control the Qalamoun
area on the Syria-Lebanon border. According to al-Karim, “currently controls the
Syrian coast, while Iran has succeeded in controlling the Qalamoun, especially the
town of Zabadani and Madaya”… Once the war has ended, Syrian reconstruction
will represent and opportunity for both Russia and Iran to revive their economies
and businesses in various related sectors.

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | May 2018

7

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
“Turkey-Russia Rapprochement” Continues
OE Watch Commentary: Talks during Russian President Vladimir Putin’s
visit to Turkey on 3 April 2018 were dominated by three issues: breaking
ground for the Akkuyu Nuclear Power Plant, the purchase of S-400 Triumf
anti-aircraft weapons systems, and a bilateral gas pipeline project. The author
of the accompanying excerpted article from Hurriyet expands on these topics
and notes that without a doubt, Russia will play an important role in Turkish
foreign policy in upcoming years.
According to the author, the visit will be remembered by the
groundbreaking ceremony of the $20 billion Akkuyu Nuclear Power
Plant in a town on Turkey’s Mediterranean coast. The nuclear power plant
will be the biggest bilateral cooperation project contributing to Turkey’s
economic development and energy security. Another major project the two
leaders announced was the purchase of Russian S-400 Triumf anti-aircraft
weapons systems. They agreed to move up the delivery of the weapons
to July 2019, ahead of the previously agreed-upon date of 2020. The two
countries are already cooperating on construction of the Blue Stream
natural gas pipeline, and, in addition, they will also work together to build
Turkish Stream. The author notes that this pipeline will stream natural gas
to Turkey and on to southeastern Europe. The natural gas will flow from
Russia and pass through the Black Sea in two parallel pipelines to the
Turkish and European markets.
The author notes that all these agreements and cooperation indicate
development of strong ties between Moscow and Ankara. As such, Russia
will play increasingly in Turkish foreign policy. According to the author,
by building cooperative ties with Russia, President Erdogan is signaling a
more independent foreign policy. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“Turkey hasn’t finalized the approval of the
land transit of this project [natural gas pipeline].
Knowing Russian eagerness of wanting to
finalize this project, Turkey wants to use this
approval as bargaining chip with Russia.”
Source: Sedat Ergin, “Türkiye - Rusya yakınlaşması tarihi
önemde, ancak...(Turkey – Russia rapprochement has a
historical importance, but…),” Hurriyet, 5 April 2018. http://
www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sedat-ergin/turkiye-rusyayakinlasmasi-tarihi-onemde-ancak-40794936
Turkey’s purchase of S-400 air defense system is an important
project. Despite of being a NATO member, Turkey entering into
military cooperation with Russia, in terms of foreign policy,
means a significant challenge to the Western World.
In terms of natural gas… by bypassing Ukraine, Russia will
have the opportunity to transfer its natural gas through an
alternative route to the southern Europe.
Turkey hasn’t finalized the approval of the land transit of this
project [natural gas pipeline]. Knowing Russian eagerness
of wanting to finalize this project, Turkey wants to use this
approval as bargaining chip with Russia.
While Turkey is approaching to Russia for its own interests, it
should refrain itself from resembling to Russia domestically.

Akkuyu Nuclear Power Plant groundbreaking ceremony.

Source: Kremlin.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Akkuyu_Nuclear_Power_Plant_ground-breaking_ceremony_07.jpg

OE Watch | May 2018

8

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Defense Companies Reach Agreements
with Qatar’s Armed Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Ankara’s recent involvement in
the Gulf region resulted in Turkish defense industry companies
signing several deals to sell military hardware to Qatar’s armed
forces totaling $800 million, at the Doha International Maritime
Defense Exhibition and Conference (DIMDEX 2018). A total of
33 Turkish companies attended DIMDEX 2018 under the Turkey’s
Defense Industries Undersecretariat. The accompanying excerpted
articles from the Turkish State-run Anadolu Agency, the Turkishlanguage daily newspaper Milliyet, and the pro-government
newspaper Yeni Safak, shed light on the deals between Turkish
companies and Qatar’s armed forces.
The article from Anadolu Agency states that the Turkish
automotive company BMC will deliver 85 armored vehicles to
the Qatari Armed Forces. On 13 March Ethem Sancak, the
head of BMC, spoke to Anadolu Agency and said his company
will produce 50 BMC Kirpi Mine-Resistant Ambush-Protected
vehicles and 35 BMC Amazon 4x4 multi-purpose armored
vehicles for Qatar. Sancak stated that “Export is important for
Turkey. Previously, we sold our vehicles to the Turkmenistan and
Tunisian armies,” adding that increased demand is coming from
several armies around the world. The article states that BMC
plans to export nearly 40 percent of its production by 2019.
The article from Milliyet is about other deals that Turkish
defense companies signed with Qatar’s government. According
to the article, Turkey’s armored vehicle producer Nurol Makina
reached a deal to supply 214 of its NMS 4x4 armored vehicles
to Qatar’s armed forces. The article also states that Turkey’s
Anadolu Shipyard signed an agreement to build two training
warships for Qatar’s navy. The ships will have the capacity to
train 72 naval cadets. Qatari officials also signed separate deals
with Turkey’s Ares and Yonca-Onuk shipyards for another 17
vessels. A maritime school, Piri Reis University, also signed an
agreement to establish an academy for Qatar’s navy.
The article from Yeni Safak provides an excerpt from an
interview it did with Baykar Makina CEO Haluk Bayraktar. On
14 March 2018 Baykar Makina signed an agreement at DIMDEX
2018 to export six armed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) called
TB2 to Qatar. Additionally, the company will provide three
ground control station systems and equipment, a simulator, and
set up a UAV operation center and supply other digital services
and training to Qatar. The TB2 armed UAVs will be exported for
the first time; they have been used by the Turkish Armed Forces
since 2015. TB2s can carry ammunition, carry out assaults, and
have laser target acquisition. They were developed for tactical
reconnaissance and surveillance missions with the capability
to operate day and night. Bayraktar stated that Qatari officials
looked at technologies from the US, Europe, and China before
signing the deal. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Bayraktar TB2 UAV.

Source: By Bayhaluk [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Bayraktar_TB2_Runway.jpg

Source: Goksel Yildirim “Turkey to deliver 85 armored vehicles to
Qatar,” Anadolu Agency, 13 March 2018. https://aa.com.tr/en/middle-east/
turkey-to-deliver-85-armored-vehicles-to-qatar/1087610
One of the leading Turkish automotive companies will deliver a total of
85 armored vehicles to Qatar, the company’s chairman said on Tuesday
[13 March 2018].
Source: “Türk şirketlerden Katar`da gövde gösterisi (Show of strength
from Turkish Companies in Qatar),” Milliyet, 16 March 2018. http://
uzmanpara.milliyet.com.tr/haber-detay/gundem2/turk-sirketlerdenkatarda-govde-gosterisi/80000/80356/
The total economic size of the contracts were about 800 million dollars.
This figure corresponds to 46 percent of Turkey’s defense and aerospace
exports of last year, a total of 1.74 billion dollars.
At the exhibition Turkey’s armored ground vehicle manufacturer Nurol
Makina signed an agreement to provide 214 NMS 4X4 vehicles to Qatari
Special Forces Command. Qatar became the first country to add NMS to
its inventory. Delivery of the vehicles will be completed in about 2 years.
Within the scope of the contract, Anadolu Shipyard will build two armed
combat training ships with the capacity to train 72 naval cadets for Qatar
Naval Forces. These vessels will be used to train the personnel needed by
the Qatar navy. The ships will be delivered in 36 months.
Source: “Milli SİHA ilk kez ihraç edildi: 6’sı Katar’a satıldı (National
UAV exported for the first time: six of them sold to Qatar),” Yeni Safak,
14 March 2018. https://www.yenisafak.com/ekonomi/milli-siha-ilk-kezihrac-edildi-6si-katara-satildi-3177879
Baykar [Makina] signed an agreement with Qatar’s Armed Forces to
deliver six Bayraktar TB2 armed UAV Platforms, three ground control
station systems and equipment, and a UAV training simulator within a
year. For Qatar’s Armed Forces a UAV operation center and networkbased data tracing and archiving software also will be set up by Bayakar.
…With this agreement out county will, for the first time, export such an
advanced aerial vehicle at the scale. To export one of the most advanced
applications of aviation technology such as UAV is a very important
achievement for our national systems and technology.

“One of the leading Turkish automotive companies will deliver a total of 85 armored vehicles to Qatar, the
company’s chairman said on Tuesday.”
OE Watch | May 2018

9

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
A New Striking Power for the Turkish Armed Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Turkish weapons
manufacturer Roketsan is starting the mass production
of the Smart Micro Munitions MAM-C. According to
the accompanying excerpted article, published online by
the Turkish daily Haberturk, the new weapon employs
the technology of the Cirit laser-guided rocket that is
in service with the Turkish Armed Forces. MAM-C
is developed for use with unmanned aerial vehicles
and light attack aircraft, and it is based on a 70-mm
diameter body and weighs just 18.7 pounds with a
5.5-pound warhead. MAM-C, alongside its cousin
MAM-L, provides the Turkish Armed Forces with
another alternative of the most effective weapon for
target specific precision. According to excerpted article,
MAM-C with its high explosive fragmentation warhead,
is highly effective against light structures, unarmored
ground vehicles, radar antennas and soft targets like
weapon pits as well as personnel scattered in a 25m
radius. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: “Milli Akıllı Mühimmat’ın seri üretimi başlıyor (Mass Production of
National Smart Micro Munitions starts),” Haberturk, 5 April 2018. http://www.
haberturk.com/milli-akilli-muhimmatin-seri-uretimi-basliyor-1906062-ekonomi
The new striking power of the Turkish Armed Forces (TAF), named MAM-C,
has a high strike capability thanks to its laser-guided warhead. MAM-C also has
a variety of warheads such as the Cirit rockets that are being used by the TAF.
With usage of ROKETSAN products, MAM-L and MAM-C, the TAF will have the
chance to choose the most effective alternative against different targets.
Wings on MAM-C allows it to float on its target in a balanced manner once it is
dropped from unmanned aerial vehicles.
Length: 80 cm [31.4961 inches]
Diameter: 70 mm [27.5591 inches]
Weight: 8.5 kg [18.7 pounds]
Warhead: 2.5 kg [5.5 pounds]
Range: 8km [4.97097 miles]

“Wings on MAM-C allows it to float on its target in a balanced manner once it is dropped from unmanned
aerial vehicles.”

MAM-C by Roketsan.

Source: By VoidWanderer [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Roketsan_display_in_Kyiv_05.jpg

OE Watch | May 2018

10

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Will Iran Interfere in Kashmir?
OE Watch Commentary: The dispute between Pakistan, India, and China
over the Kashmir region dates back to the 1947 partition of India and it
remains one of the world’s most intractable problems. Today, India controls
approximately 43 percent of Kashmir (in the state of Jammu and Kashmir,
where 70 percent of the Kashmir region’s total population lives), and Pakistan
controls 37 percent of the region as a province it calls Azad Kashmir, or Free
Kashmir. China controls Aksai Chin, a border area which falls under the
administration of the Xinjian Uyghur Autonomous Region.
On 1 April 2018 violence flared in India-controlled Kashmir, leading to the
deaths of 20 people, including 13 rebels, four civilians, and three members of
the Indian army. Against this backdrop, the Iranian foreign ministry offered
itself as a mediator in a statement excerpted from the Islamic Students News
Agency.
While Iran has cordial relations both with India, an important trading
partner, and increasingly Pakistan, its interest in Kashmir might also be
ideological. While Iranian leaders frequently talk about their support of
Palestinian “resistance” against Israel, Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei also
frequently lists the administration of Kashmir by Hindu-dominated India as
both a grievance that the world should rectify and as evidence of a plot by
Western powers to subjugate Muslims.
As the Islamic Republic increasingly acts militarily and by proxy to
export the values of its revolution, more ideological elements inside the
Iranian government might seek to ramp up their activities in, and support
for, Kashmiri separatists in Jammu and Kashmir. While the practicalities of
Iran-India trade might temper this, the presence of Twelver and Ismaili Shi’ite
Muslim communities in Kashmir provide a means for the Iranians to augment
their activities should the ideologues win the debate against foreign policy
pragmatists. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Iran has supported any actions that are in
the best interests of the people of Kashmir.”
Source: “Amadegi Iran baraye komak beh Kahesh Tenesh dar
Kashmir” (“Iran is Ready to Reduce Tensions in Kashmir”),
Islamic Students News Agency, 2 April 2018. https://goo.gl/
ud8RPX
The spokesman of the Foreign Ministry, expressing regret
at the recent conflict in Kashmir, called upon both sides for
restraint. Behram Ghassemi, expressing regret at the recent
unrest in Kashmir, which led to the deaths and injuries of
many citizens, invited the parties to show restraint in the
conflict. The Foreign Ministry spokesman added, “The
Islamic Republic of Iran has supported any actions that are
in the best interests of the people of Kashmir, and Iran is
ready to take effective steps to reduce tensions if requested by
the parties.”
Source: “Didar-e Rais Jomhuri Slovini bah Rahbar-e
Enghelab” (“Meeting of the President of Slovenia with the
Supreme Leader”), Khamenei.ir, 22 November 2016, http://
farsi.khamenei.ir/news-content?id=34967
“U.S. officials do not have a plan for uprooting the Islamic
State. Like the British-- who have kept the wound of Kashmir
open since an era of colonialism on the Indian subcontinent,
which has resulted in the discord of two neighboring
countries, India and Pakistan, until today….”

Neelum Valley, Azad Kashmir, Pakistan.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, goo.gl/PQd7ds, Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

11

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Rouhani Speaks about the Internet
OE Watch Commentary: In December 2017
and January 2018 Iranians took to the streets in
largely spontaneous demonstrations catalyzed by the
penetration of social media among the population.
The protests—which led to dozens of deaths and
the arrests of more than 5,000 individuals—sped up
discussions among the Supreme Leader’s Supreme
Cyberspace Council and the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps’ Passive Defense Organization about the
need to crackdown on social media and messaging
applications and create instead a national intranet,
largely cut-off from the surrounding world. Iranian
authorities have targeted Telegram, a messaging
application, for particular ire as they have argued that
it shares information with foreign intelligence agencies
and poses a national security threat. On 23 March
2018 Alaeddin Boroujerdi, chairman of the Iranian
parliament’s foreign policy and national security
committee, announced that Iran would prohibit
Telegram’s use within its borders effective the end of
April.
It is against this context that the excerpted article
from the semi-official Islamic Students News Agency
is interesting. Iranian President Hassan Rouhani,
himself a former secretary of the Supreme National
Security Council, opines for the first time on efforts
to constrain the internet. He argues that rather than
focus on “filtering” and censorship, the Iranian
government should simply seek to break outside
applications’ monopolies and outperform them.
While this sounds reasonable, it is doubtful the
Iranian government has the ability to outperform
Silicon Valley. Rather, Rouhani seems to be playing
the role of good cop in contrast to the security
services, who will be on the vanguard of the internet
and social media crackdown. By speaking out for
internet freedom, Rouhani might be seeking to
capture the hearts and minds of young Iranians to
keep them in the system rather than having them
simply oppose the Islamic Republic in its entirety.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Domestically-made software…should be geared towards
breaking monopolies.”

Hassan Rouhani enters his office in Saadabad Palace.

Source: Tasnim News Agency, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/35/President_Rouhani_enters_his_office_in_Saadabad_Palace.jpg

Source: “Gosteresh-e Dastresi beh Ertetabat va Ettela’at va Qodrat-e Entekhab-e
Mardam Zarori Ast (It is essential to Expand Access to Communications and
Information and the Power of the People’s Choices),” ISNA, 3 April 2018. https://goo.
gl/8Kxojm
The president of the republic emphasized that the strengthening of hope and vitality
of society and creation of a more suitable space for work and production in the year
of “Supporting Iranian goods” is the duty and responsibility of all the authorities of
the country, and said, in job creation, fighting poverty, eradicating absolute poverty,
and reducing income inequality is the job of the government, and while the lowincome community has taken strides, these steps will continue this year….
The president of the republic expressed the desire of the people who voted for the
government that there be more efforts to strengthen prosperity and security by taking
steps to further expand access to communications and information and he said
it is essential that the people can choose… “The goal of creating and supporting
domestically-made software and applications should not be censoring or blocking
access. It should geared towards breaking monopolies over applications… suitable
cyber space can be provided through creating good, attractive and useful content, not
only by monopolizing and restricting it.”

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | May 2018

12

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Why Did the Mayor of Tehran Resign?
OE Watch Commentary: Tehran is Iran’s largest city and its
mayoralty is a political prize. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was mayor
of Tehran before he became Iran’s president, and Mohammad
Baghir Ghalibaf used his mayoralty as a launch point for three
ultimately unsuccessful presidential runs. Iranians were surprised,
therefore, to hear on 14 March 2018 that Mohammad Ali Najafi,
the reform-minded mayor of Tehran, suddenly resigned. Like many
politicians who embrace the Islamic Republic’s more reformist
line, Najafi was criticized for some of his social positions. He had
hung billboards around the city celebrating the achievements of
women and hardliners castigated him for subsequently attending a
ceremony in which a troop of young girls performed a dance.
In the excerpted article, Mohammad-Hossein Moghimi, governor
of Tehran Province and also a relative pragmatist, discusses Najafi’s
resignation and seems to imply that he was wrong to give up in the
face of criticism. What is most interesting, however, is Moghimi’s
acknowledgment of the difficulties in large Iranian municipalities
like Tehran and the criticism which local officials face because
of poor economic performance or stewardship. That his advice is
that city leaders must simply put up with creditors and protestors,
however, suggests that Iranian leaders have no real strategy to
address the economic malaise and financial mismanagement that
led protestors into the streets in late December 2017 and January
2018. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Vakenesh-e Ostandar-e Tehran beh Istefa’ye Najafi (The
Reaction of the Governor of Tehran to Najafi’s Resignation),”
Rajanews, 29 March 2018. https://goo.gl/CyJgKu
Referring to the resignation of Tehran mayor Mohammad Ali Najafi,
the governor of Tehran stated that with works such as those of the
governorate and the municipality, it is natural that there are people
that support them and oppose them, and there is always pressure, and
accepting these responsibilities requires a spirit of resistance.
[Mohammad-Hossein] Moghimi, with regard to the resignation of
Tehran’s mayor, spoke of the pressures and reasons, and stated, “I
have not yet talked to Mr. Najafi about this, but I believe that if there
are any pressures the officials must resist against them. Pressures are
always there and some will try for whatever reasons, such as political,
administrative etc. to oppose what the municipality does. We must listen
to the opposition and remain resilient….”
Moghimi said, “When Mr. Najafi accepted the post of mayor of Tehran,
the municipality was severely in debt to banks and contractors, and
creditors used to gather daily in front of the municipality offices to
put this organization under pressure. All in all, there are many types
of pressures on a municipality from various directions, including
creditors, but the city’s management must put up with them.”…“I have
not talked to Mr. Najafi about this issue”

“Creditors used to gather daily in front of the municipality offices to put this organization under
pressure.”

Tehran remains among the world’s most polluted cities.

Source: Klára Nováková, goo.gl/LxZncr, Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International

OE Watch | May 2018

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Former Governor: ISIS May Reemerge in Kirkuk
OE Watch Commentary: The presence of Shiite
militias and their treatment of residents is creating
grievances among residents of the Kirkuk Governorate.
The accompanying article is an excerpted transcript of an
interview with Najmaldin Karim, the former Governor of
Kirkuk, conducted by Kurdistan 24, broadcasting from
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. In the interview, Karim
assesses the current situation in the city and warns about the
possibility of the resurgence of the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) in Kirkuk.
According to Karim, the situation in the city is dire, as the
Shiite militias insert their control alongside the Iraqi Federal
Police. He states that the influence of Iran in Iraq’s Interior
Ministry through a senior figure in the Badr Organization,
an armed group supported by Tehran for decades, is not
helping the situation. Karim mentioned that Shiite militias
have arrested people without warrants and taken money
from shopkeepers and that nobody can run a business
without paying the Shiite militias. There are several armed
organizations operating in Kirkuk, including Turkmen
Shiite militias and Asa’ib Ahl-al-Haq, the latter headed by
Qais al-Khazali, who with the help of Iran was involved in
attacking coalition forces during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Karim also notes that basic services like electricity and
garbage collection are not being provided consistently. In
this chaotic atmosphere, ISIS is reemerging, as it never
really disappeared from Kirkuk. He stated that when
Iraqi forces took Hawija, there was no fight because
ISIS members just went home and changed their clothes.
The former governor also noted that what happened in
Afghanistan after ousting the Taliban might happen in Iraq.
He believes that like the Taliban, ISIS will likely come back.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“‘When Huweija was taken by the Iraqi
forces, there was no fight,’ he explained.
‘They [ISIS members] just went home, and
they changed their clothes.’”

Former Governor of Kirkuk Dr. Najmaldin Karim.

Source: By SGT Kandi Huggins (DVIDS) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Najmaldin_Karim_conference_speech.jpg

Source: Baxtiyar Goran, “Najmaldin Karim: Warns of resurgence of Islamic State, says US supports strong Kurdistan,” kurdistan24.net, 10
April 2018. http://www.kurdistan24.net/en/news/eb87beb8-e379-4233-beee-b22bebf88a0d
The current situation in the city is “not good,” Karim explained. “Kirkuk is really occupied by Shiite militias.” There are also Federal police,
but they are “the same thing.” Iraq’s Interior Ministry is headed by a senior figure in the Badr Organization, an armed group that Tehran has
supported for decades, going back to the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980s.
“The Shiite militias are part of the problem” in Kirkuk, Karim said. “They arrest people” arbitrarily, without arrest warrants. “They take
money from shopkeepers,” he continued. “Nobody can run a business now, if they don’t pay a faction of the Shiite militias.”
Moreover, as Karim explained, “It’s not just one group.” The armed organizations in Kirkuk include: Turkmen Shiite militias; Asa’ib Ahl-alHaq, headed by Qais al-Khazali, who was involved, with Iranian support, in attacking coalition forces during Operation Iraqi Freedom; as
well as the Badr Organization, to name but a few.
In this chaos, IS is re-emerging, Karim warned. IS “never disappeared from Kirkuk.” “When Huweija was taken by the Iraqi forces, there
was no fight,” he explained. They just “went home, and they changed their clothes.” Karim fears that “what we saw happen in Afghanistan
after the Taliban were ousted” and then they came back, will also happen in Iraq.
OE Watch | May 2018

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Tunnels of Ghouta
OE Watch Commentary: Tunnels and other subterranean
structures have become a persistent feature of the Syrian
battlefield. When Syrian loyalist forces reclaimed Damascus’s
eastern periphery (the Eastern Ghouta) in April 2018, they
uncovered an extensive subterranean network crisscrossing the
area. The Ghouta’s residents and its rebel fighters had withstood
years of siege and bombardment thanks in large part to this
underground network. The tunnels did not play a direct role in
rebel defenses of the Ghouta’s densely populated areas closest
to the capital, though, as opposition fighters withdrew under
Russian-brokered truces and surrender deals, in echoes of what
occurred in the eastern half of Aleppo in late 2016. The tunnels
of Ghouta were instead abandoned and left behind for progovernment and foreign news channels to gawk at and examine.
The first accompanying excerpt, from the French news agency
AFP, describes “an underground labyrinth, fitted with hospitals and
military headquarters,” connecting several of the Eastern Ghouta’s
neighborhoods and stretching for as long as 5 kilometers.
Digging and maintaining a semi-sophisticated tunnel network
is cheaper and easier than ever before. Rebels in Eastern Ghouta
appear to have used a combination of mechanical and manual
digging, with most tunnels fully furnished with electrical power
provided by generators placed at tunnel entrances, often in the
basements of multi-story apartment buildings. Regular power
meant many of the tunnels had lighting, cameras, communications
systems and various amenities needed to remain underground for
an extended period of time, including medical facilities. Existing
subterranean infrastructure was leveraged where possible: as noted
in the second excerpt, from official Syrian state media, one of these
tunnels linked to the sewer line in the Ghouta village of Hazah.
Syrian loyalist forces have collapsed many of the tunnels,
particularly those posing security and/or structural threats.
According to the third excerpt, from the pro-government news
channel al-Mayadeen, the rebels provided the Syrian military
with detailed maps showing the location of tunnels and IEDs.
The AFP article further notes that part of the truce deal involved
rebels handing over maps of their underground tunnel system
to Russian forces. Now, according to the fourth accompanying
excerpt, from the Syrian opposition news website Enab Baladi, the
Syrian government plans to take a close look at the tunnel system.
According to the article, “the government decided to produce a
detailed map to determine the location and characteristics of all the
tunnels. It also resolved to conduct a topographical survey and an
electronic rendition of the map, as well as establishing plans to deal
with each of the tunnels in order to benefit from them as much as
possible.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…In Eastern Ghouta, Syrian rebels
left behind an underground labyrinth,
fitted with hospitals and military
headquarters…”

Source: Rim Haddad. “Rebels leave behind labyrinth of tunnels under
Syria’s Ghouta,” AFP (via Yahoo News), 2 April 2018.
https://www.yahoo.com/news/rebels-leave-behind-labyrinth-tunnelsunder-syrias-ghouta-183848292.html
Tunnels stretch into the darkness, some wide enough to drive a car
through. In Eastern Ghouta, Syrian rebels left behind an underground
labyrinth, fitted with hospitals and military headquarters. “This
network of tunnels is a real spider’s web,” said a Syrian army official
who escorted journalists on a visit Monday to areas of the Damascus
suburb recaptured from the rebels… The tunnels are dug about 15
metres (50 feet) deep. The walls are reinforced with metal rods and
the tunnels are equipped with surveillance cameras and lights. Some
corridors are wide enough to drive a car through, while others can
only be accessed on foot. The network is about five kilometres (three
miles) long, connecting Jobar with the rebel-held areas of Ain Tarma
and Zamalka… In talks leading up to the deal, Russia, the Syrian
government’s strongest ally, demanded that the rebels hand over the
plans of the tunnel network
Source:
‫الجيش يعثر على شبكة أنفاق ومشاف ميدانية فى بلدتي حزة وعني ترما بالغوطة الشرقية‬
“The Army Finds a Tunnel Network and Field Hospitals in Hazah and
Ein Terma in the Eastern Ghouta,” General Organization of Radio and
TV - Syria, 26 March 2018. http://www.ortas.gov.sy/index.
php?d=100451&id=239638
A field commander noted that following the Syrian Army’s advance
toward the village of Hazah, a complex tunnel network was discovered
linked to the sewer line, which the terrorists used for movement and to
transfer ammunition between the towns of Sabqa, Irbeen, Harasta and
Zamalka. The tunnel was 3 meters wide and 4 meters deep and could
easily be traversed by cars.
Source:

‫اكتشاف شبكة أنفاق ومستشفيات تحت األرض‬...‫بعد تحرير الغوطة‬
“Following Ghouta’s Liberation… Network of Underground Tunnels
and Hospitals Discovered,” al-Mayadeen, 2 April 2018. https://goo.gl/
jbKXVL
Al-Mayadeen’s correspondent confirmed that the main obstacle for
returning life to normal in the Ghouta are the massive tunnels dug by
militants. She added that the [Syrian] Army had obtained a map from
rebels showing IEDs and tunnels, and that the army’s engineering units
were working to detonate the mines.
Source:
‫النظام السوري يدرس استثمار أنفاق الغوطة الشرقية‬
“Syrian Regime Studies How to Benefit from Eastern Ghouta Tunnels,”
Enab Baladi, 9 April 2018. https://www.enabbaladi.net/archives/219898
The Syrian regime government announced that it will launch a
study of the Eastern Ghouta’s tunnels dug by opposition fighters over
the past several years, in order to benefit from these tunnels. In a
meeting focused on the reconstruction of the Ghouta held on 9 April,
the government decided to produce a detailed map to determine the
location and characteristics of all the tunnels. It also resolved to
conduct a topographical survey and an electronic rendition of the map,
as well as establishing plans to deal with each of the tunnels in order to
benefit from them as much as possible.

OE Watch | May 2018

15

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Online “Suicide Challenge” Draws Attention in Egypt
and Beyond
OE Watch Commentary: The “Blue Whale Challenge” is a social media
game where contestants progress by completing a series of 50 challenges,
the final of which is committing suicide. The game originated in Russia
and first came to light in a May 2016 investigative report by the Russian
newspaper Novaya Gazeta, mentioned in the accompanying article published
on the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) website in February
2017. The game is targeted toward young teenagers, who are set up with a
“curator” or “administrator” who guides them through the game, confirming
that each challenge is completed and providing them with the next one. The
challenge first emerged on the Russian social media site VKontakte but has
since proliferated to a variety of platforms, making it difficult to monitor.
In early April, the game drew extensive attention in Egypt and beyond
after the 18-year old son of former Egyptian parliamentarian Hamdy alFakhrany committed suicide, purportedly as a result of playing the challenge.
In response, Egypt’s top religious body declared the game to be un-Islamic,
as noted in the accompanying excerpt from Egypt Today. Islam’s prohibition
on suicide makes the game particularly baffling and troubling in Muslim
societies. The accompanying excerpt from Arab News cites a social media
post from the sister of Khalid al-Fakhrany, the Egyptian teen who committed
suicide, which states: “I beg you, don’t challenge yourselves and try the
game. No one was as strong and as religious as Khalid, yet he challenged it,
and it defeated him.” Similar teen suicides have been reported in Morocco,
Algeria, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and Syria, in addition to a handful of other
countries throughout the world. The game has been forbidden in Saudi
Arabia, Tunisia and Algeria, although government options are limited given
that at its basic it entails communication between two individuals that can
easily be encrypted.
The number of young men and women who were drawn to joining ISIS
in Syria based purely on online interactions is testament to the power of
online social interactions. Like ISIS recruiters encouraging “lone wolf
attacks,” Blue Whale “curators” are able to incite individuals to commit acts
of violence without ever meeting them in person. Yet in contrast to ISIS and
other radical groups, the Blue Whale Challenge has no political-ideological
underpinnings. Instead, the game’s “curators” target vulnerable youth
through a combination of scare tactics and brainwashing, effectively gaining
control over their actions without resorting to ideological appeals. There is
no way to verify whether a Blue Whale Challenge “curator” is legitimate;
given the attention the game has received, it should come as no surprise that
there are many “false curators,” as the RFE/RL article describes. End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source: Sergei Khazov-Cassia. “Teen ‘Suicide Games’ Send
Shudders Through Russian-Speaking World,” Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty, 21 February 2017. https://www.rferl.
org/a/russia-teen-suicide-blue-whale-internet-social-mediagame/28322884.html
Concern about the game was piqued by a much-criticized
article in Novaya Gazeta in May that claimed, among other
things and seemingly without justification, that the “vast
majority” of the roughly 130 youth suicides in Russia between
November 2015 and April 2016 were tied to the Blue Whale
phenomenon. The paper published an equally alarming
follow-up article on February 16… Many participants in
the Blue Whale game say they are threatened by curators
when they try to leave the game… [though] there are no
reported incidents of any Blue Whale incidents occurring in
the nonvirtual world… Several of the players complained of
“ false” curators. Stefan, a 15-year-old from Solikamsk, in
Russia, says three different curators gave him as his second
task the assignment of sending them 200 rubles ($3.50). He
didn’t have any money, so he blocked them. The majority of
players told RFE/RL they got involved either to “mess with
the curators” or just because “it seemed interesting.”
Source: “Dar al-Ifta prohibits ‘Blue Whale’ game,” Egypt
Today, 6 April 2018. https://www.egypttoday.com/
Article/1/47120/Dar-al-Ifta-prohibits-%E2%80%98BlueWhale%E2%80%99-game
Egypt’s Dar al-Ifta, the Sunni Islamic institute concerned
with Fatwa (Islamic Law) issuance, has religiously forbidden
playing the “Blue Whale” game, which pushes children to
commit suicide… “The users are asked to cut themselves with
a sharp weapon such as a needle or a knife, and this act is
religiously forbidden. The preservation of a person’s life is
one of the most important purposes in Islam,” the fatwa read.
Source: “Death of Egyptian MP’s son linked to ‘Blue Whale’
suicide trend,” Arab News, 4 April 2018. http://www.
arabnews.com/node/1278906/offbeat
“I beg you, don’t challenge yourselves and try the game.
No one was as strong and as religious as Khalid, yet he
challenged it, and it defeated him,” the sister wrote.

“I beg you, don’t challenge yourselves and try
the game. No one was as strong and as religious
as Khalid, yet he challenged it, and it defeated
him.”

A humpback tail. California, Gulf of the Farallones NMS.

Source: HBy Tom Kieckhefer. (NOAA Photo Library: sanc0116) [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0) or Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanc0116_-_Flickr_-_NOAA_Photo_Library.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

16

AFRICA
Kenya: “You Don’t Look Like a Terrorist”
OE Watch Commentary: The face
of terrorism in Kenya is changing. As
the accompanying excerpted article
from the Kenyan newspaper Daily
Nation states, the classic image of
bushy-bearded men holding AK47’s while a black flag flutters in the
background is no longer the typical case
in the country. Nowadays some terrorist
groups are comprised of young college
students – the article describes them as
eloquent and charismatic – who do not
come close to fitting the old description
but yet are still as dangerous, perhaps
even more so because their nondescript
appearance does not draw as much
scrutiny.
The article goes on to describe how
these college students are recruited.
Social media accounts for a significant
portion of the recruits, especially if
they are not media savvy and tend to
believe that if it is posted, it is true.
Crowd fleeing sounds of gunfire near Westgate Mall attack, Nairobi, Kenya, September 2013.
Source: By Anne Knight [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Crowd_fleeing_sounds_of_gunfire_near_
Indoctrination and conversion is
Westgate.jpg.
also done by on-campus recruiters,
essentially fellow students, who do not initially reveal that they are associated with terrorist groups. Slowly, they can convince some of their
fellow students of the rightness of their cause, a process facilitated by ready access to the aforementioned social media sites. As a result, with
very little resources, al-Shabaab has been able to recruit beyond its territory in Somalia.
Another group being targeted for recruitment as terrorists is Kenyan women, with at least 100 having reportedly joined al-Shabaab and ISIS.
Over the past three years at least 20 of them have been killed. In one incident in 2016, three of them were killed while attacking a police station
in Mombasa with grenades and knives. Children are also not immune from being recruited. According to the National Police Service Director
of Communications, some as young as six years old have carried out raids. Their youth also makes their movements less suspicious, and as
such, they have been used to plant IEDs on roads.
Kenya’s struggle with terrorism notably includes the Westgate Mall attack in September 2013 which left over 60 dead and 175 wounded, and
the Garissa University College attack in April 2015 which left 148 dead and over 7 injured, with most of the casualties students. There have
been numerous other attacks that may not have gained as much international attention as the Westgate Mall or Garissa University College
incidents, but still resulted in many deaths and injuries. Against this backdrop of ongoing terrorism, many believe Kenyan authorities need to
develop new ways to detect terrorists, because the old descriptions do not always fit. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Terrorist groups are now made up of university students, young, charismatic and eloquent youths who
have been brainwashed and ready to kill.”

Source: Stella Cherono, “Kenyan Security Forces Grapple with Changing Face of Terrorism,” Daily Nation, 11 April 2018. https://www.
nation.co.ke/news/Kenyan-security-forces-grapple-with-changing-face-terrorism/1056-4381204-11dsh40z/index.html
Terrorist groups are now made up of university students, young, charismatic and eloquent youths who have been brainwashed and ready to
kill.
The situation is complicated by the widespread availability and accessibility of social media.
With apps such as Signal and Telegram, which guarantee almost complete anonymity, people are often approached by their peers then added
to the group chat apps for more indoctrination and conversion.
The United Nations Security Council expressed concerns in February that under the new conditions, terrorist organisations are expanding
and strengthening the network of cells, most of which operate with a certain degree of autonomy, making it difficult for governments to detect
them.
OE Watch | May 2018

17

AFRICA
Climate Change as a Conflict Driver in Somalia
OE Watch Commentary: Somalia has been mired in a combination of civil
war, famine, political instability, and in some areas almost continuous chaos
for nearly three decades. As the accompanying excerpted article from South
Africa’s Institute for Security Studies explains, there are many underlying
causes for the country’s woes, but climate change in particular is poorly
understood. While the country is stuck in war, there are six million people
facing starvation and it is important that this key factor be examined so that
possible ways may be developed to help mitigate its adverse effects.
The article’s authors state that about 70 percent of the Somali population
is dependent upon a regular climate pattern in order for them to meet their
basic needs. With the government having only very limited capacity to assist
its populace, when that pattern is disrupted, a large number of people suffer
the consequences. As an example, climate change-related desertification
has resulted in less land suitable for farming or grazing, making an already
vulnerable population even more so, with some turning to conflict as a way to
survive.

Source: Giovanna Kuele and Ana Cristina Milla, “Climate
Change Is Feeding Armed Conflict in Somalia,” Institute for
Security Studies, 6 April 2018. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/
climate-change-is-feeding-armed-conflict-in-somalia
Climate change feeds armed conflict in Somalia in three
ways: by exacerbating tensions between clans; boosting the
ranks and role of terrorist groups, including al-Shabaab;
and increasing migration.
Conflict prevention in the Horn must include environmental
initiatives, not just counter-terrorism and piracy efforts.
Second, the relationship between the proliferation of illegal
armed groups and the severe droughts in Somalia is evident
in the case of al-Shabaab. The group has been successful in
attracting young people who are affected by famine and food
insecurity and who face no job prospects. Those youth end
up joining al-Shabaab in a bid to survive, finding no other
option than to get involved with the extremist group.

The article further dissects this climate-change-causing-conflict-thesis and
lists three ways it occurs. The first is that it sharpens disputes among warlords
over already scarce resources. With less access to water during droughts,
disease breaks out, there is less food grown, and clans that had co-existed relatively peaceably before fight over the remaining and still
diminishing water supplies. The second way climate change leads to conflict is that during droughts young people often face food insecurity
and no job prospects. In these instances al-Shabaab, which offers both food and work, becomes a very tempting proposition to those hungry,
unemployed youths. The third and final way discussed in the article as to how climate change leads to conflict is through generating large
numbers of migrants. As of 2016, at least one million Somalis are internally displaced. As these people traverse the country, they are at risk of
being attacked, with rape a regular occurrence.
To mitigate the effects of climate change and in turn decrease conflict in Somalia, the international community is being called upon to
provide the financial and technical resources necessary for the country to build resilience. Some countries have answered that call, but with
Somalia’s long history of not always spending aid money well, it is uncertain at this time as to how many countries will respond with large
commitments. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Climate change feeds armed conflict in Somalia in three ways: by exacerbating tensions between clans;
boosting the ranks and role of terrorist groups, including al-Shabaab; and increasing migration.”

Climate change helps fuel conflict in Somalia in several ways, including increasing tension between clans over increasingly scarce resources.
Source: Oxfam East Africa/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Oxfam_East_Africa_-_A_family_gathers_sticks_and_branches_for_firewood.jpg. CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

18

AFRICA
Black Gold Helps Fund Al-Shabaab in Kenya
OE Watch Commentary: It is only a brief article in the Somalia
media website Shabelle News, but it reflects a massive problem:
illegal logging and the production and sale of charcoal (aka Black
Gold) in Kenya’s Boni National Reserve, which is very close to
the Somali border. Besides the environmental devastation caused
by those illegal activities, a large portion of the proceeds go to
fund the Somali terrorist group al-Shabaab. As accompanying
excerpts of the article reveal, the police commander for the region,
Muchangi Kioi, said security officers with the Linda Boni operation
– an operation designed to flush the Somali terrorists from the
Boni’s large forested area – will work with local police to try to
stop the illegal trading. What the article did not mention were the
numerous reports accusing Kenyan military troops, both in Kenya
and in Somalia, of being complicit with al-Shabaab in those very
same illegal activities. It should be noted that the Kenyan military
denies those reports.
Much of the illegal charcoal from Somalia and Kenya is destined
for the nearby Gulf States of Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Qatar. It
is shipped through the Somali port of Kismayo, which used to be
in al-Shabaab hands but after they were forced out, Kenyan troops
took control of it as part of their African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) duties. UN monitors accused Kenya of smoothing
the charcoal trade through the port despite the ban. Interestingly,
Kenya gave the reason for defying the ban – although not saying its
troops were profiting from this action – as an effort to protect their
troops from Kismayo charcoal dealers who would be angered by
the loss of their livelihood.

The illegal production and sale of charcoal, aka ‘Black Gold’ helps fund al-Shabaab.
Source: Ollivier Girard/CIFOR, Flickr, https://goo.gl/9MufDT, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

Source: “Charcoal, Illegal Logging Fund Al Shabaab Militants Hiding in
Boni Forest,” Shabelle News, 28 March 2018. http://radioshabelle.com/
charcoal-illegal-logging-fund-al-shabaab-militants-hiding-boni-forest/
Proceeds from illegal logging and charcoal burning inside the Boni
Forest are being used to fund terrorists, the authorities say.
[Lamu Police Commander] Kioi said al Shabaab sympathizers were
endangering the lives of innocent Kenyans. He said it was unfortunate
that residents were still supporting terrorists.

The accompanying article also mentions that in addition to illegal logging and production of charcoal in the Boni Reserve, al-Shabaab is
benefiting from the sale of game meat, presumably also from the reserve. The combination of all of these activities has been environmental
degradation and a loss of ecotourism. Hearing of al-Shabaab’s presence in the region is also not conducive to people wanting to visit the area. As
a result, revenue from tourism has taken a hit.
There has been previous pressure for Kenya to crack down on illegal activities that help fund al-Shabaab. This has proven to be difficult to
implement. Besides al-Shabaab’s actual presence in Boni, the terrorist group also has sympathizers there, making efforts to eliminate the logging
and charcoal production which support the terrorists that much more difficult. Combined with a Kenyan military that has been accused of
complicity in the illegal trading ventures, it will have to wait to be seen if anything actually changes with this latest call for the eradication of the
deeply entrenched and quite profitable illegal logging and charcoal production/trade. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Proceeds from illegal logging and charcoal burning inside the Boni Forest are being used to fund
terrorists, the authorities say.”
The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377

OE Watch | May 2018

19

AFRICA
Still Deadly: Al-Shabaab Attacks Ugandan AMISOM
Contingent
OE Watch Commentary: While the Somali terrorist
group al-Shabaab has been forced from most cities, it still
claims a significance presence in many rural areas and some
towns. That point was driven home loudly and bloodily
when, as the accompanying article from the Somali News
Service Shabelle News describes, the terrorists attacked
an African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) base in
Bulamerer, about 110 kilometers southwest of Mogadishu.
The ensuing battle between the Ugandan soldiers who man
the base and the heavily armed militants who stormed it
left many dead. Al-Shabbab claims 14 of its fighters and 59
Ugandan soldiers died in the attack, but Uganda disputes
this figure, claiming the death of 36 militants and citing
eight of its own soldiers having been killed.

“Al Shabaab militants battled for hours on Sunday with
African Union troops after exploding a car bomb outside
their base, Somali police, military and the militants said.”
Source: “Al-Shabaab simultaneous car bomb attacks African Union base in
Somalia,” Shabelle News, 1 April 2018. http://radioshabelle.com/al-shabaabsimultaneous-car-bomb-attacks-african-union-base-somalia/
Since withdrawing from Mogadishu in 2011, the al-Qaeda-linked group has
lost control of most of Somalia’s cities and towns. But it still retains a strong
presence in regions outside the capital.
Abdiasis Abu Musab, a spokesman for al-Shabab said 14 of the group’s
fighters and 59 AMISOM troops were killed in the incident.

Al Shabaab militants battled for hours on Sunday with African Union troops
Reports from various news outlets describe the attack
after exploding a car bomb outside their base, Somali police, military and the
on Bulamerer, also spelled Bulo Marer and Bula Marer, as
militants said.
beginning with two trucks laden with explosives blowing
up. This was followed by approximately 100 militants
attempting to storm the base, though they were reportedly repelled. Almost simultaneously, two other bases – Golweyn and Barawe – in the
same region were attacked, which the news outlets presume was to prevent those outposts from sending reinforcements to help the Ugandan
contingent at Bulamerer.
The deputy governor of the region has complained that al-Shabaab has not only been present, but also active in the region. He further stated
that both AMISOM and Somali military forces have not launched a major offensive against them for several years. At the time this commentary
was written it was uncertain how AMISOM or the Somali government will respond to this accusation.
To those who have followed the news coming out of Somalia for several years the town of Bulamerer may sound familiar. It was the site in
2013 of a failed attempt by the French military to free a hostage, Denis Allex, being held by al-Shabaab. While there are conflicting claims, it is
generally believed that Allex was killed during, or shortly after, the operation. A French captain was also killed during the rescue attempt. Five
years later the town is once again in the news, related to deadly actions by a still-present al-Shabaab. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Ugandan soldiers attached to AMISOM, such as the ones pictured here, were attacked by al-Shabaab at their base in Bulamerer.
Source: AMISOM/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amisom_Uganda_07Btn_06_(6440675973).jpg. Public Domain.

OE Watch | May 2018

20

AFRICA
A French General Discusses Challenges in Mali
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 March the Malian French-language
website Journal du Mali, in the accompanying excerpt, published an
interview with the French commander of the Barkhane Force, General
Bruno Guibert, who is responsible for French military activities in the
Sahel. Guibert’s emphasis is that he is in a military role and does not
engage in politics, but that what he does militarily will have an impact
on what happens in the political arena. According to the article, one of
the challenges he has faced, however, is that he knows that there are
some actors on the side of the Barkhane Force who are colluding with the
terrorists that he is combatting.
Guibert also recognizes that terrorist activities have recently spread
towards the south of Mali, largely because of jihadists co-opting intercommunal conflicts between Fulanis and ethnic other groups. This
has become a major issue of concern. Guibert, however, only has
responsibility for combatting terrorist groups in the north of Mali. The
article states that the Barkhane Force has been hesitant to move towards
central Mali and, according to Guibert, this is because the Malian
authorities have not permitted his forces to operate there.
Despite the challenges, Guibert concludes the interview on a positive
note. He says that as a result of the Barkhane Force’s military operations
in the past few years, Mali is no longer a terrorist safe haven. There is,
according to Guibert, no place in the country where terrorist groups are
not at least being tracked. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “General Bruno Guibert, Commandant de Force
Barkhane: ‘Il n’y a Plus de Sanctuaire Terroriste au Mali’” (“Gal
B. Guibert, Commander of the Barkhane Force: There is no longer
a terrorist sanctuary in Mali”),” Journal du Mali, 22 March 2018.
http://www.journaldumali.com/2018/03/22/general-bruno-guibertcommandant-de-force-barkhane-ny-a-plus-de-sanctuaire-terroristemali/
“Barkhane is a military force. So I’m fighting, I’m not involved
in politics, I do not position myself in the political arena even if
I understand that military action has an impact on the political
arena,” says the French General.
Barkhane has “evidence of collusion of some actors with terrorist
groups. Suspicion of collusion was discussed after the strike in
Abeibara that caused the death of Malian soldiers.” “It’s a difficult
and complicated subject,” admits the chief of Barkhane.
The zone of instability has been moving for several months
towards the south of the country. “If today we are not engaged in
the center of Mali, it is because the Malian authorities did not wish
for it,” explains General Guibert. “We act mainly in the north of
Mali, because this is where some terrorists are concentrated, and
the principals of these groups are in the north. For the moment, it
is not expected that Barkhane will intervene in the center.”

“There is no more impunity for terrorist groups in Mali. They are tracked everywhere.”

Opération Barkhane.

Source: TM1972,“Opération Barkhane.jpg,” (CC BY 4.0), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Op%C3%A9ration_Barkhane.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

21

AFRICA
Nigeria Recovering 300 Million Dollars from Corrupt
General’s Foreign Account
OE Watch Commentary: Even for a country that has gained a notorious reputation for corruption,
the amount Sani Abacha, the Nigerian general who also served as de facto president for five years in
the 1990’s, looted from the national coffers is considered immense, estimated at five billion dollars
and perhaps higher. Now, as the accompanying excerpted article from the Nigerian newspaper
Vanguard explains, $322,510,000 of that money has been returned to the country by Switzerland.
Additional funds stashed away in foreign bank accounts by Abacha, who died in 1998, have already
been returned, are in the process of being returned, or are still being searched for by international
investigators.
As a breaking news story the article only says the funds have been recovered; it does not describe
how Abacha came to acquire such a large amount of money. For that, it is necessary to review other
publications, which reveal more of the story, including that Abacha was once dubbed one of the most
corrupt leaders in history by Transparency International. While poverty is widespread in the country,
there is enormous wealth from the oil industry that has been prone to be siphoned off by some of the
country’s elites, including Abacha. Besides living a lavish lifestyle in numerous sprawling homes, he
is believed to have stashed over two billion dollars in European banks. Some of the money was also
laundered through the purchase of US government backed bonds. Later the FBI would help recover
over 400 million dollars from bank accounts in several countries.
Apparently corruption was a family affair as his son, Abba, was charged by a Swiss court with
Sani Abacha.
money laundering, fraud, and forgery in 2005. He would spend 561 days in custody for his crimes.
Source: By Published on the AfricanSuccess website (http://www.africansuccess.
org/visuFiche.php?id=414&lang=en), Fair use, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=41401244.
Because some members of the family have been accused of stealing and hiding vast sums of money,
interestingly, Abacha and the names of several of his relatives have often been falsely used in the infamous advance fee scam known as a 419,
so-called after the Nigerian Criminal Code section that deals with fraud. Unwary individuals have sent untold sums of money to con artists in
an attempt to claim some of the hidden loot.
There is perhaps a certain irony in the story of Sani Abacha. While notoriously corrupt, and rising to power through a series of successful
coups, Abacha greatly improved the Nigerian economy, including taming inflation, reducing the foreign debt, and increasing foreign reserves.
There are those in Nigeria who still honor him for his economic accomplishments. However, the accompanying article serves as a reminder that
while helping the country, he also helped himself. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The federal government says it has received 322.51 million dollars from the Swiss Government as part of
looted funds recovered from former head of state, late General Sani Abacha.”
Source: Dicta Asiimwe and Julius Barigaba, “Troop contributing countries disagree with UN, donors on Amisom withdrawal,” The East
African, 3 March 2018. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Amisom-withdrawal-region-differs-with-UN-and-donors-/2558-43274463fn59t/index.html
Tough choices as troop contributing countries seek to increase boots on the ground, but funders push for a reduction…The change of heart
by the Somali authorities on the withdrawal of Amisom gained momentum last week after the Ugandan army shot dead three SNA soldiers
in a friendly fire incident, prompting a flurry of accusations and counteraccusations between Ugandan and the SNA over who started the
shooting…Uganda’s Foreign Affairs Minister Sam Kutesa added the mission was also in need of force enablers and multipliers, which are
crucial in carrying out effective operations.
“Going forward, it is essential therefore that the international community look at the bigger picture in Somalia, so that the gains made in
recent years through enormous efforts and great sacrifice of Amisom and the SNA are not in vain,” Mr Kutesa said.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094
OE Watch | May 2018

22

AFRICA
Multiple Sources of Trafficked Weapons
OE Watch Commentary: For many years the UN and African Union
(AU) have struggled to implement effective arms control. However,
as the accompanying excerpted article from ENACT (a division of the
South African Institute for Security Studies that attempts to enhance
Africa’s response to transnational organized crime) points out, the
ongoing proliferation of small arms is indicative of the need for new and
effective measures to counter weapons trafficking.
The article breaks down Africa’s illicit arms market as being supplied
through diversion by three main sources. The first is from those in the
hands of a government, or in other words, licit stockpiles being diverted
to illicit ones. Sometimes this happens when rebels overrun government
forces and capture an arsenal; other times soldiers, especially those
poorly paid, sell their weapons to the enemy. Unfortunately, this also has
been known to occur during peacekeeping missions where soldiers have
“lost” arms and/or ammunition. One study looked at 11 peacekeeping
missions to Sudan and South Sudan and discovered at least 22 of
these incidents, with nearly half of them reflecting significant losses of
between 50 and 99 firearms and 2,500 to 4,999 rounds of ammunition.
The battlefield is the second main source of weapons entering the
illicit arms market. However, these are not always just from government
forces surrendering to an enemy. Unlike the first example where a
few lower-ranking, impoverished, rogue soldiers sold their weapons,
here leaders such as military commanders become involved in armstrafficking networks.
The final source of these weapons is from international suppliers
acting in conjunction with corrupt internal actors. Unfortunately, it is
rare for Africa to prosecute arms dealers. As the article explains, many
times those internal actors are well-connected politicians who use
forged documents, making it difficult to trace the flow of these weapons.
Further obscuring the origin of these arms are numerous porous
borders, which allow them to pass with no questions asked.
The article makes several recommendations to try to stem the arms
trafficking, many based on the AU’s roadmap of initiatives for its goal
known as “Silence the Guns by 2020.” These include evidence-based
policy research, especially that focused on why people traffic arms;
building capacity of African nations to better manage arms stockpiles;
having the AU assist in developing more effective arms embargoes;
ensuring institutional collaboration among those fighting the trafficking;
and combating violent extremism, because radicalized youth increase
the demand for illicit weapons. With less than two years until 2020, it
will become apparent relatively soon how much of the AU’s ambitious
goal can be reached by these initiatives. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

“Although many African countries have adopted
regional and global policies on arms control, the
continued illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons is an indication of wider transnational
organized crime on the continent that calls for more
attention.”

A cache of smuggled weapons in Kenya.

Source: Fredrick Onyango/Peace Efforts/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gun_pyre_in_Uhuru_Gardens,_Nairobi.jpg CC
BY 2.0

Source: Nelson Alusala, “Africa and Arms Control,” ENACT/
ISS, 28 March 2018. https://enact-africa.s3.amazonaws.com/site/
uploads/2018_03_28_PolicyBrief_Arms.pdf
Although many African countries have adopted regional and
global policies on arms control, the continued illicit proliferation
of small arms and light weapons is an indication of wider
transnational organized crime on the continent that calls for more
attention. Criminal networks exploit gaps in the regulatory systems,
porous borders and weak law enforcement procedures. The United
Nations (UN) and the African Union (AU) have for years sought
to address these challenges. The AU, in particular, has designed a
number of measures aimed at combating illicit arms flows. If these
initiatives are implemented effectively, there is a real possibility that
the flow of illicit arms in Africa can be stemmed.
Although the AU has shown renewed urgency in addressing illicit
arms flows, especially through its Master Roadmap to Silencing the
Guns, it should develop clear directives and timelines for member
states to implement its initiatives.
The illicit arms market involves various actors, from the
manufacturer to the end user, and usually a number of illicit
brokers along the supply chain
OE Watch | May 2018

23

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia and Brazil Look for Solutions to Deal
with Massive Venezuelan Migration
OE Watch Commentary: The situation in Venezuela seems
to get worse by the month as political problems continue to
cause chaos in virtually every sector of the country. Those
most affected by this are the citizens themselves, as they
continue to search for basic survival solutions due to lack of
work, food, medication and other basic necessities. In light
of these issues, migration seems to be one of the most readily
available options. Wide scale migration is already prevalent in
Colombia; an idea evidenced by the fact that in December 2017,
more than half a million Venezuelans had already migrated
to the country. However, this phenomenon is now extending
to Brazil, as discussed in the accompanying excerpted article
from Infobae. Authorities in Boa Vista estimate that in recent
months, some 40,000 Venezuelan migrants have sought refuge
in Brazil. Currently, those living in Boa Vista are crammed into
small shelters or living on the streets. As for the city itself, it
is located in Roraima State, one of the poorest in the country.
For this reason, the local government is looking to the federal
government for support in response to the massive migration
as discussed in the accompanying excerpted article from El
Nacional.
The accompanying excerpted article from Noticieros Televisa
reports how Colombia and Brazil realize they need to do
something to stop the mass migration from Venezuela, and in
mid-February, both countries announced plans to expand troop
deployments along their shared borders with Venezuela. As
for Colombia, President Juan Manuel Santos said he ordered
the deployment of 3,000 additional security personnel to the
Venezuelan border. Similar border measures have also been
introduced by Brazil, which has announced plans to double
its border patrols along the Venezuelan frontier. Brazilian
authorities have also said they plan to relocate Venezuelan
migrants away from border towns and disperse them into
Brazil’s interior. At this point, the migration issue is critical and
despite diplomatic disputes between Venezuela and Brazil, the
Brazilian President has offered humanitarian aid to Venezuela
and those who have sought refuge in the country. Colombia has
also been generous in trying to help refugees, but neither Brazil
nor Colombia have the long-term resources to support mass
migration movements from Venezuela. Worse still, the article
from Noticieros Televisa also points out that many expect that
Nicolas Maduro will secure another six-year term in the 22
April election, in part, because the most popular opposition
candidates have been banned from running. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “La llegada de más de 40.000 venezolanos amenaza con
ocasionar una crisis humanitaria en Brasil (The Arrival of 40,000
Venezuelans Threatens Humanitarian Crisis in Brasil),” Infobae, 12
December 2017. https://www.infobae.com/america/fotos/2017/12/12/
la-llegada-de-mas-de-40-000-venezolanos-amenaza-con-ocasionar-unacrisis-humanitaria-en-brasil/
Venezuela’s downward economic spiral has led to widespread food
shortages, hyperinflation and now mass migration. Many Venezuelans
are opting for the easiest escape route — by crossing the land border
into Colombia and Venezuela. At the end of 2017, Colombian immigration
officials reported that more than half a million Venezuelans have migrated
to the country in the last two years. And in recent months, the Brazilian
city of Boa Vista reported the arrival of some 40,000 Venezuelans looking
to seek refuge in the country.
Source: “Temer viajará a Boa Vista para debatir inmigración de
venezolanos en Brasil (Temer Plans Visit to Boa Vista to Discuss
Venezuelan immigration in Brazil),” El Nacional, 11 February 2018.
http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/latinoamerica/temer-viajara-boavista-para-debatir-inmigracion-venezolanos-brasil_222790
Senator Romero Jucá, a Brazilian government leader in the Senate and
representative in the Brazilian state of Roraima, has requested help to
provide health, education, housing, and employment for the Venezuelan
immigrants. This is because the state is one of the poorest in the country
and is not equipped to deal with mass immigration issues. In light of the
crisis, President Michel Temer traveled to the Brazilian city of Boa Vista
in mid-February to discuss measures to help the migrants with regional
and municipal authorities.
Source: “Crece el éxodo venezolano hacia Colombia y Brasil en busca de
alimentos (Venezuelan Exodus to Colombia and Brazil Grows as Citizens
Look for Basic Necessities),” Noticieros Televisa, 16 February 2018.
http://noticieros.televisa.com/ultimas-noticias/internacional/2018-02-16/
crece-exodo-venezolano-colombia-y-brasil-busca-alimentos/
According to Noticieros televisa, Brazilian measures were similar to the
ones announced on 8 February 2018 by Colombia, during which time
President Santos suggested that the crisis will last as long as Nicolás
Maduro, Venezuela’s increasingly authoritarian president, remains in
power. His socialist economic policies have led to a collapse of the local
currency and inflation expected to hit 13,000 percent this year, according
to the International Monetary Fund. Still, Maduro is widely expected to
secure another six-year term in the April 22 election, in part, because the
most popular opposition candidates have been banned from running.

“Still, Maduro is widely expected to secure another six-year term in the April 22 election, in part,
because the most popular opposition candidates have been banned from running.”

OE Watch | May 2018

24

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil’s Federal Government Open Border Policy
Challenges Frontier States
OE Watch Commentary: Brazil is experiencing a déja vu of sorts on
The goal is to employ 1,000 people in 90 days.
its border with Venezuela in the northern Amazon state of Roraima. Over
40,000 Venezuelans have crossed the border into Roraima and continue on ‘Most of them have a university degree, so let’s do
to the city of Boa Vista, the state capital and home to 330,000 Brazilians.
what we can, after all, we are the eighth largest
While nothing compared to the number of Venezuelans crossing into
Columbia (400,000 at last count), the influx has increased the population of
economy in the world.’
Boa Vista by over 10 percent, straining public and welfare services in the
Source: “Brasil anuncia reforço de segurança na fronteira com
city and the entire state.
Venezuela (Brazil Announces Reinforced Security at Border with
This has happened before. Following the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, at
Venezuela),” Folha De S.Paulo, February 8, 2018. https://www1.
least 10,000 Haitians risked their lives to travel from Haiti all the way
folha.uol.com.br/mundo/2018/02/brasil-anuncia-reforco-deto the Brazilian border in the Amazon state of Acre via a route that took
seguranca-na-fronteira-com-venezuela.shtml
them from Santa Domingo, Dominican Republic to Quito, Ecuador to
“Justice Minister Torquato Jardim announced a pilot program
Cuzco, Peru before arriving in Brazil. As in the current case in Roraima,
to create jobs for Venezuelans, with an emphasis on getting the
the Haitians arriving in Acre were sent onward from the border post at
most qualified immigrants to other states of the country. Jardim,
Assis-Brasil, where there are no federal or state services to speak of, to
who called the program the Interiorization Plan, said the goal is
the state capital, Rio Branco. Many moved on to the neighboring state
to employ 1,000 people in 90 days. ‘Most of them have a university
of Rondonia, landing in the state capital, Porto Velho. Both the states of
degree, so let’s do what we can, after all, we are the eighth economy
Acre and Rondonia struggled to assimilate and take care of the growing
of the country.’”
Haitian community.

“

”

Both the current Venezuelan and the former Haitian immigrations are
fueled by a federal open border policy. However, it is the border states that
become overwhelmed and desperate, as state governments continue to
move new immigrants further into the interior and coastal states of Brazil.
This practice alleviates stress on one state, while adding to another.
The strain became so great that the mayors of both Rio Branco and
Porto Velho chartered passenger planes and flew many Haitians out of
their respective capitals—one way flights to sprawling Sáo Paulo. The act
was not taken lightly in Sáo Paulo and a very public war of words ensued
between the state government of Sáo Paulo and the state governments of
Acre and Rondonia.
Fast forward to today, according to the accompanying excerpted article
from Folha De S.Paulo, federal ministers have been on a fact finding
trip to Boa Vista. While there, commitments were made. Venezuelan
immigrants will be registered through a census to determine who, how
many, and what job skills they possess. They will then be moved to other
states across Brazil to alleviate the strain on the state of Roraima and its
capital, Boa Vista. There is no provision or surety that the other Brazilian
states would be any more welcoming than the government of Sáo Paulo
was to the Haitians only a few years ago.
Details are still unclear what the actual plan will be. Justice Minister
Torquato Jardim said that they should be able to integrate Venezuelan
doctors, engineers and other highly educated people into Brazilian
economic life. However, these are the easiest immigrants to integrate into
Brazil because they arrive with means and a high-tech skill. The article
also quoted Minister Jardim as saying he wanted to “employ 1,000 in 90
days.” There have been questions that even if the federal government can
pull it off in that time frame, it provides no answers for the other 39,000
Venezuelans left in Roraima.
TOP and BOTTOM IMAGES: Brazilian Military personnel provide temporary assistance
to Venezuelan refugees in Boa Vista, Roraima.

Source: Brazilian Navy’s 2° Sgt Paulo Johnson Lopes da Cunha. Permission Granted by Author.
If the Haitian experience is a cautionary tale (nearly all ended up in big
city ghettos and favelas, with no meaningful source of income and dependent on social services and humanitarian work done by NGOs, like
the Peace Mission in Sáo Paulo), the future does not bode well for the federal plan to relocate Venezuelans caught between a rock and a hard
place, unable to have a life at home and struggling to find a new one in Brazil. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

OE Watch | May 2018

25

LATIN AMERICA
Colombian-Venezuelan Border Ills
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying references are exemplary among many reports that seem to indicate that armed conflict in
Colombia is intensifying, especially in border areas. Many of the reports are about Colombian Army confrontations with units of the People’s
Liberation Army (ELN). The reports suggest that the ELN apparently expanded in some border areas at the expense of FARC formations that
had been dismantled or had lost territorial control in the context of the power sharing agreement with the Colombian government. However,
as the reference from Radio La FM suggests, some of the FARC dissident groups are apparently now openly reorganizing and reasserting
themselves as guerilla. In any case, it may be that the border areas under dispute are the same as those that had been fought over for decades.
They are the contraband corridors where the preferred clandestine lines of communication are maintained. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…they are armed and would be collecting what they call ‘taxes’…”

Source: Editors, “Con secuestros y
control territorial, arrecia el conflicto
armado (With kidnappings and
territorial control, the armed conflict
worsens),” El Mundo 5 April 2018.
http://www.elmundo.com/noticia/Consecuestros-y-control-territorialarreciael-conflicto-armado/369245
“Decisions of the governments of
Rafael Correa, in Ecuador, and
Juan Manuel Santos, in Colombia
have facilitated the growth and
penetration of the residual group of
the FARC in the border zone that the
two chief executives agreed to leave
unattended. …The crimes occur in
territories where illicit cultivations,
illegal mining and drug trafficking
routes have grown in the shadow of
the limitations that the State selfimposed.”

Source: Ricardo Monsalve Gaviria, “El Eln
y su actividad en frontera (The ELN and
its border activity),” El Colombiano, 30
March 2018. http://www.elcolombiano.com/
colombia/el-eln-y-su-actividad-en-fronteraYJ8469551
“While in Quito Ecuador the fifth cycle
of conversations advances between the
government and the ELN with the intention
of arriving at a new bilateral cease-fire,
the armed conflict between those parties is
still felt, although with less intensity, in this
country [Colombia], especially in the areas
bordering other countries where the ELN
apparently feels much more comfortable.…
Drug trafficking routes and other illicit
economic activities are the principal reasons
why the illegal groups try to appropriate
dozens of border kilometers that did not have
state control, and the ELN is no exception.”

Coat of Arms of Colombia.

Source: By Shadowxfox [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coat_of_arms_
of_Colombia.svg.

Source: Radio La FM, “Grupo disidente de las Farc
se habría reactivado como cuadrilla guerrillera
(Dissident Group of the FARC reactivates itself as a
guerilla unit),” Radio La FM, 2 April 2018. https://
www.lafm.com.co/orden-publico/grupo-disidentede-las-farc-se-habria-reactivado-como-cuadrillaguerrillera/
“…part of the reasons given by the chiefs for
returning to arms is that the reincorporation was
not done in accordance with what was stipulated;
neither the freeing of political prisoners nor
respect for the lives of social leaders…...he [a
spokesperson] said that other groups that had
formed in the sector of the Colombian Pacific and
in other zones of Cauca [Department], to which
campesinos are also attaching themselves, and he
added that the situation is complex given that they
are armed and would be collecting what they call
‘taxes’ in places where coca and cattle ranching is
the base of the economy.”

Coat of Arms of Venezuela.

Source: By Deiby A. Vargas R. [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Escudo_de_
Armas_de_Venezuela_2006.png.

OE Watch | May 2018

26

LATIN AMERICA
Bolivarians Gain Influence over Colombian Resources
OE Watch Commentary: In 2016 a Colombian High Court
emited an opinion that has changed the political dynamic in
Colombia to a degree unexpected by many. The court ruled that
local (county-level) communities, through means of a popular vote,
could prohibit certain natural resource exploration and extraction.
One of the first communities to take such a step was Cajamarca,
Tolima, a county that was the home of a large gold mining
operation run by a foreign firm. The locals there voted 97 percent
to 3 percent to shut down the operations. Operations indeed ended
as the accompanying excerpted article from Vanguardia Liberal
demonstrates, which emboldened activists to attempt the same in
other communities, some of which are listed in the article from
Semana.
Recently, for instance, in El Peñón County in Santander
Department, the local government held a popular consult, which
voted to disallow a full range of exploration and extraction
operations. The intention, ostensibly at least, was to favor an
economy of agriculture and tourism. El Peñón (which translates
to ‘crag’) is a beautiful mountainous place, so the preference of a
pastoral, touristic future is not an unreasonable fantasy. The article
from Semana (which also enjoyed wide publication), however, argues
that the locally determined, total prohibition of resource extraction
activities is unconstitutional. It further argues that some of the
consults were promoted on the basis of false arguments. Regardless,
El Peñón may present a case-study of a security challenge created by
an admixture of related, not so innocent phenomena.

Flag of El Peñón (Santander).

Source: By Shadowxfox [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Flag_of_El_Pe%C3%B1%C3%B3n_(Santander).svg.

“Thus is the escape of fuels, foodstuff, cash and
gold from Venezuela. Thousands of products are
transported toward the neighboring country in
complicity with the ‘glorious’ Bolivarian National
Guard (GNB), the nation’s most repressive and
corrupt security body.”

Some communities, perhaps El Peñón, are near, contiguous with,
or perhaps home to smuggling routes. Such intimacy with smuggling
routes exposes a community to smuggling gangs, including powerful
guerrilla hybrids such as the ELN and FARC, or to some of the
lesser-known criminal smuggling organizations. These gangs tend
strongly to be in some kind of mutually beneficial association with
the regions’s Bolivarian hierarchy, that is to say, with the inter- and
trans-national political-governmental movement of the Marxist left.
As is perhaps the case in El Peñón county (and several of the other
counties noted in the Semana article), the local consults and attendant
marches have been organized by pro-Bolivarians. The exact voting
result in El Peñón is unknown, but the 97% vote in Cajamarca was
itself suspect as a bit too perfect.
In spite of protestations to the contrary, it appears that after
a community nixes legal extraction enterprises, the gangs then
encourage artisanal or informal mining operations, organizing the
miners. The gangs control the claims, assaying and movement of the
product. The result can be continued environmental deprivation, loss
of government income, violation of safety and labor law preferences,
and myriad other ills, not the least of which is the overall fiscal and
strategic strengthening of the Bolivarian hierarchy.
The article from Los Benjamins, for instance, is typical of reports
that smuggling into and out of Venezuela is controlled in part by
armed elements associated with the Bolivarian government in
Venezuela, in this case its Bolivarian National Guard. A similar
article was posted on Dolar Today at https://dolartoday.com/el-grannegocio-de-la-gnb-asi-es-el-contrabando-de-alimentos-efectivo-yoro-hacia-colombia/. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

El Peñón County, Santander Department, Colombia.

Source: By Shadowxfox [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Colombia_-_Santander_-_El_Pe%C3%B1%C3%B3n.svg.

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2018

27

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Bolivarians Gain Influence over
Colombian Resources
Source: Editors, “En este municipio de Santander no se podrán realizar obras de minería (In this Santander county they will not be able to
conduct mining operations),” Vanguardia Liberal, 5 April 2018. http://www.vanguardia.com/economia/local/220425-en-este-municipio-desantander-no-se-podran-realizar-obras-de-mineria
“The mentioned project establishes that it prohibited is: ‘the development of mining activities of metallic minerals and the large and medium
mining of other minerals, activities related to the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons and activities related to the execution of energy
production projects such as hydroelectric plants in the jurisdiction of the county of El Peñón…”
Source: Milton Fernando Montoya, “La minería ilegal, la principal amenaza que enfrenta el estado (Illegal mining, the principal threat
confronting the state),” Semana, 9 February 2017. http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/consultas-populares-e-interpretacionnormativa/538592
“The Constitutional Court never wanted to authorize unilater powers of prohibition to territorial entities. It is an openly unconstitutional
interpretation and without legal support.
At the date of the writing of this article [Early September 2017] popular consults have been conducted against mining, petroleum and electric
projects in counties such as Arbeláez, Cabrera, Cajamarca, Cumaral, Pijao, and Paujil, and about forty other consults are in the works.
Likewise, to date, counties such as Jericó, Támesis, Ibagué, Urrao, Pitalito, Timaná, Oporapa, Altamira, and El Agrado among others, have
furthered agreements by way of their county consults that in a unilateral manner have decided to prohibit mining activities of hidrocarbons or
of electric infrastructure in their territories.”
Source: Kassandra Montenegro, “El Contrabando hacia Colombia que desangra a Venezuela (the contraband to Colombia that is bleeding
Venezuela),” Losbenjamins.com, 8 April 2018. https://losbenjamins.com/2018/04/contrabando-colombia-venezuela/
“Thus is the escape of fuels, foodstuff, cash and gold from Venezuela. Thousands of products are transported toward the neighboring country
in complicity with the ‘glorious’ Bolivarian National Guard (GNB), the nation’s most repressive and corrupt security body….Once the fuel
and other products arrive in Cúcuta [Colombia], the hoarders and smugglers take payment exclusively in cash, that they then carry to money
changers to solidify illegal conversión…Once the fuel and other products arrive in Cúcuta [Colombia], the hoarders and smugglers take
payment exclusively in cash, that they then carry to money changers to solidify illegal conversión…”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | May 2018

28

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuelan Elections Worth Anything?
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying reference is a pair of articles
written on behalf of an opposition candidate in the Venezuelan election and
published in Peru21. The author argues why the elections are not a waste of time -that candidate Henri Falcón might have a chance this time and that he is not a sellout for participating. Falcón has been the leader of the progressive party Avanzada
Progresista, and may not be particularly opposed to the Bolivarian movement, if at
all.
The second reference, which in turn references an AP report on the French
government’s position, is evidence of what seems to be the prevailing Venezuelan
opposition attitude -- that the elections are a fraud and should not be given any
credit at all, irrespective of the outcome. For what it is worth, that reference is from
the website, DolarToday, which has for years been running a continuous poll of its
readership asking who they would elect as president if the elections were held that
day. It is hardly a scientific poll, but DolarToday is considered the most prominent
of opposition websites and its latest polls have enjoyed, if we are to believe the
statistics provided, more than one and a half million respondents each iteration.
Henri Falcón has been getting about three percent of the vote in those polls, well
behind Henrique Capriles, Henry Ramos Allup, Maria Corina Machado, Leopoldo
Lopez, and Lorenzo Mendoza. Whatever analysis of the numbers we might provide,
they do not bespeak much solidarity with Mr. Falcón or lend weight to what many
see as the coming election-like event. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Politics is results and in these 18 years of Chavezism the
MUD failed...”

Henri Falcón in 2012.

Source: Lara Ataro [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Henri_Falc%C3%B3n_2012.png.

Source: Juan Claudio Lechín, “Denigrar a Henri Falcón (1) (Denigrate Henri Falcón
[1]),” Peru21, 16 March 2018. https://peru21.pe/opinion/opina21-juan-claudiolechin/denigrar-henri-falcon-1-399714; Juan Claudio Lechín, “Denigrar a Henri
Falcón (2) (Denigrate Henri Falcón [2]),” Peru21, 30 March 2018. https://peru21.pe/
opinion/opina21-juan-claudio-lechin/denigrar-henri-falcon-2-401523
“The opposition MUD [Table of Democratic Unity, a shorthand for what is
an opposition block] attacks Henri Falcón for being a candidate in the coming
Venezuelan elections (May, 2018). Politics is results and in these 18 years of
Chavezism the MUD failed, helping-- premeditatedly or disingenuously -- the
installation of tyranny….Why participate in the May 2018 Venezuela elections if there
is going to be a fraud? Because in politics inaction generates nothing…”

Source: “¡EL MUNDO NO RECONOCERÁ EL
FRAUDE! Francia: Presidenciales en Venezuela no
permiten una elección justa y libre (The World Will
Not Recognize the Fraud! France: The presidentials
in Venezuela do not permit a just and free election),”
DolarToday, 3 April 2018. https://dolartoday.com/elmundo-reconocera-el-fraude-francia-presidencialesen-venezuela-permiten-una-eleccion-justa-y-libre/
“Emmanuel Macron, President of France, asserted
that the organizational conditions of the presidential
voting process of May 20 in Venezuela would not
permit a ‘ just and free’ election…”

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | May 2018

29

LATIN AMERICA
Regarding the Colombian Elections
OE Watch Commentary: The first of the accompanying
references is from a Spaniard writing in ABC, who observes the
obvious, that the coming Colombian election revolves around the
FARC accords and what their future will be. He notes that Piedad
Córdoba, a Colombian political personality who has associated
herself closely with the FARC, is struggling to gain voter support,
at least according to the polls. Struggling in this case means unable
to register even a tenth of a percent in voter intention, as indicated
by the second reference which was posted on YouTube. Part of the
immediate context was the arrest of one of the FARC leaders, Jesus
Santrich, on drug trafficking charges. The candidates were being
asked what their opinion was of that. The poll leader, anti-FARC
candidate Iván Duque, was positive about the arrest and claimed
it indicated the criminal nature of FARC behavior. The candidate
from the left with the highest voter intention, Gustavo Petro, chose
not to answer. The reference from El Colombiano did not include
Piedad Córdoba, if she was found for comment. The presidential
elections will still be a few weeks away when this article is first
published, and a great deal can happen in that amount of time.
At this moment, however, it appears the FARC, the accords, and
the left generally will fare relatively poorly. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…Gustavo Petro: did not answer…”
Major Political and Administrative Division of Colombia.

Source: MAORIVEROS, https://openclipart.org/detail/183878/mapa-fa%C2%ADsico-de-colombia, CC 1.0.

Source: Ramón Pérez-Maura, “La falsa paz
de Colombia (Colombia’s false peace),”
Diario ABC, Madrid, 1 April 2018. http://
www.abc.es/internacional/abci-falsacolombia-201804011136_noticia.html
“…It does not surprise anyone that at this
point the election revolves around the peace
process that President Santos insisted to
impose upon the Colombians with the praise
of half the world which meanwhile did
nothing to demand respect for the will of the
Colombians freely expressed in a plebiscite….
Enrique Santiago [a lawyer for the FARC]
had his moment of greatest glory with the
Havana ‘accords’. But the Colombian people
then turned their back to them and everything
seems to indicate that they are going to do it
again. …today the Iván Duque-Marta Lucía
Ramírez ticket is the clear favorite. The
candidate historically closest to the FARC,
Piedad Córdoba, counts on less than one
percent of voter intention….”

Source: Videos al Natural, “Iván
Duque le gana a Gustavo Petro
según última encuesta presidencial
(Iván Duque wins over Gustavo
Petro according to the latest
presidential poll),” YouTube, 9 April
2018. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=9EXnANi1E1g
“Duque gets 9 points over Petro,
and 36 over Fajardo and Vargas
Lleras in the Datexco poll. The
survey was made known this
Monday by W Radio, besides
showing a gaping advantage for
the uribista [those with an affinity
toward the politics or political
organization of ex-President Álvaro
Uribe] and Colombia Humana
candidates over their competitors,
it leaves…Piedad Córdoba with
0.0%.”

Source: Editors, “Así reaccionaron los candidatos
(This is how the candidates reacted [to the capture
of Jesus Santrich]),” El Colombiano, 10 April 2018.
http://www.elcolombiano.com/colombia/santrichsegundo-jefe-de-farc-que-iria-a-carcel-de-ee-uuCF8520657
“--Iván Duque: ‘The capture of Santrich puts in
to evidence that the FARC has not given up its drug
smuggling routes…’…
--Humberto de la Calle: ‘If this is about crimes
after the agreed-upon date, they have to respond to
the prosecution…’…
--Sergio Fajardo: ‘The Colombian Justice
Department should act, act to review all of
Santrich’s actions…’…
--Viviane Morales: …’Good for the Prosecutor’…
--Germán Vargas Lleras: ‘The rules of the
game are clear: those who commit crimes after
31 December 2016 will lose the benefits of the
Accord…’…
--Gustavo Petro: did not answer…”

OE Watch | May 2018

30

LATIN AMERICA
Archbishop of Bogotá Confesses Left
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying references, from leading Paris-based Colombia political
analyst and FARC historian Eduardo Mackenzie, addresses what many Colombians (judging from re-publications
of the essay, at least) apparently see as an ominous event. This Easter Week, according to Mr. Mackenzie, the
senior Roman Catholic prelate in Colombia, 75 year old Cardinal and Archbishop of Bogotá Rubén Salazar
Gómez, sermonized in an emotionally charged and unusually direct, partisan manner. He apparently advised
his flock to “respect” the Colombian peace agreement with the FARC. Mackenzie suggests that the prelate may
be reacting to what seems to have been a broad turn of opinion against the left, a turn that will be tested in the
coming presidential elections.
The second accompanying reference is a long essay from last September, also by Mackenzie. In it, he recounts
the difficult, often violent history of the institutional church and the Bolivarian left, and exposes key personalities
within the radicalized portion of the church. Mackenzie is a professed anti-communist who takes a dim view
of what has happened to senior church leadership in this regard. His reporting, however, is especially significant
in that institutional loyalties in the region, and in particular the moral authority and political influence of the
Vatican seems to have arrived at a major crossroad in a country which for centuries identified as decidedly Roman
Catholic. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Cardinal Rubén Salazar,
Archbishop of Bogota.

“…There is a peace agreement and it must be respected.…”
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Baculazos insólitos (Unprecendented blows with
the Crusier),” Twishort (@eduardomackenz1), 4 April 2018. https://twishort.
com/mBVmc; El Mundo, 9 April 2018. http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/
search?q=cache:okj0fjKihB0J:www.elmundo.com/noticia/Baculazos-insolitos/369424&num
=1&safe=active&hl=en&gl=us&strip=1&vwsrc=0
“Lately the 75 year old Cardinal Rubén Salazar Gómez seems exasperated….His curious
attitude during Easter Week liturgical ceremonies is noteworthy….His Eminence ended his
presentation with a spectacular order urbi et ordi (to the city and to the world). ‘There is a
peace agreement and it must be respected. Because this is not simply a peace agreement of
a government. It is a peace agreement of Colombia and therefore we must respect it.’ …The
Archbishop of Bogotá has thus become, in the primary cathedral, an intransigent voice of
earthly power, of President Santos and the FARC, given that what he said about the Havana
pacts are the questionable position of those two actors.”

Source: By JuanCardozo, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Monse%C3%B1or_Rub%C3%A9n_Salazar.jpg, CC
BY-SA 3.0.

Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “La ofensiva
antirreligiosa de las FARC (The anti-religious
offensive of the FARC),” Voto Católico, 5
September 2017. http://www.votocatolico.
co/2017/09/la-ofensiva-antirreligiosa-de-lasfarc.html
“The Bishop [referring to a Mexican
prelate]…preaches without smiling that
Marxism is ‘sharing wealth’, that Marx
‘is quite correct as to economics’ and that
‘United States imperialism oppresses and
impoverishes its neighbors’….”

Peruvian President Resigns, Replaced
OE Watch Commentary: As reported in the first accompanying reference, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, known colloquially as PPK, resigned
on 21 March 2018 and is no longer president of Peru. Martín Vizcarra, who had until Friday 23 March been the First Vice-President, is now
President. The change is another outcome of the Odebrecht scandal that has swept through Latin America during the last couple of years. (See,
for instance, “‘Odebrecht’ and the Forum of Sao Paulo,” OE Watch April 2017). According to the first reference, it appears that former President
Kuczynski is hoping for leniency. News from Brazil about the jailing of former President Lula (also on corruption charges related to Odebrecht),
does not bode well for the Peruvian. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Vizcarra is considered a political technocrat…”
Source: Editors, “Ya es un hecho PPK renunció a la
presidencia del Perú (Now a fact, PPK renounced the
presidency of Peru),” Gestión, 21 March 2018. https://
gestion.pe/peru/pedro-pablo-kuczynski-renuncia-presidenciaperu-229887
“In political crisis and in the context of revealing videos,
PPK resigned the presidency, according to informed sources…
whereas some ministers have already formalized their
resignations… ‘I know that Thursday we’ll be OK. And
afterwards [after the brief presidential vacancy], as always we
will turn the other cheek because we are Christian people who
forgive. We want reconciliation’, said PPK.”

Source: Lino Calderon, “Vizcarra, el ingeniero austero que será Presidente
de Perú (Vizcarra, the austere engineer who will be President of Perú),”
Rutafinafinanciera (blog), 23 April 2018. http://rutafinanciera.blogspot.
com/2018/03/mundo-vizcarra-el-ingeniero-austero-que.html
“The First Vice-President of Peru, Martín Vizcarra, an engineer without
connections to the traditional political parties, has been called to preside
Peru upon the resignation Wednesday of Pedro Pablo Kuczynski…Vizcarra
would have to complete Kuczynski’s mandate of five years, which concludes
in July of 2021…Vizcarra is considered a political technocrat, an unusual
mix in the Peruvian scene. His profile is paradoxically, his greatest strength
in a country where the political class has been discredited and wrapped in
scandals and corruption…”
OE Watch | May 2018

31

LATIN AMERICA
Brazilians Send Former President to Jail
OE Watch Commentary: The Brazilian
Supreme Court sent former President Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva (1 January 2003 – 1
January 2011) to jail for twelve years. He
had been convicted of money laundering
and corruption in July 2017, but his appeals
process ran out this month, not in his favor. The
news was reported extensively all around the
continent. Lula is an icon of the Latin American
Marxist left. Besides becoming President of
Brazil and mentor of another former President,
Dilma Vana Rousseff, he was also the founder,
along with his ally and friend Fidel Castro, of
the Forum of Sao Paulo. President Rousseff
had been President Lula’s Chief of Staff. Late
in 2015, the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies
presented charges of impeachment to the
Senate against then President Rousseff and in
2016, the Brazilian Senate found her guilty of
budget crimes and removed her from office. It
is difficult to believe, had she not been removed
from office, that Lula’s legal fate would not have
been different. In any case, before reporting
Former President of Brazil Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva with Cuban leader Fidel Castro (2003).
Source: By Antônio Milena/ABr (Agência Brasil [1]) [CC BY 3.0 br (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/br/deed.en)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
to prison, Lula returned to his roots, giving an
File:Lula_anda_Castro9822.jpeg.
encouraging speech to an audience of metal
worker unionists. He may have pointed out, or perhaps tried to anoint as such, the coming leadership of the activist far left in Brazil, Manuela
d’Avila and Guilherme Boulos. Needless to say, radical leftist organizations from seemingly everywhere voiced their support for him. Typical
was the unequivocal message of solidarity from the Colombian FARC, which demanded on his behalf all the guarantees of the Brazilian
Constitution. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“Former President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva spent last night as a prisoner in Curitiba, after a judicial
process that condemned him to 12 years and one month of jail for corruption.”
Source: AP y Télam, “Lula pasó su
primera noche en la celda: hubo 9 heridos
por los disturbios durante su ingreso (Lula
spent his first night in the cell: there were
nine injured in disturbances during is
in-processing),” La Nación, 8 April 2018.
https://www.lanacion.com.ar/2123780lula-paso-su-primera-noche-preso-en-unacelda-de-15-metros-cuadrados
“Former President Luiz Inacio Lula
da Silva spent last night as a prisoner
in Curitiba, after a judicial process that
condemned him to 12 years and one month
of jail for corruption….the authorities
transformed a cell into a special cell of
about 160 square feet. The room has a
simple bed, a wardrobe and a private
bath.….”

Source: Alberto Armendáriz, “Antes de la caída, el
intento final de Lula de unificar la izquierda (Before
the fall, Lula’s final attempt to unify the left),” La
Nación, 8 April 2018. https://www.lanacion.com.
ar//2123699-antes-de-la-caida-el-intento-final-deunificar-la-izquierda/
“On top of the loudspeaker truck in front of the
metalworkers union where he took the first steps of his
political career as a union leader , he dedicated a lot of
time and kind words to highlight the presence of two of
the principal ‘representatives of the new generation of
the left’: the 36 year old Guácha state deputy Manuela
d’Avila, presidential candidate for the Communist
Party of Brazil (PCdoB), and the national coordinator
of the Workers Movement Without Ceiling (MTST), 35
year old Guilherme Boulos, aspirant to the Palacio del
Planalto [Brazilian White House in Brazilia] for the
Socialism and Liberty Party (PSOL).…”

Source: FARC, “Las FARC se
solidarizan con Lula (The FARC
expresses solidarity with Lula),”
FARC and Brazilian Workers Party
Secretariat, 7 April 2018. http://www.
pt.org.br/blog-secretarias/farc-sesolidariza-con-lula/
“The party Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común
[Alternative Revolutionary Force of
the Majority, FARC] expresses its
solidarity with Brazilian companion
and ex-president LULA. We reject
the decision adopted against him
by the Brazilian Supreme Court of
Justice and demand for him all of the
political and judicial guarantees of
the Brazilian constitution…”

OE Watch | May 2018

32

LATIN AMERICA
Cuban Media Praises Putin’s Victory
OE Watch Commentary: Shortly after the conclusion of the Russian presidential election in March, the Cuban media announced their
support of Vladimir Putin’s victory. As the accompanying excerpted article from Granma, a Cuban government newspaper, notes, “the core of
Putin’s success consists of having achieved sustained development in Russia, in political, economic, and social terms.” Cuban support for Putin
is not shocking considering the Cuban government views Putin to be “the alternative to a unipolar world created by the United States in the
wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union.”
The excerpt hails Russia’s continued development of “innovating weapons models developed by [Russia]” in response to the United States’
“installation of close to 400 military bases around [Russia].” The article suggests that despite Cuba’s decreased reliance on the former Soviet
State, Cuba remains supportive of Russian geopolitical objectives. End OE Watch Commentary (Kelsay)
Source: “Column in State Media Hails Putin Win as Victory for Russia’s Sovereignty,” Granma, 18 March 2018. http://www.granma.cu/
mundo/2018-03-18/por-que-vladimir-putin-18-03-2018-19-03-02
The answer is simple: because Russia and China are the alternative to a unipolar world created by the United States in the wake of the
collapse of the Soviet Union. Could any country, France, for example, refuse to follow the steps dictated to it by the United States? No, not even
if it wanted to, but it could if US hegemony were to break….
…The disintegration of the USSR came accompanied by the destruction of its armed forces, its social security system, the obliteration of its
industry, and the reduction of the living standard it had enjoyed….
…The core of Putin’s success consists of having achieved sustained development in Russia, in political, economic, and social terms; of being
the standard-bearer of Russian ideology who restores the loftiest national, moral, religious, cultural, artistic, and philosophical values that
have always constituted Russian civilization; and of having strengthened that country’s armed forces to defend the sovereignty, riches, liberty,
and independence of Russia.
This is what stands out from President Putin’s yearly address before the Federal Assembly of Russia in which, in addition to the achievements
attained in the social field, he referred to the innovating weapons models developed by his country in response to the unilateral withdrawal
from the Anti-Ballistic Missiles (ABM) Treaty when the United States installed around Russia an antimissiles system that impairs the strategic
nuclear parity that was achieved; to the new US nuclear doctrine that enables it to employ nuclear weapons whenever it wants to and against
anyone it wants to; and to the installation of close to 400 military bases around it. Only then, did Russia develop new strategic weapons
models.

“…The core of Putin’s success consists of having achieved sustained development in Russia, in political,
economic, and social terms; of being the standard-bearer of Russian ideology who restores the loftiest
national, moral, religious, cultural, artistic, and philosophical values that have always constituted Russian
civilization; and of having strengthened that country’s armed forces to defend the sovereignty, riches, liberty,
and independence of Russia.”
Raul Castro and Vladimir Putin, Sep 2015.

Source: Kremlin.ru. http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/50388. CCA By 4.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

33

LATIN AMERICA
Criminal Organizations and the Use of Encrypted
Communication Devices in Latin America
OE Watch Commentary: Pablo Escobar was shot to death on the roof
of a home in Medellin, Colombia on 2 December 1993. His death resulted
in the collapse of one of the most famous cartels of all time, but it taught
other Colombian cartels an important message as an intercepted phone
call is what led police to his location. Other cartels learned that more
secure communication lines are needed in order to operate. According to
Colombian authorities, as outlined in the accompanying excerpted article
from Xataka, cartels began to change their methods of communication
drastically in the late 1990s. Specifically, they began to communicate
messages in small groups or face-to-face, as opposed to using commercial
devices. Another important change implemented following the death of
Escobar was that drug cartels became highly proficient in conducting
their own counter-intelligence to intercept the calls of authorities. Cartels
carried out interceptions prior to the death of Escobar and intensified their
activities in this after his death.
The Xataka article also points out that authorities arrested a
communications specialist in Cali known as Gilberto Mora Mesa on
12 October 2017. At the time of his arrest, he was in possession of
communication equipment that is not even utilized by intelligence services
in Colombia. This same source indicated that the technology possessed by
cartels allowed them to intercept phone calls of high ranking government,
military, and police officials, which in turn enabled them to gain valuable
knowledge about operations. Among the devices seized were items to
identify and trace phone numbers, equipment used to determine if a phone
is being intercepted and jammers to ensure phone calls are not being
listened to in the first place.
However, it recently became public knowledge that a Canadian company
is currently under investigation for its role in selling encrypted mobile
phones that were used to conceal criminal activity for drug cartels;
specifically the Sinaloa Cartel. As discussed in the excerpted article
from Xataka Movil, authorities allege that “(the company’s) networks
were specifically designed to prevent law enforcement from intercepting
and monitoring communications on the network,” and that the company
provided services intended to aid transnational drug trafficking
organizations.
This source further points out that encrypted email platforms are not
illegal, and there are many legitimate reasons people use encryption to
protect their electronic messages. Similarly, it is not necessarily illegal to
sell a phone installed with encryption technology; however, in this case,
authorities say the company’s entire business model revolved around selling
encrypted phones to crime groups. The excerpted article from InSight
Crime also discusses how the company used servers based in Panama and
Hong Kong, thinking that those countries would be less likely to scrutinize
the communications or cooperate with foreign law enforcement authorities.
In reality, the creation of sophisticated communication and interception
equipment gives cartels an edge to increase their productivity and deceive
authorities, because if they already know how they are going to react to a
certain situation, they can simply improvise. Sophisticated communication
and interception equipment is also unique in the sense that not every
criminal group has them and those with the best equipment hold a certain
edge over those not privy to it. It is no secret that cartels have spent and
will continue to spend insurmountable amounts of money to keep their
communications safe and to intercept the communications of anyone
looking to seize their shipments or hurt their business in any way. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The company allegedly sold Blackberry
phones that had their cameras, microphones, and
standard internet and text messaging removed.
Instead, the devices came pre-loaded with
encrypted email platforms.”
Source: “Selva, policía y narcos: cómo se comunicaban los cárteles
en la Colombia de los 90 (Jungle, Police and Narcos: How Cartels
Communicated in Colombia in the 90s),” Xataka, 14 September
2017. https://www.xataka.com/n/selva-policia-y-narcos-como-secomunicaban-los-carteles-en-la-colombia-de-los-90
Following the death of Pablo Escobar, major Colombian
cartels began to organize themselves into smaller and more
specialized groups to avoid possible infiltration. Furthermore,
to avoid having phone calls intercepted, orders were given
person to person instead of over commercial lines. Authorities
in Colombia are also indicating that criminal organizations
are using communications equipment not even available to
intelligence services in the country.
Source: Fernandez, Samuel. “Detenido por vender BlackBerry
modificadas sin cámara, GPS ni micrófono al crimen organizado
(Individual Arrested for Selling Modified BlackBerry without
Camera or GPS to Organized Crime Groups),” Xataka Movil, 20
March 2018. https://www.xatakamovil.com/movil-y-sociedad/
detenido-por-vender-blackberry-modificadas-sin-camara-gps-nimicrofono-al-crimen-organizado
In a complaint filed in a federal court, authorities alleged
that “Phantom Secure’s networks were specifically designed
to prevent law enforcement from intercepting and monitoring
communications on the network,” and that the company
provided services intended to aid transnational drug trafficking
organizations. The company allegedly sold Blackberry phones
that had their cameras, microphones, and standard internet and
text messaging removed. Instead, the devices came pre-loaded
with encrypted email platforms.
Source: “FBI: empresa canadiense adaptaba teléfonos encriptados
para carteles (Canadian Company Custom-Made Encrypted
Phones for Cartels: FBI),” InSight Crime, 16 March 2018. https://
es.insightcrime.org/noticias/noticias-del-dia/empresa-canadienseadaptaba-telefonos-encriptados-para-carteles-fbi/
Phatom used servers based in Panama and Hong Kong in the
belief that those countries would be less likely to scrutinize the
communications or cooperate with foreign law enforcement
authorities. The company also used other techniques to mask
their customers’ digital footprints. Phantom claimed to be
able to remotely wipe any device that fell into the hands
of authorities, according to the complaint.The phones cost
between $2,000 and $3,000 each for a six-month period. Many
of Phantom’s clients also used encrypted email addresses
associated with narco culture, like “The.cartel@freedomsecure.
me” and “Elchapo66@lockedpgp.com”
OE Watch | May 2018

34

LATIN AMERICA
Private Jets as a Viable Option for Trans-Atlantic
Cocaine Shipments
OE Watch Commentary: Colombia and Peru have produced record
high quantities of cocaine in recent years to meet demand in areas
around the world. The European market is particularly lucrative as a
kilo of cocaine can be sold for significantly more than in US cities.
Most commonly, largescale cocaine shipments crossing the Atlantic are
transported via maritime routes in cargo ships, but this is not the only
method used by traffickers to move trans-Atlantic shipments. This idea
is suggested in the accompanying excerpted article from Caracol, which
also discusses the use of a private jet to smuggle half a metric ton of
cocaine from El Dorado International Airport in Bogotá to the United
Kingdom on 29 January 2018.
A private jet flying from Colombia to London is not uncommon, but
this particular case raised suspicion for multiple reasons. First, the five
passengers on the flight paid $300,000 for the trip, but their professions
were noted as follows: two construction workers, an assistant chef, a
hairdresser, and an unemployed individual. Second, three of the suspects
entered Colombia with tourist visas in November 2017, supposedly with
the intention of buying cocaine for Italy’s ‘Ndrangheta mafia, as discussed
in the accompanying excerpted article from El Periodico. Colombian
authorities launched an investigation into the security failures that
allowed the flight to depart from Bogotá in the first place and according
to the accompanying excerpted article from El Espectador, they believe
that an individual disguised as a police officer may have helped load
the shipment onto the plane while it sat in the hangar at El Dorado
International Airport.
Record high production has increased trafficking groups’ capacity to
absorb losses from seizures, and has thus emboldened them to carry out
smuggling schemes such as the one recently seen in the United Kingdom.
Given that Mexican cartels have near virtual control of the US market,
it can be hypothesized that Colombia will continue to look for new and
diverse ways to move their product into the lucrative European market.
End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Investigations conducted by Colombian and the
United Kingdom NCA (National Crime Agency)
aided authorities in seizing 500kgs of cocaine that
departed on a private jet from Bogota to the UK.”

Source: “Así se desmanteló la red de drogas del ‘Narcojet’
(That’s How They Dismantled the Drugs Network Known as
‘Narcojet’),” Caracol, 22 February, 2018. http://caracol.com.co/
radio/2018/02/22/internacional/1519314414_629928.html
Investigations conducted by Colombian and the United Kingdom
NCA (National Crime Agency) aided authorities in seizing 500kgs
of cocaine that departed on a private jet from Bogota to the UK.
This seizure occurred on 29 January 18.
Source: “Procuraduría colombiana indaga caso de ‘narcojet’
que llevó cocaína a Londres (Colombian Attorney General
Investigations Narco Jet Case that Trafficked Cocaine to London),”
El Periodico, 6 February 2018. https://www.elperiodico.com/es/
internacional/20180206/procuraduria-colombiana-indaga-caso-denarcojet-que-llevo-cocaina-a-londres-6605937
On 08 December 2017, English construction worker Martin Neil
traveled to Colombia with Italian Chef Alessandro Iembo and a
Spanish national identified as Víctor Franco Lorenzo. Although
they declared themselves as tourists, it was later discovered
that they were in the country to purchase cocaine for the Italian
mafia known as La Ndrangheta. After this initial trip, the three
aforementioned individuals traveled back to Colombia with
Spanish hair dresser José Ramón Miguélez Botas and another
unemployed construction worker.
Source: “Así van las investigaciones por el ‘narcojet’ (Progress on
the ‘Narcojet’ Probe)”, El Espectador, 05 February, 2018.
https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/judicial/asi-van-lasinvestigaciones-por-el-narcojet-articulo-737404
Authorities confirmed that police searched the hangar in which
the private jet was parked at El Dorado prior to its departure.
However, the Prosecutor’s Office indicated that a source close to
the company that owns the company stated the following: “There
is a very delicate security issue at the airport. The jets can utilize
various tarmacs, however, before taking off, the plane went
through all the routine procedures; even the luggage was searched.
Due to these measures, the source indicated that the company
which owns the hangar, as well as the Austrian owners of the plane
were involved.”

by LUCAS WINTER, FMSO

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/228773
OE Watch | May 2018

35

LATIN AMERICA
The Price of Chinese Investment in Latin America
OE Watch Commentary: As noted in the
excerpted article from La Prensa, Chinese
enterprises have “reached out” to Central and South
America. According to the article, that engagement
has taken on a predatory character and potentially
increased dependence on Chinese trading. In cases
such as Nicaragua, Cuba, and Venezuela, Chinese
investment has also provided “a strong support base
for China in the region,” as demonstrated in the
excerpted article from NotiEspartano.com.
While China has greatly increased loans and
investments in Latin America and the Caribbean in
recent years, some in the region consider that such
activities are less about promoting development
than about benfitting the commercial goals of
Chinese-based companies and advanced Chinese
strategic interests in extracting needed commodities
and securing access to the region’s markets. Since
2005, Chinese-based banks have lent approximately
$141 billion to Latin America and the Caribbean,
and since 2001, Chinese companies have invested
an estimated $113.6 billion there. The loans
have almost exclusively financed infrastructure
projects performed by Chinese companies (often
with a heavy component of Chinese workers),
the completion of which facilitates access to the
region’s resources and markets. Some 65 percent
of Chinese investment in Latin America has been
in the mining and petroleum sector, furthering
Chinese extraction of the region’s commodity
resources. Other projects, such as smaller
investments in final assembly facilities for autos
and heavy machinery, or sales and service networks
for telecommunications companies such as Huawei,
expand Chinese access to the region’s markets, as
discussed in the excerpted article from El País.
Some in Latin America view the influx of Chinese
cash in the region as helpful in producing short
term benefits, but it is still not clear that long term
benefits will extend from short term solutions. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“China is already the largest
trading partner of Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, and Peru. However, China,
as it does in emerging markets
throughout the world, offers the
appearance of an attractive path to
development, but, this often involves
trading short-term gains for longterm dependency.”

Chinese President Xi Jinping and Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto (2013).

Source: By Angélica Rivera de Peña, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cena_de_Estado_que_en_honor_del_Excmo._Sr._Xi_Jinping,_Presidente_de_la_Rep%C3%BAblica_Popular_
China,_y_de_su_esposa,_Sra._Peng_Liyuan_(8960384656).jpg ,CC BY-SA 2.0.

Source: “China y América Latina y el Caribe refuerzan sus lazos comerciales:
exportaciones crecerán 30% en 2018 (China, Latin America and the Caribbean
Reinforce Commercial Ties: Expected 30% Increase in Exports),” La Prensa, 18 Dec
2017. http://prensacanada.com/exportaciones-latinoamerica-china/
China’s trade with and investment in the region deepened at around the time of the
great recession of 2008. Between 2015 and 2019, it plans to invest $250 billion in
direct investment in the region and about $500 billion in trade. In 2018 alone, it plans
to increase overall exports from the region by 30% and it is well on its way. China is
already the largest trading partner of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Peru. However,
China, as it does in emerging markets throughout the world, offers the appearance of
an attractive path to development, but, this often involves trading short-term gains for
long-term dependency.”
Source: “¿Cuál es el alcance del apoyo de China, Rusia y Cuba? (What is the Reach of
the Support Provided by China, Russia and Cuba),” NotiEspartano.com, 10 November
2017. https://notiespartano.com/2017/11/10/venezuela-alcance-del-apoyo-china-rusiacuba-mariano-alba/
China has looked to countries such as Nicaragua, Venezuela and Cuba for multiple
reasons. First, it seeks to take advantage of natural resources desperately needed by
the PRC. Second, these countries serve as a strong support base for China in the region
and enable/support PRC expansion.
Source: “China profundiza su apuesta por América Latina (China Bets Even Further
on Latin America),” El País, 17 June 2017. https://elpais.com/economia/2017/06/15/
actualidad/1497560655_900574.html
Latin American countries have a hard time securing international financing because
of poor governance, corruption, and their economic policies. But China goes to them,
builds desperately needed roads, railways, and ports, and uses these new facilities
to transport raw material to feed its growing economy and population. China is an
attractive investor not only because it has a policy of non-interference in the domestic
affairs of its partner countries but because its projects are completed at a speed that
developing nations are unused to. Furthermore, the region is replete with raw materials
desperately needed by China and the country has not wasted time in making deals
to secure these materials in exchange for much needed infrastructure that is lacking
throughout the region. However, China even benefits through its building contracts
because the government brings in its own companies and many of its own workers to
complete these projects.

OE Watch | May 2018

36

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Lauds Its Model of Development Cooperation
in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: On 23 March the Chinese language website
guancha.cn published the accompanying excerpted article discussing the
emerging Chinese model for engaging in international development cooperation
with African countries. The article was written several months ahead of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) Summit, which will be held in
Beijing in September 2018. The article argues that mainstream development
models are not experiencing success in Africa because they force African
countries to rely on resources from abroad, instead of whatever domestic
resources the African countries already have. The article claims that China’s
own development came from its reliance on domestic resources, so it practices
what it preaches in cooperating with Africa countries by making them rely on
their own natural resources.
The article also argues that the Western model is overly dependent on
Western countries proposing projects to African countries whereas the Chinese
“request-based” model requires the African countries to propose plans and
then the Chinese government will decide on which plans to support based on
their feasibility, the amount of funding required, and whether they promote
the development of China’s own domestic industries. The article also notes
that Western development models often involve “soft” infrastructure, such
as promoting improvement in laws and regulations, business norms, and
human resources of recipient countries. China, in contrast, focuses on “hard”
infrastructure, such as roads or bridges.
Although the article recognizes that there are some advantages of Western
development agencies, the article suggests that China’s model represents
the future trend. The article avoids the issue of the connection between
development and security cooperation, although it notes that Chinese projects,
such as a railway in Djibouti, have been received with great welcome.
Presumably, if China’s development cooperation with African countries
will be as successful as the article suggests, it could lead to successes in
China’s security cooperation with African countries as well. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “中非发展合作，与ODA不同的援助路径
(China-Africa Development Cooperation, Different Paths of
Assistance from the ODA)”, guancha.cn, 23 March 2018.
http://www.guancha.cn/chengcheng/2018_03_23_451212.
shtml
Chinese scholars and development practitioners have
begun to establish their own theoretical framework to
explain China’s aid to Africa and various other forms of
cooperation. The ODA of Western countries has established
a one-way dependence relationship between the donor and
recipient countries, and has a hierarchical and dependent
quality relationship while the China-Africa development
cooperation established under the framework of SouthSouth cooperation is trying to achieve cooperation
between the two parties and equal and mutually beneficial
cooperation. This difference in essential.
In the day-to-day operations of ODA, it is often the
aid agencies and independent consultants who assisted
countries to issue “prescriptions” and formulate assistance
programs. On the contrary, in China-Africa development
cooperation, it is generally up to the African partners
to take the initiative to put forward the required list of
projects, while the Chinese select projects based on the
feasibility of the project, the amount of funding required,
and whether it can promote the development of China’s
domestic industries.
Western ODA models are mostly implemented by a unified
state aid agency, such as the U.S. Agency for International
Development. China-Africa development cooperation does
not have a unified aid agency for implementation, but it
is promoted through a coordination mechanism between
several government departments and policy banks.

“On the contrary, in China-Africa development cooperation, it is generally up to the African partners to
take the initiative to put forward the required list of projects, while the Chinese select projects based on the
feasibility of the project, the amount of funding required, and whether it can promote the development of
China’s domestic industries.”

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | May 2018

37

ASIA-PACIFIC
PLA Dispatches First Military Medical Team to
Mozambique
OE Watch Commentary: On 20 November 2017 China dispatched its first group of
PLA medical personnel to the East African nation of Mozambique as reported on in the
article from PLA Daily. The nine members of the Military Medical Experts Group were
drawn from military hospitals in Wuxi, Nanjing, Shanghai, and Hangzhou and specialized
in surgery, ENT (ear, nose and throat), internal medicine, orthopedics, and intensive care.
While their primary responsibility was working with the military of Mozambique to train
in epidemic prevention and general medical work, during their two months the group
diagnosed roughly 3,000 patients and performed 40 major and minor surgeries. Epidemic
prevention work in particular is important, as Mozambique has the fourth-highest
prevalence of AIDS in the world.
Chinese Ambassador to Mozambique, Su Jian (苏健) also noted that the team made a
point of providing health care to employees at Chinese companies and overseas Chinese
communities during their weekends, treating over 200 patients. While the focus is on
building relationships with their host countries, these visits are also an important part of
showing the flag to Chinese companies and ethnic-Chinese communities abroad.
In 2016 China and Mozambique expanded their diplomatic relationship to
“Comprehensive Strategic Cooperative Partnership” (全面战略合作伙伴关系) during
a visit by Mozambique’s President Nyusi to China as noted in the press release from
the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Chinese involvement in Mozambique dates
back to its support for anti-colonial movements in the 60s, but in recent years China has
become a major trading partner and donor of humanitarian relief to the country. Chinese
UN peacekeepers served in Mozambique from 1993-1994. In 2007 China provided
Mozambique with a $1.5 million grant to improve several departments in the Mozambican
military. Another grant of over $10 million for training and equipment followed the
upgrading of relations in 2016.
China’s relations with Mozambique are frequently framed in terms of the “Belt
and Road” Initiative. As infrastructure improves and the country becomes wealthier,
Mozambique could grow into a major hub allowing Chinese goods to reach across the
Indian Ocean and plug into markets in Southern Africa while providing natural resources
to China. Chinese military aid, even in the form of short visits by doctors, is another way
of confirming Chinese commitment to its relationship with Mozambique, and will open the
doors to other visits. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “中国首批援莫桑比克军事医疗专家
组圆满结束任务回国,” (“China’s First Group
of Medical Experts Successfully Concluded
Their Mission and Returned to China”), PLA
Daily, 15 January 2018. http://www.81.cn/
jwgz/2018-01/15/content_7908296.htm
Chinese Ambassador to Mozambique, Su
Jian (苏健), praised the expert group for
its outstanding performance in fulfilling its
mission. He said that China’s dispatch of
military medical experts to Mozambique
is a concrete manifestation of the ChinaMozambique comprehensive strategic
cooperative partnership and the implementation
of the important consensus reached by the two
countries last year regarding strengthening
exchanges and cooperation between the two
militaries in the military medical field.
Source: “习近平同莫桑比克总统纽西举行会
谈 两国元首决定建立中莫全面战略合作伙伴
关系” (“Xi Jinping and Mozambican President
Nyusi – Both Nations Agree to Establish
a Comprehensive Strategic Cooperative
Partnership”), Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, 18 May 2016. http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/
ce/cegh/chn/zgyw/t1364501.htm
“China wishes to support Mozambique’s
efforts to strengthen the building of national
defense and stability maintenance capabilities
and upgrade the security cooperation to a new
level.”

“Colonel Armando Mello, the president of Maputo Military Hospital, thanked the expert group for their
selfless dedication...and hoped that China could continue to provide assistance and hoped that the two
countries’ two militaries could have closer cooperation in the future.”
Maputo.

Source: By Andrew Moir, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4d/Maputo.jpg CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

38

ASIA-PACIFIC
Retired PLA Lieutenant General Outlines Scenario in
which China Could Take Taiwan by Force in Three Days
OE Watch Commentary: Cross-strait relations between Mainland China and Taiwan
have gone through many ebbs and flows. Each side disagrees on the status of Taiwan and the
One-China policy. A new push for democracy and independence by Taiwan has prompted
one hardline retired PLA Lieutenant General to outline a process that he says would allow
the People’s Republic of China (PRC) to take Taiwan by force within three days. Retired
Chinese Lieutenant General Wang Hongguang outlines his proposed strategy to take Taiwan
back by force in the three accompanying excerpted articles.
In the first part of the series, Wang describes six types of military offensive operations to
take Taiwan by force with “firepower operations” making up the first type. Wang projects
that during “the firepower preparation phase,” three waves of firepower assault using
artillery and missiles, plus three waves of additional firepower assault by aviation troops,
will destroy one-third of Taiwan’s major targets, all according to computer simulations. He
adds that superior firepower from shore-based long-range rockets, tactical aviation forces,
army aviation forces, and/or naval artilleries and missiles can be summoned to destroy
any counterattacks. Wang proposes using the U.S. military’s “van Fleet’s load concept,”
which he describes as using munitions liberally so that dense and intense firepower can kill
rival forces to the greatest extent and reduce the loss of friendly troops. The second type
of military operations is “targeted operations” (or “death point strikes”). Wang explains
that, according to their nature, targets can be categorized as either those that should
be destroyed, suppressed, overtaken, monitored, or retained. He argues that Taiwan is
vulnerable because of the exposure and the concentration, within short distances, of areas
that could be potential military targets. The third type of military operations is “fullspectrum operations,” in which the enemy’s situation and terrain should be considered in
determining what type of operations to pursue. The fourth type is “informatized,” including
electromagnetic and cyberspace, in which China would protect its own information
systems, while attacking and destroying Taiwan’s. The fifth and sixth types of operations
are “special operations” and “psychological (including legal and public opinion) operations,”
respectively.
In the second of Wang’s three part series, he explains that strategic thinkers in the past
have wondered how long it would take China to capture Taiwan. Answers have varied,
ranging from a few days to several weeks, depending on the scenario and the variables.
Examples of variables included how long supporting forces might take to respond. Wang
envisions a scenario in which it would only take a few days for China to take Taiwan
and then goes into detail explaining why, discussing variables such as the cut in Taiwan’s
military troop’s numbers. He goes on to outline a hypothetical comprehensive battle
scenario and concludes, if outside forces do not arrive to assist within three days, perhaps
because they have been blocked by China’s DF-21D missiles, naval and air forces, and
firepower, then China would “never have to worry about making the trip again.”
Finally, Wang dedicates the third article to the capture of Taiwan’s leaders. First, he
describes seven ways in which Taiwan’s military would likely assist President Tsai Lngwen to escape. In response, he describes how China might counter Taiwan’s efforts. For
example, anticipating that Chinese forces would take assault boats to advance toward the
presidential office along a freshwater river located not far from Taiwan’s presidential office,
Wang explains that Taiwan’s strategy would therefore be to deploy large numbers of troops
at the entrances of the freshwater rivers and along the rivers to guard them closely. As a
result, rather than sending assault boats, Wang suggests using helicopters instead to directly
assault the presidential office.
The current Taiwanese administration’s push for independence has incensed many in
China. The three-part series is lengthy, detailed and could very well be the ramblings of
a disgruntled retired military officer. Or, being that it was published in official Chinese
media, it could even be an attempt to instill fear and uncertainty in the Taiwanese
population in hopes that the people might pressure the government to reverse its rhetoric
and stop pushing for independence. Whatever it is, originating from a former high-ranking
deputy commander of China’s former Nanjing Military Region, it is worth noting. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“During the firepower preparation
phase, three waves of firepower
assault based on artilleries
and missiles plus three waves
of additional firepower assault
by aviation troops will destroy
one-third of major Taiwanese
targets according to computer
simulations.”
Source: Wang Hongguang, “武统台湾怎么打？
解放军中将：六种战法三天拿下 (How Will
China Take Taiwan by Force? PLA Lieutenant
General: Six Types of Military Operations
to take it in Three Days!)” Sina News, 27
March 2018. http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/
china/2018-03-27/doc-ifysrtfk9948065.shtml
During the firepower preparation phase, three
waves of firepower assault based on artilleries
and missiles plus three waves of additional
firepower assault by aviation troops will destroy
one-third of major Taiwanese targets according
to computer simulations. Other important
and general targets will also be suppressed,
resulting in the loss of functionality for 48
hours. Afterwards, unmanned combat aerial
vehicles will conduct aerial surveillance and
eliminate any sporadic firepower.
During the offensive stage, there will be
no need to storm the enemy in the event of
counterattacks by the Taiwanese military or
summoned to destroy them. The “superior
firepower” can be shore-based long-range
rockets, tactical aviation tough resistance
at defensive or support points. Instead, the
superior firepower will be forces, army aviation
forces, or naval artilleries and missiles. The
particularly strong underground facilities will
be repeatedly attacked with missiles (earth
penetrating munitions). Therefore, in an assault
group with a combined arms battalion as the
backbone, there will be an artillery forward
observation station, an Air Force target
guidance team, an Army aviation command
team, and naval firepower guidance personnel…
There are two characteristics about Taiwan’s
military objectives that make them easily
beaten. The first is being concentrated... The
second is being exposed.

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2018

39

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: Retired PLA Lieutenant General Outlines
Scenario in which China Could Take Taiwan by Force
in Three Days
Source: Wang Hongguang, “为什么统一的炮声一响，“台独”顶多撑三天!”
(Why when the Unification Cannons Sound, ‘Taiwan Independence’ would
Only Last Three Days),” Huanqiu.com, 29 March 2018. http://mil.huanqiu.
com/world/2018-03/11710139.html
“How long could the Taiwan army [guo jun] resist the communist army” has
actually been an enduring topic in Taiwan and a lasting “pain” in the hearts of
the military and the people, for which successive “Ministers of Defense” have
had their own answers…
If we start counting from the first artillery shells falling on Taiwan with the
landing coming 24 hours later, then that would be “D-24h” plus”D+48h” for a
total of 72 hours. We would take Taiwan in three days.
… only give the outside forces assisting Taiwan like the United States and
Japan three days at most. If those assisting armies do not arrive within three
days or if those forces cannot approach Taiwan because they are blocked by
our DF-21D missiles, naval and air forces, and firepower, then we would not
ever need to worry about making the trip again.

Source: Wang Hongguang, “解放军“驾临台湾”日，
蔡英文能往哪里跑？(When the PLA “Rides to
Taiwan” where will Tsai Lng-wen be able to Run?),”
Huanqiu Wang, 30 March 2018. http://mil.huanqiu.com/
world/2018-03/11720942.html
In the less than two years that Tsai Ing-wen has been in
office, they have conducted six “anti-decapitation” drills.
In order to ensure that Tsai Ing-wen is not “decapitated,”
Taiwan’s “Ministry of National Defense” recently expanded
the “military police security platoon” into the “military
police rapid response company” to become Tsai’s palace
guards or perhaps her personal bodyguards…
Following the thinking behind the Taiwan military helping
Tsai Ing-wen escape and looking at how she might escape
from a military perspective, there are roughly seven
options.

Flags of the Republic of China and the People’s Republic of China.

Source: By Supreme Dragon [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flags_of_the_Cross-Strait_entities.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

40

ASIA-PACIFIC
China in Greenland: Mines, Science, and Nods to
Independence
by Miguel Martin
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 4, dated 12 March 2018, Edited for OE Watch. For
the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/china-greenland-mines-science-nods-independence/

OE Watch Commentary: Although China’s recent Arctic white paper, a document primarily intended for foreign consumption, avoids direct
mention of Greenland, the island plays an important role in the PRC’s Arctic strategy, due to its abundant natural resources, importance as a
scientific research base, and possible emergence as an independent state that could give China more influence in Arctic affairs. Little actual
Chinese investment has taken place in Greenland to date, but Chinese companies are expected to be involved in two of the island’s largest planned
mining projects (including one of the world’s largest rare-earth mines), while plans to build research facilities have also been announced, among
them a year-round research base and a satellite ground station.
Greenland enjoys a high level of autonomy as a constituent country of the Danish Kingdom. Most of Greenland’s political class is committed to
leaving the Kingdom, although economic independence remains unfeasible in the medium term. Denmark’s annual block grant provides for more
than half of Greenland’s state budget. The government sees developing transportation infrastructure as a way of expanding other industries, in
particular tourism. Possible Chinese involvement in infrastructure development has been under discussion for years. In 2015, then-minister Vittus
Qujaukitsoq talked about airport, port, hydroelectric and mining infrastructure development to representatives of companies including Sinohydro,
China State Construction Engineering and China Harbour Engineering.
Given the generally favorable attitudes toward China in the Greenlandic government, however, its independence could be geopolitically
advantageous to the PRC. China has consistently avoided showing any form of support for such ambitions, and has taken care to treat Greenland
as a sub-national entity, but despite this caution, the issue of independence is now openly discussed in Chinese academia.
Greenland has abundant mineral reserves, but low commodity prices and high development costs have hindered development. Only one mine
is currently active, and another one is expected to come online in summer of 2018. Four sites in Greenland have attracted serious interest from
Chinese companies; two have a realistic chance of coming online in the short term. Once in operation, they would make Chinese state owned
enterprises the top foreign investors in Greenland’s natural resources.
The most important mining project in Greenland is also the most controversial: the uranium and rare-earth site at Kuannersuisut (Kvanefjeld),
one of the world’s largest rare-earth deposits. The license owner, ASX-listed Greenland Minerals and Energy (GME), had signed non-binding
agreements with China Nonferrous to develop the mine, but in 2016 rare-earths processor Shenghe Resources bought an eighth of GME and
stated its interest in increasing its stake to a controlling one once the project enters production. Although listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange,
Shenghe is ultimately controlled by the PRC Ministry of Land and Resources (MLR).
As in Antarctica, mineral prospecting is the main goal of China’s scientific activities in the Arctic; many of Greenland’s major mineral sites have
been visited and studied by Chinese scientists.
Plans for a permanent research station in Greenland were discussed as a priority by Chinese polar program leaders in 2015. In May 2016, the
State Oceanic Administration (SOA) signed an agreement with a Greenlandic ministry that included the construction of a station. Two possible
locations have been hinted at: one seemingly near Kangaamiut or Maniitsoq in the island’s southwest, and another near the Citronen Fjord zinc
project of interest to China Nonferrous. Its location could provide a unique vantage point, being farther north than Denmark’s Station Nord and the
US Thule Air Base (Pituffik).
Last May, a ceremony was held in Kangerlussuaq, Greenland’s airport hub, to launch a process intended to lead to the establishment of a
satellite ground station to be used for climate change research, which could also be used for the dual-use Beidou navigational system. The
ceremony was led by Professor Cheng Xiao of Beijing Normal University, a leading polar scientist, specializing in remote sensing, and featured
Zhao Yaosheng, a Beidou pioneer with a military background. They traveled to Greenland as part of a contingent of 100 ‘elite’ tourists, including
Rear Admiral Chen Yan, former political commissar of the South China Sea fleet, who served as an audience for the ceremony. The ground
station project was reported on Chinese media, but was not known to Greenland’s authorities, whose authorization would be required, until it was
reported on by the author and local media. It’s unclear if and when construction will start.
The Greenlandic government is enthusiastic about China as a key investor in mining and infrastructure projects, as well as a source of tourism
and a customer for seafood, with a foreseeable central role in reducing economic dependence from Denmark. Such enthusiasm has not been
reciprocated through major investments, although that might be about to change. Chinese companies remain cautious, as the development of the
mining industry is hindered by high costs, low commodity prices, a lack of infrastructure and financial uncertainty. Although it remains unstated,
an independent Greenland with China as a key trade and investment partner and good political relations would be a valuable geopolitical asset in
the context of China’s long-term Arctic strategy. End OE Watch Commentary (Martin)
Source: “Michael Allan McCrae, “Zinc project in Greenland receives Chinese backing,” Mining.com, 11 August 2017. http://www.mining.com/zincproject-greenland-receives-chinese-backing/
Ironbark’s Citronen base metal project in Greenland has the support of China Nonferous Metal Industry which signed a memorandum of
understanding with the junior for potential funding of the zinc property…China Nonferrous Metal Mining Group is a state-owned Chinese
corporation with mines in Zambia, Mongolia and Thailand.
OE Watch | May 2018

41

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Gaining Momentum in Quantum Technologies
That Can be Used in Military Applications
OE Watch Commentary: China is determined
to lead the world in quantum-based technologies
that can contribute to military superiority. Pan
Jianwei, executive vice president of the University
of Science and Technology of China, member of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the one of the
country’s leading experts and researchers on quantum
communication, claims that China is already leading
the world in encrypted quantum communications.
According to the accompanying excerpted article
published by Taikong Media, Pan sees China as
already being firmly established in the international
academic community in quantum computing.

Source: “潘建伟委员：我国量子保密通信技术在国际处于全面领先地位 (Pan
Jianwei: China Takes the Lead in Developing Encrypted Quantum Communication
Technology),” Zhongguo Taikong Wang, 20 March 2018. http://www.taikongmedia.
com/Item/Show.asp?m=1&d=25348

The excerpted transcript from a program broadcast
on CCTV News gives an overview on some of China’s
most recent developments. After China launched its
quantum-enabled satellite Micius in 2016, the country
began to expand its quantum network. A quantum
network is meant to allow the transmission of secure
communications without the threat of an eavesdropper
setting in undetected. In 2017 China achieved the
first 1000-km-level Beijing-Shanghai quantum fiber
link and the world’s first intercontinental quantum
communication. A ground-based network of optical
fiber quantum communication works in tandem with
Micius and, according to the report, has contributed
to China taking the leading position in quantum
communication research and development.

Quantum-enable satellite “Micius” had achieved three main goals one year earlier;
the world’s first 1000-km-level Beijing-Shanghai quantum fiber link has been in
operation and the world’s first intercontinental quantum communication has been
successfully achieved. At the end of 2017, a research group led by Jianwei Pan made
a series of important developments in the field of quantum communication, enabling
China to take the lead in this area.

Finally, in support of its continued plan to remain at
the forefront of research and development of quantum
related technologies, China is reportedly building the
world’s largest quantum research facility. According
to the article published in China Morning Post, the
facility will be located in Hefei, Anhui province
and will be used to develop a quantum computer
and other revolutionary forms of technology, which
can be used by the military. Along with encrypted
communications, other quantum-based technologies
of value to the military include quantum computing,
which will be able to break today’s encryption
systems, and “quantum metrology,” which could
improve submarine stealth operations. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“China is now in an all-round leading
position in the world of encrypted
quantum communications and is
firmly established in the international
academic community in quantum
computing.”

Pan Jianwei, executive vice president of the University of Science and Technology of
China and a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said that (under the state’s
great attention and strong support,) China is now in an all-round leading position
in the world of encrypted quantum communications and is firmly established in the
international academic community in quantum computing.
Source: “未来已来·量子通信时代来临 (The Future is Coming – the Advent of the
Era of Quantum Communication),” CCTV News, 26 December 2017. http://m.news.
cctv.com/2017/12/26/ARTIr04gypqG4PANjuEWWr78171226.shtml

On June 16th 2017, the internationally authoritative academic journal Science
published “Satellite-based entanglement distribution over 1200 kilometers” as the
cover essay.
On August 10th 2017, the internationally authoritative academic journal Nature
published another two important achievements of “Micius”: satellite-to-ground
quantum key distribution and ground-to-satellite quantum teleportation. So far,
“Micius” has accomplished all three goals set for it successfully.
On September 29th 2017, the world’s first 1000 km-level quantum private
communication trunk---Beijing to Shanghai trunk officially opened. Supported by
the satellite-ground chain, Beijing and Vienna successfully implemented the first
intercontinental quantum private communication ever in history.
Quantum Satellite Head Scientist, Chinese Academy of Sciences Scholar, Weijian
Pan says, “We hope in the future, there are high-track satellite and earth-based
satellite constructed constellations in the sky, connecting with the internet on the land,
constructing a worldwide, practical, and general quantum communication web. As
the quantum information technology times comes, we believe it is highly possible that
a quantum revolution featured by quantum information is happening right now.”
Source: Stephen Chen, “China Building World’s Biggest Quantum Research Facility,”
South China Morning Post, 11 September 2017. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/
society/article/2110563/china-building-worlds-biggest-quantum-research-facility
China is building the world’s largest quantum research facility to develop a quantum
computer and other “revolutionary” forms of technology that can be used by the
military for code-breaking or on stealth submarines, according to scientists and
authorities involved in the project.
The National Laboratory for Quantum Information Science will be located on a
37-hectare site next to a small lake in Hefei, Anhui province. Sometime this month
developers will be invited to bid for a contract to construct the site, according to
an article in Hefei Evening News, a daily newspaper run by the city government on
Thursday.
Pan Jianwei, China’s lead quantum scientist who was playing a key role in the
project, told local officials at a briefing in May that technology developed in the
facility would be of immediate use to the armed forces, according to Anhui Business
Daily newspaper.
OE Watch | May 2018

42

ASIA-PACIFIC
China is Beefing Up Its Intelligence Curriculum for
Military Personnel
OE Watch Commentary: As China focuses on becoming a
leading military power, an important part of its agenda includes
revamping the training and education system of its armed forces.
The accompanying excerpted article talks about efforts to build up
the military intelligence curriculum at China’s National University
of Defense Technology’s (NUDT) International Relations College.
NUDT is viewed as a top People’s Liberation Army (PLA) military
academy located in Changsha, Hunan Province.
The article begins with a depiction of a battlefield situation
training scenario, which is a part of the university’s curriculum.
The course is entitled “Combined Handling and Assessment of
Sea-Air Intelligence in Joint Operations.” It is said to be the fifth
joint operations support course recently offered. Further into the
article, the reader gains a better sense of the changing dynamics of
China’s intelligence operations. As the PLA focuses more on joint
operations, there is a growing emphasis on building more wellrounded professionals in the intelligence field. Military intelligence
is considered a national-level key course of study. With foreign
language as a foundation and intelligence as the core, military
training is “the pillar.”
There has also been an increased emphasis on developing joint
operations support personnel who are specialized, but have many
skills. NUDT has already added 14 new joint operations support
courses, such as “Information sources for Battlefield Situation,”
“Evaluations for Feedback for Joint Operations Reconnaissance,”
and “Battlefield Imagery Reading and Assessment for
Comprehensive Training.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“…what tomorrow’s battlefields most urgently need
are joint operations support personnel who are
specialized but with many skills.”
Source: Guo Hongyu and Chen Zhen, “聚焦明日战场砥砺知敌尖兵
(Focus on Tomorrow’s Battlefields to Know the Enemy),” Jiefangjun
Bao, 3 April 2018. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2018-04/03/
content_203092.htm
Like budding flowers basking in breeze after spring rain, the men
quickly become forces of the three services. “The education path we
have taken in the new era can be summed up as ‘ foreign languages as
the foundation, intelligence as the core, and military [training] as the
pillar.’”
“During the reforms, there emerged many forward-looking and
forward-thinking designs. Therefore, what tomorrow’s battlefields
most urgently need are joint operations support personnel who are
specialized but with many skills.”
Military intelligence is a national-level key course of study. In this
semester, just in this field, the college has already initiated in six
specialty tracks 14 joint operations support courses such as
“Information Sources for Battlefield Situations,” “Evaluations for
Feedback for Joint Operations Reconnaissance,” “Battlefield Imagery
Reading and Assessment for Comprehensive Training,” and others. They
thus have greatly improved their teaching that “ focuses on new joint
operations reforms and covers the entire process of joint operations
support.

The gate of National University of Defense Technology.

Source: Huangdan2060, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:National_University_of_Defense_Technology1.jpg , CC0.

OE Watch | May 2018

43

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Holds Naval Review in the South China Sea
OE Watch Commentary: On 12 April the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) held its
largest-ever naval review in the South China Sea near Hainan province as reported on in the
accompanying excerpted article from People’s Daily. Led by a complement of submarines, and
with the Liaoning aircraft carrier in a prominent place, the review included 48 warships and
submarines, 76 combat aircraft and more than 10,000 personnel.
Notably, more than half of the naval vessels that participated were commissioned after the 18th
Party Congress in 2012, when Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Xi Jinping came to
power. The review appears to be the capstone of a 6-month cycle of political achievements for
Xi, who further consolidated his power at the 19th Party Congress in October of last year, and
during China’s National People’s Congress in March, where the body changed term limits to
allow Xi to remain president beyond 2023. The review also took place right before the PLAN’s
69th anniversary on 23 April. Speaking from the deck of the Changsha, a Type-052 Destroyer,
and accompanied by the Central Military Commission (CMC) Vice Chairman Xu Qiliang (许
其亮) and CMC members Zhang Youxia (张又侠), Wei Fenghe (微风和), Miao Hua (苗华) and
Zhang Shengmin (张升民), Xi emphasized the role that the PLAN plays in what he frequently
describes as the “great rejuvenation of the Chinese people.”
Xi Jinping has made large-scale military parades a more regular feature of his tenure as Party
Secretary. In 2017 he reviewed a PLA parade commemorating the 90th anniversary of the PLA
in Zhurihe, Inner Mongolia after the conclusion of annual exercises. In both cases, the parades
have been a prelude to, or conclusion of, combat training, rather than a stand-alone event. This
reflects the emphasis Xi has placed on improving the PLA’s training.
After the review, many of the forces involved are expected to depart for inter-regional (跨区),
actual combat training exercises near the Taiwan Strait. The review and subsequent exercises
are also regarded as sending a deterrent message to the region, particularly in the light of recent
remarks by Republic of China (Taiwan) Premier William Lai’s (赖清德) regarding Taiwan’s
sovereignty—which Chinese government officials described as “dangerous and presumptuous.”
Editorial commentaries in the official government mouthpiece People’s Daily article further
linked the threat of Taiwanese independence to the need for a strong navy. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

Source: “习近平在出席南海海域海上
阅兵时强调:深入贯彻新时代党的强
军思想 把人民海军全面建成世界一
流海军 (Xi Jinping Presiding at South
China Sea Naval Review Emphasizes:
Deepen Implementation of the Party’s New
Era Strong Military Thought; Build the
People’s Navy Into a World-Class Navy),”
People’s Daily, 13 April 2018. http://paper.
people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2018-04/13/
nw.D110000renmrb_20180413_2-01.htm
It has always been China’s aspiration to
have a strong navy, which serves as a key
guarantee to achieve the great rejuvenation
of the Chinese nation.
[Xi] asked naval officers and soldiers
to fully implement the Party’s absolute
leadership over the armed forces, be firm
in ideals and convictions, and uphold
the glorious traditions, while pushing
for technological innovation, developing
new types of battle forces, and building a
modern maritime combat system.
Xi asked naval officers and soldiers to
remain on high alert, answer the calls of the
Party and the people at all times, resolutely
defend the national interests, and strive to
contribute more to upholding the peace and
stability of the region and the world.

“Xi asked naval officers and soldiers to remain
on high alert, answer the calls of the Party and the
people at all times, resolutely defend the national
interests, and strive to contribute more to upholding
the peace and stability of the region and the
world.”

People’s Liberation Army Navy frigate Yueyang.

Source: U.S. Navy Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Shannon Renfroe Public domain,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:People%27s_Liberation_Army_(Navy)_frigate_PLA(N)_Yueyang_(FF_575)_steams_in_formation_with_42_other_ships_and_submarines_during_Rim_of_the_Pacific_(RIMPAC)_Exercise_2014.jpg

OE Watch | May 2018

44

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Carrier Aviation Unit Improves Training
OE Watch Commentary: China’s first Aircraft Carrier, the Liaoning (previously the
Russian, Kuznetsov-class aircraft carrier Varyag), has transited the Taiwan Strait on its way
from its homeport in Qingdao, Shandong Province to its training area in the South China Sea
twice this year, first in January and again on 20 March. Before heading to another area to
conduct regular training, the Liaoning participated in a fleet review held on 12 April, which
marked China’s largest fleet review since 1949. Xu Ying (徐英), Commander of the Naval
Aviation Regiment aboard the Liaoning, piloted one of the first aircraft in formation during
the review.
Xu’s unit is playing an important role in laying the groundwork for future carrier aviation
units. Commissioned into service in September 2012, the Liaoning began its first carrier
landings later that year. While China has at least two facilities onshore with ski-jumps to
practice carrier operations (Huludao, Liaoning Province where naval aviators are trained for
carrier operations, and Yanliang Air Base outside Xi’an, Shaanxi, home to China’s Flight
Test Establishment), the full range of support operations can only be practiced aboard the
Liaoning.
Carrier operations are difficult even for nations that have long experience carrying them
out. For China, it has been an uphill battle. In 2014 it was reported that two pilots had died
during landings on the Liaoning. Other mishaps have occurred in the unit training future
carrier pilots. In April 2016 another aviator training to join the carrier-based unit, Zhang
Chao (张超), died while landing during a routine training onshore. In the same month,
another even more experienced pilot, Cao Xianjian (曹先建), suffered multiple spinal
fractures after being forced to eject in a similar accident onshore. It is unclear from Chinese
media reports if, or how many, enlisted personnel have been involved in accidents, though
given the number of years China has been practicing carrier launch and recovery operations,
a number have likely occurred.
China has made additional efforts to improve its pipeline of new carrier pilots. New pilots
are being trained by the Navy, rather than being recruited from the Air Force as before (Xu,
for example, was previously a PLAAF pilot). More advanced jet trainers such as the L-15 are
entering service to more quickly familiarize pilots with the conditions of modern fighter jets.
Experienced carrier pilots continue to contribute to the force’s knowledge base to improve
carrier operations. Dai Mingmeng (戴明盟), the commander of the Liaoning’s Carrier-borne
Aviation Force (舰载航空兵部队) and the first pilot to land on the Liaoning, still regularly
flies. Cao Xianjian, the pilot who suffered grievous spinal injuries, quickly returned to flying
after the accident.
China’s first indigenously produced aircraft carrier (Type 001A) was launched on 26 April
2017. Though not expected to be commissioned into service until 2020, it puts Xu and the
other carrier aviators’ intense training into context. While China’s carrier aviation is still
nascent, the amount of resources devoted to improvement—and China’s industrial capacity
and eagerness to build a large number of carriers—are worthy of careful monitoring. End
OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “海军航母编队体系化训练逐
步常态化” (PLA Navy Aircraft Carrier
Formation Step-by-Step Systematizes
Training), CCTV, 15 April, 2018.
http://m.news.cctv.com/2018/04/15/
ARTI1Tk3gTbYcHD8iG1IK0Go180415.shtml
Chen Xiaoyong (陈小勇), a “Yellow Shirt”
or Aircraft Launch Assistant (起飞助理):
The efficiency of aircraft flight operations
directly affects the combat capability of an
aircraft carrier. When launching aircraft, the
individual support teams must work together
closely. The aviators, flight deck operators,
mechanical inspection teams must all
cooperate to ensure that the aircraft can take
off safely.
Chen Yueqi (陈岳琪), Commander of the
Liaoning Carrier Formation (航母编队):
Currently we have completed all of the tasks
of the Carrier Formation exercise guidelines,
and organized all systems, elements, and
processes of weapons live-fire exercise,
realistic opposition force training and long
distance, inter-regional mobilization training.
All of this has deepened the integration of the
formation, and currently our cooperation is
organic and natural, commands are followed
smoothly, operations proceed smoothly, we
have improved the 3-dimensional sensor
awareness capabilities, naval air-attack and
comprehensive defense capabilities of the
formation.
Xu Ying (徐英) Commander of the Liaoning’s
Carrier-Based Naval Aviation Regiment:
During this mission we explored various
techniques for deck operations to optimize the
support team’s processes. At the same time, we
pushed our equipment to the limit to discover
new capabilities.

“Currently we have completed all of the tasks of the Carrier Formation exercise guidelines, and
organized all systems, elements, and processes of weapons live-fire exercise, realistic opposition force
training and long distance, inter-regional mobilization training.”
Carrier-Based Multirole Fighter J-15 (2016).

Source: By Garudtejas7 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:J-15_03.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

45

ASIA-PACIFIC
Relocation in Southern Xinjiang: China Expands the
Program
OE Watch Commentary: The Xinjiang Prefectures of Kashgar, Hotan, Aksu, and the
Kizilsu Kyrgyz Autonomous Prefecture have been identified by Xinjiang authorities as
necessary targets of a broader labor transfer campaign—a frequent feature in Xinjiang.
Building on the 15,000 people already transferred, the government has a year-long goal of
45,000 and a three-year goal of 100,000 people set to transfer to other parts of China in order
to work in factories and other State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs).
As the accompanying excerpt from Urumuqi Xinjiang Ribao reports, the director of the
Public Employment Service Bureau of the Ministry Human Resources and Social Security
of the Autonomous Region plans to target 22 counties in four prefectures, labeled as “heavily
impoverished,” with a developmental relocation plan of: political education, cultural and
national language training, as well as the technical training required for people to perform
the work assigned to them after relocation.
Poverty has been identified as a key ingredient to civil unrest and ethnic tensions in
Xinjiang by officials in both the Xinjiang (Provincial) and Beijing governments, and this
campaign is viewed as part of the broader strategy to increase long-term stability in the
region. The program continues from last year’s, as well as the broader trend in seeing ethnic
Uyghurs targeted by government authorities to meet goals of ethnic harmony and stability.
End OE Watch Commentary (Shanks)

Harmony in Urumqi #3.

Source: David Vilder (https://bit.ly/2HteO85) (CC BY 2.0).

“As of March 25, more than 15,000
people have been transferred,
achieving a ‘good start’.”

Source: “WANG, Yongfei. “南疆四地州贫困家庭劳动力转移就业实现“开门红 (Workers from Poor Families in Four Southern Xinjiang
Prefectures Relocated for Employment, “Off to a Good Start),” Urumuqi Xinjiang Ribao. 27 March 2018. http://wap.xjdaily.com/
xjrb/20180327/102150.html
The director of the Public Employment Service Bureau of the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security of the Autonomous Region…
said that in the next three years, our district plans to transfer through intraregional migration in Xinjiang…the four counties in South
Xinjiang…with 100,000 people. Among them, in 2018, we plan to transfer 40,000 people. As of March 25, more than 15,000 people have been
transferred, achieving a ‘good start’…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | May 2018

46

ASIA-PACIFIC
Perspectives on the Future of Marawi
OE Watch Commentary: In October 2016 after several months of battle, the Philippine
Armed Forces finally put down a rebellion launched in Marawi, Mindanao by ISISaffiliated militants. The accompanying excerpted article from GMA News offered
perspectives from a forum that was held in the Philippines on how the country can return
Marawi to normalcy. It was argued at the forum that the government will not have won
the battle until a strategy is developed to prevent a future outbreak of violence and those
who were displaced are returned to their homes. If people cannot return to their homes and
remain dissatisfied with the government, according to the article, then they can become
targets for recruitment by the militants.
One of the risks that the article cites is that the government plans to build what it calls
a new and modern Marawi. However, sultans and local traditional leaders have not been
consulted on the development plans and may not agree with the government’s decisions. If
they are alienated, they could begin to sympathize with the militants who are also opposed
to the government. One other risk is that many of the people who lived in Marawi had
housing without formal rights to the land, so there is little recourse for them to return and
claim their now destroyed homes. The government has reportedly not addressed this issue.
At the same time, martial law and the suspension of the writ of habeus corpus has
been extended to 31 December 2018. This can make local people feel as if they are under
occupation. The article serves as a warning to the Philippine government that it may
have won the battle in Marawi last year, but that the war is not over. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“The government needs to
step up counter-terrorism and
rehabilitation efforts in Marawi.”
Source: “PHL hasn’t won Marawi conflict until
rehab, counter-terror measures in place,” GMA
News, 8 March 2018. http://www.gmanetwork.
com/news/news/nation/645988/no-winner-inmarawi-conflict-until-rehab-counter-terrormeasures-in-place-expert/story/
The government’s response to the extremism
inflicted by Islamic State-affiliated terror groups
in Mindanao will determine who truly won the
conflict in Marawi…Martial law remains over
Mindanao after President Rodrigo Duterte
and the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)
pleaded for more time to quell remaining
terrorist movements in the region. Suspension
of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus in
Mindanao was extended until December 31,
2018.

A building in Marawi is set ablaze by airstrikes carried out by the Philippine Air Force.
Source: Mark Jhomel, “Bombing on Marawi City.jpg,” https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bombing_on_Marawi_City.jpg, CC-BY-4.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

47

ASIA-PACIFIC
Indonesia Brings Terrorists and Victims Together
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 March the Indonesian-language
website ucanews.com published the accompanying excerpted article
about a program organized by Indonesia’s National Agency for
Combating Terrorism (BNPT), in which repentant terrorists, victims
of terrorism and their families were brought together. According to
the BNPT, the purpose of these two groups meeting is to engage in
reconciliation. The BNPT hopes that when terrorists meet victims it
will help them understand the negative consequences of their actions
and, as a result, they will work with the government to prevent others
from embarking on the radical path that they took.
Although some victims chose not to attend due to the pain of seeing
those who killed or injured them or their family members, others found
closure in seeing their attackers repent. The Minister of Social Affairs,
who also attended the event, promised psychological and other forms of
support for victims as part of their rehabilitation.
The BNPT considers the event to be part of its soft approach to
countering terrorism. Other initiatives have included setting up two
boarding schools for the children of terrorists, so they do not follow
their parents’ path after their parents are imprisoned. The Minister
for Technology and Education also said at the event that scholarships
would be provided to the children of ex-terrorists so they could obtain
an education and not be marginalized.
The article does not elaborate on whether there are metrics to test the
success of this and other BNPT soft approach programs. However, it
does note that arrests of terrorists were roughly the same from 2016 to
2017, with 163 and 172 arrests, respectively in each year in the country.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Around 124 terrorist prisoners met 51 terrorist
victims as part of a reconciliation effort initiated
by the National Agency for Combating Terrorism
(BNPT).”
Source: “BNPT Mempertemukan Eks-Narapidana Terorisme dan
Korban Teroris” (“BNPT Brings together Terrorist Ex-Prisoners
and Victims of Terrorism”), indonesia.ucanews.com, 2 March 2018,
http://indonesia.ucanews.com/2018/03/02/bnpt-mempertemukaneks-narapidana-terorisme-dan-korban-terorisme/
Around 124 terrorist prisoners met 51 terrorist victims as part of a
reconciliation effort initiated by the National Agency for Combating
Terrorism (BNPT). However, some of the victims of terrorism and
families of terrorist victims were not mentally prepared to meet exterrorist prisoners. “This is the first event that has been held. We
want to develop a spirit of reconciliation,” said the head of BNPT…
Mokhtar Daeng Lau, the bomber of a McDonalds restaurant that
killed three people in Makassar, South Sulawesi on December 5,
2002, said that the meeting was beneficial because it gave him a
chance to become more aware of the consequences of what he had
done. “I have repented and I will help the government tell others not
to follow the radical path I have done,” he told ucanews.com…
BNPT has also built boarding schools for terrorists’ children
in Medan, North Sumatra and Lamongan, East Java, to prevent
children from following their parents’ footsteps…
The Indonesian National Police arrested 172 suspected terrorists
last year, while in 2016, there were 163 suspected terrorists arrested.

Memorial for the victims of the Bali bomb in Kuta (Indonesia), 2002.

Source: Simon Wedege Petersen, “Kuta-bomb-3.jpg,” https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kuta-bomb-3.jpg, CC-BY-3.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

48

ASIA-PACIFIC
Thailand and Malaysia Build Border Wall
OE Watch Commentary: On 16 March, the accompanying
excerpted article in Singapore’s The Straits Times reported on the
decision of Thailand and Malaysia to build a border wall between
the two countries, among other forms of security cooperation. The
border wall will only extend 11 of the total 640 kilometers of the two
countries’ border and will be built in Songkhla, Thailand. According
to the article, the Songkhla Province is where a Muslim Malay
insurgency in Thailand has persisted for years, but also where the
smuggling of drugs and oil as well as human trafficking also takes
place.
The article cites a Thai general who says the border wall will still
not be sufficient to meet the security needs of both countries. Both
countries, for example, recognize that the insurgents in Songkhla
have often taken advantage of dual citizenship to carry out attacks in
Thailand and then retreat to Malaysia and remain unidentified. The
two countries will therefore seek to find out how many citizens have
dual citizenship and share information about such individuals.
The article notes that Malaysia is dealing with its own terrorism
threats, including from the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),
whose members have attempted attacks and recruited on Malaysian
territory. Thailand has offered Malaysia support for dealing with
those terrorism threats as well. Overall, the article shows there are
physical (the border wall), administrative (dual citizenship screening)
and intelligence (information-sharing) responses to the security
threats that Thailand and Malaysia are mutually undertaking. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Thailand and Malaysia have agreed to proceed
with a plan to build a border wall in Thailand’s
southern province of Songkhla as part of efforts
to strengthen security operations and fight
transnational crime.”
Source: “Thailand, Malaysia to build border wall in Songkhla
province,” The Straits Times, 16 March 2018. http://www.
straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/thailand-malaysia-to-build-border-wallin-songkhla-province
Thailand and Malaysia have agreed to proceed with a plan to build
a border wall in Thailand’s southern province of Songkhla as part
of efforts to strengthen security operations and fight transnational
crime…The border wall is expected to stem the flow of drugs,
weapons, illegal petrol and human trafficking between the two
countries.
According to General Prawit, the latest meeting also touched on
the issue of dual citizenship and a memorandum of understanding is
expected to be signed on the citizenship issue soon.
He said the authorities still have to find out how many people hold
dual citizenship but the move is needed to enhance security and
surveillance in the restive south…Gen Prawit said Thailand has also
expressed a willingness to increase collaboration in informationsharing with Malaysia to tackle terrorist threats in the region.

Songkhla.

Source:Tarik Abdel Monem, “City of Songkhla.jpg,” https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:City_of_Songkhla.jpg, (CC BY-SA 2.0).

OE Watch | May 2018

49

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
India’s Red Line for China
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 March the Indian website First Post
featured the accompanying excerpted article about Indian policy towards
China’s engagement in the Maldives. According to the article, India will not
seek to intervene in the Maldives despite the fact that the country, which
is in its neighborhood, is increasing its ties to China. The article notes that
any form of intervention in the Maldives to deter China would likely be
more costly than doing nothing at all. Rather, the article suggests that subtle
persuasion, which is synonymous with diplomacy, is sufficient for India to
prevent China from engaging India’s neighbors in a way that would threaten
its national security interests.
The article notes that even without any action, countries that receive
Chinese aid may realize some of its drawbacks. For example, problems
related to China’s lack of transparency in loans have already surfaced in
Maldivian media, according to the article. Another example that the article
provides is Myanmar, which decided to democratize and diversify its
sources of investment to Western countries rather than rely on Beijing.
While the article urges India to have patience regarding Chinese financial
activities, the article argues that a red line for India must be drawn when
it comes to China setting up military bases in neighboring countries,
including Pakistan. Another potential red line, according to the article, is
China building a railway to connect its Tibet region to Kathmandu, Nepal.
To address issues that cross India’s red lines, the article argues that India
needs to use its military as a deterrent, while for issues related to China
gaining influence through its loans, aid or investments, India should make
neighboring states better offers of its own. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“That red line would be crossed if China were
to set up a military base in our neighborhood,
including in Pakistan.”
Source: “India telling China it won’t interfere in Maldives not
sign of weakness; military must be beefed up, vulnerable states
given aid,” First Post, 28 March 2018. https://www.firstpost.
com/india/india-telling-china-it-wont-interfere-in-maldivesnot-sign-of-weakness-military-must-be-beefed-up-vulnerablestates-given-aid-4409215.html
With regard to Maldives, there was never at any time a
reasonable military option of intervention. An intervention
is inevitably open-ended, expensive in multiple ways, and is
highly unlikely to deliver the objectives of the operation, which
is to ensure a friendly and cooperative Maldives. In fact, the
end result would probably be the reverse. The decision not to
intervene is not a sign of weakness per se. Recent events point
to a possibility that Chinese financing offers are now being
rejected…
To the discerning public and certainly to Chinese policy
makers, there is one clear red line for India. That red line
would be crossed if China were to set up a military base in our
neighborhood, including in Pakistan. There are other lines that
are not so clearly ‘red’ at first glance, but are developments
that hint at definite dangers to India. One such is the proposal
by China to link Kathmandu with Lhasa. This needs to be
resolutely opposed by New Delhi…

Port of Malé.

Source: Shahee Ilyas, “Port of Malé,” https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Port_of_Malé.jpg, (CC-by-4.0).

OE Watch | May 2018

50

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
The Future of Indian-Russian Security Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: India’s partnership with
Russia has become strained over the past couple of years
and there have been indications that this could impact
Russian sales of weapons and equipment to the Indian
Armed Forces. The accompanying excerpted articles
report on India’s recent decision to solicit bids for a
contract to overhaul a large number of its fighter aircraft
and a possible deal to acquire the Russian S-400 surfaceto-air missile system. Both developments could be a good
indicator of how the downturn in Indian-Russian relations
will impact Russian arms sales to India.
The article from the English-language daily newspaper
The Times of India reports on India’s decision of “reinviting global aviation majors to compete for producing
fighter jets in India” through an agreement which includes
a requirement that “85% are to be built in India with a
domestic strategic partner or production agency.” The
article also notes that a large percentage of the Indian Air
Force’s current inventory of fighters are Russian with “10
existing squadrons of old MiG-21s and MiG-27s” and
that these are set to be retired in a few years. The Indian
Air Force also has several dozen MiG-29 fighters in its
inventory. The article mentions that Russia’s MiG-35 will
be in consideration for the new bid, but it is believed that
the bid’s requirement of producing a large percentage of
the aircraft in India will not be feasible with a Russian
company.
The article from the Indian English-language newspaper
The Asian Age provides an update on the deal to acquire
the S-400 surface-to-air missile system that Indian
Defense Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, looked to finalize
on a recent visit to Moscow. Many in India believed that
the deal would be finalized, but as the article mentions,
it “only progressed to the extent of agreeing to expedite
negotiations for the military platforms.” It is possible
that the deal for the S-400 could still go through, but the
article also notes that “India has griped about the delays in
procuring critical spares and equipment from Russia” and
this is reportedly one of the things holding it up. Overall,
the Russian government remains in a position to maintain
close security cooperation with India; however, if the bid
for fighter aircraft and the lack of a deal for the S-400 are
any indication, the Indian government could be looking
for other options. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: Pandit, Rajat. “$20 billion defence project: India kicks off process
to procure 110 fighter jets for IAF,” The Times of India, 6 April 2018. https://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/20-billion-defence-project-india-kicks-offprocess-to-procure-110-fighter-jets-for-iaf/articleshow/63646424.cms
…India has kicked off a fresh dogfight for its $20 billion “mother of all defence
deals” by re-inviting global aviation majors to compete for producing fighter jets in
India under the government’s “strategic partnership” policy. The Indian Air Force
on Friday issued a preliminary global tender or RFI (request for information)
to acquire 110 fighter jets, of which 85% are to be built in India with a domestic
strategic partner or production agency. The aviation majors have to submit their
responses to the RFI, which also stipulates that 75% of the fighters will be singleseat jets, by July 3…
…the aim is to set up a second fighter manufacturing line in India to supplement
the long-delayed production of indigenous Tejas jets. IAF, after all, is grappling
with just 31 fighter squadrons (each with 18 jets) when at least 42 are required to
tackle the “collusive threat” from Pakistan and China. Moreover, the 10 existing
squadrons of old MiG-21s and MiG-27s are slated for retirement by 2022.
The RFI comes after the NDA government scrapped its two-year-old plan to
produce 114 single-engine fighters with foreign collaboration…But this will ensure
a repeat of the original MMRCA (medium multi-role combat aircraft) project for
126 jets, which was initiated by the previous UPA regime in 2007 but could never
be inked due to a deadlock in the final commercial negotiations with the eventual
winner of the contest, the French Rafale fighters…
The new RFI has also been issued to the six contenders in the scrapped MMRCA
project, which were F/A-18 ‘Super Hornet’ and F-16 ‘Super Viper’ (US), Gripen-E
(Sweden), MiG-35 (Russia), Eurofighter Typhoon and Rafale, who will now field
their latest variants for the new contest…It had then gone in for the off-the-shelf
acquisition of 36 Rafales under the 7.8 billion Euros (Rs 59,000 crore) contract
inked in September 2016…The 36 Rafales alone, which will be delivered in the
2019-2022 timeframe, will of course not make up the fast-depleting number of
fighter squadrons, especially because HAL has so far managed to deliver only six
of the 324 Tejas fighters planned for induction in the long-term.
Source: “S-400 missile system, Kamov copter deals still some way off,” The
Asian Age, 5 April 2018. http://www.asianage.com/india/all-india/050418/s-400missile-system-kamov-copter-deals-still-some-way-off.html
Belying hopes that defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman would ink the deals to
buy S-400 missile systems and the state-of-the-art Kamov helicopters from Russia
during her ongoing visit, the minister’s talks with the her Russian counterpart
General Sergey Shoygu and industry and trade minister Denis Manturov in
Moscow only progressed to the extent of agreeing to expedite negotiations for the
military platforms…
…India is expected to buy five S-400 systems, the delivery of which will be
completed in 54 months time on the deal being inked…Defence ministry officials
here said that during the talks, both sides also agreed to further ramp up bilateral
defence cooperation. Ms Sitharaman is on a three-day visit to Russia…

“The 36 Rafales alone, which will be delivered in the 2019-2022 timeframe, will of course not make up the
fast-depleting number of fighter squadrons, especially because HAL has so far managed to deliver only six
of the 324 Tejas fighters planned for induction in the long-term.”

“While historically India and Russia have cherished close military ties with Russia accounting for almost
60 percent of India’s defence exports, India has griped about the delays in procuring critical spares and
equipment from Russia…”
OE Watch | May 2018

51

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
The Goals of the Tashkent Security Conference
OE Watch Commentary: The Tashkent Conference on
Afghanistan, which took place 25-27 March in the capital of
Uzbekistan and involved a number of participants (including
representatives from the Central Asian states, Russia,
China, Turkey and the US), advocated for the government
of Afghanistan to launch direct talks with the Taliban and
resolve the conflict in Afghanistan. The accompanying
excerpted article features an interview with the director of
Uzbekistan’s Institute of Strategic and Interregional Studies
(an organization under the president), which took place during
the conference. There are a couple of things mentioned in it
that provide insight into how the government of Uzbekistan
will be involved with Afghanistan over the next several years.
The article appeared in Fergana, a Russian-language
website with news on Central Asia, and consisted of an
interview conducted by Arkady Dubnov (a Russian political
scientist who focuses on the region) of Vladimir Norov, the
director of the Institute of Strategic and Interregional Studies.
Norov mentions the Uzbek government’s creation of the
“6+2” group, which conducted negotiations in the late 1990s
with all states bordering Afghanistan (China, Iran, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan), in addition to
Russia and the US. The UN backed the group’s Tashkent
Declaration, which included members agreeing not to
provide weapons or other security assistance to any party in
Afghanistan as well as having dialogue between all factions
in the country and resolving the conflict through non-violent
means. The 6+2 group effectively ceased functioning in 2001,
but the Uzbek government under former President Islam
Karimov periodically mentioned reorganizing the group.
If the Tashkent Conference is any indication, the current
government under President Shavkat Mirziyoyev is looking
to continue some of the 6+2 group’s efforts and put the Uzbek
government in a unique diplomatic position. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

Source: “Узбекистан берется за старое. Почему Ташкент снова готов
принять талибов (Uzbekistan reaches back in time. Why Tashkent is
again prepared to accept the Taliban),” Fergana, 2 April 2018. http://www.
fergananews.com/articles/9880
The expert on Central Asia Arkady Dubnov met with Vladimir Norov, the
director of the Institute of Strategic and Interregional Studies under the
President of Uzbekistan, during the Tashkent conference on Afghanistan, which
took place at the end of March. With permission, Fergana is publishing a
written version of this conversation.
Dubnov: Will the Tashkent conference on Afghanistan be the first real step on
the way to achieving the Afghan negotiation process?
Norov: This high-level event is not one day long. The leadership of Uzbekistan
has already put forth several initiatives for peace and stability in Afghanistan,
including the creation of a group “Neighbors and Friends” of Afghanistan
under the auspices of the UN and in the “6+2” format…It is significant that a
high-level meeting of the “6+2” group on Afghanistan took place in Tashkent in
July 1999. Outside of the members of the group, representatives of the Northern
Alliance and the Taliban took part in it…
Today, there is a great opportunity for the start of the peace process in
Afghanistan. Among the key reasons: …Currently in Afghanistan, as it was
in 1997, there has been a sort of status quo, when neither the Taliban nor the
officials in Kabul fully control the situation across the country…The general
opinion of all the participants in the (Tashkent) conference is that the Taliban
must be recognized as an independent political force. It is in this respect that
the Tashkent Declaration emphasizes the need for a guaranteed inclusion of the
Taliban in the negotiation process…The Tashkent Declaration of 1998 on the
basic principles of the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan is still
the only official document agreed and accepted by all the political forces of this
country and approved by the UN…
Dubnov: Can Uzbekistan, using its dominating role in the region and
providing significant economic assistance to Afghanistan, force Kabul to have
loyalty to its opposition?
Norov: Uzbekistan follows the policy of non-interference in the internal affairs
of Afghanistan…Uzbekistan hopes that the Taliban will listen to the appeals of
the participants of the Tashkent conference…

“It is significant that a high-level meeting of the ‘6+2’ group on Afghanistan took place in Tashkent in July
1999. Outside of the members of the group, representatives of the Northern Alliance and the Taliban took
part in it.”

Skylines of Tashkent, 2010.

Source: By Dilshod Akbarov [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f7/International_Business_Center._Tashkent_city.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

52

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Armenia Gears Up for ‘Future Wars’
by Eduard Abrahamyan
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 51, dated 4 April 2018, Edited for OE
Watch. For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/armenia-gears-up-for-future-wars/

OE Watch Commentary: In mid-March, the Armenian Ministry of Defense (MoD) released an 18-page strategic document entitled “2018–
2024 Modernization Program for the Armenian Armed Forces.” The document lays out a framework for boosting technological innovation in
the defense and security sector, raising the moral resiliency of Armenian troops, and preparing them for the challenges of modern warfare. It
is designed to provide strategic guidance for the “long-term fundamental adaptation process” of the Armed Forces to hone and enhance their
military prowess.
The adopted “Modernization Program” touches on a wide range of spheres, including military diplomacy, good operative governance, militaryindustry upgrades and arms procurement policy. It also regulates the military’s engagement with the civilian sector and non-military contested
spaces, such as the cyber, radio-electronic and information domains. Pointedly, the document identifies Azerbaijan as an imminent security threat
to Armenia.
Furthermore, it acknowledges that besides being the “main guarantor of Armenia’s national security,” the Armenian Armed Forces will continue
to serve as the critical security guarantor for the population of Artsakh (Karabakh). It estimates that a breakthrough in the negotiation process over
the final status of Karabakh, mediated by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s (OSCE) Minsk Group is “less likely.” Indeed,
the document does not rule out an “abrupt resumption of hostilities” that could escalate “into a full-scale war” and spill over from the Karabakh
region onto Armenian territory.
In parallel to releasing the “Modernization Program,” Armenian authorities reportedly launched a process to revise the country’s National
Security Concept, which has not been modified since 2007. Notably, this year, Armenia will be completing its transition from a presidential to
a parliamentary republic. In assessing the value of the newly adopted program, MoD spokesperson Arcrun Hovhannisyan stressed that for the
first time ever, an Armenian strategic document calls for boosting non-linear defense and security capabilities in the contested cyberspace and
information domains. He added that “the document is as characteristic example of our resolve to pursue a new armed forces concept whereby our
local military-industrial complex will meet approximately 25 percent of our domestic needs.”
Another key objective in the document is to adopt efficiently synchronized command, control and communications for the military and integrate
them into a single information space. Presumably, this will require the procurement of advanced components related to command, control,
computers, communications, real-time surveillance, reconnaissance, navigation and precision strike. The intensive four-day fighting between
Armenian and Azerbaijani troops, which occurred in April 2016 across the Line of Contact (LoC) in Artsakh, provided a new impulse in Yerevan
to accelerating the testing and adoption of these systems.
Despite Moscow’s tense stand-off with the West and international isolation, the new Armenian strategic program nevertheless cements the
country’s loyalty to Russia. It restates Armenia’s pivotal reliance on Russia’s regional security architecture as well as espouses its full-fledged
alliance with Russia under bilateral and multilateral dimensions, including within the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), leaving
almost no room for strategic-level engagement with other actors.
The Modernization Program explicitly accuses Azerbaijan of “instigating” a regional arms race. But it stresses that Armenia’s policy is to
focus on the actual effectiveness of its procured armaments instead of simply matching the numbers of weapons systems wielded by its regional
rival. Nevertheless, analysis of the document’s content suggests that, at least at this stage, Armenia hews most closely to a classic “deterrence-bypunishment” approach underpinned by capabilities to carry out pre-emptive strikes.
The “Modernization Program” also stresses that strategic containment involves not only threatening to shift combat operations to an adversary’s
territory, but also deterrence via diplomatic and non-military means. As for technical modernization and arms procurement policy, the Armed
Forces strategic planning document calls for reinforcing Armenia’s precision-guided ballistic missile as well as long-range artillery capabilities
with “modern equipment to permit carrying out disproportional combat punishment actions.” The goal is the ability to execute “accurate longrange strikes deep inside enemy territory” in order to hit command-and-control systems as well as essential military-economic infrastructure. But
it is unclear whether Armenia will have the resources to achieve it. End OE Watch Commentary (Abahamyan)
Source: “Armenia: Azerbaijani subversive attacks on Karabakh will cease soon,” Panarmenian.net, 15 December 2017. http://panarmenian.
net/m/eng/news/249960
Minimization of subversive attacks by Azerbaijan is connected with the installation of special equipment on the line of contact in Nagorno
Karabakh (Artsakh), Armenian president Serzh Sargsyan said in an interview with Armenia TV on Thursday, December 14.
“Following the installation of surveillance systems, 2-3 attempts of subversive attacks were made all of which failed. As a result, the
possibility for organizing such operations has dropped,” the president said, adding that Azerbaijan’s subversive attacks and other actions
alike will be ruled out…

OE Watch | May 2018

53

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Russian Military Police Deploy to Armenia
OE Watch Commentary: On 12 January 2015 Valery
Permyakov, a Russian soldier from the 102nd Military
Base in Armenia, killed a family of seven in the city of
Gyumri. Russian personnel apprehended the soldier near
the Armenian-Turkish border not long after the incident
and the subsequent case caused controversy in Armenia.
The accompanying excerpted articles report on the recent
deployment of a unit of Russian military police to the 102nd
base in Gyumri and the backlash it has caused in Armenia.
The article from Lragir, a news website in Armenia,
discusses some of the legal aspects of the deployment and
that according to existing Armenian-Russian agreements,
“not a single word about the military police exists.” The
author of the article cites the Permyakov case and how
“Russian service members conducted search operations in
violation of agreements.” It is worth remembering that a
Russian military court prosecuted Permyakov first, before
Armenian officials conducted a case of their own while
he remained in Russian custody at the 102nd base. An
Armenian court sentenced Permyakov to life, but he was
extradited to Russia in 2017 to serve his sentence. Mass
demonstrations took place in Armenia in the days following
the murder about the way the case was handled by Russian
and Armenian officials.
The article from Rosbalt, an independent Russianlanguage news website, also looks at the deployment and
notes that the unit is “already patrolling the streets of
Gyumri” and that a number of Armenians believe that “the
base in Gyumri became “a hotbed of crime” a long time
ago.” The official Russian Ministry of Defense statement
mentions that the military police deployed to help “maintain
discipline.” The author does not point to any specific
criminal activity at the base, though she faults the Armenian
government for not providing more information to the
public on the deployment and the Russian government for
not signing an agreement beforehand to avoid speculation
from Armenians. It is worth noting that the deployment took
place before the resignation of Armenia’s Prime Minister,
Serge Sarkisian on 23 April. Sarkisian became prime
minister (after holding office as president for 10 years) on
17 April in a controversial move by Armenia’s parliament,
which sparked several days of protests until he resigned. In
any case, the reaction to the deployment in Armenia shows
how the Russian presence in the country continues to cause
issues. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: Ionnisyan, Daniel. “Размещение подразделений военной полиции
РФ в РА противозаконно (The deployment of the Russian military police unit
in Armenia is illegal),” Lragir, 27 March 2018. http://www.lragir.am/index/
rus/0/country/view/61809
Yesterday the headquarters of the Southern Military District of the Russian
Armed Forces reported that military police units will be formed in Armenia.
These armed units are planning to deploy in Yerevan and Gyumri, despite the
deployment being illegal and not defined by an interstate agreement.
The “Agreement between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Armenia
on the Jurisdiction and Mutual Legal Assistance in cases connected to the
location of the Russian military based in the territory of Armenian” was
signed in 1997 and came into effect in 2002…the agreement does not assign
any function of the military police of the Russian Armed Forces in the Russian
military base in Armenia or outside of it…(under the agreement) not a single
word about the military police exists…
According to the Southern Military District’s report, the personnel of the
military police will be “issued weapons, equipment and special means.”…
Article 2 of the agreement states that outside the territory of the Russian
military base, weapons can be issued in “extreme circumstances.”…in
January 2015, after the escape of Valery Permyakov (for the murder of the
Avetisyan family), the soldier of the 102nd military base, Russian service
members conducted search operations in violation of agreements and detained
Permyakov and did not transfer him to Armenian police…
Source: Dzhorbenadze, Irina. “Зачем Россия «поджигает» Кавказ? (Why
is Russia ‘setting fire’ to the Caucasus?),” Rosbalt, 5 April 2018. http://www.
rosbalt.ru/world/2018/04/05/1693963.html
…While Moscow and Yerevan are discussing what legislative basis to put
under this unpopular action for Armenians, and barely protested by local
authorities, the guys from the military police unit are already patrolling
the streets of Gyumri – they have been photographed by local reporters…
According to the Russian Ministry of Defense, the unit was deployed “to
maintain discipline, road safety and the protection of objects in the Gyumri
garrison.”…Armenians agree that the base in Gyumri became “a hotbed of
crime” a long time ago…
…human rights activist Larisa Alaverdyan believes that Russia “violated
nothing” and the problem is the deficit of information in Armenia…the duty
of the authorities is fully inform citizens about the goals and tasks of any
contingent…Russia could be free of the speculation if, prior to the deployment
of the military police, it signed a related treaty. This did not happen…
…Russia often falls into a mess, because it is not interested in the national
feelings of “younger brothers.”…as a result, all of it turns against her…

“These armed units are planning to deploy in Yerevan and Gyumri, despite the deployment being illegal
and not defined by an interstate agreement.”

OE Watch | May 2018

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Considering No-Fly Zones in Russian Military Science
OE Watch Commentary: According to the authors of the accompanying excerpted
article from Военная Мысль (Military Thought), the subject of “no-fly zones” is
understudied by the Russian General Staff. As the article points out, present official
military guidance describes the creation of “no-fly zones,” “airspace closure,” and
“aerial blockade.” The historical analysis includes non-Russian reviews of US and
Western coalition operations in Libya, Iraq, and the Balkans. This contrasts to the
homegrown case studies that are almost exclusively derived from the Soviet WWII
experience.
In the practice of Russian military science, historical analysis is a systematic,
detailed investigation—often a mathematical study—of the experiences of Russians
and others. To Russian analysts, the article makes the point that this important
military function requires reinvigoration. The authors note that current Russian
“guidance” documents categorize aerial combat conditions as aerial supremacy to
achieve “creation of no-fly zones,” aerial superiority to achieve “airspace closure,”
and aerial blockade. The authors suggest that these conditions could be approached
systematically by considering the factors of “compliance with legal authorities”
(referring mostly to the United Nations), by country size, by number of participants,
and by areas of enforcement. The article also notes that “Recent military conflicts
reveal that creating and maintaining no-fly zones is a rather costly activity.” This
indicates another standout factor that would be taken into consideration in correlation
of forces calculations, as this concept moves into development of what they call “forms
and methods” for applying it in the real world. While the Russians have certainly
dealt with command of airspace issues in their current conflicts, the broader concept
and practice of “no-fly zones” is getting a fresh look. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wilhelm, Vainer)

“Analysis of guidance documents
and scientific work shows that the
theoretical side of enforcement of no-fly
zones and closure of airspace requires
further development.”
Source: A.V. Shlikov, A.U. Zolotov, “Взглады
на развитие теории закпрытия воздушной
блокады в современных условйях (Perspectives
on Developing the Theory of Airspace Closure and
Conduct of Airspace Blockade in Contemporary
Conditions),” Военная Мысль (Military Thought),
pp. 52-58, 12 December 2017.
“As we have seen, enforcement of a no-fly zone
or closure of airspace is one of the primary tools
of today’s international politics that supports the
peacekeeping mission in various types of military
conflicts by creating and maintaining an airexclusion zone over the area of conflict. Over the
past decades, advanced military powers often used
no-fly zones to resolve issues of military conflicts.
Such actions were carried out according to UNSC
resolutions, e.g. Bosnia-Herzegovina, 1992-1995,
and Libya, 2011, as well as without UN sanctions,
e.g. no-fly zones over Iraq from 1991 to 2003.

Flights for combat use of aviation equipment VKS of Russia from the airfield “Khmeimim” (Syrian Republic).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://syria.mil.ru/photo/gallery.htm?id=25401@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | May 2018

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
The Douhet Doctrine, Russian Style
OE Watch Commentary: Italian general and air power theorist, General Giulio Douhet, pioneered theories of air power and strategic
bombing in the 1920s to achieve national objectives that is often referred to as the Douhet Doctrine. The accompanying excerpted article from
Nezavisimaya Gazeta discusses how Russia is using air power to achieve its objectives in Syria. Although the article refers to Russia’s use of the
Douhet Doctrine to save the Assad regime, the way that the Russians use air power is quite a bit different than what General Douhet envisioned,
namely high-altitude strategic bombing to intimidate the civilian population into leveraging the government to surrender or negotiate for peace
from a disadvantaged position. Undoubtedly, Russia has used airpower to accomplish its objectives in Syria, but most of this air power has been
of a close air support variety, involving Russian aircraft (including helicopters) directly supporting ground troops and conducting low altitude
bombing.
The accompanying excerpted article from Kommersant discusses the death of a Russian pilot after his aircraft was downed by a Soviet/Russian
Igla man-portable air-defense systems. Major Roman Filipov flew Russia’s premier close air support fighter, the Su-25SM. The Sukhoi Su-25
Grach (Су-25 Грач, NATO designation Frogfoot) is a single-seat, twin-engine jet aircraft designed to provide close air support for the Soviet
Ground Forces by defeating small, mobile and stationary ground targets, and engaging low-speed air targets (slow flying airplanes, helicopters,
large UAVs, etc.) throughout the tactical and operational depths. The Su-25 made its maiden flight in 1975 and went into serial production in
1978 in the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic’s capital, Tbilisi. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Sukhoi shifted production to the Russian
Federation and the Su-25 is currently manufactured by the Sukhoi Design Bureau Joint Stock Company and the Novosibirsk Aircraft Production
Association.
The Su-25 has several versions, including: a two-seater trainer, the Su-35UB; a naval variant capable of carrier operations, the Su-25UTG
(currently in service aboard the Admiral Kuznetsov); a dedicated antitank version, the Su-25T, and the Su-25TM, an upgraded version of the Su25T. The most prominent version is the Su-25SM. The Su-25SM was designed in 2000 to be an affordable upgrade of the Su-25, due to concerns
that the Su-25T and Su-25TM upgrade variants were too expensive. The Su-25SM is equipped with new engines and flight control, navigation,
targeting, communications, and radar systems. In particular, the weapons have been upgraded to include: the Vympel R-73 air-to-air missile,
B-13 five-round rocket 130 mm pods, and Kh-25ML and Kh-29L missiles.
In 2017 Russia started fielding the latest Su-25 variant, which was developed as a day/night all-weather platform to destroy moving targets
(tanks, armored vehicles, etc.). The Su-25SM3 variant has two main defining features, the first of which is the SOLT-25 electro-optical targeting
system that permits the aircraft to detect and track targets day and night in all-weather conditions at a range of up to 8 km with a .5-meter
accuracy. The SOLT-25 has an electro-optical (television) sensor with a 16X zoom capability, thermal imaging device and laser rangefinder,
which determines the distance to the target, and illuminates it for laser guided missiles and bombs. The second distinguishing feature is the
Vitebsk EW system that can jam air defense systems. The Vitebsk EW system is reportedly accomplishing this by suppressing enemy targeting
radars and interfering with hostile missiles. The addition of the SOLT-25 electro-optical targeting system and the Vitebsk EW system has
allowed the Su-25 to evolve from an aircraft designed to fill the niche of a close air support aircraft for troops on the battlefield to a light,
multifunctional strike aircraft, which is now equally valuable for engaging a high-tech enemy as it for engaging a simple armored column or
guerrilla detachment. These capabilities are provided at an affordable price. Some estimates put the base cost of a new Su-25 at around $11
million, with the SM3 modernization package costing around $6 million, depending on the model being upgraded. Russia has reportedly
modernized 10 Su-25s to the Su-25SM3 variant, with plans to modernize a total of 80 aircraft.
After the downing of Major Filipov’s Su-25SM Russia reportedly switched to only allowing Su-30s and Su-35s, aircraft with greater
capabilities to defend themselves from air defense systems, to perform close air support missions. Given that only Su-25SMs are currently
in Syria, the confirmation of insurgent air defense capabilities, the Su-25SM3’s increased capabilities against air defense systems, and the
importance of close air support, it is reasonable to expect that Russia will begin to replace the Su-25SM fleet in Syria with Su-25SM3s. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Sukhoi Su-25SM Frogfoot (The international aerospace salon MAKS-2013).

Source: By Doomych [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/34/Sukhoi_Su-25SM_at_the_MAKS-2013_%2801%29.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

(continued)
56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: The Douhet Doctrine, Russian Style
“...whereas the Western antiterrorist coalition today needs 5.32 aircraft sorties to destroy one target,
Russian pilots need only 1.14 aircraft sorties.”
Source: Nikolay Yakubovich, “Кремль применил для защиты Башара Асада
доктрину (Kremlin Used Douhet Doctrine to Defend Bashir Al-Asad),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 27 February 2018. http://www.ng.ru/armies/2018-02-27/8_7180_siria.html
In the light of the latest build-up of the Russian Federation Aerospace Forces grouping
in Syria, whereby it has been decided to subject even the latest domestically produced
fifth-generation Su-57 aircraft systems to an ordeal by fire, the result of the employment
of Russian aviation here in the preceding period affords interest. This is all the more
important because Moscow has effectively managed to realize the provisions of the
well-known Douhet doctrine in a new, hi-tech phase -- to destroy the adversary largely
through the use of its aviation alone. And although the use of ground forces could not be
dispensed with entirely (their role was played by Syrian troops, militiamen, and Russian
special operations forces), the operation in Syria has caused observers to look at the role
of the Russian Aerospace Forces, and assess their real combat potential, in a new way…
The backbone of the Hmeimim airbase’s airplane and helicopter air fleet was composed
not just of the modernized “veterans,” Su-24M2s, Su-25SMs, and Su-27SM3s, but also by
state-of-the-art Su-30SMs, Su-34s, and Su-35Ses. The helicopter pool was represented
by combat Mi-24Ps, Mi-35Ms, Mi-28Ns, and Ka-52s. Ship-launched Su-33 and MiG29K airplanes also took part in the combat operations. Mi-8AMTSh helicopters, An-72
airplanes, UAVs, IL-22M reconnaissance planes, and A-50 flying radars were used as
auxiliary forces. And Long-Range Aviation crews in Tu-22MZM, Tu-95MSM, and Tu-160
airplanes also took part in the strategic operations; moreover, the crews of the firstmentioned of these planes inflicted strikes with air bombs and the rest with X-101 cruise
missiles.
Moreover, it was not only the Russian contingent’s sudden appearance in Syria that
proved a sensation, but also the active employment of high-precision weapons, together
with the improved precision-hitting with conventional weapons, which was completely
unexpected for the adversary...As a result, whereas the Western antiterrorist coalition
today needs 5.32 aircraft sorties to destroy one target, Russian pilots need only 1.14
aircraft sorties.
The Russian Federation Aerospace Forces began inflicting strikes on the terrorists’
fortified regions, command and control centers, and areas of concentration, and also on
their armored vehicles and convoys in Syria at the end of September 2015, when the AlAsad government controlled only 15 percent of Syrian territory. At that moment in time,
the air grouping included more than 59 aircraft, including one squadron of Su-24M2s
and one squadron of Su-25SMs (12 aircraft) and four Su-SMs, and also Mi-8 and Mi-24P
helicopters. By December, the air grouping had grown to roughly 70 aircraft, mainly
through the addition of assault aircraft; but not for long, only until February 2016. In
the initial period, Su-24M2s, Su-34s, and Su-25SMs completed about 20 combat sorties
per day, gradually increasing their number. On individual days, the Aerospace Forces
grouping completed up to 71 sorties. The tactics of the employment of aviation were also
perfected…
Since the beginning of the combat operations, the Russian Federation Aerospace
Forces have completed more than 1,600 sorties, destroying more than 2,000 ground
targets. From November 2016 through January 2017, the combat operations saw the
participation of carrier aircraft, which took off from the heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser,
the Admiral of the Soviet Union Fleet Kuznetsov. At the same time, pilots completed 420
combat sorties, including 117 at night, and destroyed 1,252 terrorist facilities. In turn, the
Tu-160s and Tu-95MSes launched, all told, more than 30 missiles…

Source: Aleksandra Dzhordzhevich, Marianna
Belenkaya, and Ivan Safronov: “Летчик принял
бой на земле (Pilot Engages in Combat on
Land),” Kommersant, 5 February 2018. https://
www.kommersant.ru/doc/3540044
On Saturday the Russian Federation Defense
Ministry confirmed the loss of a Su-25SM groundattack aircraft in Idlib province: The plane, which
had been carrying out a reconnaissance flight,
was shot down with a portable antiaircraft missile
system. The pilot -- Guards Major Roman Filipov
-- managed to eject from the burning plane, but
he was encircled and killed during a shootout
with the fighters who had downed the plane. The
response followed a few hours later: First, the
quadrate in which the Islamists were located
was bombarded with Kalibr cruise missiles,
then Syrian special-purpose forces and Russian
aviation set about cleaning up the territory. They
were instructed at whatever cost to recover Maj.
Filipov’s body from the fighters…
This is the first Su-25SM to have been lost since
the start of Russia’s operation in Syria. Some
experts wonder why the ground-attack aircraft
were flying at such a low altitude: A missile from
an Igla portable antiaircraft missile system can
hit a target at an altitude of up to 5,000 meters…
One of Kommersant’s sources supposed that the
height at which the Su-25 was flying may have
been linked to the fact that Turkey has promised
a guarantee of safety in this territory. It is Turkey
that oversees the Idlib deescalation zone. “When
the flight assignment was being devised, they
may have relied on that,” Kommersant’s source
reckons. Until the last minute, reports that the
fighters had portable antiaircraft missile systems
had not been confirmed, but now aviation will
have to take this into account…
According to Konstantin Makiyenko, deputy
director of the Center for the Analysis of
Strategies and Technologies, following Vladimir
Putin’s declaration of victory over the radical
Islamists the Russian Federation Aerospace
Forces “have lost more planes in Syria than over
the previous two years of the campaign.” “This
indicates that the supposed crushing defeat of
the groups and the start of the political process
certainly do not mean the war is over, and that
withdrawing from the war may be more difficult
that the military campaign itself,” the expert
concluded…
OE Watch | May 2018

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Gerasimov on Future War and Modernization Priorities
OE Watch Commentary: The Chief of the General Staff,
First Deputy Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation,
General Valeriy Gerasimov, addressed the plenary session
of the Academy of Military Sciences at the General Staff
Academy about the nature of future war and Russia’s
modernization priorities, as described in the accompanying
excerpted article from RIA Novosti. The keynote speech
by the Chief of the General Staff has traditionally been the
highlight of these events, and make it possible to understand
what the “Russian Army’s brain” is concerned with, which
wars it considers most likely, and how it intends to prepare
for those wars. In 2001, for example, the former Chief of the
General Staff, Anatoliy Kvashnin, spoke about the conflict
between supporting the conventional forces or strategic nuclear
deterrent forces and was quoted saying “The Russian Army
resembles a person whose one hand (the Strategic Rocket
Forces) is pumped up, while the other one (the conventional
forces) is short, weak, and withered.” A few years later one
of General Kvashnin’s successors, General Makarov, would
initiate the greatest reorganization of the Russian Armed
Forces in over 100 years, resulting in a major modernization of
the conventional forces.
In the article Gerasimov speaks about many of his previously
discussed themes, including the fact that Russia’s military is
modernizing and continuing to develop non-nuclear deterrence
capabilities. As in the past, there was also a mention of the
trend toward the blurring of distinctions between peacetime
and war. Gerasimov discussed how the boundaries of the
theater of military operations are expanding and that “The
adversary’s economic facilities and state governance systems
will be the primary targets for destruction.” He also points
out the importance of information and space by stating “In
addition to the traditional realms of armed conflict, the
information and space realms will be actively involved” and
Valery Gerasimov.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/management/info.htm?id=11113936@SD_Employee, CC 4.0.
indirectly mentions the importance of electronic warfare by
saying “countering communication, reconnaissance, and navigation systems will also play a special role.”
The accompanying excerpted article from TASS lays out General Gerasimov’s modernization priorities in four areas. The first is the
development of a new Reconnaissance-Strike System (ROS), which may be a reference to the already fielded Strelets ROS, which has
reportedly been quite capable. The new ROS is intended to reduce the cycle for completing fire missions by 2–2.5 times and increase the
accuracy of targeting by 1.5–2 times. The second area is on improvements to command and control structures and information technology
for precision weapons, which will reduce the time for preparing for the use of high-precision weapons by 1.5 times. The third area focuses
on the continued development of counter UAV technologies, some of which will be based upon “new physical principles.” The last
modernization priority is the development of Reconnaissance-Strike UAVs, which will not only conduct reconnaissance missions, but will
also be armed for combat missions. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The main distinguishing features of future conflicts will be the broad employment of precision and other
types of new armaments, including robotic… In addition to the traditional realms of armed conflict, the
information and space realms will be actively involved…”

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2018

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: Gerasimov on Future War and
Modernization Priorities
Source: “Генштаб: особенностью конфликтов будущего станет
применение роботов и космических средств, (General Staff:
Future conflicts will be characterized by the use of robots and space
vehicles),” TASS, 24 March 2018. http://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/5062463
…are being refined through the balanced development of the Armed
Forces’ branches of service and branches of arms, and by increasing
the level of equipment with state-of-the-art armaments and military
equipment…
A New Reconnaissance-Strike System [РазведывательноУдарная Система] for the Armed Forces
This should profoundly reduce the time cycle for completing fire
missions by 2–2.5 times and increase the accuracy of targeting by
1.5–2 times…
Precision Weapons [Применение Высокоточного Оружия]
Improvements to command and control structures and information
technology has made it possible to reduce the time for preparing for
the use of high-precision weapons by 1.5 times…
Countering UAVs [Оснащение комплексами БПЛА]
The expansion of the use of unmanned aerial vehicles and
difficulties of striking them by the existing air defense system require
the creation of the efficient countermeasure system. The advanced
systems of countermeasures to the use of UAVs, including the ones
based on the new physical principles, are being developed and have
already begun to be supplied to the Armed Forces..
Reconnaissance-Strike UAVs [Разведывательно-Ударные
БПЛА]
The development of multi-purpose unmanned aerial vehicles, which
conduct not only reconnaissance missions, but also combat missions
is being conducted…

Source: “В Минобороны рассказали о ‘войнах будущего’ (Ministry
of Defense Describes ‘Wars of the Future’),” RIA Novosti, 24 March
2018. https://ria.ru/defense_safety/20180324/1517183908.html
The main features of conflicts of the future will be the use of robotic
complexes, the information realm, and sophisticated resources, the
Chief of the Armed Forces General Staff, First Deputy Minister of
Defense of the Russian Federation Valeriy Gerasimov, reported at a
military conference at the General Staff Academy.
“Without question, every military conflict has its own hallmarks.
The main distinguishing features of future conflicts will be the
broad employment of precision and other types of new armaments,
including robotics. The adversary’s economic facilities and state
governance systems will be the primary targets for destruction. In
addition to the traditional realms of armed conflict, the information
and space realms will be actively involved,” Gerasimov said.
In addition, as he put it, “countering communication,
reconnaissance, and navigation systems will also play a special role.”
“This is just an outline of the most likely war of the future. At the
same time, the spectrum of possible conflicts is extremely broad, and
the Armed Forces must be ready for any of them,” the Chief of the
General Staff stressed.
He noted that the on-going building and training of the Russian
Federation Armed Forces take into account these trends in the
changing character of armed conflict. “The possibility of military
conflicts arising simultaneously in various strategic sectors
predetermined the creation of integrated groupings of troops and
forces within the make-up of the military districts, which provide
for the combat forces’ ability to wage combat operations effectively
in both peacetime and wartime,” the Chief of the General Staff
stressed…

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | May 2018

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
The Kremlin’s Media Strategy
OE Watch Commentary: There was little doubt that
Vladimir Putin would be re-elected as Russia’s Commanderin-Chief on 18 March, with official results stating that he
received over 75 percent of the votes. His wide popularity can
be attributed to many factors, but one of the most important
has been the Kremlin’s skillful exploitation of the country’s
mass media. For a good example of this expertise, consider the
accompany excerpts from an interview given by Russian first
deputy minister of defense, Ruslan Tsalikov, on the evening
talk-show program “Right to Know,” portions of which were
subsequently reprinted in the official newspaper of the Russian
Ministry of Defense, Krasnaya Zvezda. (Tsalikov’s complete
interview can be found here: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=IaXErijQrZE)
Tsalikov appeared on this popular talk-show program two
days prior to the presidential election, and his comments center
upon the skillful leadership of President Putin in strengthening
Russia’s armed forces. He gives countless examples of how
“the combat readiness of the Russian Federation Armed Forces
has improved,” particularly since the “decision of the Supreme
Commander in Chief to appoint Sergey Kuzhugetovich Shoygu
as Defense Minister.” The host of the program, Dmitry Kulikov,
known for a deep devotion to the Kremlin leadership, competed
with his guest in praising the country’s political and military
leadership. They both echoed the sentiment that “the Russian
Federation Armed Forces are today stronger than any potential
aggressor.”
The format for this type of media manipulation follows
a simple rule: all achievements and successes are due to
the bravery, wisdom and hard work of the Russian people
(particularly the political and military leadership), while all
failures and setbacks belong to the conniving West or domestic
traitors. In their rendition, “Russia has never threatened anyone,
but has itself often been the victim of aggression and has had
to respond.” Tsalikov repeated the warning “delivered recently
by General of the Army Valeriy Gerasimov” regarding “the
inevitability of negative consequences for” the US should they
dare “to carry out a strike against Damascus.” Tsalikov used
the TV program to assert that “We will stand up for ourselves!
I hope they have heard us and I hope it will not be necessary
to resort to this. We will not retreat from this position of ours,
which was confirmed by the Supreme Commander in Chief.”
A good portion of President Putin’s popularity stems from
the Kremlin’s indirect control over the Russian media, where
a key component of the narrative has been rebuilding and
modernizing the country’s armed forces to defend against
perceived Western aggression. Now that Putin has been reelected, it will be interesting to watch the degree to which the
Kremlin will continue to foster anti-Western sentiments in the
media. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Russia has never threatened anyone, but has
itself often been the victim of aggression and
has had to respond.…”

First Deputy Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, Ruslan Tsalikov.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, https://structure.mil.ru/structure/forces/air/news/more.htm?id=12109797@egNews, CCA By 4.0.

Source: Aleksandr Tikhonov, “Россия будет побеждать умом: Первый
заместитель министра обороны Российской Федерации Руслан
ЦАЛИКОВ принял участие в программе ‘Право знать’ на канале ТВ
Центр (Russia will gain victory with its brain: First Deputy Minister of
Defense of the Russian Federation, Ruslan Tsalikov Took Part in the ‘Right
To Know’ Program on Center TV),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 19 Mar 2018. http://
www.redstar.ru/index.php/syria/item/36539-rossiya-budet-pobezhdat-umom
Demonstrating once again the Army’s openness to society, the first deputy
head of the military department answered numerous questions from
anchor Dmitriy Kulikov. They discussed the situation in Syria, the absolute
confidence of Russian citizens in our Armed Forces and the basis for that
high level of confidence, the results of the tackling of service members’
social problems and improvements to the system of management of the
defense of the Russian Federation, the innovative activities of the military
department, and much else….
…In connection with recent provocative statements by the US authorities
on their readiness to carry out a strike against Damascus and the warning,
in response, of the inevitability of negative consequences for them that was
delivered recently by General of the Army Valeriy Gerasimov, chief of the
Russian Federation Armed Forces General Staff and first deputy minister of
defense of the Russian Federation, Ruslan Tsalikov confirmed yet again the
clear and firm position of the Russian Defense Ministry. “We will stand up
for ourselves! I hope they have heard us and I hope it will not be necessary
to resort to this. We will not retreat from this position of ours, which was
confirmed by the Supreme Commander in Chief.”
…History attests eloquently, Ruslan Khadzhismelovich [Tsalikov] noted:
“Russia has never threatened anyone, but has itself often been the victim of
aggression and has had to respond. …
…What are the results of the work done since that time by the new Defense
Minister and the team who arrived with him?
[Tsalikov] “First, the combat readiness of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces has improved. This is our main task: to ensure the defense of the
Motherland, the defense of our citizens.
“To quote, once again, our Supreme Commander in Chief, at the Defense
Ministry Collegium he assessed this as meaning that the Russian Federation
Armed Forces are today stronger than any potential aggressor.”
OE Watch | May 2018

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Keeping Russian Troops Informed and Inspired
OE Watch Commentary: Russia recently celebrated the 100th
anniversary of the creation of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Red
Army (RKKA). As the excerpted article from Russia’s official
news agency TASS points out, “On January 28, 1918, Chairman
of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Russian Soviet
Federative Socialist Republic Vladimir Lenin (Ulyanov) signed
a decree setting up the Workers’ and Peasants’ Red Army. On
February 23, the recruitment of volunteers into the Red Army
began.” The holiday has since been renamed as “Defender of the
Fatherland Day.”
Lev Trotsky, one of the founding fathers of the RKKA,
used a specially designed armored train to both coordinate
military actions and to maintain and raise the morale of Red
Army soldiers. In a similar vein, the excerpted article from
the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya, describes the development
of new “multimedia all-terrain vehicles” designed to provide
“multimedia equipment for educational work and for organizing
Lev Trotsky’s armored train.
servicemen’s leisure activities in field conditions.” According
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Leon_Trotsky%27s_Armored_Train_2.jpg. Public Domain.
to the article, the “multifunction information system [PMIK]”
is capable of creating “a Wi-Fi network and transmit video in HD resolution” in addition to producing “various printed materials.” The
equipment is still under development, and each “military district will receive two PMIKs for testing.”
The article goes on to assert that this new equipment will allow “officer-rank educators…[to] create modern informational products: video
clips, short films, and electronic or printed newspapers and magazines.” It quotes a military expert who claims that “great attention has always
been devoted in the Russian Army to keeping servicemen informed,” and that such material “helps raise soldiers’ combat morale and to
distract them from the difficult living conditions.” The article points out that “the new system’s capabilities will make it possible to create a
high-quality informative media product that is comprehensible to every soldier,” but makes no mention of using the equipment for offensive
purposes to spread disinformation. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…great attention has always been devoted in the Russian Army to keeping servicemen informed.”

Source: “Russia to salute its men and veterans on Defender of the Fatherland Day,” TASS, 22 February 2018. http://tass.com/society/991264
February 23 marks Defender of the Fatherland Day in Russia…. The holiday dates back to the initial years after the foundation of the
Russian Soviet Republic. On January 28, 1918, Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist
Republic Vladimir Lenin (Ulyanov) signed a decree setting up the Workers’ and Peasants’ Red Army. On February 23, the recruitment of
volunteers into the Red Army began….
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Aleksey Ramm, “Военные воспитатели получили мультимедийные вездеходы (Military Educators Have
Received Multimedia All-Terrain Vehicles),” Izvestiya, 11 March 2018. https://iz.ru/701824/aleksandr-kruglov-aleksei-ramm/voennyevospitateli-poluchili-multimediinye-vezdekhody
Russian officer-rank educators have received “multimedia all-terrain vehicles.” The Defense Ministry has begun procuring mobile
multifunction information systems [PMIK]. A PMIK is a van carrying multimedia equipment for educational work and for organizing
servicemen’s leisure activities in field conditions. With the aid of it, one can create a Wi-Fi network and transmit video in HD resolution.
The system also makes it possible to produce various printed materials -- combat news bulletin leaflets, newspapers, et al. In the opinion of
experts, this will boost the effectiveness of work with the generation of soldiers that has grown up in the high-tech age.
The Defense Ministry has informed Izvestiya that the basic decision on the procurement has already been made. Every military district will
receive two PMIKs for testing. A total of eight systems will be purchased, for a sum of 152 million rubles….
…The PMIK is being installed inside a van carried aboard a Ural or KamAZ vehicle with enhanced off-road capability. With the aid of
it, officer-rank educators will create modern informational products: video clips, short films, and electronic or printed newspapers and
magazines….
…Military expert Oleg Zheltonozhko noted that great attention has always been devoted in the Russian Army to keeping servicemen
informed. Even in a combat situation, deputy commanders for political affairs have regularly shown movies and published combat news
bulletin leaflets. This helps raise soldiers’ combat morale and to distract them from the difficult living conditions….
…The new system’s capabilities will make it possible to create a high-quality informative media product that is comprehensible to every
soldier. Today’s technology significantly simplifies the process of compiling audio and video reports. Of actually creating an engaging topic
within a few hours…
OE Watch | May 2018

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Cleaning Up the Professional Ranks
OE Watch Commentary: Russia continues to
slowly move toward developing a professionally-staffed
military. While young Russian males (age 18-27) are
still subject to one-year conscription, the total size of the
draft contingent continues to shrink. As the excerpted
article from the pro-Kremlin source RIA Novosti
describes, during the Spring 2018 draft period (which
runs from 1 April to 15 July) only “128,000 people are
called for in the forthcoming campaign, which is 10%
less” than the Spring 2017 campaign. As the article
points out, as far back as the Spring 2015 draft, there
are now more contract soldiers in the Russian military
than conscripts.
The military has also undertaken measures to
improve the overall quality of the professional
contingent (officers and enlisted contract personnel).
Besides improving living conditions, pay and benefits,
the military is also making it easier for commanders
to discharge service members for various forms of
misconduct. The excerpted article from the proKremlin source Izvestiya points out that “commanding
officers will [soon] receive the right to use a simplified
procedure to dismiss their subordinates for abuse of
alcohol and drugs, improper conduct, corruption, or
divulging unclassified official information.”
The article points out that the current regulation
“does not stipulate the possibility of dismissing service
members for misdemeanors that are corruption-related
or involve divulging official information” nor does it
“make provision for punishment for acts that discredit
the honor and dignity of a service member.” Under the
current system, commanders must “demonstrate that
[the offending soldier] has repeatedly infringed the
terms of his contract” which can force “the dismissal
process…[to] drag on for months.” The article quotes an
expert and advocate for soldiers’ rights, who asserts that
provisions under which a soldier might be discharged
“must be clearly described in legislation, with an
exhaustive list of such infringements,” suggesting
that otherwise soldiers may be subject to the arbitrary
decisions of commanding officers. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Commanding officers will receive the
right to use a simplified procedure to
dismiss their subordinates for abuse of
alcohol and drugs, improper conduct,
corruption, or divulging unclassified
official information.”

Source: “Весенний призыв: 128 тысяч новобранцев к 100-летию российских
военкоматов (Spring Draft: 128 thousand recruits for the 100th anniversary of the
Russian military registration and enlistment offices),” RIA Novosti, 1 April 2018.
https://ria.ru/defense_safety/20180401/1517692734.html
…For the first time the number of contractors (about 300 thousand) exceeded the
number of “conscripts” (about 280 thousand) in the spring of 2015… Personnel
Chief Lieutenant-General Yevgeny Burdinsky addressed the media on March 30 with
explanations on the draft, called “Spring-2018.” One of the features of the current
spring campaign, he called a significant reduction in the number of drafted.
“If in the spring of 2017 142 thousand recruits were sent to the army, 128 thousand
people are called for in the forthcoming campaign, which is 10% less.” The
reduction in the rate is primarily due to the increase in the Armed Forces of the
proportion of military personnel under the contract,” Burdinsky stressed.
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Военных обяжут беречь честь
и достоинство (Military Will Have Obligation To Safeguard Honor and Dignity),”
Izvestiya, 6 March 2018. https://iz.ru/715007/aleksandr-kruglov-bogdan-stepovoi/
voennykh-obiazhut-berech-chest-i-dostoinstvo
Commanding officers will receive the right to use a simplified procedure to dismiss
their subordinates for abuse of alcohol and drugs, improper conduct, corruption, or
divulging unclassified official information. The Defense Ministry told Izvestiya that
the military department has proposed the corresponding amendments to the Federal
Law on Military Obligation and Military Service. These changes are currently at the
stage of coordination. In the opinion of experts the aim of the new legislative rules
is to increase requirements on service members. But certain clauses of the draft law
need to be made more specific in order to avoid abuses….
…The current version of the Law on Military Obligation and Military Service does
not stipulate the possibility of dismissing service members for misdemeanors that
are corruption-related or involve divulging official information. The law also does
not make provision for punishment for acts that discredit the honor and dignity of a
service member….
…At present, in order to dismiss a service member, it is necessary to demonstrate
that he has repeatedly infringed the terms of his contract. One condition is the
existence of several disciplinary penalties. Because of this, the dismissal process
can drag on for months. By means of the amendments it is proposed to eliminate this
legislative loophole and grant commanding officers the right to dismiss offenders in
accordance with a simplified procedure.
…Sergey Krivenko, leader of a working group on questions of the protection
of service members’ rights at the Council Under the President of the Russian
Federation for the Development of the Civil Society and Human Rights, believes that
service members’ standard contracts include many references to statutes and federal
laws regulating the life of the Army, but not much in the way of specifics.
“The concept of ‘acts that discredit the honor and dignity of a service
member’ must be clearly described in legislation, with an exhaustive list of such
infringements,” Sergey Krivenko believes. “The statutes do not indicate specifically
what actions can be considered as such. This concept can be interpreted in various
ways. The same goes for the clause concerning official information. There have been
cases where complaints by soldiers and officers to the military prosecutor’s office
have been assessed in that way by superior officers.”

OE Watch | May 2018

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Additional Compensation for Remote Assignments
OE Watch Commentary: Despite economic
challenges, the Kremlin continues to place a high
priority on military readiness and modernization.
Pay and benefits for military personnel remain key
components behind the improved morale and status
of Russia’s armed forces. As reported in the March
2018 OE Watch, (“Promised Pay Raise for Military”)
officers and contract personnel received a hefty pay
increase beginning in January. According to the brief
excerpted article from the pro-Kremlin source Izvestiya,
this economic largesse will also soon apply “to the
unemployed spouses of officers and contract soldiers”
in “military towns and garrisons [where] they have no
opportunity to find a job.”
As the article points out, this unemployment
allowance (9,489 rubles or about $170 a month)
compensates for lack of employment opportunities
for spouses of military personnel who are “serving in
remote garrisons in Siberia, the Arctic, and the Far
East.” Those spouses who are caring for chronically ill
children “are also eligible for payments.” The article
quotes a legal expert who suggests that applying for
this benefit “will be quite easy to process,” although
there may be difficulties for those in remote locations,
where applicants may be forced “to travel 40-50
kilometers from their military township” to collect all
the paperwork. Rather than paying the family member
directly, the article points out that “the monetary
payments will be made directly in the military units.”
Some have suggested that economic sanctions
might induce the Kremlin leadership to pursue a
less confrontational foreign policy and to limit the
pace of military modernization. While funding for
social programs (education, healthcare, infrastructure
improvements) remains anemic, the Kremlin appears
intent upon providing generous support to military
and security forces, even to family members in remote
locations. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Bogdan Stepovoy and Aleksandr Kruglov, “Минобороны доплатит
женам офицеров за жизнь в отдаленных гарнизонах (Defense Ministry Will
Provide Additional Payment to Officers’ Wives for Living in Remote Garrisons),”
Izvestiya, 20 March 2018. https://iz.ru/720362/bogdan-stepovoi-aleksandr-kruglov/
minoborony-doplatit-zhenam-ofitcerov-za-zhizn-v-otdalennykh-garnizonakh
The Defense Ministry will start paying allowances to the unemployed spouses of
officers and contract soldiers. In some military towns and garrisons they have no
opportunity to find a job relating to their profession and they receive unemployed
status. The allowances extend primarily to the wives and husbands of service
personnel serving in remote garrisons in Siberia, the Arctic, and the Far East.
Spouses caring for sick children are also eligible for payments. The sum of the
allowance is equal to the minimum wage -- currently this is 9,489 rubles ($170) a
month.
The Defense Ministry told Izvestiya that this department has developed a draft
resolution “On the amount of and procedure for paying a monthly allowance to the
spouses of servicemen -- citizens engaged in military service under contract -- while
they are living with their spouses in areas where they cannot work in their special
field.” The document is currently being agreed in the security departments.
The monetary payments will be made directly in the military units. The spouses of
servicemen in garrisons where they cannot find work relating to their profession can
claim the allowance. The wife or husband of an officer or contract soldier -- there
are over 40,000 women contract service personnel serving in the country’s Armed
Forces -- are eligible for the payments….
…To obtain these allowances the service personnel member will have to submit
an application to their military unit together with a package of documents relating
to their spouse. That includes their employment record book and copies of their
marriage certificate and Russian passport with a note of registration at the place
of service. A note from the local employment service testifying that the spouse is
unemployed and not receiving allowances is also necessary.
The allowance will be quite easy to process, and all the necessary documents can
be collected without red tape, Oleg Zherdev, a member of the Gvardiya Russian
Association of Security Department Lawyers, believes.
“Difficulties may arise only when trying to obtain a note from a local employment
service,” Oleg Zherdev told Izvestiya. “These services are in rayon centers. It is not
out of the question that in some places in Siberia people will have to travel 40-50
kilometers from their military township to the ‘mainland’ to acquire this note.”…

Russia’s Arctic military base, Arkticheskiy Trilistnik, on the Franz Josef Land archipelago.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry website, http://mil.ru/files/files/arctic/Arctic.html, CCA By 4.0.

“The Defense Ministry will start paying allowances to the unemployed spouses of officers and contract
soldiers.”
OE Watch | May 2018

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Reasons for Caspian Flotilla Headquarters Relocation
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Sputnik gives some vague reasoning behind Russia’s recent decision
to move the Caspian Flotilla headquarters from Astrakhan to the town of Kaspiysk in the Republic of Dagestan. The Black Sea Fleet’s former
commander, Admiral Vladimir Komoyedov stated that the move was simply “strategically correct.” The move has garnered little attention in the
Russian mass media, but has been of significant interest in the other Caspian littoral states. The accompanying excerpted article from AzerNews,
a newspaper in Azerbaijan, gives a bit more of an explanation for the move. Generally, there is little belief that the move was made to influence
or deter other Caspian littoral states, or for internal security purposes, as Dagestan is probably the most volatile area in Russia. The consensus of
thought appears to believe that the relocation is being done for practical reasons. The Volga River is growing shallower and the Volga Delta and
the northern part of the Caspian Sea can freeze over in winter. In addition, the Kaspiysk location is closer to waters needed for launching KalibrNK missiles into certain locations in the Middle East, as the Caspian Flotilla launched Kalibr-NKs into Syria in 2015. By some estimates, the
move could save the flotilla 12 hours. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Admiral Explains Why Russia Moving Caspian Flotilla HQ to Dagestan,” Sputnik, 3 April 2018. https://sputniknews.com/
military/201804031063158439-admiral-flotilla-relocation/
Russia is preparing a new base for its Caspian Flotilla, which is set to become of the country’s most technically advanced naval facilities.
The Black Sea Fleet’s former commander, Admiral Vladimir Komoyedov, welcomes the decision to relocate the Caspian Flotilla headquarters
from Astrakhan to Kaspiisk in Dagestan as “strategically correct.”…“From a strategic standpoint, all the neighboring countries are our good
friends. Secondly, we are just moving the command and control headquarters there,” Komoyedov said…
A source familiar with matter told Sputnik that the transfer is slated for next year, but added that changes to the schedule were possible
depending on funding. The Caspian Flotilla is the maritime element of the Southern Military District, which is stationed in Astrakhan and
ensures Russian national interests in the Caspian Sea region by carrying out antiterrorist activities, providing safety of trade, protecting
national interests in the area of oil fields. The flotilla consists of several brigades and divisions of surface ships and units of coastal troops…
The Caspian Flotilla is also a strong factor in ensuring Russia’s leadership on the world’s largest landlocked sea where littoral states have
been engaged in a 15-year-old tug-of-war over the sea’s oil and bio resources. The Caspian Flotilla gained prominence in Russia’s strategic
vision when it carried out a series of cruise missile strikes at terrorist positions in Syria in October 2015.
Source: Azer Ahmadbayli, “Why move Caspian flotilla to Middle Eastern theater?” AzerNews, 6 April 2018. https://www.azernews.az/
analysis/129908.html
So, why move?
All of the [Caspian littoral] states have good relations with Russia, so Russia’s rivalry with coastal countries is not the reason.The Caspian
Sea is an enclosed body of water, so a possible clash with warships of third parties may also be excluded. Also, the transfer of the naval base
from Astrakhan to Kaspiysk is quite costly…Then why has the decision been made? Let’s take a look at some possible reasons.
Strike task factor
Growing tensions in the Middle East can one day lead to armed clashes or full-scale war, which is harmful for Russia’s national interests. So
Russia is taking preventive measures, if it happens. The flotilla will be relocated closer to the Middle East theater of operation strengthening
Russia’s striking capacity from the North and winning time for deployment.
Internal security factor
Stability in the North Caucasus is of critical importance to Russia…Dagestan, like the entire North Caucasus, is likely the most sensitive
region of Russia…Therefore, the presence of the naval base will be an additional stabilizing factor, not only with regards to the ongoing
developments in Dagestan, but in general. Some military experts consider this reason to be totally groundless, where some others say it
makes sense…

“The Black Sea Fleet’s former commander, Admiral Vladimir Komoyedov, welcomes the decision to relocate
the Caspian Flotilla headquarters from Astrakhan to Kaspiisk in Dagestan as ‘strategically correct’.”

Caspian Flotilla at parade in Astrakhan in 2012 (Dagestan).

Source: By Vissarion [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9d/Caspian_Flotilla_Parade.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Chechen Special Troops Retake Nuclear-Powered
Icebreaker in Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: Chechen strongman Ramzan
Kadyrov continues to support President Putin’s military
programs and has sent Chechen troops to Syria and the
Arctic. The accompanying excerpted article from The
Independent Barents Observer reports that Chechen troops
are back and, once again, Kadyrov’s special unit “The
Flying Squad” (aka “Terek,” a major river in Chechnya
and the name of its leading soccer team) is involved. In
the past, they parachuted into the Arctic snow near the
North Pole and in this exercise they worked to “rescue”
a Russian nuclear-powered icebreaker from the grasp of
“terrorists”. They are joined by a Chechen contingent of
the Russian National Guard. The Russian National Guard
is nothing like the US National Guard. It is a full-time
professional force designed for internal control of the
Russian population. Estimated at some 300,000 strong,
the National Guard prevents riots, civil unrest and “color
revolutions.” Russian military, border guards and National
Guard have all participated in Arctic deployments and
training. The Chechen regime, as part of Russia, continues
to be a reliable supporter of the Russian government. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Chechen Special Forces Drills Anti-Terror on
Nuclear Icebreaker,” The Independent Barents Observer, 9 April 2018. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2018/04/chechen-special-forces-anti-terrordrill-nuclear-icebreaker
…In April 2016, The Barents Observer reported that the same paramilitary
group [“The Flying Squad”] trained at the North Pole, then parachuting onto
the ice from an aircraft taking off from Murmansk. Cargo and other personnel
were brought into Murmansk via Norway’s Longyearbyen airport on Svalbard…
[Chechen leader] Ramzan Kadyrov’s own aide on law enforcement, Daniil
Martynov, headed the group loading equipment into the Russian An-74 aircraft
at Longyearbyen airport. Exercising anti-terror operation on board a nuclear
powered icebreaker is only one of several tasks to be practiced in the Arctic over
a period of several weeks. The Chechen TV report says nothing about where in
the Arctic other parts of the exercises will take place.
The first part of the Rosgvardia’s exercise started in late March when several
helicopters were observed in the skies above Murmansk…Exercise Barneo 2018
is currently underway in the high Arctic. On Saturday, head of the ice base,
Irina Orlova, wrote on her Facebook profile that helicopters are currently flying
around from 89 degrees north in search for suitable ice on which to establish the
runway for aircrafs to bring in more equipment currently waiting for take-off
from the airport in Murmansk.

“Ramzan Kadyrov’s own aide on law enforcement, Daniil Martynov, headed the group loading equipment
into the Russian An-74 aircraft at Longyearbyen airport. Exercising anti-terror operation on board a nuclear
powered icebreaker is only one of several tasks to be practiced in the Arctic over a period of several weeks.”

Russian nuclear icebreaker “Arktika”.

Source: By Abarinov [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Russian_Nuclear_Icebreaker_Arktika.jpg.

OE Watch | May 2018

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
The Russian Yasen-M Class Submarines Examined
OE Watch Commentary: Recent Russian efforts to revitalize the military have focused on modernization and replacement of key assets.
The Russian Navy in particular has come under scrutiny as in need of improvement. To that end, Russian Navy Commander, Admiral Vladimir
Korolev is in the process of overseeing the building and implementation of Yasen and Yasen-M multirole nuclear submarines, which he claims
“will soon be the most powerful in the Russian navy in terms of strike capacity” as reported on in the accompanying excerpt from Gazeta.ru.
According to Admiral Korolev, the first Yasen class submarine, the Severodvinsk, “is already part of the Northern Fleet” and actively
engaging in military exercises. The Severodvinsk took 21 years to build and certify, from the time construction began until it officially joined
the Russian Navy. However, the article’s author states that subsequent submarines will not take as long to construct. The lengthy process, the
author writes, was partially caused by several revisions to the project during the construction period.
The author states that the new Yasen-M project submarines use updated technology and designs, including “optimized contours and further
noise reduction” and abandon “the use of equipment deliveries from countries of the former USSR.” Additionally, this is the first Russian nuclear
submarine to locate the torpedo tubes “behind the control room compartment, which has made it possible to place the antenna of a new sonar
system on the nose tip.” The submarines are armed with torpedoes, mines, and cruise missiles. According to the article, the Yasen-M class
submarines are comparable to the American Seawolf and Virginia class submarines, the French Barracuda, and the English Astute.
The first of the Yasen-M class submarines, the Kazan, was launched over a year ago and will likely be adopted officially into the Russian Navy
this year. The third submarine in the Yasen and Yasen-M project, the K-573 Novosibirsk, is expected to join the Navy next year with the K-571
Krasnoyarsk, the K-564 Arkhangelsk, and the Perm (no current number) to enter service by 2020. The Russian Navy hopes to add the Ulyanovsk
by 2023. The submarines will enter into service in both the Northern and Pacific fleets. However, according to the article, even if all seven
nuclear submarines are produced at the ambitiously declared rate, there will not be enough to supplement one Russian fleet, much less two. End
OE Watch Commentary (Johnson)

“Submarines of the Yasen-M project are the last word in Russian submarine manufacture. These boats are
the quietest and also the most powerfully armed.”

Severodvinsk.

Source: Минобороны России/Олег Кулешов Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:АПКР_”Северодвинск”.jpg, CCA By 4.0.

(continued)
OE Watch | May 2018

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Continued: The Russian Yasen-M Class Submarines
Examined
Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “Практически недосягаемые: у флота появится семь Ясеней,” (Practically Unattainable: The Navy Will
Have Seven Yasens),” Gazeta.ru, 19 March 2018. https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2018/03/19/11688343.shtml
The contingent of Yasen and Yasen-M multirole nuclear submarines will soon be the most powerful in the Russian Navy in terms of strike
capacity, Russian Navy Commander Admiral Vladimir Korolev told the Krasnaya Zvezda newspaper….Russian Navy Commander Vladimir
Korolev noted that the lead submarine of this project is already part of the Northern Fleet and regularly performs combat service tasks in
remote areas of the world’s oceans.
The Navy’s commander stressed that the construction and adoption of Yasen-M submarines into both the Northern and Pacific Fleets will
be continued. The Yasen project lead submarine — the K-560 Severodvinsk, was laid down at the Severnyy machine-building enterprise on
23 December 1993. In 1996, the construction of the nuclear submarine was halted due to funding problems. Work on completion of the ship
resumed only in 2004, when it was already in a finalized project…
It took 21 years from when the Severodvinsk was laid down until it joined the Navy’s combat inventory. This dismal record in the practice of
Russian shipbuilding is now unlikely ever to be surpassed…”The 08851 Yasen-M project differs from the basic project in respect of updated
equipment, optimized contours and further noise reduction,” Aleksandr Khramchikhin, deputy director of the Institute of Political and
Military Analysis, reminded Gazeta.Ru…
…The third submarine, the K-573 Novosibirsk, was laid down on 26 July 2013 under the Yasen-M project 885. Commissioning is expected
in 2019. The fourth submarine, the K-571 Krasnoyarsk, was laid down on 27 July 2014. The fifth submarine, the K-564 Arkhangelsk, was laid
down on 19 March 2015. The sixth, the Perm, was laid down on 29 July 2016. The seventh, the Ulyanovsk, was laid down on 28 July 2017.
…It is planned to hand over six Yasens by 2020 and the seventh by 2023. “However, such a number of boats will not be enough even for one
division,” Aleksandr Khramchikhin believes. At the same time, it should be noted that all seven Yasens will be distributed between two fleets
— the Northern and Pacific….
The Yasen-M project multirole nuclear submarines have a displacement of 13,800 tons, immersion depth of 520 meters, underwater speed 31
knots. Endurance at sea is 100 days. It has a crew of 64. The armament includes mines, 533 mm calibre torpedoes, Kalibr and Oniks cruise
missiles.
“For the first time in Russian shipbuilding the torpedo tubes are located not in the fore part of the ship but behind the control room
compartment, which has made it possible to place the antenna of a new sonar system in the nose tip,” Konstantin Makiyenko, deputy director
of the Center for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, told Gazeta.Ru.
Eight vertical launchers are used for missiles. The hull of the ship is made of high-strength low-magnetic steel, so the submarine can dive to
600 meters, which puts it practically out of the reach of almost all types of modern antisubmarine weapons.
“Submarines of the Yasen-M project are the last word in Russian submarine manufacture. These boats are the quietest and also the most
powerfully armed, “Konstantin Makiyenko stressed.
According to the expert, Yasen-M submarines in the future will be able to use Tsirkon advanced hypersonic missiles. The next generation
after the Yasen-M project will be the fifth- generation Khaski project submarines from the Malakhit Design Bureau that are currently in
development.
Analogues of the Russian-made Yasen are the American Seawolf and Virgina class multirole nuclear submarines, the French Barracuda, and
the English Astute…

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | May 2018

67

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Russian Robot Ships in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: With selfdriving automobiles under development, can
self-sailing ships be far behind? This is not
just a Russian idea. The Autonomous Ship
Technology Symposium 2018 will be held in
Amsterdam 27-29 June. Norway’s Konigsberg
Maritime and Britain’s Rolls Royce Maritime
are very involved in this concept as are several
seafaring nations’ governments. The Russians,
however, are designing particularly for the
Northeast Arctic Passage with ships that include
thicker hulls and the elimination of quarters,
passageways, mess, doors, stairs, HVAC, food
and water, and the bridge for much more cargo
capacity and better balancing and reduced
ballast. Conventional fuel savings should be
significant, but since Rosatom (Russia’s State
Atomic Energy Corporation) has the concept
lead, the Russian model will probably be
nuclear-powered. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Russia to develop Unmanned Ships for the Arctic,” The
Independent Barents Observer, 5 April 2018. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/
arctic/2018/04/russia-develop-unmanned-ships-arctic
…Cargo can be placed in the bow, the dimensions of the vessels will be optimized in
a more favorable way, all making the voyage more effective in icy waters. Still, one of
the powerful nuclear powered icebreakers will sail first opening the ice for a convoy of
unmanned vessels enroute either to or from a domestic Arctic port or in transit between
Asia and Europe.
The next step in the study will be to develop digital models and create model simulations
for such autonomous cargo ships. The researchers emphasize how unmanned vessels will
be safer than vessels operated by on-board crew members. Some 60-80% of all incidents
on ships are caused by human error, either in navigation or for other reasons. Instead of
people, the new autonomous ships will navigate using computer systems linked with radio
signals and digital monitoring of the ship’s movements in the water.
“This will provide economic savings, especially in the difficult conditions of the Arctic
region,” according to nuclear researchers.
The study refers to Norway and other European countries where several similar studies
of autonomous shipping are conducted. In southern Norway, the industrial company Yara
is will open a route for shipping using full-electric, autonomous containerships running
between the fertilizer plant at Herøya and the port of Brevik. The first voyage will sail the
route in 2020.

“The researchers emphasize how unmanned vessels will be safer than vessels operated by on-board crew
members. Some 60-80% of all incidents on ships are caused by human error, either in navigation or for
other reasons.”

UAV Support for Military Mountaineering
OE Watch Commentary: Russian troops have a significant presence in Armenia
and the neighboring countries of Turkey and Azerbaijan are aware of this. Armenian
forces have modernized with Russian systems such as the Iskander tactical-range
ballistic missile. The Russian troops are located primarily with the Armenian 4th
Corps at the 102nd Military Base near Yerevan, and are part of the Russian Southern
Military District. The 102nd has three motorized rifle battalions, a tank battalion,
a reconnaissance battalion, an engineer battalion, a signal battalion, a maintenance
battalion, a supply battalion, four artillery battalions and two air defense battalions.
It also has an operational-tactical air defense regiment, long-range Smerch multiple
rocket launch systems and the Iskander. The primary recipients of the military
mountaineering training reported on in the accompanying excerpted article from
TV Zvezda, a Russian Ministry of Defense news channel, were evidently from the
reconnaissance battalion.
The use of UAVs to support military mountaineering is an innovative adaptation of
this technology. Assistance with route selection is clearly an advantage, as mountain
paths and approaches change with weather and rock slides and the Pambak Mountain
Range is one of 16 mountain ranges in Armenia. UAVs have a long loiter time, which
is ideal when supporting slow, difficult mountain treks. UAVs may also spot enemies,
provide fire coordinates for mortars and artillery, conduct post-strike assessment,
search for injured or missing climbers and provide radio retransmission support
when properly equipped. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Roman Zakharov. “В Армении разведчики
ЮВО осваивают мастерство альпинизма под
наблюдением беспилотников (In Armenia Southern
Military District Recon Scouts Master Mountaineering
Proficiency under Observation by UAVs),” TV
Zvezda, 1 April 2018. https://tvzvezda.ru/news/forces/
content/201804010323-y7e4.htm
Over 300 servicemen are taking part in the practical
mountaineering training at the Pambak Range in
the Transcaucasus. They are supported by some
50 modern military systems, including the UAVs…
Immediately prior to starting the mountaineering
instruction course, the recon scouts studied the safety
regulations, the fundamentals of mountaineering
knots, and the rules of behavior in the mountains.
The men are currently rehearsing the elements of
movement along steep slopes, and negotiating descents
and ascents with regulation gear, armament, and
specialized mountain equipment. At a rocky sector
of terrain and a mountain sports complex the recon
scouts will be instructed in how to negotiate obstacles
and to perform complex mountaineering techniques
utilizing an individual safety harness.

“Over 300 servicemen are taking part in the practical mountaineering training at the Pambak Range in
the Transcaucasus. They are supported by some 50 modern military systems, including the UAVs.”
OE Watch | May 2018

68

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
New Fuel Bladders for Improved Mobility
OE Watch Commentary: During the annual Victory
Day parade in Moscow on 9 May, the Russian military will
display models of its latest weapon systems. This impressive
display of firepower is designed to both commemorate the
heroic deeds of the Great Patriotic War (WW II) and to
assure the nation that Russia is prepared to defend against
any external aggression. While certainly imposing, most
military experts understand that employing these weapon
systems is largely predicated upon a robust and versatile
system of logistics. The accompanying excerpted article
from the pro-Kremlin source Izvestiya, describes a new
fuel storage system which could improve Russian military
mobility.
Where in the past the Russian military used metal tanks
to store and pump fuel, the article describes the development
of “special pliable reservoir-bladders” holding “600 cubic
meters of fuel,” and which “can refuel 14 fighting vehicles
simultaneously.” The fuel-bladder system “consists of 12
‘cushions,’ each holding 50 cubic meters in volume.” The
system is largely temperature resistant, “able to function in
ambient outdoor air temperatures from -60 to +50 degrees
C.” The system can be up and running in less than 72 hours
and can be deployed in just about any terrain.
The article quotes a military expert who points out that
this new fueling system does “not require bulky special
equipment during transportation, and this makes them supermobile.” The system does not require “lengthy preparatory
procedures when installing,” and he also asserts that “it is
easy to stop leaks in the new technological containers.” The
Victory Day parade will highlight advances in the Russian
military arsenal. Less visible, but perhaps equally important,
are developments in logistics which allow these weapon
systems to maneuver on the battlefield. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“The Defense Ministry has begun
procuring ‘field fuelers’ for supplying fuel
to vehicles in field conditions.”

Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Минобороны решило
хранить топливо в ‘мешках’ (The Defense Ministry Has Decided To Store
Fuel in ‘Bladders’),” Izvestiya, 12 March 2018. https://iz.ru/716543/aleksandrkruglov-bogdan-stepovoi/minoborony-reshilo-khranit-toplivo-v-meshkakh
The Defense Ministry has begun procuring “field fuelers” for supplying fuel
to vehicles in field conditions. The special pliable reservoir-bladders can be
transported empty in small containers. It takes no more than 20 hours to fully
deploy such a depository. According to experts’ assessments, the innovation
will make it possible to reduce expenditures on transporting fuel and will
significantly increase the durability and mobility of storage facilities.
The Defense Ministry has told Izvestiya: “The field fuel depot (PSG-600)” has
undergone tests in the troops. Based on their results, a decision to adopt it as a
supply source has been made…. The sum of the first contract for the PSG-600
field fuel depot’s delivery is more than 72 million rubles. This system can refuel
14 fighting vehicles simultaneously. A fully deployed depository holds 600 cubic
meters of fuel. The pliable thermoplastic polyurethane reservoirs are able to
function in ambient outdoor air temperatures from -60 to +50 degrees C.
The field fuel depot consists of 12 “cushions,” each holding 50 cubic meters in
volume. The field fueling system has a single automated control center, and all
information relating to expenditure of fuel goes into its computer.
The time taken to fully deploy the PSG-600 is 20 hours. Assembling the depot
requires only six people. Such mobile fueling systems may be rapidly deployed
in field conditions and concealed within terrain irregularities. The flexible
reservoir will be set up successfully on any ground -- on sand, stones, or boggy
terrain and, in winter, directly on top of snow.
It is possible to begin filling the reservoirs already two days after the work of
installing them begins. The PSG-600 makes it possible to take on fuel directly
from railroad and motor vehicle tanks, oil tankers, and main pipelines.
In conversation with Izvestiya, military expert Oleg Zheltonozhko described
the concept of manufacturing field fueling systems from flexible and gasolineresistant materials as promising. The new-style reservoir is far cheaper than
its metal equivalent, he noted. “Such depots will lighten the rear services’ work
during combat operations in difficult conditions,” Oleg Zheltonozhko said.
“The polyurethane containers do not require bulky special equipment during
transportation, and this makes them super-mobile. In the event of coming
under fire, the storage facility can quickly be redeployed elsewhere. It can
be relocated to a new place by several people. It is also of some importance
that it is easy to stop leaks in the new technological containers.” The expert
noted especially that, hitherto, it was impossible to proceed without lengthy
preparatory procedures when installing a field fuels and lubricants station….

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of the Lone
Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of low-level guerrilla
combat as told by the survivors. They cover fighting from the cities
of Grozny and Argun to the villages of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and
finally the hills, river valleys and mountains that make up so much
of Chechnya. Dodge Billingsley, the primary author was embedded
with Chechen guerrilla forces after the first war, so he knows the
country, the culture, the key actors and the conflict. Yet, as a Western
outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and objectivity. Fangs
of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is becoming
modern and future war.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download
OE Watch | May 2018

69

RUSSIA, UKRAINE, EUROPE
Is Catalonia an Irregular Warfare Battleground?
OE Watch Commentary: It seems unlikely
from the accompanying reportage that political
instability in Catalonia has gone away. The first of
the accompanying excerpted references, from OK
Diario, claims what seems to be an ominous turn,
at least rhetorically. If the separatists are insisting
that the situation in Catalonia requires resolution
by terrorism or civil war, one might reasonably fear
they are preparing to effect such a future. The second
reference, from La Gaceta and evidently from a writer
who favors the Spanish political right, points out that
thousands of businesses have left Barcelona due to
political uncertainties. It also notes a piece of stylistic
messaging that supports the separatist assertions
reported in the first reference. The Catalonian left
paid homage to an historically prominent, radical
communist from the time of the Spanish Civil War.
These writers remind their readers that the Catalonian
independence movement is being led and spurred
by the radical left. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…the situation in Catalonia will

only be resolved with ‘terrorism or a
civil war’…”

Source: M.A. Ruiz Coll, “Separatistas dicen: lo de Cataluña sólo se arregla con
‘terrorismo o una guerra civil’ (Separatists say: What is happening in Catalonia will
only be resolved with ‘terrorism or a civil war’),” OK Diario (Madrid), 31 March
2018. https://okdiario.com/espana/cataluna/2018/03/31/empresarios-separatistassugieren-que-lo-cataluna-solo-arregla-terrorismo-o-guerra-civil-2019921/
“…The Catalan Business Circle (CCN), a clique of independent business owners who
support Puigdemont, have launched a frightening message in which they suggest that
the situation in Catalonia will only be resolved with ‘terrorism or a civil war’…[it]
has already accomplished its objective: the 3,000 largest Catalonian businesses have
transferred their headquarters to utside the region, fleeing the political and social
instability provoked by the independentists….[it] has gone on to compare the current
situation in Catalonia with the years of lead of the Basque Country: ‘In spite of the
years of political and social state of siege that for decades swept the Basque Country,
the Spanish government never proposed to end the Basque autonomy, nor suspend
the fundamental rights and liberties that emanate from the Constitution of 1978, nor
forced the Basque administration into exile….”
Source: Juan E. Pflüger, “La izquierda homenajea a Largo Caballero, el ‘Lenin
español’ (The left pays hommage to Largo Caballero, the ‘Spanish Lenin’),” La
Gaceta (Madrid), 9 April 2018. https://gaceta.es/espana/largo-caballero-el-leninespanol-con-monumento-en-nuevos-ministerios-20180409-0840/
“He was one of the most active organizers of the coup d’état camouflaged as a
revolutionary strike in October of 1934. He was accused and remained detained for
a crime of rebellion in the grade of maximum leader…. And a few months prior to the
uprising of 18 July [a traditional milestone of the start of the Spanish Civil War] he
dedicated himself to assuring that the civil war was inevitable.”

Francisco Largo Caballlero visits during the siege of the Alcázar of Toledo, accompanied by militants and
officers of the Republican Army. (September, 1936).
Source: Narodowe Archiwum Cyfrowe, 1-E-6908, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LargoCaballeroAlcazar.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | May 2018

70

