community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #11
November 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

1RL257E Krasukha-4
Electronic Warfare System
EURASIA
3
5
6
8
9
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
21
22
23

Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan Electronic Warfare
Battalions
Russian MoD Considers a “Pocket” Iskander
The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile Defense System Is
Coming!
More Muscle for the Northern Fleet
Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
Why Russians Fight in Syria
Increased Economic Strains for Russian Military Personnel
Military Benefits of the Caspian Sea Convention for Russia’s
Power Projection Capabilities
The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border
Gauging Armenian and Azerbaijani Military Exercises
Moscow Pushes Own Approaches to Cyber Security on Rest
of CSTO
Russian De-dollarization: Economic Counter-Attack?
Polish Perspective on Russian Disinformation Campaigns
Social Media Restrictions for Russian Security
NATO Arctic Exercise Draws Russian Response
French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route
Russian Coast Guard Expanding in the Arctic
India and the Arctic?
Bulgarian Fighter Aircraft Acquisition

INDO-PACIFIC
24
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Made-in-China 2025
A Look at the PLA’s Youth Aviation Programs
Recruit Training Extended for New PLA Recruits to Increase
Readiness
The Growing Face of China’s Civil-Military Integration
Initiative
Poor Training and Insufficient Personnel Hamper Chinese
Maritime Militia Development
Chinese-Nepalese Anti-Terror Training Causing Concern in
India
India Upgrades Its MiG-29s
Singapore Unites Southeast Asia to Counter Terrorism
Is It Too Late for the Maldives to Lift Itself Out From Under
China’s Hold?
Vietnam Begins Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
43
44
45
46
48

Iranian Government Details Ahvaz Terrorist Incident
Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Confirms Use of Armed
Drones in Syria
Iran to Build New Missile System?
Turkey Tests Anti-torpedo Torpedo
Turkish Naval Special Forces
The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the Middle East
Russia and China Help Egypt’s Space Industry Move
Forward
Supreme Leader’s Advisor: United States Common Enemy
of Iran and China
Turkish and Iranian Cooperation to Fight Terrorism
Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s Drilling Plan
The “Soft War” on Hezbollah

AFRICA
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Yemen’s Civil War Fails to Discourage Horn of Africa Refugees
Cameroon Prison Break Signals Rising Anglophone Insurgency
South Sudan’s Civil War Death Toll Reaches 400,000
Nigeria’s Chukwu on Cross-Border, Counter-Boko Haram
Operations
Environmental Crimes Reportedly Leading Funding Source for
Terrorists
Military Intervention for Ebola Outbreak in DRC
With Tight Budgets, South Africa’s Military Strains to Meet
Mandates
Partisanship Alleged in Promotion of Malian Generals
Will Corruption in South Sudan Torpedo Peace Plan?

LATIN AMERICA
58
59
60
60
61
62
63
64
65

A Bolsonaro Brazil and the FSP
Mexican President-Elect Plans to Extend Federal Security
Presence
Worse to Come in Venezuela
Overton Window Shift on Venezuela
Chinese Medical Aid to Venezuela
ELN and FARC Seek Sanctuary
Colombia May Return to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields
Protests Disturb Peace Commonly Associated with Costa Rica
Student Marches as a Form of Struggle

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 11

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Nurlan Aliyev
Chuck Bartles
Matti Dimmick
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Matthew Stein
Sergey Sukhankin
Tom Wilhelm

Indo-Pacific

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.

November | 2018

Cindy Hurst
Aaron Jensen
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Ihsan Gunduz
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Catalina Wedman

		
ON THE COVER:
1RL257E Krasukha-4.

Image Source: By Vitaly V. Kuzmin (http://vitalykuzmin.net/?q=node/620) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/4.0) or CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MAKS2015part6-51.jpg. Transparency mask added to original image.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan
Electronic Warfare Battalions
OE Watch Commentary: Currently, Russian ground forces’ electronic warfare (EW) capabilities reside only at the tactical level through
EW companies found at the brigade/division level, and at the operational-strategic level through EW brigades found at the military district
(Joint Strategic Command) level. The tactical level EW companies are capable of jamming communications (with the R-934B/ R-378B/ R-330B
Mandat/Borisoglebsk-2), interfering with radio controlled artillery fuses (with the SPR-2 Rtut), and jamming GPS signals that are essential for
precision weapons (with the R-330ZH Zhitel/Borisoglebsk-2). These systems have varying capabilities to interfere with hostile communications,
disrupt precision targeting, and determine the location of the sources of hostile emissions. At the operational-strategic level, Russia’s largest and
most powerful EW systems such as the Murmansk-BN, Krasukha, Leer-3, Krasukha-2, and Krasukha-4, and Moskva, are found in the ground
forces’ EW brigades. These systems’ capabilities include wide area cellular communications jamming, GPS location spoofing, reconnaissance
and communication satellite jamming, and disrupting early warning aircraft.
The accompanying excerpted article, from the 10 October 2018 edition of Izvestiya, discusses a large increase in Russian EW capability.
Russia’s 12 Combined Arms Armies (operational level units) will each reportedly get a dedicated EW battalion. These battalions will have
capabilities that could previously be found only in the EW brigades. Namely, RB-341V Leer-3 and the new ‘Divnomorye’ system, which will
reportedly replace the Moskva, Krasukha-2, and Krasukha-4, as explained in the 4 May 2018 edition of Izvestiya. This development is in sync
with ongoing Russian trends of pushing organic capabilities down to lower level commanders. As the Russian Defense Ministry indicates in the
October 2018 Izvestiya article, there will be one EW battalion in each of the 12 Combined Arms Armies before the end of the year. It is unlikely
that these units will have to be created from scratch. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The Russian military intend to substantially increase the Ground Troops’ capabilities in the electronic
warfare sphere. For this purpose, a regular EW battalion will be created in every combined-arms army.”

RB-341V Leer-3 ECM system with UAV (Military exhibition in Park Patriot for Minister of Defense, 2015).
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Static-displays-Park-Patriot/i-VncQgCF/A, CC 4.0. (https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy).

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2018

3

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan
Electronic Warfare Battalions
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Nikolay Surkov, “Пехоту
прикроют электронным «зонтиком» (The Infantry Will Be
Covered by an Electronic ‘Umbrella’),” Izvestiya, 10 October
2018. https://iz.ru/744402/aleksandr-kruglov-nikolai-surkov/
pekhotu-prikroiut-elektronnym-zontikom
The Russian military intend to substantially increase
the Ground Troops’ capabilities in the electronic warfare
sphere. For this purpose, a regular EW battalion will
be created in every combined-arms army. As a result,
formations will gain the possibility of “blinding” an
adversary’s radars, jamming their communications, and
disrupting the operation of their electronic devices. In the
view of experts, this will substantially boost the possibilities
for counteracting an adversary’s technical reconnaissance.
The Defense Ministry has told Izvestiya that one EW
battalion will appear in each of 12 combined-arms armies
before the end of this year. These subunits will be equipped
with Divnomorye mobile complexes and RB-341V Leer3 systems. The first experimental battalion of this type
was created at the 58th Army base in Vladikavkaz. The
experiment has been judged successful…
The Russian Army is now counting on more extensive use
of EW equipment. And the creation of EW battalions in
every combined-arms army is a part of that trend, military
expert Aleksey Leonkov noted. “Previously, such battalions
were only at military districts’ disposal; now, their quantity
will increase considerably, and they will appear at a lower
tactical level,” the military expert explained. “So-called
interbranch EW battalions are being created, which it will
be possible to rapidly redeploy to the most dangerous zones
and to mobilize for various units’ and formations’ purposes.
This will expand manyfold the possibilities of electronic
concealment. Thanks to modern technology, the troops will
be reliably sheltered from an adversary’s reconnaissance
equipment by interference.”
Russia is regarded today as one of the world leaders in
terms of the EW equipment development level. It is planned
that, before 2020, equipment in EW troops will have been
renewed by more than two thirds.

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Aleksandr Kruglov, “Помеха для врага (Jamming
for the Enemy),” Izvestiya, 4 May 2018. https://iz.ru/733273/aleksei-rammaleksandr-kruglov/pomekha-dlia-vraga
The Electronic Warfare Troops have obtained a multifunction transformer
station. The “Divnomorye” mobile complexes jam radars and other airborne
electronic systems of aircraft, helicopters, and unmanned aerial vehicles. The
station also creates powerful jamming for “flying radars” – the E-3 AWACS,
E-2 Hawkeye, and E-8 JSTARS. The system selects the type of jamming and
the jamming method depending on the target and, therefore, it has received
the nickname “transformer-station” in the troops. In the experts’ opinion, the
innovation will bring the Russian EW Troops to a new technological level.
A Ministry of Defense spokesman told Izvestiya that the first Divnomorye
complexes will arrive in the troops this year. They have already completed
testing and test operation. The training of specialists for work on the new
equipment is being conducted right now. The new complex is capable of
fencing off facilities from radar detection with an “umbrella” in a sector of
several hundred kilometers. This is adequate in order to reliably conceal
command posts, troop groupings, PVO systems, and important industrial and
administrative-political facilities. The station effectively counters airborne
and ground detection systems. The innovation can use powerful jamming “to
shut down” the hardware of several aircraft radars simultaneously at a range
of several hundred kilometers. It is also capable of effectively dealing with spy
satellites. They plan that the Divnomorye will simultaneously replace three
electronic warfare complexes in the troops: “Moskva”, “Krasukha-2”, and
“Krasukha-4”. It is noteworthy that these systems began to arrive in units and
subunits just five years ago, in 2013…
Divnomorye is simultaneously a high-tech command post, an ELINT
reconnaissance station, and powerful jamming equipment. The complex
consists of a single vehicle on an off-road chassis. The system is deployed
into battle order in a total of several minutes. This makes it highly-mobile
and practically invulnerable. The complex covertly advances to a favorable
position, accomplishes the combat mission, and slips out from under a strike.
Divnomorye’s primary advantage – is complete automation. When a target
is detected, the system independently analyzes the signal and determines its
type, direction and radiated power. The target’s performance specifications
are determined based upon this data. After this, the automated system
compiles the jamming plan and independently selects the most effective type
of jamming. Then the system affects the enemy radar with powerful noise
radiation…

LEFT: 1L269 Krasukha-2 jamming station (ARMY-2018), RIGHT: EW intelligence vehicle 1L265 from 1L267 Moskva-1 system (ARMY-2017)

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog,CC 4.0. (https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy), LEFT: https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2018-Static-part-3/i-FPx52N4, RIGHT: https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Static-p4/i-kG92wV3/X3.

OE Watch | November 2018

4

EURASIA
Russian MoD Considers a “Pocket” Iskander
OE Watch Commentary: The
accompanying excerpted article from
Izvestiya discusses Russian plans for a
“pocket” Iskander, a small (likely) Ground
Launched Cruise Missile (GLCM) system,
known as the Precision Guided Tactical
Missile System (VTRK) [высокоточный
тактический ракетный комплекс
(ПТРК)]. Apparently, just as the Army
Group (Combined Arms Army, Tank
Army, Army Corps) commander has an
Iskander system, brigade and division
commanders will have a VTRK. The
VTRK is intended to give brigade and
division commanders an organic capability
to conduct deeper strikes to the full
extent of the tactical depth, approximately
100km. (Currently, these commanders’
organic artillery assets, such as howitzers
and 122mm MLRS, can only hit targets
up to approximately 20-60 km, depending
on equipment types and availability of
extended range munitions.) Unlike the
Iskander that is mounted on a heavy multiaxle chassis, the VTRK is envisioned to
be mounted on a two-axle utility vehicle
similar to a U.S. Humvee. Since UAVs
with a 120 km range are already found at
the brigade and division level, these units
already have the capability to provide
necessary targeting data to the VTRK,
thereby creating a substantial deep
strike capability. The deployment of this
system to the brigade and division level
demonstrates the Russian confidence in
the up-down and down-up integration of
their reconnaissance fire complex and their
ability to communicate in an electronic
warfare and cyberwar environment. End
OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Divisions and brigades must have their own weapon systems, which
are capable of conducting precision-guided strikes in the depth of the
entire tactical zone.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Карманный «Искандер»: военные получат
высокоточные ракетные комплексы (The Pocket ‘Iskander’: The Military Will Receive
Precision-Guided Missile System),” Izvestiya, 12 October 2018. https://iz.ru/795530/alekseiramm-bogdan-stepovoi/karmannyi-iskander-voennye-poluchat-vysokotochnye-raketnyekompleksyвысокоточных тактических ракетных комплексов — ВТРК
The Ministry of Defense has begun the development of precision-guided tactical missile system
(VTRK). These items have already received the unofficial designation “pocket Iskanders”. The
launchers of the compact VTRKs will be able to be mounted on Tigr or Tayfun armored motor
vehicles. Despite their miniature dimensions, the system should destroy any targets – equipment,
fortifications, and also communications and command and control posts. They are designed to
conduct precision-guided strikes in the probable enemy rear at a depth of up to 100 kilometers.
The VTRKs will assist divisions and brigades to organize close coordination with unmanned
aerial vehicles, reconnaissance systems, and signals formations…
That close coordination with the reconnaissance personnel and UAVs will permit the “pocket
Iskanders” to successfully accomplish missions for the destruction of the probable enemy’s targets
in the depth of battalion offensive operations – up to 100 kilometers.
The new system will be able to conduct strikes against the pressure points of the probable
enemy’s defense, first of all, against headquarters, communications centers, the tactical reserves’
deployment areas, depots, and important infrastructure facilities, for example, against bridges or
railroad junctions, in order to disrupt the supply of some or other grouping…Forward airfields,
tactical air defense missile system batteries, rocket-propelled and tube artillery, EW vehicles, and
supply columns can be worthy targets for those missiles. But, if necessary, the missiles will be
able to directly reach even such small targets as individual tanks, field fortifications, and weapons
positions on the battlefield. In coastal areas, the probable enemy’s vessels, boats, and even ships
will become the VTRK’s targets…
There is one more fundamental difference – the new tactical missiles, in contrast to the Soviet
missiles, will not be nuclear warhead platforms…
Precision-guided system will seriously assist ground units, Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy
thinks. “Divisions and brigades must have their own weapon systems, which are capable of
conducting precision-guided strikes in the depth of the entire tactical zone”, he pointed out.
“They don’t exist right now. The Iskander-M system – are of the operational level and are
not subordinate to the division commanders. The Smerch multiple rocket launcher system –
is long-range but it doesn’t have powerful precision-guided missiles. There are only guided
submunitions”. They will have to develop an entire line of munitions for the new missiles. They
will include high-explosive fragmentation, cluster, and penetrating munitions, and also munitions
that are designated for below-ground targets, for example, bunkers, the expert pointed out…

Reconnaissance-in-Force Russian Style
By Lester W. Grau

“Integrated fires, rapid detect-destroy systems and the controlled, merciless
onslaught of smaller robot tanks and assault vehicles may rip through robust
defenses to determine the true nature of the defense and prepare the main attack
to totally dismantle it. To the Russian way of thinking, the reconnaissance-inforce remains a viable method of tactical intelligence. Learning how to employ it
optimally is the current challenge.”
This paper was originally published in Armor journal’s Winter-Spring 2018 edition.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/230764
OE Watch | November 2018

5

EURASIA
The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile Defense
System Is Coming!
OE Watch Commentary: Discussion of the S-500 “Prometheus” air defense-antimissile (PVO-PRO) system began in 2004, with research
and development commencing in 2007. During this time, estimates began appearing when the S-500 would enter service and the timeline for the
S-500 has been pushed back several times from 2012 to 2014 to 2017, and then, as former Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov mentioned,
2020. In May 2018, during a meeting with the President of Finland, Russian President Vladimir Putin spoke about the need to complete
development and begin serial production of the S-500 as soon as possible. According to the accompanying excerpted article from Interfax-AVN,
the S-500 will be fielded in the next 12-18 months.
It is important to note that the S-500 is not a completely “new” system. Major Russian end-items (planes, tanks, ships, etc.) are almost always
built using the “evolutionary” approach, by evolving new systems from existing systems. In this case, the S-500 is a further development of the
S-400 “Triumf,” which was a further development of the S-300. The S-500 system itself consists of a launch vehicle, command post, acquisition
radar, engagement radar, and an antiballistic missile radar, that for the most part, are simply upgraded versions of the S-400 system. The S-500’s
capability to engage a range of targets, including cruise missiles, aircraft, MRBMs, and ICBMs, is due to the use of the aforementioned radars
(including a new antiballistic missile radar), and its ability to fire ten different missiles. The S-500 uses seven “old” missiles from the S-400
that are designed to intercept “air-breathing” targets. Each missile differs in range, intended interception altitude, speed, dynamic qualities,
and homing system in order to best deal with its appropriate class (high-speed, low-flying, maneuvering, etc.) of target. The S-500 will also use
three “new” missiles, specifically made for the S-500. The 40N6M has the longest range of the missiles, giving the S-500 an impressive reach
of 600 km. The 77N6-N and 77N6-N1 missiles are designed to destroy high-speed ballistic missiles, targets that can travel 7 km/s. The S-500s
radars are reported to be significantly upgraded versions of (roughly equivalent) equipment of the S-400 system. The S-500 acquisition radar
can reportedly detect targets up to 800 km, and the ballistic missile radar reportedly has a detection range of up to 2,000 km. The accompanying
excerpted article from Svobodnaya Pressa discusses the S-500s purported capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

New self-propelled launch vehicle 5P90S on BAZ-6909-022 chassis for S-400 system
(Demonstration of military vehicles at Bronnitsy test range, 2011).

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog,CC 4.0. (https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy), https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Demonstration-in-Bronnitsy/i-D6KNDGb/A.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2018

6

EURASIA
Continued: The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile
Defense System Is Coming!
“The uniqueness of the Prometheus lies in the fact that it equally effectively intercepts both aerodynamic
and ballistic targets. That is, the system is universal, classed as it is as both an antiaircraft and antimissile
defense asset.”
Source: “Russian military to get S-500 missiles in 12-18 months,” Interfax-AVN, 15 October 2018.
The delivery of the next-generation S-500 Prometheus surface-to-air missile (SAM) system to the Russian Armed Forces will begin in a year or
a year and a half, Ret. Lieut. Gen. Aitech Bizhev, a Russian expert on air defense, said.
“As far as I know, research and development work on S-500 is underway. The system should start entering service in the very near future, I
think in a year or a year and a half,” Bizhev, a former deputy commander of the Russian Air Force, said…
The S-500 is a long-range, high-altitude-interception universal SAM system with an increased missile defense potential.
The S-500 will become the basis of the national air and missile defense system, Andrei Cheburin, commander of a missile defense unit of the
1st Army of Air and Missile Defense of the Aerospace Forces, said in an interview with the Defense Ministry’s newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda in
January 2017.
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Русский «Прометей»: Перехват в космосе и у земли гарантирован ЗРС С-500 выходит на финишную
прямую (The Russian ‘Prometheus’: Interception Guaranteed in Space and on Earth; S-500 Surface-To-Air Missile System Approaches the
Finish Line),” Svobodnaya Pressa, 30 September 2018. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/211816/
…The S-500 provides guaranteed protection against air strikes on large areas where military and civilian facilities are located and acts as a
protective umbrella for large cities and individual regions. The radius of the Prometheus long-range missiles is 600 kilometers. The maximum
altitude at which it can intercept ballistic missiles and satellites in low orbits is more than 200 kilometers. Meanwhile, the upper strike limit is
kept secret.
The tasks assigned to the Prometheus, which belongs to the new generation of air defense-antimissile (PVO-PRO) systems can be described
very concisely: to shoot down with antimissiles everything that can fly. Or almost everything. All aerodynamic targets, including advanced
targets, are intercepted. That is, to “survive,” an attacking aircraft will not be helped by stealth, or the ability to maneuver with large
overloads, or hypersonic speed exceeding Mach 5.
There are limitations as regards the destruction of ballistic missiles. Tactical and operational-tactical missiles, as well as medium-range
missiles, are intercepted. Intercontinental ballistic missiles can be hit during the final section of the trajectory and, under certain conditions,
during the middle section. The S-500 works more easily with satellites and space platforms with strike weapons because their movement in orbit
is absolutely predictable and an antimissile launched toward a reference point is guaranteed to intersect with the space vehicle.
The uniqueness of the Prometheus lies in the fact that it equally effectively intercepts both aerodynamic and ballistic targets. That is, the
system is universal, classed as it is as both an antiaircraft and antimissile defense asset. Before it, there was no such universalism. So, for
example, the S-400 surface-air missile system predominantly has an air defense function and it is more difficult for it to deal with ballistic
targets. The Prometheus is equipped with 10 different missiles, each of which is designed to intercept a specific type of flying vehicle… Here
there is a clear division between the antiaircraft and antimissile parts. The S-500-is, in fact, two systems, each of which handles its own tasks.
One engages with aerodynamic targets (airplanes, helicopters, cruise missiles, drones), the second with ballistic targets. Accordingly, two
groups of equipment and missiles were created…
…The Prometheus is able to repel massive air attacks. A single S-500 battalion tracks up to 160 targets and simultaneously fires on 80.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | November 2018

7

EURASIA
More Muscle for the Northern Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: The Fleet Admiral of the
Soviet Union Gorshkov, the lead ship of Admiral Gorshkovclass frigates, is the new pride of the Northern Fleet as the
accompanying excerpt from Russian Ministry of Defense
demonstrates. It was featured in the 2017 and 2018 Navy
Day fleet parades in the Gulf of Finland and has undergone
intensive testing. It is now homeported in Snezhnogorst. The
Admiral Gorshkov-class frigates are replacing the Krivakclass frigates and are capable of long-range strikes, antisubmarine warfare and escort duty. The keel of the Admiral
Gorshkov was laid in 2006 and it missed targeted completion
dates in 2009, and then in 2011. It is finally here and more
frigates are to follow, with a priority for the Northern Fleet.
Besides the Kalibr missiles, it carries a 130mm gun, torpedo
tubes and even a helicopter. Its namesake, Fleet Admiral
Gorshkov (1910-1988), was the Soviet Navy commander
under Khrushchev and Brezhnev and is credited with
building a strong, modern, capable navy. The first Fleet
Admiral of the Soviet Union Gorshkov ship was a Kiev-class
aircraft carrier sold to the Indian Navy in 2004. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The frigate Fleet Admiral of the Soviet Union
Gorshkov is the first surface ship carrying
Kalibr cruise missiles in the Northern Fleet. ”

Source: “Экипаж фрегата «Адмирал Флота Советского Союза Горшков»
провёл учение по противовоздушной обороне в Баренцевом море (The
crew of the frigate “Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Gorshkov” held
an air defense exercise in the Barents Sea),” Ministry of Defense of the Russian
Federation, 2 October 2018. https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.
htm?id=12197934@egNews
…The ship’s crew carried out air defense training using on-board radiotechnical armament and a surface-to-air missile system. The small ASW ship
Snezhnogorsk, which launched Saman target missiles, and also aircraft of the
Northern fleet’s air force and air defense large strategic formation supported
the mission.
During the exercise, sailors of the Northern Fleet carried out the detection
and tracking of small-scale aerial targets and also rehearsed the … use of the
surface-to-air missile system. After completion of the training in the Barents
Sea, the frigate will return to the Northern Fleet’s main base at Severomorsk.
The frigate Fleet Admiral of the Soviet Union Gorshkov arrived in the
Northern Fleet from Saint Petersburg on 8 September. It is part of the missile
ship division -- the Russian Navy’s largest surface vessel group -- which also
includes the heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser Fleet Admiral of the Soviet Union
Kuznetsov and the heavy atomic missile cruiser Peter the Great.
The frigate Fleet Admiral of the Soviet Union Gorshkov is the first surface
ship carrying Kalibr cruise missiles in the Northern Fleet. It has completed a
number of interfleet cruises from the Baltic Sea to the Barents Sea and White
Sea for tests of surface-to-air, missile-artillery, and mine-torpedo armaments
in the Northern Fleet’s maritime training grounds. In the entire period of state
tests, the Project 22350 lead ship has covered over 80,000 miles and completed
62 combat training exercises, including 16 firings of the main missile system….

Admiral Gorshkov Russian frigate (2018).

Source: Mil.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Admiral_Gorshkov_frigate_03.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

8

EURASIA
Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from the 8 October 2018 edition of Izvestiya describes how Russia is
integrating naval fires to support ground operations. Russia is integrating Project 21630 Buyan small artillery ships (MAKs) and Project 21631
Buyan-M small guided-missile ships (MRKs) into the Strelets reconnaissance, command and control, and communications system (KRUS)
[комплекса разведки, управления и связи (КРУС)]. The Strelets system allows for the integration of fires throughout the ground, air, and
sea domains. If these ships are successfully integrated into the Strelets KRUS, these naval platforms will provide a significant enhancement of
capabilities to ground component commanders (ground forces, airborne, naval infantry), when available. The Buyan MAK is equipped with a
A-190 100mm artillery system and a naval variant of the Grad-M 122mm MLRS. Perhaps the most important addition is the Buyan-M MRK,
which carries up to eight Kalibr or Onyx missiles.
Although Russia is reportedly making great efforts to develop littoral systems and integrate naval systems into ground operations, thereby
increasing “Brown-Water” capabilities, there are some opportunity costs. According to the 12 September 2018 edition of Izvestiya, Russia’s
emphasis on ground support and smaller platforms is inhibiting the Russian Navy’s “Blue-Water” ambitions. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“Inclusion of the Buyan at part of RUK and ROK will increase the efficiency of employment of the fleet for
support of ground troops in littoral theaters and, specifically, at amphibious assault landings.”

Serpukhov corvette Project 21631 Buyan-M.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/NAVY-Day-2018-Saint-Petersburg/i-8zQSJn8, CC 4.0.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2018

9

EURASIA
Continued: Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm,
“Ракетные «малыши» научились обеспечивать
поддержку Сухопутным войскам (Little Missile
Ships to Provide Support for the Ground Forces),”
Izvestiya, 8 October 2018. https://iz.ru/739077/nikolaisurkov-aleksei-ramm/raketnye-malyshi-nauchilisobespechivat-podderzhku-sukhoputnym-voiskam
Project 21630 Buyan small artillery ships (MAK) and
Project 21631 Buyan-M small guided-missile ships
(MRK) have been included in the integrated system of
command and control. They will now at an onshore
request engage the adversary with fire of artillery guns
and missiles. Thanks to the latest modifications, these
ships will be able in real time to obtain information
from the Ground Troops and drones and strike then
and there. This will make these assault platforms
capable of operating in a close coupling with ground
troops.
Izvestiya was told in the Navy Main Command that
the Project 21630 MAK and Project 21631 MRK will
be included in so-called reconnaissance-strike and
reconnaissance-fire loops (RUK and ROK). This
decision was made at the outcome of five-day exercises
of the Caspian Flotilla in April. The ships practiced
fire from artillery guns at ground targets and also
struck with Kalibr and Oniks missiles here.
These ships will as part of RUK and ROK obtain
information on targets in real time from drones and
from gunners at the forward edge. The strikes will
be delivered at an onshore request – the information
is transmitted via the reconnaissance, command and
control, and communications system (KRUS). It is
sufficient for the warrior to note the target on a special
tablet to summon artillery fire or a missile strike…
Inclusion of the Buyan at part of RUK and ROK
will increase the efficiency of employment of the
fleet for support of ground troops in littoral theaters
and, specifically, at amphibious assault landings,
independent naval expert Aleksandr Mozgovoy
believes.
“Extensive employment of the fleet for support of
the Ground Troops is characteristic of the Caspian
since there has been and is now no worthwhile naval
adversary there,” the expert explained. “The Buyan
was initially built as a gunboat. It was built for shore
operations. Modern missile arms have given the
gunboat a ‘long arm’. The Buyan-M corvettes may
through the employment of Kalibrs strike at a large
part of the Near East, which they demonstrated during
the strikes against the terrorists in Syria…

Source: Ilya Kramnik, “Поближе к берегу: как изменится состав ВМФ России
(Closer to Shore: How the Composition of the Russian Navy Will Change),”
Izvestiya, 12 September 2018. https://iz.ru/787950/ilia-kramnik/poblizhe-k-beregukak-izmenitsia-sostav-vmf-rossii
The parameters of the new state armaments program, including the section on the
Navy, are as yet unclear but current trends in military shipbuilding allow us to draw
certain conclusions. The proportion of deep-sea and oceangoing surface ships in
the Russian Navy could be greatly reduced in the next 10 years…
A Politically and Economically Motivated Trifle
The sharp shift in military shipbuilding priorities began after the events of 2014
and was prompted by both political and economic considerations. The political
rupture with Ukraine and end of the long-established pooling of shipbuilding
resources badly dislocated the construction schedules for the Project 11356 and
Project 22350 frigates and also made it harder to maintain a number of Soviet-era
ships. The need to reduce defense spending and issues bringing several of the latest
systems to maturity also had an adverse impact on the rate of implementing new
projects.
A solution was found in building more of the simpler and cheaper vessels, such as
for example the Project 22160 patrol ships (corvettes) and the Project 21631 and
22800 small missile ships…
The need to build two different types of small missile ship is also due to a desire
to remedy the main defects of Project 21631, which stands out for its poor seagoing
performance and may be of limited use even in the Black and Mediterranean
Seas…Thus, the group of surface ships in the main classes intended for operations
in coastal and nearby seas currently comprises 73 according to the available
information, and could remain as many and, possibly, increase to 80 or more by the
late 2020s….
High-Ranking Problems
Renewal of the group of deep-sea and oceangoing ships is the main problem facing
the Russian Navy today. Iz.ru has already looked at the prospects for building
aircraft-carrying ships and renewing the fleet’s amphibious assault forces, but
the state of affairs with the group of nonaircraft-carrying category 1 and 2 ships,
which should ensure that the Navy can perform most of its duties, is now critical.
Repeated postponements of the construction of new destroyers and major changes
to the frigate building program risk undermining the fleet’s ability to accomplish its
tasks away from our shores…
The creeping reduction of the group of major surface ships is made more
dangerous by the quite lengthy time needed to build them. On top of that, the
already small projected number of these ships for 2028 could shrink further if
construction of the new-generation destroyers is again postponed or, equally, if the
upgrade program for the fleet’s existing frigates is cut back.
This situation increases both the workload for the group of coastal waters ships
and the importance of the frigate construction program. The most realistic solution
seems to be to continue building the relatively inexpensive Project 20380 ships,
which two yards can do at present, and building as many as possible Project
22350M frigates. If properly financed, it will be possible to build 12-14 multirole
missile ships in the coming 10 years and compensate for the retirement of the Sovietera ships.

OE Watch | November 2018

10

EURASIA
Why Russians Fight in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin recently
celebrated its three-year anniversary of combat operations
in Syria. Initially, Russia’s armed involvement was
framed as helping to crush international terrorism within
Syria, but the Kremlin’s motivation may have recently
shifted since the bulk of the terrorist forces have been
eliminated. In the accompanying excerpt from the proKremlin weekly, Military-Industrial Kurier, General
Andrei Kartapolov, Chief of the Main Military-Political
Directorate of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation
(GVPU), and who once commanded Russian forces in
Syria, describes the contours of a new rationale.
General Kartapolov begins by explaining the main
goal of the GVPU “is to form a warrior-statist, a reliable
and devoted defender of the Fatherland, a bearer of the
traditional spiritual and moral values of Russian society:
spirituality and patriotism.” He goes on to compare
Russia’s current involvement in Syria with that of the
Crimean War of the 1850s, suggesting that both conflicts
represent an “act of war for the Manger of the Lord.” To
illustrate this concept, Kartapolov recounts the example of
“Major Roman Filippov,” who instead of being captured
by militant forces in Syria after his plane was shot down
in February 2018, chose sacrifice, by blowing himself
up, taking with him a number of terrorists. Kartapolov
rhetorically asks of this feat, “is this not an example of
the spirit of the Russian army, the readiness for heroism
and self-sacrifice for the sake of accomplishing a combat
mission?”
General Kartapolov also describes the new military
cathedral being built near Patriot Park outside of Moscow
(For additional details on this new cathedral, see:
“Constructing Military Ideology...and a Military Church,”
OE Watch, October 2018), pointing out that each of the
“main branches of the armed forces [will have] their
spiritual patron.” He asserts that this new church will
“become the center of spiritual education of servicemen
and historical enlightenment,” and a place to honor those
“Russian leaders, our modern martyrs, and for those who
have laid their heads on the biblical Syrian land.” Finally,
Kartapolov claims that “the revival of the Russian state,
as we see, continues through the revival of the Orthodox
faith. Therefore, the formation of a modern Russian
warrior cannot take place without high spirituality.”
As Russian military operations in Syria continue to
evolve, not only do the objectives change, but also the
justification for a continued Russian presence. This article
suggests that the Kremlin leadership might be looking to
the past for an appropriate ideology to support these new
objectives. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“And what is happening now in Syria, can be considered
another act of war for the Manger of the Lord.”
Source: Andrei Kartapolov and Oleg Falichev, “Право первым подняться
в атаку (The right to be the first to attack),” Military-Industrial Kurier, 11
September 2018. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/44913
On July 30, the Presidential Decree established the Main Military-Political
Directorate of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (GVPU)…. How the
new structure will work, the Deputy Minister of Defense - the head of the Main
Military-Political Department, Andrei Kartapolov, told the Military Industrial
Courier about this.
…The main goal of the created military and political bodies is to form a
warrior-statist, a reliable and devoted defender of the Fatherland, a bearer
of the traditional spiritual and moral values of Russian society: spirituality
and patriotism. And the main tasks will be the formation of an ideologically
convinced, strong spirit of the individual, close-knit military collectives, capable
of performing tasks for the purpose in any situation, the formation of patriotic
consciousness of servicemen and civilian personnel of the Armed Forces of the
Russian Federation, as well as military patriotic work with all citizens of Russia,
first of all youth….
- What role in this process is assigned to the military clergy and Orthodoxy?
Is this connected with the recent opening of the main military church?
- The Minister of Defense stated that the main temple of the Armed Forces will
be created in honor of the Resurrection of Christ. This is an absolutely unique
structure in terms of size, capacity and applied construction technologies. There
are five main chapels. The first is connected with the Resurrection of Christ itself.
The remaining four are devoted to the types of the Armed Forces and the main
branches of the armed forces, their spiritual patrons….
But we want the canonical things to be reflected in this temple, so that it
becomes the center of spiritual education of servicemen, historical enlightenment.
Therefore, there is a place for Russian commanders, for our modern martyrs,
and for those who have laid their heads on the biblical Syrian land. Recall, the
first Crimean War was also called the war for the Manger of the Lord, because
the British, the French, the Turks decided to cut off access to the Mediterranean
and Jerusalem. Every soldier on the Malakhov Hill knew clearly that he was also
fighting for Bethlehem. And what is happening now in Syria, can be considered
another act of war for the Manger of the Lord.
At the main temple of the Armed Forces there will be a whole complex of
training military clergy. Historically, the role of the clergy has always been very
high in the Russian army, and we must return it. The spirit of the soldier is also
a weapon. We saw this on the example of our guys who are fighting in Syria.
Take Major Roman Filippov. Is this not an example of the spirit of the Russian
army, the readiness for heroism and self-sacrifice for the sake of accomplishing
a combat mission? This has always been one of the distinguishing features…
The temple will be an example of the unity of all our people around the idea of
patriotism, love and devotion to our Motherland, Orthodoxy.
I repeat: the spiritual component is based on the faith of man. Attempts by our
predecessors to replace the faith in God by believing in the Communist Party
and its ideals, alas, were not crowned with success. The revival of the Russian
state, as we see, continues through the revival of the Orthodox faith. Therefore,
the formation of a modern Russian warrior cannot take place without high
spirituality….

OE Watch | November 2018

11

EURASIA
Increased Economic Strains for Russian Military Personnel
OE Watch Commentary: In the Kremlin’s calculus,
where the West poses an existential threat, military
readiness remains a top priority--even under economic
constraints. However, as the author of the accompanying
excerpt from the relatively centrist daily, Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, points out, while military spending remains
robust, those serving in uniform are increasingly finding
it difficult to make ends meet.
The author begins by asserting that in 2019, “28.7
percent of budget expenditure in the country (4.9 percent
of GDP)” will go toward “national defense, security,
and law-enforcement activity.” Still, as the title of the
article suggests, the lion’s share of these hefty defense
expenditures will go toward new equipment and
current operations and not toward personnel expenses.
Indeed, the projected pay raise in 2019 “will merely
be index-linked to inflation.” The article goes on to
cite an estimate from the Duma Defense Committee,
which claims that because of inflation, from 2012 to
2017, military “pay lost almost half of its value.” These
strains on military pay are causing a higher “turnover in
personnel -- particularly contract servicemen.”
The article points out military pay is not the only
personnel benefit affected by economic strains. It quotes
a military expert who points out that the program
which allows “officers and noncommissioned officers
to acquire apartments is annually lagging behind the
growth in market prices, which reduces the quality of
housing for those in uniform.” This expert also asserts
that “military clinics are short of many medicines,” and
that “opportunities for service personnel and military
pensioners to be treated at sanitariums and military
hospitals have been significantly reduced.” The article
concludes by speculating that “the military has drawn
up proposals in a draft law on increasing the term of
service required for service personnel to gain their
pension from 20 to 25 years,” which “could have a
negative impact on the prestige of military service in
Russia.”
Over the past decade the Kremlin has done much
to restore the status and prestige of those serving
within the military. It appears that strained economic
conditions, however, combined with and ever-increasing
operational tempo and an emphasis on new equipment
over personnel costs, could be weakening the appeal of
military service. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“It is ever since the growth in military pay was frozen that
the Army has started experiencing turnover in personnel -particularly contract servicemen.”
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “В бюджете-2019 опять обделили служивых и
военных пенсионеров: У государства есть средства на Сирию и новое
оружие, но нет денег для людей в погонах (2019 Budget Again Short-Changes
Service Personnel and Military Pensioners: State Has Funds for Syria and New
Weapons, But No Money for Those in Uniform),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 2
October 2018. http://www.ng.ru/economics/2018-10-02/2_7323_pensii.html
Next year spending on national defense, security, and law-enforcement activity
in Russia will come to R5.15 trillion -- or 28.7 percent of budget expenditure
in the country (4.9 percent of GDP). As is the case this year, these will be the
biggest items of state expenditure -- bigger than the line-items “Social Policy”
(27.1 percent of all expenditure) and “National Economy” (14.7 percent). But the
growth in service personnel’s pay and military pensions in 2019 is anticipated to
be far more modest -- at 4.3 percent. In other words, service personnel’s pay and
pensions will merely be index-linked to inflation….
…According to the estimates of the Duma Defense Committee, during this
period [service] pay lost almost half of its value, since, “according to figures
from the Federal Service for State Statistics, overall inflation in the period
between 2012 and 2017 was around 46 percent, while the cost of a notional
(minimal) selection of foodstuffs rose by virtually 60 percent.” …Yet the material
incentives for service personnel remain very modest. It is ever since the growth
in military pay was frozen that the Army has started experiencing turnover in
personnel -- particularly contract servicemen…
…Nezavisimaya Gazeta was told by Captain First Class Oleg Shvedkov,
chairman of the All-Russia Service Personnel Trade Union Central Committee,
that “ feelings of disillusion prompted by the government’s reluctance to tackle
the issues of improving the level of social protection for those in uniform are
taking shape in the military sphere.” He notes the rise in negative sentiment
among the military electorate. “The vote against the party of power in the last
regional elections at certain military garrisons demonstrated this clearly,” the
human rights campaigner believes.
In Shvedkov’s opinion, apart from cutting material incentives, “the state has
lost many other levers that have a substantial impact on the prestige of military
service, including on the quality of service activity.” In particular, he believes
that “the potential of the mortgage and saving system to allow officers and
noncommissioned officers to acquire apartments is annually lagging behind
the growth in market prices, which reduces the quality of housing for those
in uniform.” The potential of military medicine as a whole is not improving.
“Military clinics are short of many medicines,” Shvedkov says…. “Because of the
Health Ministry’s imposition of so-called medical standards, the opportunities
for service personnel and military pensioners to be treated at sanitariums and
military hospitals have been significantly reduced.”
…Sources at the Defense Ministry said that the military department has drawn
up proposals in a draft law on increasing the term of service required for service
personnel to gain their pension from 20 to 25 years. This too could have a
negative impact on the prestige of military service in Russia.

OE Watch | November 2018

12

EURASIA
Military Benefits of the Caspian Sea Convention for
Russia’s Power Projection Capabilities
by Nurlan Aliyev
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 135, dated 26 September 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/military-benefits-of-the-caspian-sea-convention-for-russias-power-projection-capabilities/

OE Watch Commentary: In late August 2018, Russia’s Caspian Flotilla, in conjunction with aviation and coastal air-defense groups, carried
out special exercises in the Caspian Sea to test a new tactical formation for detecting and neutralizing low-flying missiles or aircraft. This exercise
occurred only days after the heads of the five Caspian littoral states met and signed a Convention on the Legal Status of the Caspian Sea. Among
other key points found in the Convention, the document approved Moscow’s aim of legally closing the sea to military forces of any non-littoral
states.
Despite Moscow’s habitually peaceful statements and its insistence on keeping the Caspian a conflict-free basin, over the past few years Russia
has been conspicuously increasing its military presence there. Moscow can and has used the Caspian Flotilla in its military operation in the
Middle East and to further flex its muscles in the Sea of Azov (connected to the Caspian via an internal canal across southwestern Russia). In
2018, Marine Corps units of the Caspian flotilla received new BTR-82A armored personnel carriers. Moreover, the defense ministry plans to
complete the construction of a new home naval base for the Caspian Flotilla at the port in Kaspiisk (Republic of Dagestan) by 2020. The new base
will be already able to receive the first warships by the end of 2018.
On the eve of the fifth Caspian summit, an air task force from Russia’s Southern Military District (SMD) conducted joint exercises with units
of the Caspian Flotilla. These forces trained how to destroy hypothetical enemy vessels. And several days after the signing of the Caspian Sea
Convention, Russia’s Caspian Flotilla exercised new tactics involving special formations of reconnaissance ships and aircraft, fighter jets, and
coastal air-defense systems. According to the head of the SMD press office, this approach allowed Russian military units to significantly increase
the range of detection of low-flying targets, including cruise missiles.
Moreover, the tactical method also opened up new possibilities for the use of Podsolnukh-E surface-to-surface radar stations and Buk-M3 (SA17 Grizzly) surface-to-air missile systems at sea. According to the SMD, the joint training of the air forces of the Black Sea Fleet and the Caspian
Flotilla are currently being worked out on a systematic basis. Naval units of the Black Sea Fleet and the Caspian Flotilla, the Air Force, and the
Air and Missile Defense Forces of the SMD have practiced jointly establishing defensive lines
along the Black Sea and the Caspian coasts against cruise missiles. Since last April, MiG-31
Source: “Авиация ЮВО уничтожила в
fighter jets armed with Kinzhal hypersonic rocket systems have been patrolling in the Caspian
Каспийском море корабли условного
Sea region. The defense ministry has said that the patrols are carried out within the framework
противника (Aviation of the Southern
of strategic deterrence.
Military District destroyed ships of
Article 3, paragraphs 6 and 7 of the recently signed Convention on the Legal Status of
the conditional enemy in the Caspian
the Caspian Sea explicitly call for the “non-presence in the Caspian Sea of armed forces not
Sea),” Izvestiya, 25 July 2018. https://
belonging to the parties” and forbid the signatories from allowing their territory to be used by
iz.ru/770487/2018-07-25/aviatciia-iuvo“other States to commit aggression and undertake other military actions against any party”.
unichtozhila-v-kaspiiskom-more-korabliRussian President Vladimir Putin appraised the Convention as a positive example of successful uslovnogo-protivnika
cooperation under difficult global conditions.
…According the scenario, UAVs found a group
The Convention not only legalizes Russia’s military hegemony over the Caspian but also
of enemy ships in the waters of the Caspian
prevents any outside powers from introducing a military presence in the region. This situation
Sea, the coordinates of which were relayed to a
enables Moscow to continue to use the Caspian basin as a military testing ground as well
joint control center. “The enemy was destroyed
as a base from which to conduct armed operations. As such, Russian forces stationed in the
by an aviation group of Su-30SM fighters,
Caspian can not only provide a conventional (defensive) deterrent but also be employed in
Su-24 and Su-34 bombers in addition to Su-25
offensive outward operations—the so-called “bastion” strategy, illustrated several times when
aircraft…”…
Caspian Flotilla vessels launched cruise missile strikes on targets in Syria. End OE Watch
Commentary (Aliyev)

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | November 2018

13

EURASIA
The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border
OE Watch Commentary: One of the many points of contention
between the governments of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan over the
years has been the sections of the Tajik-Uzbek border that former
President Islam Karimov ordered mined following the incursions
carried out by the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. There have
been a number of civilians from Tajikistan injured and killed
over the years along these sections of the border, though as the
accompanying excerpted article reports, the Tajik and Uzbek
governments recently started a joint effort to remove the mines.
The article comes from Anhor, a Russian-language website with
news on Uzbekistan, and it notes how “the joint group became
familiar with the mined areas of the border from a map provided
by Tashkent,” but also that the sections of the border that “have
been mined remains classified.” The effort to remove the mines
will reportedly be complete by the end of 2019. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

Source: “Узбекистан приступил к разминированию границы с
Таджикистаном (Uzbekistan has started demining the border with
Tajikistan),” Anhor, 9 October 2018. https://anhor.uz/news/uzbekistannachal-razminirovaty-svoi-granici
Demining is currently underway on the Uzbek-Tajik border around the
cities of Penjikent and Samarkand. Tajik specialists are assisting Uzbek
sappers, according to the press center of the border guards of the State
Committee for National Security of Tajikistan…
Before the start of the demining, the joint group became familiar
with the mined areas of the border from a map provided by Tashkent.
Meanwhile, information on what sections of the Uzbek-Tajik border
have been mined remains classified…Uzbekistan mined the mountainous
sections of the border with Tajikistan in the 90s…Tashkent explained the
action by saying it wanted to prevent members of the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan from entering its territory…

“Before the start of the demining, the joint group became familiar with the mined areas of the border
from a map provided by Tashkent.”

View of the Anzob Pass across the Hissar Range with the Zarafshan Range in the background (2004).

Source: By Sven Dirks, Wien [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anzob_mountains.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

14

EURASIA
Gauging Armenian and Azerbaijani Military Exercises
OE Watch Commentary: The armed forces of Armenia and
Azerbaijan have conducted a number of exercises over the years which
featured a scenario of a resumption of conflict against each other. The
accompanying excerpted article reports on another iteration of exercises
for both militaries, but statements from Armenian and Azerbaijani
officials noted the difference from past exercises. The article from
Kavkazskiy Uzel, a Russian-language website focusing on news from the
Caucasus, notes how both governments carried out “military exercises
which simulate an abrupt escalation of military conflict in the region.”
The scenario of Armenia’s exercise included a goal of Armenian forces
retaking “the conditionally lost territory,” which most likely references
the territory Azerbaijani forces took during the April 2016 conflict. The
Armenian government that took power earlier this year also noted that
the exercise is “based on the worst-case scenario of developments.”
Azerbaijan’s Ministry of Defense reported that its exercise, which
took place just days after Armenia’s, involved the “penetration of
tanks into the enemy’s multi-layer defence and the destruction of
Armenia’s military groups and advance units on the territory of Nagorny
Karabakh.” The ministry also reported how “the skills of personnel will
be tested in using military weapons and equipment, which has been
in service with the Azerbaijani army over the past year.” Azerbaijan
acquired several new types of weapons and equipment since April 2016,
including new multiple launch rocket systems from Belarus earlier
this year. There has been increased attention on the conflict since the
change in the Armenian government earlier this year and while it did not
result in the resumption of war, it appears both sides are looking at and
preparing for various scenarios. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Territorial changes after 2016 Armenian-Azerbaijani clashes.

Source: By Interfase [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Territorial_changes_after_2016_Armenian-Azerbaijani_clashes.jpg.

“In the scenario of the ‘Shant-2018’ exercise, which took place 11-13 September, Armenia retook the
conditionally lost territory.”
Source: Faik Medjid, “Учения в Армении и Азербайджане смоделировали возобновление войны (Exercises in Armenia and Azerbaijan
modeled the resumption of war),” Kavkazskiy Uzel, 14 September 2018. http://www.kavkaz-uzel.eu/articles/325370/
Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh have carried out, and Azerbaijan has announced (intention to carry out), military exercises which simulate
an abrupt escalation of military conflict in the region…
In the scenario of the “Shant-2018” exercise, which took place 11-13 September, Armenia retook the conditionally lost territory, said Artak
Davtyan, the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces…
According to Davtyan, all local self-governing bodies were prepared for a scenario to carry out mobilization in the case of martial law. At
the same time, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan explained that the drills were based on the worst-case scenario of developments…
On 13 September, with the framework of the Shant-2018 command and staff exercise, the Armenian National Assembly modeled a situation of
taking the decision of declaring war…
In turn, the Azerbaijani Ministry of Defense reported information on a large-scale operational-tactical exercise to take place on 17-22
September, which will include more than 20 thousand personnel…
“The penetration of tanks into the enemy’s multi-layer defence and the destruction of Armenia’s military groups and advance units on
the territory of Nagorny Karabakh are going to be worked out during the exercise, in addition to the tasks of liberating occupied territory
through the destruction of military and strategic facilities,” stated the report from Azerbaijan’s Ministry of Defense…They also noted that the
skills of personnel will be tested in using military weapons and equipment, which has been in service with the Azerbaijani army over the past
year.

OE Watch | November 2018

15

EURASIA
Moscow Pushes Own Approaches to Cyber Security
on Rest of CSTO
by Sergey Sukhankin
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 135, dated 26 September 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/moscow-pushes-own-approaches-to-cyber-security-on-rest-of-csto/

OE Watch Commentary: Russian military strategists who have analyzed regional military conflicts between 1999 and 2014 conclude that
even a less-developed party may be able to at least partly degrade the technological advantage of a stronger adversary if the weaker power can
attain information superiority over its opponent. Indeed, one of the key lessons Russia has drawn from its participation in the Syrian civil war is
that defeating the enemy on the information battlefield is an integral part of a successful asymmetric counter-actions strategy. The adoption of
the new Information Security Doctrine (2016) illustrates Russia’s growing determination to ensure its control over the entire information space of
the Moscow-led Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), and arguably beyond. On June 11, during the foreign ministerial meeting of the
CSTO in Almaty, the participants proclaimed that the regional alliance’s top priority for the next seven years would be the consolidation of efforts/
actions in the domain of information and cyber security.
In a May 2017 interview with the Russian military publication Krasnaya Zvezda, Ara Badalian, the deputy director of the General Secretariat
of the CSTO, argued that thanks to key steps taken in 2006–2017, the organization has managed to form “a multi-layered reaction system in the
domain of information security”. During the first stage of the above-mentioned interim (2006–2009), emphasis was placed on elaborating joint
initiatives in the field of targeting “international cyber crimes.” This included organizing annual multinational information/cyber trainings (that
brought together specialists in information/cyber security, internal affairs, anti-drug trafficking, financial monitoring and migration) under the
code name PROKSI (protivodeystviye kriminalu w sfere informatsii—“countering crime in the information sphere”).
During the second stage (2010–2017), the parties further expanded their level of cooperation, culminating in the decision to create an
Emergency Crisis Center (as an integral organ within the CSTO) specifically tasked with enabling further cyber/information policy consolidation,
regular information exchange, and establishing a collective security architecture within this field. Despite continuing emphasis on equality in
partnership, Russia’s full control over the CSTO—and now over the adoption of new cyber and information security guidelines within this bloc—
is unmistakable. Namely, the theoretical and practical training of specialists (on the basis of the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute and other
Russia-based institutions), as well as the preparation of all CSTO member state military cadres in the area of information/cyber security (at the
Krasnodar Higher Military School) remain firmly in Moscow’s hands.
Another important trend should not be overlooked: Russia’s ambitions clearly extend beyond the CSTO. On June 19, the Russian city of KhantyMansiysk hosted the Second International Conference on Information Security (Infoforum-Yugra), organized with the support of the Russian
parliament, Russian Security Council, the Federal Security Service (FSB), the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (MFA). The Infoforum-Yugra was attended by members of the CSTO, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), as well as the
BRICS group (which brings together major developing powers Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa). During the event, it was proposed
to create a “center for monitoring of and reaction to information and cyber threats” that would be located in Russia. This center would, apparently,
be jointly used by members of the CSTO and its “partners, including BRICS and the SCO”.
In addition to growing ambitions, Russia continues to develop new capabilities in information/cyber security. Notably, Moscow frequently
touts the National Defense Management Center (NTsUO). Namely, senior Russian military and civilian experts continually claim the Center’s
supercomputer (based on the Astra Linux operating system, specifically designed to meet the needs of the Russian military, other armed forces
and intelligence agencies) is said to be superior to all existing Western analogues.
Reportedly, the NTsUO’s supercomputer features 236 petabits of storage capacity (versus
Source: “ОДКБ возводит щит
12 petabits in the most advanced foreign analogues) and computing speeds of 16 petaflops
кибербезопасности (The CSTO is creating
(compared to 5 petaflops of the top rivals). The velocity of information processing is said
a shield cybersecurity),” Liter, 13 June 2018.
to equal 50 Lenin Libraries per second, allowing constant monitoring of such complex
https://liter.kz/ru/articles/show/47352-odkb_
developments as troop relocations or the tracing of information flows in mass media and online vozvodit_shit_kiberbezopasnosti
social networks. According to Russian sources, the supercomputer’s capabilities have already
…The interaction of member states in this
been tested on several occasions, including during the military strategic exercise Vostok
field has become noticeably active in recent
2014 and as part of regular monitoring of developments in Syria. Additionally, the machine
years. In turn, the combined experience and
successfully withstood multiple cyberattacks, including the WannaCry ransomware attack.
the new standing challenges are reflected in the
The intensification of Russian activities in the domain of information/cyber security
agreement on cooperation of CSTO member
underscore three main aspects. First, Russia’s emphasis on non-military forms of confrontation
states in the field of information security signed
can be expected to progressively increase, which is likely to be put in practice within the scope
last year in Minsk…The document calls for
of future regional conflicts. Second, Russia will likely continue its efforts to consolidate control
“holding joint events, especially those of a
over the information/cyber space of its partners inside the CSTO, and probably other actors
practical character, aimed at strengthening
dependent on Moscow (such as Syria, or Nicaragua). Third, Moscow will almost certainly
information security and combating illegal
employ its advancements in the realm of information/cyber capabilities as a means to increase
activities in the information space of CSTO
its role in non-Western blocs in order to break its international isolation. End OE Watch
member states…
Commentary (Sukhankin)

OE Watch | November 2018

16

EURASIA
Russian De-dollarization: Economic Counter-Attack?
OE Watch Commentary: While assuring its domestic
audience that Western sanctions work to strengthen the
Russian economy, the Kremlin leadership continues to search
for strategies to decrease the pressure stemming from these
economic restrictions. They maintain that the West (and the US
in particular) uses its economic clout to unfairly punish those
countries which do not submit to its rules. To circumvent and
counterattack Western economic sanctions, the Kremlin has
been at the forefront in attempts to weaken what they consider
America’s most potent instrument: unseating the dollar as
the global reserve currency. The first accompanying excerpt
from the centrist daily, Nezavisimaya Gazeta, describes recent
Kremlin moves to de-dollarize the Russian economy.
The excerpt begins by explaining that the primary motive for
ridding the Russian economy of dollars stems from “the increase
in the risks of sanction bans on settlements in US dollars for
Russian companies and banks.” The article asserts that “Russia
has also officially deemed the dollar to be a toxic tool,” and
because of this, “the Russian Federation has sharply reduced
investments in the American economy for a start, reducing the
amount invested in US bonds from 96 billion dollars in April
to 15 billion dollars.” The article cites Russia’s “Economic
Development Minister Maksim Oreshkin” who recently stated
that “in Russia, a very big trend toward the de-dollarization
of the economy is underway.” Oreshkin went on to assert that
“the trend toward an increase in the role of the ruble must be
supported, including by moving away from foreign currency
loans.”
The second excerpt, also from Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
describes how plans to de-dollarize the Russian economy are
affecting ordinary Russians. The article quotes a top Russian
banker who posits that “Russians with dollar bank accounts may
discover that they will manage to withdraw the money only in
other currencies if the new sanctions proposed by American
legislators come into force.” Another expert observes that
“sanctions, the outflow of foreign investments, the raising of the
Central Bank interest rate, and talk of de-dollarization all came
at the same time -- and all this puts pressure on depositors and
fills them with dread. People simply do not know what to do
with this information, and they reach the simple conclusion that
they must take what is theirs to avoid losing it.”
Over the past four years, Kremlin officials have assured the
Russian people that even in the face of Western sanctions, their
more aggressive foreign policy is not only justified, but that it
will ultimately lead to a stronger country. A key aspect of this
policy is the claim that the Russian economy is also capable of
weathering this storm. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The sanctions, the outflow of foreign investments,
the raising of the Central Bank interest rate, and talk of
dedollarization all came at the same time -- and all this
puts pressure on depositors and fills them with dread.”
Source: Anatoliy Komrakov, “Враги доллара наращивают словесные
интервенции (Enemies of the Dollar Are Increasing Their Verbal
Interventions),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 27 September 2018. http://www.
ng.ru/economics/2018-09-27/1_4_7320_dollar.html
It is time for the Russian media to publish news on de-dollarization.
Recent events in this process include the export of Russian grain for rubles
and the delivery of euros to the Russian Federation instead of dollars.
Analysts link these attempts at de-dollarization to the increase in the risks
of sanction bans on settlements in US dollars for Russian companies and
banks….
…Russia has also officially deemed the dollar to be a toxic tool. The
dollar is becoming a risky tool in international settlements, our officials
have stated, that is why the Russian Federation has sharply reduced
investments in the American economy for a start, reducing the amount
invested in US bonds from 96 billion dollars in April to 15 billion
dollars….
In Russia, a very big trend toward the de-dollarization of the economy is
underway, Economic Development Minister Maksim Oreshkin stated in
August. He said the trend toward an increase in the role of the ruble must
be supported, including by moving away from foreign currency loans….
Source: Anastasiy Bashkatova, “Население побежало за деньгами:
Финансовый сектор отпугнул как простых граждан, так и инвесторов
(Population Runs for Its Money: Financial Sector Frightens Off Both
Ordinary Citizens and Investors),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 9 October 2018.
http://www.ng.ru/economics/2018-10-09/4_7328_bank.html
The outflow of the population’s deposits is accelerating in the country, it
emerges from Central Bank data. And it is not only currency investors but
also ruble investors who are “fleeing.”
…By “the media effect of the discussion of the currency exchange rate”
Elvira Nabiullina’s department meant, to all appearances, citizens’
reaction to the statements by Vneshtorgbank head Andrey Kostin. In
early September, citing an interview with Kostin, Bloomberg reported:
“Russians with dollar bank accounts may discover that they will manage
to withdraw the money only in other currencies if the new sanctions
proposed by American legislators come into force.” “I am confident
that all clients of all banks should get their money back, that is the main
approach. By what means and in what currency is another matter,” the
banker explained….
“The sanctions, the outflow of foreign investments, the raising of the
Central Bank interest rate, and talk of dedollarization all came at the
same time -- and all this puts pressure on depositors and fills them with
dread. People simply do not know what to do with this information, and
they reach the simple conclusion that they must take what is theirs to avoid
losing it,” Yekaterina Tumanova, leader of the FinIst company’s analysis
department, adds….

OE Watch | November 2018

17

EURASIA
Polish Perspective on Russian Disinformation Campaigns
OE Watch Commentary: Poland and
Russia share a long and complicated history
that has only become more strained in
recent years by Poland’s increased ties to
the West and the Kremlin’s determination
to weaken these bonds. Because of Poland’s
Western ties, is has become a key target for
Russian influence operations. Polish experts,
however, have considerable experience
in dealing with Russian disinformation.
The accompanying excerpt, from the
popular Polish daily Warsaw Wprost, is an
interview with cybersecurity expert Kamil
Basaj, who examines how Russia is using
disinformation to create confusion and
divisions within Polish society.
Basaj argues that Russian information
operations against Poland are not singular
events, but have rather “assumed various
strategic positions” and “are constant and
long-term by nature.” He asserts that since
social media platforms allow users to target
a specific audience, “Russia is constructing
online environments dedicated to specific
information areas.” He points out that
Russian disinformation operations have been
capable of inciting actual physical conflict
between groups of Polish protesters who
support extreme ideologies. He describes
a recent scuffle between a kebab stand
employee and a customer, where “Russian
propaganda in this region was engaged in an
intense action” using social media activity
to spur the far right to a call for revenge and
the far left to organizing a “protest against
xenophobia.”
According to the article, officials in
Poland are attempting to counteract the
impact of these kind of influence operations
on the same stage that they occur. In their
upcoming elections, Basaj predicts that the
Polish information space will be replete
with Russian attempts “to influence public
opinion through compromising materials
on candidates, whether genuine or invented,
potential correspondence leaks, photos — in
other words, phishing for network data or
the production of fabricated material.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Dimmick)

“Today, Russia is constructing online environments dedicated to
specific information areas.”

Anti-Islamic Protest in Poland (2015).

Source: By Silar [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:02015-10-02_Der_anti-islamische_Protest_
in_Polen.JPG.

Source: Anna Gielewska, “Wojna w internecine (War on the Internet),” Warsaw Wprost, 9
September 2018. https://www.wprost.pl/tygodnik/10151520/Wojna-w-internecie.html
…[Gielewska] Russia has engaged in information campaigns on the Polish network for quite
some time now.
[Basaj] With the evolution of Internet and social media technologies, the right conditions
arose for this to be much easier. Today, Russia is constructing online environments dedicated
to specific information areas. The process begins with a diagnosis of how vulnerable a social
group is to a given message….
[Gielewska] What is the primary goal of Russian propaganda?
[Basaj] Creating as large a group of people as possible who will strive to improve relations
with Russia and undermine trust in both NATO and alliances with the United States. AntiUkrainian rhetoric features further down the list….
[Gielewska] In other words, the information blitz is already here.
[Basaj] Yes, it has arrived and assumed various strategic positions. Such campaigns are
constant and long-term by nature. In addition, there are sudden information attacks. One
example of such activity is an incident in Elk. A scuffle ensued between a Kebab employee
and a patron. As it turned out, Russian propaganda in this region was engaged in an intense
action from inside social media groups, aimed at inflaming emotions to induce riots. The
radical right was being incentivized to take revenge and the radical left to organize a march
to protest against xenophobia. The outcome? Two polarized groups whose collision caused
physical unrest….
[Gielewska] Russia is trying to influence elections throughout Europe. The electoral year
begins in earnest in Poland. Should we expect such interference?
[Basaj] I cannot imagine why it should not occur. What might it involve? It may be,
for example, attempting to influence public opinion through compromising materials on
candidates, whether genuine or invented, potential correspondence leaks, photos -- in other
words, phishing for network data or the production of fabricated material.

OE Watch | November 2018

18

EURASIA
Social Media Restrictions for Russian Security
OE Watch Commentary: In light of a number
of embarrassing digital revelations over the past
several years, Russian defense and security structures
have adopted measures to restrict uniformed and
civilian personnel from using social media. The
first accompanying excerpt from the main Russian
government newspaper, Rossiyskaya Gazeta,
describes proposed legislation which would “prohibit
service personnel from posting too much information
on social media.” This legislation apparently codifies
a military ban which was enacted in mid-2014 after
various journalists and investigators uncovered digital
evidence of Russian military involvement in Ukraine.
The article goes on to point out that “everything
connected with a guy’s service comes under the
ban.” Those who fail to comply can expect “harsh
punishments…right down to dismissal from the
service.”
The second excerpt from the pro-Kremlin,
Izvestiya, describes digital screening measures
enacted by the Russian Ministry of Defense (MoD)
to weed out those prospective civilian personnel
who may have inadvertently posted compromising
information on social media. According to the article,
to apply for a civilian position within the MoD,
applicants must now “supply internet portal addresses
where he has posted information over the past 3 years
enabling his identity to be established.” Depending
upon what the applicant has posted on social media,
“will influence the decision on his recruitment for
work or the cadre reserve.” This article quotes an
expert who insists that “the information on state
employees’ virtual contacts is necessary for the
safekeeping of military secrets.” Moreover, as the
article points out, a future staffer’s “indiscreet
conduct on the Net can cast a shadow over the
department.”
The Kremlin leadership has a long history in
attempting to control the flow of information. While
the public Russian internet remains largely open and
uncensored, recent legislation suggests that those who
are employed by the various security structures (or
plan to be employed) should avoid any and all social
media platforms. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“The Internet and soldiers’ private

blogs have become an invaluable
source of information for special
services -- as a result of the indiscipline
of certain bloggers in uniform. We have
to combat this.”

Source: Vladislav Kulikov, “Разжалуют в блогеры: За селфи на службе военных
будут увольнять, (Demotion to Blogger: Military to be Dismissed for Taking Selfies
on Duty),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 20 August 2018. https://rg.ru/2018/08/20/voennyhbudut-uvolniat-za-selfi-na-sluzhbe.html
On 20 August a government commission on drafting legislation examined a bill to
prohibit service personnel from posting too much information on social media.
Everything connected with a guy’s service comes under the ban: who he is (in the
sense of the number of stars on his epaulets), where he is at that precise moment,
what kind of tank he is riding, and so forth. He cannot post photos or videos from his
service locations, geographical location data, etc. Group photos against the backdrop
of military equipment, pictures of his friends on active assignments, etc. are all
prohibited.
Harsh punishments lie in store for those who are careless on social media. Right
down to dismissal from the service.… The Internet and soldiers’ private blogs have
become an invaluable source of information for special services -- as a result of the
indiscipline of certain bloggers in uniform. We have to combat this….
Source: Aleksey Kozachenko and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Виртуальные связи:
При поступлении на госслужбу в Минобороны нужно будет предоставить
информацию об аккаунтах в Сети (Virtual Ties. During Entry into State Service
with Defense Ministry It will be Necessary to Provide Information on Net Accounts),”
Izvestiya, 21 September 2018. https://iz.ru/787518/aleksei-kozachenko-bogdanstepovoi/virtualnye-sviazi
A competition using a new method will be held for candidates for state service with
the Defense Ministry. The candidate will have to supply internet portal addresses
where he has posted information over the past 3 years enabling his identity to be
established. This is not just a question of social networks but also of job sites and
thematic forums. The content of Net accounts will influence the decision on his
recruitment for work or the cadre reserve.
…At the Defense Ministry Izvestiya was told that the department has prepared a
draft order “On Approval of the Single Method for Holding Competitions for the
Filling of Vacant Posts in the State Civilian Service of the Russian Federation and for
Inclusion in the Russian Federation Defense Ministry Cadre Reserve.”
…As the draft that Izvestiya has acquainted itself with says, the recruitment of state
employees to the Defense Ministry will be conducted, as now, on a competitive basis.
But in addition to a standard set of documents, the candidate will have to supply the
internet portal addresses where he has posted “publicly accessible information and
also data making it possible to establish his identify” over the past 3 years. This is not
only a question of social network pages but also job sites and even thematic forums….
…As Izvestiya has written, according to article 20.2 of the law “On State Civilian
Service” (79-FZ) officials are obliged to report the social networks and forums
they participate in and under what names. The main aim of this requirement is “the
ensuring of the observance by civilian employees of the rules of professional ethics.”
The information on state employees’ virtual contacts is necessary for the safekeeping
of military secrets, German Klimenko, Chairman of the Council of the Foundation
for the Development of the Digital Economy, believes. “The Defense Ministry as
an employer possessing secret information must ensure its safekeeping,” he told
Izvestiya. “Like China, we have no virtual borders. Someone can be recruited using
the internet. The military department must understand whom it is hiring for work,
where, and with whom its potential staffer makes contact and how.
Indiscreet conduct on the Net can cast a shadow over the department, Aleksandr
Perendzhiyev, senior lecturer of the Russian Economics University named for
Plekhanov and a member of the Officers of Russia Expert Council, added. “A Defense
Ministry employee must observe the virtual culture and decency,” the expert noted.
“We know of instances when ambiguous photographs or comments have led to
scandals….”
OE Watch | November 2018

19

EURASIA
NATO Arctic Exercise Draws Russian Response
OE Watch Commentary: The Russians are
a bit skeptical that the NATO exercise “Trident
Juncture 18” is not directed at them, as noted in the
accompanying excerpt from Gazeta.ru, particularly
since Finland and Sweden will also join in the
exercise in some capacity. Russia has spent a good
deal of scarce national treasure on protecting her
interests in the Arctic. As indicated by Konstantin
Makiyenko from Russia’s Center for Analysis of
Strategies and Technologies, Trident Juncture will
help justify the continued expenditure of national
resources. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“According to the military chief,

apart from Russia there is no other
state in this region that is capable, in
terms of its potential, of posing purely
hypothetical threats to the alliance. ”

Group of US Marines prepare to for cold weather training in Iceland.

Source: Courtesy Photo - Allied Joint Force Command Naples, https://www.dvidshub.net/image/4838415/trident-juncture-2018-oct-19-united-states, Public Domain.

Source: “Что стоит за обвинениями Нидерландов в провокациях в Арктике (What Lies behind the Netherlands’ Accusations of
Provocations in the Arctic),” Gazeta.Ru, 15 October 2018. https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2018/10/15/12022009.shtml
NATO believes that Russia has nothing to worry about, since the Trident Juncture … exercises are “not directed against it.” However, during
these maneuvers, the NATO countries will rehearse repulsing notional enemy aggression within the framework of implementing Article 5 of
the alliance’s Charter on Collective Defense.
“But in that case a perfectly legitimate question arises: Who might be a ‘notional enemy’ for NATO within the borders of the Northwestern
Theater of Military Operations?” Lieutenant General Valeriy Zaparenko, ex-Deputy Chief of the Russian Federation Armed Forces General
Staff Main Directorate for Operations, pointed out.
According to the military chief, apart from Russia there is no other state in this region that is capable, in terms of its potential, of posing
purely hypothetical threats to the alliance. “Therefore all the NATO leadership’s arguments to the effect that Trident Juncture is not directed
against Russia do not have a leg to stand on,” according to the general. The upcoming NATO exercises will be the largest since 1991. Some
50,000 soldiers, 150 aircraft, 60 ships, and more than 10,000 fighting vehicles will be mobilized for it.
…forces will arrive in the operational areas from different parts of Europe and from North America … to test … elements of the deployment
of priority strategic reserves. Special attention will be devoted to improving logistical support. “Whatever the alliance maintains, Trident
Juncture represents a bid to prepare for large-scale armed conflict in areas directly adjacent to the Russian Federation,” Gen. Zaparenko
stated.
Konstantin Makiyenko, Deputy Director of the Center for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, states “A natural question arises: Why
do the leaders of many countries proclaim the priority of opening up territories to which they did not pay such close attention to previously
before? The answer is simple: As much as one-fourth of the potential world resources of oil and gas may lie in the Arctic….
According to the the Russian Federation Ministry of Natural Resources, 15.5 billion tons of oil and 84.5 trillion cubic meters of gas are
located in an area of 6.2 million square kilometers….
Transport routes are another Arctic resource… The volume of shipments over the Northern Sea Route is growing by rapidly in connection
with the thawing of Arctic waters. Lloyd’s Register predicts that the volumes of shipments over the Northern Sea Route will reach 15 million
tons in 2021. “To this should be added something like 25 million tons of Russian hydrocarbons that will be exported in ever greater volumes
across northern seas. Russia’s forecast for 2030 for shipments over the Northern Sea Route is for 50 million tons of freight a year,” according
to Makiyenko.
The route from China to Western Europe by the Northern Sea Route is approximately 8,100 nautical miles long. The way through the Suez
Canal is 2,400 miles longer. If ships skirt Africa, they add over 4,000 miles more. Use of the Northern Sea Route promises substantial profits
for the growing freight flow from Europe to East Asia – something like a million dollars for one voyage by a large container ship.
The 1982 UN Law of the Sea Convention allows Russia to regulate shipping over the Northern Sea Route. Makiyenko stated “This is
our privilege, which we cannot lose and must maintain by all possible means.” “It cannot be doubted that the thrust of NATO’s training in
the Arctic Region will change little in the immediate future, and exercises like Trident Juncture will be conducted more frequently and at
increasingly high latitudes.”
OE Watch | November 2018

20

EURASIA
French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route
OE Watch Commentary: The Northern Sea Route, through the Russian
Arctic waters, has seen an upturn in volume, types of cargo and types of
vessels. A French naval vessel has now made the journey and was apparently
kept on route by Russian radio signals as noted by the accompanying excerpt
from Interfax. According to the article, France has no territorial claim in
the Arctic but has observer status on the Arctic Council. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Because the Rona has no ice protection and this journey
was quite risky, Russian rescue systems were prepared to
come to the aid of the French sailors if need be. ”

Source: “NATO ship crosses Northern Sea Route for first time
‘led’ by Northern Fleet’s radio recon,” Interfax, 2 October
2018. http://www.interfax.com/
A NATO supply vessel, the Rona, has sailed through the
Northern Sea Route for first time, a source close to the Route’s
administration told Interfax….
“Because the Rona has no ice protection and this journey was
quite risky, Russian rescue systems were prepared to come to
the aid of the French sailors if need be,” the source said.
France has no territory in the Arctic but holds observer status
on the Arctic Council.

Russian Coast Guard Expanding in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federal Security
Service (FSB) is the successor to the Soviet KGB. Like
the KGB, the border security forces and coast guard are
the FSB’s responsibilities. Until last year, the coast guard
vessels were pulled out of the water when the White Sea
began to ice up and did not go back in until the waters
were again navigable. However, the Coast Guard of the
FSB is responsible for law enforcement in Russia’s Arctic
waters and it needs year-round deployability. The coast
guard is now getting ice-class vessels, as reported by
the accompanying excerpt from The Barents Observer,
and is scheduled to get one with icebreaking capabilities.
The Northern Fleet and Arctic coast guard have worked
and trained together in the past and this relationship will
continue. The long arm of the law is getting longer. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Polyarnaya Zvezda [Polar Star]
joined the fleet in 2017 and greatly enhances
the FSB Coast Guard’s capabilities in the
western part of the Russian Arctic. ”

Source: Atle Staalesen, “As Arctic flotilla enters Barents Sea, it is joined
by FSB Coast Guard,” The Barents Observer, 8 October 2018. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2018/10/arctic-flotilla-enters-barents-sea-itjoined-fsb-coast-guard
The Northern Fleet ships met a Russian coast guard that is getting
increasingly powerful. Several new ships have been included in the fleet and
their responsibilities are expanding. A federal law adopted in 2016 gives the
Federal Security Service the full responsibility for law enforcement along
the Northern Sea route. The coast guard fleet now includes ice-class vessels
capable of operating in the high Arctic. The Polyarnaya Zvezda [Polar
Star] joined the fleet in 2017 and greatly enhances the FSB Coast Guard’s
capabilities in the western part of the Russian Arctic. It is 93 meters long, 15
meters wide and has a deadweight of 3,200 tons. Top speed is 20 knots and it
can operate independently for up to 60 days….
The Murmansk-based coast guard also has two new vessels of the Okhotnik
class … the Predanny [Staunch] from 2016 and the Bditelny [Vigilant] from
2017. The fleet also includes two ships of the Sobol-class (Project 12200) and
several Svetljak-class vessels (Project 10410). Russia’s northern coast guard
fleet also includes the Belomorye [White Sea], a smaller patrol vessel built in
2009. There is more to come. In the course of the year, a ship ofhe Purga class
…will be delivered to Murmansk from the Almaz shipyard in St. Petersburg. It
will have icebreaking capability and cost almost 1.8 billion rubles ($30 million).

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a marketplace of ideas about the future of our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and community of action that continually explores the
future through collaborative partnerships and
continuous dialogue with academia and industry.
OE Watch | November 2018

21

EURASIA
India and the Arctic?
OE Watch Commentary: Russia is expanding her liquefied natural gas
(LNG) extraction fields, processing plants and delivery fleet and has begun
construction of a transfer point on the Kamchatka Peninsula, where iceclass LNG ships can transfer their cargo to regular LNG ships for further
delivery (see: “Liquefied Natural Gas terminal on Kamchatka Peninsula,” OE
Watch, July 2018). The LNG will initially originate from the Yamal fields in
the White Sea and Russia has discovered other potential Arctic petroleum
and natural gas fields that should be incorporated into this effort. India
and the Soviet Union enjoyed close relations and India still buys Russian
military equipment and maintains friendly state-to-state relations. This is
an invitation by the Russian president, as reported by the accompanying
excerpt from Interfax, but it would provide Russia an opportunity to open a
major energy market to an old supporter and customer. There are questions
as to why President Putin has juxtapositioned LNG and nuclear energy. New
civilian Russian icebreakers will be nuclear and will clear the way for iceclass LNG carriers. Perhaps this demonstrates the serious effort that Russia
is putting into Arctic resource development. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

“It will provide reliable suppliers of LNG to
the Indian and global markets in general.”
Source: “Putin invites India to participate in Arctic LNG
projects, supply via Northern Sea Route,” Interfax, 5 October
2018. http://www.interfax.com/
“We will welcome it if our Indian partners join this work in
the Arctic as well. It’s very promising, long-term work, very
serious, intended for decades to come, with good investment
and good feedback... “Given that the climate is changing
- in some places that’s good and in some not very, but the
possibilities of using the Northern Sea Route are increasing.
We are building a nuclear fleet, we are building eight nuclearpowered ships. They will be put into service one after another.
The work is now in progress. It will provide reliable suppliers
of LNG to the Indian and global markets in general. It is sure
to be very interesting work.”

Russian icebreaker Tor in the ice-covered port of Sabetta (2015).

Source: Tuomas Romu [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tor_icebreaker_(2225296).jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

22

EURASIA
Bulgarian Fighter Aircraft Acquisition
OE Watch Commentary: As reported in various
Bulgarian media, Bulgaria is currently going through the
acquisition process for new combat aircraft to update their
air force. One commentator, the former Bulgarian Minister
of Defense, Nikolay Nenchev indicated that this should
include canceling plans to repair the old MiG-29s and
renting F-16s until the acquisition is complete. Nenchev
further stated that during his time heading the Defense
Ministry, Russia had threatened Bulgarian airspace and
that Bulgarians were on alert as much as twice a day. This
corresponds to incidences in 2016 when aircraft identified
as Russian passenger planes breached airspace numerous
times in October with the transponders turned off, the
Bulgarians claimed. It is noteworthy that this in the same
general period of the downing of the Russian fighter aircraft
(in November 2016) and after Bulgaria refused overflight for
Russian planes bound for Syria in September 2015 because
of “serious doubts about the cargo onboard.” Reportedly,
current offers to sell jets all come from Western countries,
including the US, Sweden, and Italy. The acquisition would
be the biggest military purchase in the contemporary history
of Bulgaria and is not without domestic political concern.
Vesselin Marsheki, head of the Volya party and Vice Chair
of the National Assembly of Bulgaria, describes Bulgarians
as having to choose between fighter aircraft and healthcare.
End OE Watch Commentary (Wilhelm)

Source: “Николай Ненчев: България да избере Ф-16! И да скъсаме веднага
договора за поддръжката на МиГ-29 (Nikolay Nenchev: Bulgaria to choose
the F-16! And then immediately void the agreement for maintenance on the
MiG-29),” Epicenter, 17 October 2018. http://epicenter.bg/article/NikolayNenchev--Balgariya-da-izbere-F-16--I-da-skasame-vednaga-dogovora-zapoddrazhkata-na-MiG-29/166017/11/0
That is why Bulgaria must sign an agreement with the US to deliver the
newest and more modern multi-purpose generation 4 plus, F-16. And then
immediately break the MiG-29 maintenance contract!
(it) would allow us to rent several of their F-16s that our pilots would start
training here on-site in the shortest possible time. Once the Bulgarian pilots
have been trained, they will be able to take on the duty of the US-F-16 charter
on duty until the introduction of our new combat aircraft. In parallel, we need
to have more joint missions with NATO allies to guard Bulgaria’s airspace.
Source: “Bulgaria refusing airspace access to Russian aid flights to Syria,”
Reuters, 8 September 2015. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisisgreece-russia/bulgaria-refusing-airspace-access-to-russian-aid-flights-to-syriaidUSKCN0R81J420150908
Bulgaria has serious doubts about the cargo on board planes that Russia
says it will fly into Syria with aid, and has refused them access to its airspace,
the foreign ministry in Sofia said on Tuesday…“We have enough information
that makes us have serious doubts about the cargo of the planes, which is the
reason for the refusal,” a Bulgarian foreign ministry spokeswoman said…

“That is why Bulgaria must sign an agreement with the US to deliver the newest and more modern multipurpose generation 4 plus, F-16.”

A Bulgarian Air Force MiG-29 Fulcrum aircraft lands on Graf Ignatievo Air Base, Bulgaria, Nov. 10, 2008, during exercise Nickel Javelin.
Source: By Ashley Wood, U.S. Air Force [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bulgarian_Air_Force_MiG-29.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

23

INDO-PACIFIC
Made-in-China 2025
OE Watch Commentary: In September 2018, the South China
Morning Post published a three-part article series on the Made-inChina (MIC) 2025 initiative, a plan that China unveiled in 2015.
The first article, the excerpt of which accompanies this, examines
the question of whether or not Beijing’s plan to dominate high-tech
industries should be as big of a threat as the West thinks it is. The
article explains that China is still at the stage of “following” and that
MIC 2025 was originally meant for China to catch up with other
countries, but has since been seen by the West as a threat. The article
covers a lot of ground, describing MIC 2025 as “a lifeline to steer
development into the future, moving the country away from being the
world’s biggest assembly line and a producer of cheap knock-offs and
low-quality goods.” The conclusion seems to point to MIC 2025 not
being as big of a threat as the West believes, because China has been
unable to get what it needs most – core technologies, most of which
lie in US hands. In many cases, China has attempted to mimic certain
core technologies. For example, after Redcore claimed to have “broken
the American monopoly (on Google)” by developing an original
Chinese web browser, it was accused of having based its software on
Google’s Chrome program.
In part two of the article series, the authors take a look at China’s
robot industry and how that fits into the MIC 2025 initiative.
According to the article, the number of industrial automatons
operating in the country is expected to expand tenfold to 1.8 million
units by 2025. Currently 30 percent of robots used in China are
made in the country. By 2020, half of them will be made in China.
By 2025, 70 percent are expected to be made in China, all pointing
to a potential booming industry. These robots are intended to
replace humans to offset skyrocketing labor costs and China’s aging
population. China, however, continues to lack original research
when trying to develop new robots. For example, according to the
article, Europe has a competitive advantage over China because of its
deeper understanding of robotics, the artificial intelligence that goes
into building and operating them, and the integration of robots with
humans. Chinese robot makers and local governments reportedly
often have a short-sighted approach to robotics, focusing on investing
in existing technologies or setting up industrial estates to attract
foreign robot manufacturers, as opposed to supporting original core
research to develop the next generation of robots.
In the final article, the authors focus on the possibility of China
becoming a semiconductor giant. Of the three articles, the third one
seems to paint semiconductors as the most positive industry for the
country. China had been trying to develop its chip industry even
before MIC 2025, pouring in billions of dollars in subsidies, grants
and investments. That effort might be paying off as the country
appears to have gained some ground. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

“(A) vision of global leadership to match the
country’s economic might emerged in 2015 when
the government unveiled its ‘Made in China 2025’
plan.”
Source: Elaine Chan, “Made in China 2025: Is Beijing’s Plan for
Hi-Tech Dominance as Big a Threat as the West Thinks it is?” South
China Morning Post, 10 September 2018. https://www.scmp.com/
business/china-business/article/2163601/made-china-2025-beijingsplan-hi-tech-dominance-big-threat
We are basically at the stage of ‘ following’ … especially for
[developing] core technologies, which can’t be bought and nor, if we
ask for them, will people give
Prof. Zhang Haiou… For China, the original idea behind MIC2025
was simply to catch up with other countries, a tall order even by its
own admission.
MIC2025, Beijing believes, is a lifeline to steer development into
the future, moving the country away from being the world’s biggest
assembly line and a producer of cheap knock-offs and low-quality
goods.
Most of all, the plan has so far failed to get what China needs most:
core technologies that lie mostly in the hands of US companies.
Liu cited a lack of theoretical scientific knowledge, a skills deficit in
some areas and insufficient patience and perseverance to see projects
through as some of the obstacles facing China.
Source: He Huifeng and Celia Chen, “Made in China 2025: A Peek at
the Robot Revolution Under Way in the Hub of the World’s Factory,”
South China Morning Post, 18 September 2018. https://www.scmp.
com/economy/china-economy/article/2164103/made-china-2025peek-robot-revolution-under-way-hub-worlds
Under the Chinese government’s “Made in China 2025” industrial
master plan, the number of industrial automatons operating in the
country would expand tenfold to 1.8 million units by 2025, when up to
70 per cent of the robots used in China would be made in the country,
from half in 2020, and 30 per cent now.
“China is the factory of the world, and there are millions of
manufacturers that still depend on traditional labour-intensive
methods,” said Ren Yutong, executive president of the Guangdong
Robotics Association, a government think tank. “If the country
wants to maintain its top spot as a global exporter, each Chinese
manufacturer has to start replacing humans with robots due to
skyrocketing labour costs and the ageing population. [China] has
already started running out of workers.”
“We lack original research and have already tried to catch up
by copying advanced technology. But neither technology-related
mergers and acquisitions nor copycat [production] can close the gap
in the short term.”

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2018

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Made-in-China 2025
Source: Elaine Chan et al, “Made in China 2025: How New Technologies Could Help Beijing Achieve Its Dream of Becoming a
Semiconductor Giant,” South China Morning Post, 24 September 2018. https://www.scmp.com/business/article/2165575/made-china-2025how-new-technologies-could-help-beijing-achieve-its-dream
That vision of global leadership to match the country’s economic might emerged in 2015 when the government unveiled its “Made in China
2025” (MIC2025) plan. At the heart of the plan is the country’s semiconductor industry, in part because advances in chip technology can lead
to breakthroughs in other areas of technology, handing the advantage to whoever has the best chips – an advantage that currently is out of
Beijing’s reach.
China has in fact been trying to develop its chip industry for a number of years, even before the MIC2025 plan.
It has poured in billions of dollars of subsidies, grants and investments, but progress has been slow.
“China has plenty of development opportunities, the market is deep … China is the manufacturing hub and a big market for smart devices,”
said Wang Huixuan, co-president of one of China’s top three smartphone chip makers, Tsinghua Unigroup, at a technology forum in Beijing in
August.

Electronics factory in Shenzhen (2005).

Source: By Steve Jurvetson from Menlo Park, USA (glue worksUploaded by Zolo) [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons,

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | November 2018

25

INDO-PACIFIC
A Look at the PLA’s Youth Aviation Programs
by Aaron Jensen
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 16, dated 10 October 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/pla-air-force-and-navy-air-force-developing-youth-aviation-programs/

OE Watch Commentary: As the People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) and the
People’s Liberation Army Naval Aviation (PLAN Aviation) prepare for more challenging
missions and continue to integrate more advanced aviation platforms into their inventory, their
need for talented and experienced pilots and aviators is increasing. To help meet this need, the
PLAAF and PLAN Aviation have developed a number of youth aviation schools to provide
flight training to select high school students. The aim of this program is to help supply the Air
Force Aviation University, the Naval Aviation University and other military colleges and civilian
aviation universities with talented students who have been both carefully vetted for suitability
and interest in aviation, and provided with basic aviation instruction.
The PLAAF is seeking to become a “strategic air force”, but aviator quality and capability
continues to be a major limiting factor for the PLA. Faced with these challenges, the PLAAF
and PLAN view youth aviation schools as a means to help improve the quality and quantity
of their pilots and aviators, starting at a very young age. In 2011 the PLAAF initiated an
experimental youth aviation program at two high schools in Wuhan and Changchun. In 2014,
this program produced 96 graduates, 40% of whom were accepted into university aviation
programs, including the joint programs between the Air Force Aviation University and Beijing
University, Tsinghua University and the Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. The
PLAAF expanded and institutionalized the youth aviation program in 2015, when the former
General Political Department of the PLA, along with the Ministry of Education and the Ministry
of Public Security, issued the “Implementation Measures for the Construction of Air Force
Youth Aviation Schools” and established 16 air force youth aviation schools at provincial-level,
demonstration high schools in 11 provinces. In 2015 the PLAN Aviation established its own
experimental aviation programs in two high schools, expanding to nine schools in 2017.

Source: “PLA to train more fighter pilots
for aircraft carriers,” China Military, 19
September 2018. http://eng.chinamil.com.
cn/view/2018-09/19/content_9290445.htm
A recruitment campaign has been launched
for aircraft carrier cadet pilots by the
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Navy.
Cadets will learn on a new and better
type of training aircraft which more closely
resembles the J-15, a Chinese military
insider said Tuesday.
The Naval Aviation University has received
a training aircraft more similar to China’s
only current carrier-based J-15 fighter jet…
“With the Liaoning in service, the Type
001A undergoing sea trials, the third carrier
under construction and a fourth already in
planning, the PLA Navy will naturally need
more carrier-based fighter jets, which means
huge demand for pilots,” Li Daguang, a
professor at the National Defense University
of the PLA in Beijing, told the Global Times
on Tuesday...”Fighter pilots for carriers are
extremely scarce at the moment,” Li said.

Admission to the youth aviation programs is very selective; students are recruited from
among the top junior high school graduates. Applicants must be between the ages of 14 to 16,
have academic scores in the top 15% of their class, be in excellent health, meet height and weight requirements, and have excellent eyesight.
Candidates go through a detailed and comprehensive physical and psychological examination; the medical portion alone includes 240 separate
examination items. In addition to physical and academic requirements, applicants must also have proper political qualifications. The PLAAF
seeks to recruit about 1,000 students into its program each year, while PLAN Aviation will likely seek a similar number when it expands its
program from the current nine schools, to fifteen schools.

Youth aviation schools are paired with high quality provincial-level high schools, which are funded by the provincial government, and recruit
students from the entire province. Students in the youth aviation programs take normal high school courses in addition to their aviation classes
and training. The actual aviation training program consists of three years of classes in national defense education, military fitness, aviation
knowledge, and flight training. In their first year, students receive instruction in basic aviation topics such as aviation theory, navigation,
meteorology, and aviation rescue. Students are introduced to flight simulators during their second year. At the end of the second year, students
spend half a month during the summer in flight training.
In previous years, flight training was contracted out to local civilian flight schools, but in 2018 the PLAAF took over this responsibility and
began to train students according to Air Force Aviation University training methods. Students receive flight instruction in the CJ-6, the PLAAF’s
basic trainer for all aircraft, and take five orientation flights during the summer training session. In contrast to the PLAAF, the PLAN Aviation
continues to utilize civilian flight schools to train students. Students are taught basic theory and undergo simulator training. Students receive
about ten total hours of flight training in a Cessna 172, during which they are accompanied by a senior instructor.
At the end of their third year, students in the youth aviation programs participate in an aviator selection process. Qualified students are
admitted to the Air Force Aviation University and the Naval Aviation Academy. Students in the air force youth aviation program can also
apply for the dual enrollment program, which allows students to attend Beijing University, Tsinghua University, or the Beijing Aeronautics
and Astronautics University while also receiving aviation training at the Air Force Aviation University, ultimately earning a degree from
both institutions. Those who fail to gain acceptance at an aviation-related university can still gain admission into other military colleges and
universities. Students in the navy’s program can also receive a sixty point bonus on admission to Tsinghua University or the Beijing Aeronautics
and Astronautics University. Students who fail to be admitted to the Naval Aviation Academy can apply to other naval colleges.
This year marks the first graduating class of the PLAAF Youth Aviation Program. A total of 379 students have been accepted to the Air Force
Aviation University, a number which is considered to be successful. Additionally, an unknown number of graduates have entered other university
aviation programs or other military colleges. With improvements to the quality of education, student training and the management system, the
PLAAF now feels that its youth aviation program is complete, and a new track for early aviation training has emerged. Once the PLAN Aviation
expands its youth aviation program to 15 schools, it will likely achieve the same success. The youth aviation programs are now beginning to play
a foundational role in the development of China’s future air force and naval aviation talent. End OE Watch Commentary (Jensen)
OE Watch | November 2018
26

INDO-PACIFIC
Recruit Training Extended for New PLA Recruits
to Increase Readiness
OE Watch Commentary: After years of
experimentation, the People’s Liberation Army
(PLA) ground forces are adopting an extended
training course for new recruits. The authors of
this accompanying excerpted article visited the
71st Group Army [71集团军, Eastern Theater
Command, Xuzhou, Jiangsu Province) and
interviewed several officers about the new
training regime. The reporters observed a distinct
difference in professionalism between groups that
had undergone extended training versus those
that had not. Additional time is given to technical
skills, and class sizes are smaller.
A major concern had been that units were
overly burdened with too many untrained recruits
still adapting to military life and learning basic
skills, rather than being prepared to be an
effective part of their parent units. An unnamed
leader from the Army Staff Department Training
Bureau (陆军参谋部训练局) noted that the new
training method “lays a solid foundation by
training recruits at the source, which will greatly
enhance the quality of recruits. This will enhance
the overall quality of combat units, ensuring that
they will be at full strength throughout the year
and able to take on missions at any time.” The
conscription system (征兵) will continue to play
a crucial role in the makeup of the PLA. Most
conscripts will go on to serve two years; however,
it is believed that programs such as this one to
extend and enhance training, paired with ongoing
emphasis on building a strong NCO corps, will
greatly improve the core competency of most
units. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Soldiers of an honor guard of the People’s Liberation Army at their base in Nanjing, China, on June 18, 2009.

Source: By Demetrio J. Espinosa, U.S. Marine Corps (http://www.marines.mil; VIRIN: 080618-m-2361E-011) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Honor_guard_of_the_People%27s_Liberation_Army.jpg.

“Now the new recruit training is more effective, and they will be allocated to combat units after being fully
trained to the standard of a qualified soldier.”
Source: “30余年探索今定锤！陆军新兵训练时间由3个月延长至6个月 (After 30+ Years of Deliberation, Ground Forces’ New Recruits’
Training Extended From 3 Months to 6),” PLA Daily, 13 September 2018. http://www.81.cn/lj/2018-09/13/content_9280979.htm
The new recruits will be trained on professional skills before they are allocated to different companies, which have their own schedules and
pace for professional skills training, the PLA Army announced on its WeChat account on Thursday. The announcement said new recruits
could not keep pace with veterans, and veterans are not receiving enough training. The problem has influenced and stunted the sustainable
development of the PLA Army’s combat capability, an anonymous official of a training bureau was quoted as saying in the announcement.
“Now the new recruit training is more effective, and they will be allocated to combat units after being fully trained to the standard of a
qualified soldier.”
The enrollment period has been held in summer and autumn since 2013. It was previously held during winter. The change in 2013 allows
new recruits to join the PLA Army in September, and also helps increase the proportion of university graduates among the recruits. The new
recruits are placed alongside veterans in March after six months of training.

OE Watch | November 2018

27

INDO-PACIFIC
The Growing Face of China’s Civil-Military
Integration Initiative
OE Watch Commentary: China has long been
labeled a copy-cat nation, reverse-engineering,
stealing and copying technology from other nations
in an effort to try to catch up. However, China has
been changing its strategy as it has recognized the
value of innovation to the economy, industries, and
the military. One way to accomplish this is through
civil-military integration, an initiative that has been
elevated to a national priority.
The National Defense Science and Technology
Innovation Research Institute, a subordinate of the
newly restructured Academy of Military Sciences,
is viewed as an important institution for carrying
out the civil-military integration initiative. The
accompanying excerpted articles give some insight
into this organization. According to the first article,
published by Sohu, in September 2017, Guangzhou
University announced that it was joining forces
with the National Defense Science and Technology
Innovation Research Institute to start “in-depth
cooperation around some priority areas in civilmilitary integration collaborative innovation.” The
areas mentioned included next-generation robot
operating system application, artificial intelligence,
and cutting-edge technology research and
development.
In addition to joining forces with the civilian
sector, according to the second article, published
by Tencent, the National Defense Science and
Technology Innovation Research Institute has been
drawing in new top-quality recruits. These recruits
are said to be hand-picked from across the country.
They are a select group of professionals in fields such
as navigation guidance and control, control science
and engineering, electronic science and technology,
and power electronics and motor drives. Their
average age is less than 34 years old and 80 percent
of them possess “985 college degrees” (There are 39
universities that fall under Project 985 and these are
considered China’s top-ranked universities).
The 2015 white paper on China’s Military Strategy
was notable for recognizing a number of changes
going on around the world and in an effort to end up
on the leading edge of the next revolution in military
affairs, China has been busy putting into place
key research institutions, policies, personnel, and
benchmarks to ultimately push itself into a leading
role. In line with military reforms and a massive
reorganization effort that has been taking place since
the beginning of 2016, the Chinese People’s Liberation
Army created a new set of policies and procedures
to advance the development of defense science and
technology. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Having advanced technology means having the initiative
on the battlefield. Whoever has first-class scientific research
personnel will have the advantage and leading power of
technological innovation.”
Source: “我校与国防科技创新研究院共建军民融合智能制造工程协同创新中心
(Our School and The National Defense Science and Technology Innovation Research
Institute To Jointly Build a Collaborative Innovation Center for Civil-Military
Integration Intelligent Manufacturing Engineering),” Sohu, 27 September 2017. http://
www.sohu.com/a/195053712_667940
The newly-restructured Academy of Military Science of the Chinese People’s
Liberation Army is a military scientific research institution under the direct
leadership of the Central Military Commission. Its subordinate National Defense
Science and Technology Innovation Research Institute is an important institution
for carrying out civil-military integration innovation. According to the cooperation
agreement, our school and the National Defense Science and Technology Innovation
Research Institute will start in-depth cooperation around some priority areas in civilmilitary integration collaborative innovation. These collaboration areas include nextgeneration robot operating system application, artificial intelligence cutting-edge
technology research and development, and the joint venture between corresponding
businesses in Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macau to carry out typical demonstration
applications in concerned emerging industries such as next-generation robots and
intelligent unmanned systems. The cooperation will break through the barriers
between traditional disciplines and industries, achieve complementary advantages
and civil-military integration, and build a world-class integrated innovation platform
for intelligent manufacturing cutting-edge common technology research and
interdisciplinary collaborative development. According to the agreement, our school
and the National Defense Science and Technology Innovation Research Institute
of the AMS will give full play to our respective resources and advantages to jointly
establish a collaborative innovation center for civil-military integration intelligent
manufacturing engineering on the Guangzhou University campus, jointly conduct
research and development of new-generation robot operating systems and artificial
intelligence cutting-edge technologies, and collaborate with businesses to carry out
typical demonstration applications in corresponding emerging industries. The two
sides will also jointly train graduate students, bring in international high-end talents,
and carry out technical, skills, and entrepreneurship training.
Source: “军事科学院引进120多名⾼端⼈才 (Academy of Military Sciences
Introduces over 120 Top-Quality Personnel),” Tencent, 13 April 2018. https://new.
qq.com/omn/20180413/20180413A1IXI6.html
Having advanced technology means having the initiative on the battlefield. Whoever
has first-class scientific research personnel will have the advantage and leading
power of technological innovation.
The newly formed National Defense Science and Technology Innovation Research
Institute mainly focuses on cutting-edge technologies such as artificial intelligence,
unmanned systems, and cutting-edge crossover technologies. Its core mission is aimed
at defense technology innovation.
When selecting the recruits, the institute searched across the whole military for
specialty professionals in fields such as navigation guidance and control, control
science and engineering, electronic science and technology, and power electronics
and motor drives in accordance with the needs of scientific research positions. The
cadres were selected based on merit after considering their background, including
academic qualifications, age, experience, ability, and achievements.
OE Watch | November 2018

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Poor Training and Insufficient Personnel Hamper
Chinese Maritime Militia Development
OE Watch Commentary: As China continues to shift from a focus on ground
forces to greater emphasis on air, sea and space domains, the importance of
militia (海上民兵) is growing. This accompanying excerpted article discusses
the evolving role of the militia and the challenges faced by the current force.
According to China’s 2013 Defense White Paper, the militia are “tasked with
participating in the socialist modernization drive, performing combat readiness,
support and defensive operations, helping maintain social order and participating
in emergency rescue and disaster relief operations.”
In particular, maritime militia (海上民兵) have historically taken on important
combat and support roles for the PLA Navy. This article highlights the fact that
during the Yijiangshan Campaign (一江山战役), against Nationalist Chinese (KMT)held islands in the East China Sea from 1954–1955, China’s first (and only) joint air,
sea and ground campaign, “more than a thousand coastal fishermen” participated in
the fighting with a modified gunboat and used fishing boats to transport soldiers to
the islands. Over the past decade, militia has also helped China advance its political
goals by taking on missions the PLA could not. In 2009, they harassed the USNS
Impeccable in international waters, helped occupy Scarborough Reef in 2012, and
participated in China’s increased activity around the Senkaku Islands in 2016.
While Western media attention has focused on the militia based at Tanmen, on the
eastern coast of China’s southern Hainan Island, every coastal province appears to
have multiple maritime militia units. However, despite playing an important support
role for the PLA and Chinese maritime law enforcement, the maritime militia is facing
shortfalls in personnel, training and equipment. Traditionally, militia supporting the
ground forces have been given priority for resources. For example, Beihai, a city in
China’s southern Guangxi province, has 10,000 regular army militia, but only 200
maritime militia—despite the area having more than 10,000 ships.
The article questions whether China’s current maritime militia is up to the tasks
required under the “new situation”—China’s present security challenges. During a
recent call up at an unnamed military district for example, only 120 fishermen on
48 boats—less than half the necessary force—showed up due to the ongoing fishing
season. Participation in militia training can cost ship-owners thousands of yuan
(hundreds of USD) per day due to insufficient subsidies, and the pay for individual
militia members is also low.

“The maritime militia has been out
fishing on ocean-going operations for
seven or eight months a year.”
Source: “新形势下海上民兵建设要冲破哪些
思想藩篱? (In the ‘New Situation,’ What Are the
Ideological Barriers That Must Be Broken Through
For the Construction of Maritime Militia?)” China
Defense News, 31 August 2017. http://www.81.cn/
mb/2017-08/31/content_7071612.htm
The leaders of the Zhejiang Military Region stated
frankly that previously militia reserve forces training
and modernization was mainly focused on the
battlefield and island emergency response. Today,
the construction of maritime militias has given new
strategic role. To support the protection of joint
operations, it is necessary to break the traditional
“continental [army-centric] thinking”, expand the
perspective of preparing for war to militia training
for the maritime and air [domains]…
There is pain in change. The further out to sea you,
the more you encounter the difficulties and “pain
points” of realistic maritime militia training under
the conditions of informationization.
Organizing training is difficult. The maritime militia
has been out fishing on ocean-going operations
for seven or eight months a year. Civilian ships
are subordinated to various departments such as
fishery administration, transportation, and maritime
affairs. They are caught between various groups,
and personnel organization, management, and
training are difficult. Training equipment is missing.
In some places, the maritime militia detachments are
mostly equipped with maintenance equipment, and
it is difficult to carry out the necessary professional
training. Training topics are out of date. There
are fewer trainings with the Navy; there are fewer
faculty members and teaching skills for the maritime
training courses are weaker. Training subsidies are
low. The current militia training subsidy standard
is low, the funding guarantee gap is large, and the
militias of the militia are not enthusiastic.

Another reason is that many Chinese fishing vessels now ply the seas far from
Chinese shores in search of richer stocks of fish. In an unnamed city given as an
example, 20 out of 49 appropriate ships are long-distance fishing vessels. For these
ships and their crews, simply returning to port to take part in militia activities can
take more than a month, limiting the amount of time they can realistically participate.
In response, the Chinese government is undertaking modernization, training and
legislative actions to ensure the maritime militia remains an effective force. Maritime
militias are being reorganized to better make use of existing resources, pooling
personnel and ships from neighboring areas. Training is being shifted to seasons when
more fishermen are available to participate, and course materials are being updated.
Funds are also being allocated to ensure that militia have access to satellite locators, navigation radars, ultra-short-wave radios and similar
equipment.

At the governmental level, China has also updated relevant laws, including the Civil Transport Capacity National Defense Mobilization
Regulations (民用运力国防动员条例) and the Defense National Defense Mobilization Law (国防动员法) to ensure that the government can
make better use of civilian assets during a war. Given China’s lengthy coastline and complicated maritime borders, if trained appropriately
and given sufficient support, these ad hoc forces could act as an important backstop for the rapidly-modernizing PLA Navy. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

OE Watch | November 2018

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese-Nepalese Anti-Terror Training
Causing Concern in India
OE Watch Commentary: In South Asian geopolitics China’s alliance
with Pakistan usually causes concern in India. However, according to the
accompanying excerpted article from the Chinese language website dwnews.
com, which stands for “multi-dimensional news,” Chinese-Nepalese relations
are also causing concern in India. The article discusses the joint training
of the special forces of China and Nepal, which was recently completed
in Chengdu, China. The training, which was titled “Everest Friendship
2018,” lasted 10 days and was intended to prepare the units for combating
international terrorist organizations. Among other activities, the trainees
engaged in mock hostage rescue operations, climbing, sharpshooting, and
removing explosives. In addition, they conducted a comprehensive counterterrorism drill of a terrorist bus hijacking.
According to the article, Li Shizhong, the deputy chief of staff of the Tibet
Military Region of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army, considered the
training to be a “milestone.” It was the second year of this training; the 2017
training took place in Kathmandu. The article also noted how The Times of
India reported that the joint training between China and Nepal narrowed the
scope of activities after India expressed concerns about military exchanges
between those two countries. Yet, the article claimed that even if Nepal is
more “cautious” in its foreign policy with China as a result of pressure from
India, it will still not bring an end to India’s concerns. The article therefore,
makes clear that Nepal will not merely be a country in India’s sphere of
influence: China will also compete to strengthen relations with Nepal,
including through military exchanges, despite Indian concerns. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Indian media has expressed concern about the
military exchanges between China and Nepal.”

Source: “中国尼泊尔举行联合演习 印媒表担忧 (China and
Nepal joint exercise, India expresses concern),” news.dwnews.
com, 27 September 2018. http://news.dwnews.com/china/
news/2018-09-29/60088262.html
The joint training of the special forces of the two armies of
China and Nepal ended in Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China.
According to reports, this joint training is based on the joint
efforts of China and Nigeria to combat international terrorist
organizations, with “hostage rescue” as a theme. The special
forces of the two countries carried out courses including
climbing and landing, sharpshooting, and explosives removal.
They also participated in a comprehensive anti-terrorism drill
in the context of “terrorists hijacking buses.”
Li Shizhong, deputy chief of staff of the Tibet Military Region
of the Peoples Liberation Army, stated that this joint training
was a milestone in the history of the exchanges between the
two militaries. It is known that this is the second joint training
between the Chinese and Nepalese special forces. In April 2017,
the “Everest Friendship 2017” Sino-Nepalese special forces
joint training was held in Kathmandu, Nepal.
Indian media has expressed concern about the military
exchanges between China and Nepal. The Times of India
reported on August 13 that, considering India’s concerns,
the Sino-Nepalese military exercise narrowed its scale at the
last moment. However, even if Nepal is cautious in its foreign
policy, the ‘military diplomacy’ between Nepal and China will
still worry India.

A fort in Rasuwa District in Nepal China Border (2013).

Source: By Krish Dulal [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nepal_China_Border.JPG.

OE Watch | November 2018

30

INDO-PACIFIC
India Upgrades Its MiG-29s
OE Watch Commentary: A lot of attention over the past
The strategically important Adampur Air Force Station,
year on the Indian government’s procurement for its armed
forces has been on the acquisition of the S-400 missile
which is around 100 km from Pakistan and 250 km away from
system from Russia and the ongoing controversy over a
China, is now equipped with upgraded MiG-29.
deal with the French company Dassault for a multirole
fighter. While these are significant developments, the
Source: “MiG-29 gets upgrade, gains in lethality,” The Tribune, 8 October 2018.
accompanying excerpted article reports on a recent
https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/mig-29-gets-upgrade-gains-inupgrade of a number of India’s MiG-29 fighters and there lethality/664924.html
are a couple of important things in the article to note.
The India Air Force’s beast — MiG-29 — has gained in strength and ferocity
The article mentions that the upgrades come at a time
after an upgrade, giving the force, which is battling a shortage of fighter aircraft, a
when the Indian government “is battling a shortage of
much-needed boost, according to officials.
fighter aircraft,” part of which has been related to the
The Russian-origin aircraft, now capable of effecting mid-air refuelling, is
Rafale controversy. The controversy started a number
compatible with latest missiles and can launch multi-dimensional attacks, Flight
of years ago when the Indian government put out a bid
Lieutenant Karan Kohli, who is deployed at Adampur Air Force Station, said…
Last week, the upgraded MiG-29 showcased its combat capabilities at Adampur
for 126 multirole fighters, awarded the French company
station…The upgraded MiG-29 also has a Multi-Functional Display (MFD) screen.
Dassault the contract in 2012, only to rescind it a few
...The strategically important Adampur Air Force Station, which is around 100 km
years later. The government reached an agreement with
from Pakistan and 250 km away from China, is now equipped with upgraded MiGDassault in 2016, but the deal only included the purchase
of 36 of Dassault’s Rafale multirole fighters, with the first 29…
set of deliveries to take place sometime in 2019.

“

”

The Rafale agreement has been mired in allegations within India that Prime Minister Modi’s government chose Dassault because of its
partnership with the domestic Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. There have been reports that the Indian government will retire its inventory of
MiG-29s within the next 10 years (most likely those in the air force, but naval MiG-29Ks could remain in service longer aboard the country’s
lone aircraft carrier) and it is believed that the upgrades will fill the gap until then. Lastly, the upgrades include “mid-air refueling” and took
place for MiG-29s based at “Adampur Air Force Station,” which is located in northern India and has been noted as an important part of
operations in past conflicts with Pakistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

IAF MiG-29 at Aero India 2009.

Source: By aztonyx [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IAF_MiG-29.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

31

INDO-PACIFIC
Singapore Unites Southeast Asia to Counter Terrorism
OE Watch Commentary: The rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),
which included foreign fighters from Southeast Asia, and ISIS-inspired jihadists in
Southeast Asia has compelled the countries of the region to strengthen their counterterrorism efforts. Most recently, as the accompanying excerpted article from Singapore’s
The Straits Times indicates, Singapore is playing a leading role in encouraging regional
counter-terrorism cooperation. According to the article, Singapore will propose the
establishment of an Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) regional counterintelligence sharing network. Singapore’s defense minister stated such a network was
necessary because Singapore itself faces threats from terrorism. In addition, the defense
minister noted that with ISIS’s demise in Iraq and Syria, jihadist fighters will return to
their home regions to wage battles.
The new network would seem to be an evolution of the Our Eyes Initiative, which is a
strategic intelligence platform that Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, Brunei, Malaysia and
the Philippines launched in January. According to the article, the Singaporean defense
minister would, however, envision the new network including countries like the US
and Australia, which have also played a major role in countering terrorism in Southeast
Asia since the Jemaah Islamiya attacks in Bali, Indonesia in 2002. These non-ASEAN
countries would be called the “plus” countries in the intelligence-sharing network. The
article notes they may also add strength to the initiative if several ASEAN countries do
not join the new network because they do not share Singapore’s threat perceptions.
The article also identified how terrorism has evolved in Southeast Asia. It first entered
the radar of most Southeast Asian countries with the Bali bombings in 2002 and was
fueled by al-Qaeda and Jemaah Islamiya, but then it took a dangerous turn with ISIS
over the past few years. Now the region is in a post-ISIS phase. One notable attack in
the current phase was in May, when terrorists in Surabaya, Indonesia co-opted their
families, including their young children, into suicide bombing missions on churches.
The article does not predict what the next phase will be, but states terrorism is “real,
present and growing” in Southeast Asia and that Singapore must do more. An improved
intelligence-sharing platform, according to the article, is but one necessary response.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Even as ISIS is

Source: “Singapore seeks support for regional antiterror platform,” The Straits Times, 11 September
2018. https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/
singapore-seeks-support-for-regional-anti-terrorplatform
Singapore is working closely with Indonesia to get
more support at an Asean meeting later this month
for the building of a regional counter-terrorism
intelligence-sharing network, Defence Minister Ng
Eng Hen disclosed. The proposed platform comes
amid the continuing terror threat facing Singapore,
Dr Ng said. Unfortunately, the threat of terrorism
will be a long-term one - all terrorism experts
think so. In fact, even as ISIS is decimated in the
Middle East, the threat here is expected to grow,
as foreign fighters return to wage jihadist battles in
our region. RSIS international relations professor
Tan See Seng said getting all 10 Asean members
to cooperate could prove challenging, given the
region’s trust deficit and potentially conflicting
threat perceptions. “Where going beyond Asean
is concerned, countries like Australia and the
United States have played important roles since the
2002 Bali attacks in exchanging information and
intelligence with Asean states. It therefore makes
good sense to include the Plus countries.”
Dr Ng said terrorism is one threat that today’s
generation faces - first fueled by Al-Qaeda globally
and Jemaah Islamiah regionally, then by the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and its affiliates in the
region.

decimated in the Middle
East, the threat here is
expected to grow, as
foreign fighters return to
wage jihadist battles in
our region.”

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) through the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance in Disaster Management (AHA Centre) hands over
relief items and equipment for the internally displaced persons from Marawi City and other affected localities (2017).
Source: By Philippine Information Agency (Philippine Information Agency) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ASEAN_aid_for_Marawi_2.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

32

INDO-PACIFIC
Is It Too Late for the Maldives to Lift Itself Out
From Under China’s Hold?
OE Watch Commentary: When President of the
Maldives Abdulla Yameen was defeated by opposition
leader Ibrahim Mohamed Solih in the September elections,
it drew sighs of relief from critics, who feared Yameen had
sold the country out to China in the midst of Beijing’s push
with its global trade and infrastructure plan, known as the
Belt and Road initiative (BRI). However, trying to reverse
Yameen’s deals with China may not be as easy as critics in
the Maldives would have hoped.
The Maldives, which has long been a popular tourist
destination, has grown in strategic importance in recent
years. As a result, there has been a tug-of-war between
China and India to see who could gain the most influence.
Maldives had long been loyal to India until Yameen took
office in 2013, after which the country shifted its loyalty to
China. The first accompanying excerpted article, published
by the South China Morning Post, explains that this shift in
loyalty fueled concern in India, which feared Beijing was
using the Maldives as part of its “String of Pearls” strategy
to build a network of economic and military ties in the
region to contain India. After Yameen endorsed China’s
new Silk Road initiative, China made huge investments
in infrastructure projects in the archipelago nation. These
projects included an $830 million investment to update the
Maldives’ Velana International Airport and a bridge to link
the airport to Male (the capital of Maldives), a 25-story
apartment complex, and a hospital. While the Maldives drew
closer to China, its relations with India deteriorated.
Fast forward to 17 November 2018, when President-elect
Solih is expected to assume the role as president. According
to the second excerpted article, published by India-based The
Economic Times, there is now talk that Solih might put on
hold, or even cancel, Chinese-funded BRI projects within
the country. Some of those projects have been completed,
however and, as the article points out, Solih faces challenges.
For example, there is the challenge of repaying Chinese
loans that have already been extended for the projects.
Maldives is facing some $1.4 billion in liabilities, which
account for approximately one third of the country’s gross
domestic product. Seventy-five percent of the debt came
from the BRI projects. Critics point to this “debt trap,” as
making the Maldives one of the most at-risk countries of any
involved with the BRI. The fear is that China could exert
pressure on the Maldives if it cannot repay its debt for the
projects. As the first article points out, the Maldives could be
forced into major concessions, “as its neighbor Sri Lanka has
– it was forced to sign a 99-year lease with China for the port
of Hambantota after it was unable to repay loans to develop
the project.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“…the debt may see the country making major
concessions as its neighbour Sri Lanka has – it was
forced to sign a 99-year lease with China for the port of
Hambantota after it was unable to repay loans to develop
the project.”
Source: Lee Jeong-ho, “Why are China and India so Interested in the
Maldives?,” South China Morning Post, 25 September 2018. https://www.
scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/2165597/why-are-china-and-indiaso-interested-maldives
The Maldives, long a popular tourist destination, has grown in strategic
importance in recent years as China and India vie for influence in the region,
and as Beijing pushes ahead with its global trade and infrastructure plan.
But China’s increasing presence there has fueled New Delhi’s suspicion that
the nation is part of Beijing’s “String of Pearls” strategy to build a network of
economic and military ties in the region to contain India.
Those fears have grown as Yameen used Chinese money to build
infrastructure in the Maldives, and after he endorsed Beijing’s new Silk Road
initiative.
They [investments] include a US$830 million investment to upgrade the
Maldives airport and build a 2km (1.3-mile) bridge to link the airport island
with the capital Male… a 25-story apartment complex and hospital in the
Maldives.
Critics have warned that the debt may see the country making major
concessions as its neighbour Sri Lanka has – it was forced to sign a 99-year
lease with China for the port of Hambantota after it was unable to repay loans
to develop the project.
China’s foreign ministry has said Beijing never attached any political
conditions to its Maldives aid, which has done no harm to the country’s
sovereignty and independence, nor jeopardized security in the Indian Ocean
region.
Source: Dipanjan Roy Chaudhury, “President-Elect Ibu Solih May Look at
Halting BRI Projects in Maldives,” The Economic Times, 19 October 2018.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/world-news/
president-elect-ibu-solih-may-look-at-halting-bri-projects-in-maldives/
articleshow/66278481.cms
Solih’s challenge will, however, be the repayment of Chinese loans extended
for the projects in the island-nation.
The Maldives is facing liabilities of $1.4 billion, accounting for about a third
of the country’s gross domestic product, due to Yameen’s policies.
Seventy-five percent of the debt was generated from the BRI projects. …
Maldives, a small economy heavily reliant on tourism, is one of the most atrisk countries of any involved with the BRI because of debt, according to the
Center for Global Development, a Washington DC-based think-tank tracking
the initiative.

OE Watch | November 2018

33

INDO-PACIFIC
Vietnam Begins Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan
OE Watch Commentary: On 1 October 2018, the
Vietnamese-language website vietnamnet.vn published the
accompanying excerpted article, along with photos, of the
first Vietnamese contingent to be sent to South Sudan as
peacekeepers. The peacekeepers, who are primarily military
medical professionals, demonstrate a Vietnamese commitment
to providing security in a liberal world order. Australia is
taking responsibility for flying the Vietnamese peacekeepers
to South Sudan on its largest military transport aircraft. One
of the photos in the article includes a caption highlighting that
the Vietnamese peacekeepers were speaking English with the
Australians and emphasizing the international obligation they
are meeting. The article also notes the 63 Vietnamese personnel
who are heading to South Sudan were trained in English.

Source: “Lực lượng gìn giữ hòa bình Việt Nam xuất quân lên đường sang
Nam Sudan” (Vietnam peacekeepers leave for South Sudan),” vietnamnet.
vn, 1 October 2018. http://vietnamnet.vn/vn/thoi-su/chinh-tri/luc-luong-gingiu-hoa-binh-viet-nam-xuat-quan-len-duong-sang-nam-sudan-480597.html
This morning, the Ministry of Defense held a ceremony before sending
troops to the second level field hospital of the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in South Sudan. Lieutenant General Nguyen Chi Vinh sent off the
cadres and soldiers and Lieutenant General Nguyen Chi Vinh, Deputy
Minister of Defense, affirmed that 63 military officers and soldiers set out
to perform the UN peacekeeping mission, which marks a new step in the
development of the People’s Army of Vietnam. Lieutenant Sa Minh Ngoc,
the administrative officer, stated: “Our national flag will be flying over
Bentiu, South Sudan, so that we remember our motherland when we look at
the national flag.” Before leaving the 63 officers and soldiers were trained
in English, survival skills, and peacekeeping. The unit can provide services
for up to 40 outpatients and 20 inpatients per day, emergency resuscitation,
air and road transport, and more. It can also perform 3-4 surgeries per day
with anesthesia. The United Nations also requested that Vietnam provide
emergency medical assistance for the South Sudanese people. The United
Nations requires peacekeepers to be 10% female, but in the delegation,
the number is 17%. Captain Nguyen Thi Phuong Thao said that they are
prepared to face the difficulties in South Sudan. In addition to being a little
worried about the climate in South Sudan, the delegation is very confident
in their training.

The article frames the peacekeeping mission in terms of
national patriotism. The peacekeepers who were interviewed
state they will face harsh conditions in their area of operation
in Bentiu, South Sudan, including the heat, but they consider
their mission to be a service to the motherland because it is part
of the development of the army. One lieutenant who will be
on the mission expressed pride that the Vietnamese flag would
fly over their living quarters and that they would see it every
day. The peacekeepers also take pride that they surpassed the
United Nations quota requiring them to have at least 10 percent
women in their contingent. One woman who was interviewed stated she had a four-year old son, but her husband encouraged her to embark on
the mission. The article also notes the women had designated an “older sister,” who stated in her interview the women were proud of their role
and were confident in the training they received.

The peacekeepers do not intend to see combat, but rather will engage in air and road transport, resuscitation of injured civilians, and provide
other medical care to United Nations and other international staff in Bentiu and the South Sudanese people, including surgeries with anesthesia.
Considering the enthusiasm the Vietnamese contingent is demonstrating for this peacekeeping mission, it may became the first of other
missions abroad for the Vietnamese. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The United Nations also requested that Vietnam provide emergency medical assistance for the South
Sudanese people.”

Ariel View of UN Camp in Maridi - South Sudan (2011).

Source: By Akashp65 [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:U_N_camp.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

34

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Government Details Ahvaz Terrorist Incident
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 September 2018, gunmen attacked a military
parade in the southwestern Iranian city of Ahvaz. It was the deadliest attack inside
Iran since terrorists attacked a Shi’ite procession in the southern city of Chahbahar in
2010, killing more than 30. Ethnic tension is nothing new in Khuzestan, the Iranian
province of which Ahvaz is the capital. Khuzestan is traditionally Arab, although in
recent decades the migration of ethnic Persians to the region has decreased the overall
proportion of Iranian Arabs resident there. At the same time, Khuzestan is historically
the center of Iran’s oil industry. Many local Arabs (and, for that matter, resident nonArabs) feel that they do not receive true benefit from its resources.
There are a couple of things to note from the accompanying excerpted interview
from Raja News, a hardline portal associated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps. First, the uncorroborated allegation that Saudi Arabia was financing the attacks
and offering the perpetrators refuge in any Arab country and, second, the insinuation
that the United States was also involved with the terrorist cell. In the first instance,
parliamentarian Abolfazl Hasanbeigi’s suggestion that Riyadh offered the terrorist cell
members refuge in any Arab country highlights the ethnic animus toward Arabs that
infuses the Iranian leadership: To imply that Saudi Arabia had the support of every
Arab country in rewarding anti-Iranian terrorism reinforces the notion that all Arabs
are enemies of Iran, the pro-Iranian policies of Syria and Qatar notwithstanding. That
the United States had allegedly had contact with individuals in the cell who were also
involved in the Islamic State reinforces a common theme of Iranian propaganda, that
the United States created the Islamic State.
Also of interest in the reference is the mention of tribalism in Khuzestan. Throughout
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, tribal movements in Khuzestan
centered around Muhamrah (today’s Khorramshahr) threatened to secede from Iran
to create their own Arab emirate. Reza Shah, the father of the shah ousted in 1979,
crushed the tribal movements not only in Khuzestan, but also in predominantly
Kurdish areas along the Iraqi border. Seldom do Iranian authorities acknowledge
tribalism, except perhaps for the nomadic and more placid Qashqa’i and Bakhtiari. That
the Iranian government openly acknowledges tribalism, even if simply to acknowledge
that it tapped into tribal networks, suggests that tribal identity is again of importance in
Khuzestan. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Jadidtarin Jozi’yat az Hadisah-e terrorist-e
Ahvaz (The Latest Details on the Ahvaz terrorist
incident),” Raja News, 26 September 2018. goo.gl/
x16Fgg
Abolfazl Hasanbeigi said: “Saudi Arabia had
promised the perpetrators of the Ahvaz incident that
after the operation, they would be given $5,000 and
residency of any Arab country that they wished.”
Abolfazl Hasanbeigi, a member of the National
Security and Foreign Policy Committee of the
Majlis, speaking with [the news site] Dana.ir with
regard the details of the Ahvaz incident, stated: “The
group that carried out the terrorist attack in Ahvaz
were members of the same family, and had, recently,
been in Saudi Arabia where they converted their
religion to the Wahhabism and Salafism” He added:
“These individuals were trained by the Americans
in the Deir ez-Zor region and one of their members
also joined the Islamic State, but in one of the
operations was killed….”
“Internally, there were 26 people involved, four of
whom were killed, and 22 of whom were arrested
by the soldiers of the Imam Zaman [Muhammad
al-Mahdi, a Shi’ite messianic figure], but a few
are outside the borders of the country in Denmark
and England, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
must take action to extradite and arrest them.” The
member of the National Security and Foreign Policy
Committee of the Majlis explained, “Saudi Arabia
had promised a 40-member team including the 26 in
Iran $5,000 and residency in an Arab country that
they could choose.” At the end, Hasanbeigi said,
“The people’s support for the system and country is
unsurpassed and, of interest, the tribe of the attacker
cooperated with the security forces and without that,
we could not have arrested all 22 people.”

“The people’s support for the system
and country is unsurpassed…”

2018 Ahvaz military parade attack.

Source: By Fatemeh Rahimavian (https://www.farsnews.com/photo/13970631000975) [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2018_Ahvaz_military_parade_attack_10.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past five
years, the use of rudimentary military UAVs by
non-state actors has steadily grown in the Middle
East. The Ansar Allah Movement (the Houthis) and
their allies in Yemen’s military have arguably been
the most skilled and proficient users of rudimentary
UAVs. The accompanying excerpted articles from
Arabic-language media highlight recent Ansar Allah
claims of using UAVs to strike civilian airports in
the UAE and in “joint operations” to help direct
artillery fire and missile strikes against forces from
the Saudi/UAE coalition.
Ansar Allah and their allies often make false or
inflated claims, and their purported employment of
UAVs is no exception. In July 2018, they claimed to
have dispatched a small UAV to strike Abu Dhabi
Airport, located approximately 1,500 kilometers
from the Yemeni border. The absence of proof, UAE
denials of the incident, and the technical challenge
of flying a small drone across such distances,
however, cast serious doubts on the claim. The
first accompanying article, from the Qatari daily
al-Araby al-Jadid, argues that in the unlikely
case a Yemeni UAV actually made it to Abu Dhabi,
the drone would have either been flown by a team
that infiltrated Saudi territory or by one working
off the coast with Iranian support. In August 2018,
Ansar Allah claimed to have struck Dubai’s busy
airport with an armed drone, though once again no
evidence was provided beyond the circumstantial
fact of several flights being canceled that day. The
following month a similar, uncorroborated claim
was made.
In February 2018, Ansar Allah’s media announced
they had destroyed a Saudi/UAE coalition Patriot
PAC-3 air defense system near the port city of
Mocha in a “joint operation” involving drones and
a ballistic missile launch. According to Saudi
and UAE media, the missile was in fact shot
down and its launch site destroyed. Since then,
and especially since August 2018, the frequency
with which Ansar Allah media claims “joint
operations” using drones has increased markedly,
particularly when paired with artillery fire. Drone
footage from one such attack last September shows
artillery fire striking a coalition position based on
intelligence purportedly provided to its operators
by the UAV (https://twitter.com/AnsarAllahMC/
status/1039616823589851140). More complex joint
operations, for instance using small drone swarms
to disable or confound defensive radar systems,
may well be on the horizon. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“…a unique, rapid operation…carried out by artillery forces in
conjunction with unmanned aerial forces…”

Purported Houthi “Joint Operation” (September 2018).

Source: Ansar Allah Media Channel, https://twitter.com/AnsarAllahMC/status/1039616823589851140, Fair Use.

Source:
‫طائرات املليشيات بحث ًا عن الدرونز في اليمن وسورية والعراق‬
Othman al-Mokhtar. “Militia Planes: Researching Drones in Yemen, Syria and Iraq.”
al-Araby al-Jadid, 5 October 2018. https://goo.gl/2ymsKa
The Houthi announcement that they had bombed Abu Dhabi Airport late last July using
a UAV was described as “the coup group’s most recent innovation in UAV production.”
There is broad disagreement on the extent to which armed groups in the region as
a whole can develop these weapons in ongoing conflicts. There is near-unanimous
agreement among military analysts on the falseness of the claim, which is rather part of
the Houthi propaganda campaign given the impossibility of a UAV whose wingspan is
no greater than 35 centimeters crossing Saudi Arabia to reach Abu Dhabi, a distance
of around 1,500 kilometers, something experts believe to be “physically impossible.”
Nonetheless, they consider that if this actually occurred the UAV did not take off from
Yemeni territory but rather somewhere else in the Arabian Gulf waters and with Iranian
assistance or via successful infiltration into Saudi territory, which would cut the distance
for the UAV to reach Abu Dhabi from around 1,500 to less than 200 kilometers.
The Houthis have thus far not been able to prove the alleged strike, and none of the
travelers in Abu Dhabi airport, estimated at around 3,000 people according to the flight
schedule from Thursday 27 July, heard any sound coming from an explosion or saw
smoke coming from inside the airport.
Source:
‫عملية يمنية مشتركة تدمر باتريوت العدوان‬
Ali al-Darwani. “Joint Yemeni Operation Destroys Enemy’s Patriot,” Ansar Allah, 12
February 2018. http://www.ansarollah.com/archives/138154
A UAV flew over Yemen’s southwestern coast and was able to evade the Patriot’s sensors
and monitor the location of the raiding force’s defensive system in Mocha. After this it sent
the information and coordinates to a joint operations room for the missile forces, which
was in turn ready to use this information to strike the target using a precision ballistic
missile, which was able to avoid the Patriot’s radar monitoring systems.
Source:
‫ناطق الجيش عمليات نوعية لسالح الجو املسير والقوة املدفعية بالساحل الغربي‬
“Army Spokesman: Special Operations by Unmanned Air and Artillery Forces in the
Western Coast,” Saba News, 11 September 2018. https://www.sabanews.net/ar/
news507970.htm
… a unique, rapid operation against the enemy mercenaries… carried out by artillery
forces in conjunction with unmanned aerial forces.

OE Watch | November 2018

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Confirms
Use of Armed Drones in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)
launched seven unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) into Syria after it fired six
ballistic missiles into the Middle Euphrates River Valley. According to the
accompanying excerpted article by Tasnim News Agency, an official Iranian
state media source, the IRGC used UAVs over Syria’s Deir ez Zour province to
target Islamic State militants in what they called Operation Muharram Strike.
The UAVs reportedly flew 300 kilometers to reach the province. According
to Tasnim, the UAV is Iran’s Saeqeh class, which is a long-range drone that
can carry “smart, precision guided bombs.” A video posted by Tasnim in
the article is believed to be a recording of the attack and it shows one UAV
releasing what appeared to be unguided bombs.
The UAV attack followed an earlier missile attack, according to the
excerpted article by Fars News Agency, another Iranian news outlet. The
article details the IRGC’s launch of six surface-to-surface ballistic missiles
from Iran’s Kermanshah province into Abu Kamal in Syria’s Deir ez Zour
province. Two types of missiles were used, according to the article: Zolfaqar
and Qiam, which can travel 750 kilometers and 800 kilometers, respectively.
According to the article, the missiles flew over Iraq to reach their targets in
Syria. Operation Muharram Strike targeted Islamic State militants in response
to the 22 September attacks on Iran’s military parade in the Iranian city of
Ahvaz. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

Source: “Gozaresh ekhtesasi: ‘Zerbet Muharram:’
Avaleen amaleeyat beeroon marzee pahpadhaye sepah
ba ‘bombafkan saeghe’ (Breaking News: ‘Operation
Muharram:’ The IRGC’s first international drone operation
with Saeqeh),” Tasnim News Agency, 1 October 2018.
https://goo.gl/F2Y3Z8
…Today, the IRGC launched a series of drones under
Operation Muharram Strike to target terrorists in Syria…
Source: “Entegham mooshakee va pahpadee sepah dar
pasokh beh hadese ahvah/mooshakha az no-eh zolfaqar va
qiam bood-and (IRGC launch drones in response to Ahvaz
attack/missiles were Zolfaqar and Qiam),” Fars News
Agency, 1 October 2018. https://goo.gl/FjNM9k
…Today at 2:00 in the morning, the IRGC launched a
series of drones to target terrorists who were responsible
for the Ahvaz attack. In Operation Muharram Strike, six
ground-to-ground ballistic missiles were launched followed
by drone attacks from Kermanshah. The area targeted was
Abu Kamal…

“Today at 2:00 in the morning, the IRGC launched a series of drones to target terrorists who were
responsible for the Ahvaz attack.”

Iranian Saegheh UAV (undated).
Source: Tasnim News, https://goo.gl/F2Y3Z8, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | November 2018

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran to Build New Missile System?
OE Watch Commentary: In the accompanying excerpt from
Tasnim News, an agency affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC), Mahmud Ebrahimnejad, the deputy
commander of the IRGC’s air defense wing (in Iran, air defense is
a separate branch of the military, distinct from the air and ground
forces), spoke about developing a domestic version of the Russian
Pantsir missile system. Russia builds several variants of the Pantsir,
a medium range surface-to-air missile and anti-aircraft weapon.
Ebrahimnejad cited the Pantsir’s supposed success in shooting
down missiles launched against regime targets in Syria. While
there have been only limited airstrikes against Syrian bases and on
Iranian facilities and encampments inside Syria, the openness with
which Ebrahimnejad talks about copying systems for domestic
production is noteworthy. Many Iranian weapons systems today
come from Russia, but it is uncertain to what degree the Russian
government tolerates the Iranian military industry’s reverseengineering of its products. If Moscow disapproves of the potential
Iranian Pantsir system, greater Russo-Iranian tension could be on
the horizon. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“This system…destroyed many of the missiles that
were fired into Syria.”

96K6 Pantsir-S (Military-technical forum ARMY-2018 - Demonstration).
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2018-Demonstration-part-2/i-Cbv5R3q, CC 4.0.

Source: “Iran ‘Pantsir’ Misazad (Iran to build Pantsir),” Tasnim News, 14 September 2018. https://goo.gl/Sc3uZW
This system, which has two 30 mm auto cannons and 12 missile launch pads has performed well in recent wars in the region, as it destroyed
many of the missiles that were fired into Syria. Currently, Iraq, Syria, and the [United Arab] Emirates are among those that possess the
Pantsir in the region. Gen. [Mahmud] Ebrahimnejad, deputy commander of Khatam-ol-Anbiya Air Defense Base in charge of research and
development, in a conversation with the Tasnim correspondents, stated that [the Air Defense center] had begun a study about [possible]
Iranian construction of Pantsirs. In response to a Tasnim reporter’s question about whether the Defense Base is planning to build such a
system, he said, “We started this one or two years ago, and we pursue it seriously. When appropriate, we will give information to the public.”

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues

OE Watch | November 2018

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey Tests Anti-torpedo Torpedo
OE Watch Commentary: ASELSAN, one
of the premier Turkish defense companies,
successfully completed tests for a prototype of an
anti-torpedo torpedo. The accompanying excerpted
article from the Turkish state-owned media outlet
TRT Haber states that with this prototype, Turkey
has passed a critical juncture in terms of creating
a domestic submarine countermeasure system.
This is a hard-kill torpedo countermeasure system,
or TORK, and it provides an effective defense
against torpedoes. TUBITAK, the Scientific
and Technological Research Council of Turkey
provided support to ASELSAN to produce this
weapon system. This first test showed that the
system detects the surface target with the support
of a sonar seeker and approaches its target to
destroy it. As the article notes, Turkey expects it to
be one of the most effective domestic underwater
weapon systems of the future. End OE Watch
Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: “ASELSAN’ın su altı silahı hedefe ilerliyor (ASELSAN’s submarine weapon
advances towards the target),” TRT Haber, 1 October 2018. https://www.trthaber.com/
haber/bilim-teknoloji/aselsanin-su-alti-silahi-hedefe-ilerliyor-387207.html
Turkey’s leading defense company ASELSAN completed its test for the prototype of an
anti-torpedo torpedo, a countermeasure system, successfully.
The most effective defense against torpedo threats for submarines and ships is provided
by a combination of soft-kill and hard-kill methods.
ASELSAN, has been working on the development of these technologies. The company
produced a prototype of TORK, a hard-kill torpedo countermeasure system, in a short
time with the support of the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey.
The TORK succeeded in marine tests conducted with the first-ever domesticallyproduced sonar seeker. The system detected the surface targets with the help of the
sonar seeker and headed toward its target in the tests conducted in Turkey for the first
time.
TORK approaches an incoming torpedo threat with active homing guidance and
explodes at an effective range to destroy or harm to stop its operation. It can cooperate
with ZARGANA and HIZIR torpedo countermeasure systems in order to maximize
defense capability against torpedo threats…
It is expected to be one of the most important underwater weapons of the future.

“Turkey’s leading defense company ASELSAN completed its test for the prototype of an anti-torpedo
torpedo, a countermeasure system, successfully.”

Starboard view of Turkish submarine TCG Batıray (S-349).

Source: By LT P.J. Azzolina [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TCG_Batiray(S349).jpeg.

OE Watch | November 2018

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Naval Special Forces
OE Watch Commentary: The Underwater Defense Forces (SAS in Turkish) are one of two Turkish
Navy special operations units – the other is the Underwater Offence Forces (SAT) and they are the
equivalent of the US Navy SEALs. The accompanying excerpted article from the state owned Anadolu
Ajansı is about SAS forces and it states that they operate in the sea as well as on the ground. The article
focuses on the capabilities and the recent training of the SAS forces that the author observed.
As the article states, the SAS forces execute their duties with “patience, intelligence, and responsibility.”
In accordance with Turkish interests, they have participated in the counterterrorism operations of
Euphrates Shield and Olive Branch, which Turkey launched into Syria and they also supported the peace
Logo of Underwater Defence Group
operations in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Kosovo. SAS commandos are known for amphibious sabotage
Command.
Source: By Elmasmelih, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sualt%C4%B1_
Savunma_logo.gif,
CC 3.0.
operations in addition to being very adaptable and capable in a variety of conditions. The author was able
to follow a recent SAS training provided by the SAS Group Command in Istanbul and the article is accompanied by a short video about the
training. The video shows a robot directed by the SAS teams dismantling an explosive and some SAS commandos on the ground neutralizing
a booby trap with a sniper firing at it. Overall, the pictures, a short video and the text shed light on the SAS forces and their trainings.
Turkey has had many security threats on its borders and in the surrounding seas in recent years and it has been noted that the government
wishes to demonstrate strength and garner public support, despite having dismissed about 40 percent of its generals and admirals after the
failed coup attempt. The training of Turkey’s special forces has previously been publicized through statements from the chief of the general
staff, but in recent years, Turkey has provided more access to its state-owned news agency or pro-government journalists to follow military
training and other defense related events. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“SAS Forces continue their challenging training on the ground and in the sea as they wholeheartedly
safeguard the interest of Turkey in the homeland and abroad…”
Source: Kaan Bozdogan, “SAS komandolarinin basari sifresi: Sabir, akil ve sorumluluk (The Key to Success of SAS Commandos: Patience,
intelligence and responsibility),” Anadolu Ajansı, 30 September 2018. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/turkiye/sas-komandolarinin-basari-sifresisabir-akil-ve-sorumluluk/1268649
SAS Forces continue their challenging training on the ground and in the sea as they wholeheartedly safeguard the interest of Turkey in the
homeland and abroad…
With the objective of safeguarding Turkish interests, Underwater Defense (SAS) Commandos have successfully completed several anti-terror
operations such as Euphrates Shield and Olive Branch as well as operations in support of peace in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Kosovo. They
continue their training with the motto of “patience, intelligence and responsibility.”
SAS Forces consist of Turkish Navy’s elite soldiers and operate on the ground and in the sea…
SAS Commandos can neutralize every kind of sabotage, explosive objects and weapons. They stand out in amphibious operations as they
engage the enemy and any ambush on land or sea.
They have expertise in simple explosive munitions as well as in complicated booby traps. They have the capability to make a correct decision
very fast and execute in very risks situations.
AA team watched their training that was carried out by the SAS Group Command…
SAS Commandos who were deployed to a forestry terrain, in a short period of time repelled enemy attacks and neutralized all the terrorists
as part of the training.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter
OE Watch | November 2018

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the Middle East
OE Watch Commentary: The Turkish
and Russian alliance passed the test, for now,
over the looming Syrian al-Assad regime
operation in Idlib. The accompanying
excerpted articles, one from the progovernment Turkish daily Yeni Şafak and the
other from the Turkish daily Hürriyet, argue
that the alliance not only survived what has
been called the Idlib test, but also extended
its reach beyond Syria to include Iraq and
the broader Middle East.
The first article outlines, through several
quotes from Russian and Turkish officials
and newspapers, signs of a likely agreement
between the two to expand their influence in
Iraq, even though there is no current official
agreement. According to the author, Russia
already has a presence in Iraq through its
energy companies (Lukoil, Rosneft and
Gazprom) and it is only a matter of time
before it deploys its military. Additionally,
it appears Turkey and Russia will welcome
Iran into the alliance because of Iran’s strong
influence and presence in Baghdad.
The second accompanying article states
that there are several indicators pointing to
Turkish and Russian military cooperation.
First, frequent visits of the Turkish Ministry
of Defense and the head of the National
Intelligence Agency to Russia show
the intensity of talks regarding Turkish
and Russian cooperation in defense and
intelligence. The second is the expansion of
the functions of the joint Iranian, Russian
and Turkish coordination center to possibly
include military cooperation. Third,
Turkey’s decision to purchase the S-400 air
defense system from Russia will increase
the likelihood of the Turkish-Russian
cooperation. Ultimately, as the Hürriyet
article notes, Turkey continues expanding
its cooperation with Russia after “years of
contention.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

Source: Nedret Ersanel, “Turkiye ve Rusya, Irak’ta da anlaştı (Turkey and Russia reached
an Agreement in Iraq as well),” Yeni Şafak, 6 October 2018. https://www.yenisafak.com/
yazarlar/nedretersanel/turkiye-ve-rusya-irakta-da-anlasti-2047584
Things in Idlib and Syria have not ended just yet, but Turkey and Russia reached an
agreement in Iraq…The likelihood of troops combatting each other in the region formed of
“quicksand” is no longer about “power,” but the totality of forces.
You can put Russia, Turkey, Iran and even Damascus, as well as some Iraqi elements on one
side, and the U.S., Israel and the “countries” that are told, “you will not last 15 days if we
stop protecting you” on the other…
Signposts…”The Iraqi parliament elected Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) candidate
Barham Salih as the president. Salih designated Adil Abdul Mahdi, the independent
candidate of Shiites as prime minister. The appointment led to tensions between the two big
Kurdish parties.” (Oct. 5)…
“The chaotic independence outburst of the regional government in northern Iraq was
negated by the clear stance demonstrated by Turkey. Iraq was saved from a great problem
with the dominance of the central administration. Our hope is that the PKK presence in the
country is eliminated.” (President Erdoğan, Oct. 1)
“On Sept. 30 the Iranian military targeted Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan (KDPI)
camps on the Arbil-Iran border area. Iranian forces organized an attack on the KDPI’s camp
operating in Erbil on Sept. 8 and 16 KDPI members, including top-level figures, died.” (Oct.
1)…
“Our objective is to clear the entire Syrian territory of terrorists, starting from Manbij. It
is to completely clear Qandil, which is the source of the trouble, and Sinjar which is headed
toward being the new Qandil, from the separatist terrorist organization [PKK].” (President
Erdoğan, Sept. 26)
“Iranian President Hassan Rouhani prior to Erdoğan’s outburst at the UN, followed by
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov’s messages criticizing the U.S. presence east of the
Euphrates and its operations there, is a noteworthy aspect of the matter. In this respect, a
trilateral challenge against the U.S. is in question.” (Sept. 27, S. Ergin, Hürriyet)
“We are in very close and rapidly developing relations with Russia in every area. Similarly,
we are in close contact with Iran regarding our Syria and Iraq policies. We attach special
importance to including Iran in decisions regarding the future of the region.” (President
rdoğan, Oct. 1)…
Finally...It is clear that thwarting the others from Iraq is slowly giving confidence.
Moscow is present in Iraq with “star” energy names such as Lukoil, Rosneft and Gazprom.
According to a frequently repeated claim, the S-400s are going to play a role in the “new
rapport period.”
…Mikhail Bogdanov, the most powerful Russian diplomatic character in the region said
yesterday: “Iraq is one of Russia’s main partners in the region.”…Moscow’s official stance
is to protect Iraq’s sovereignty; it is on the same page with Ankara regarding Barzani’s
“independence referendum,” which was dubbed “chaotic…” (‘Russian presence in Iraq - a
matter of time’, Oct. 3, TNA.)

“We are in very close and rapidly developing relations with Russia in every area. Similarly, we are in close
contact with Iran regarding our Syria and Iraq policies. We attach special importance to including Iran in
decisions regarding the future of the region. ”

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2018

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the
Middle East
Source: Sedat Ergin, “Türk – Rus Askerî İşbirliği: İki hasımdan iki ortağa doğru (Turkish – Russian Military cooperation: From two foes to
two partners),” Hürriyet, 21 September 2018. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sedat-ergin/turk-rus-asker-isbirligi-iki-hasimdan-iki-ortagadogru-40963060
One of the most important points of the agreement reached last Monday [on 17 September 2018] in Sochi is that the functions of the joint
Iranian-Russian-Turkish coordination center will be enlarged…
The fact that a NATO country, another that has positioned itself in a historical and ideological framework as an opponent of NATO and a
third that carries the identity of the Islamic Republic came together to enter into cooperation in a military framework is a situation worth
focusing on…
The resulting bilateral cooperation axis between Russia and Turkey was one of the most interesting developments of the recent past,
especially at a time when Idlib came to the top of the international agenda.
The fact that Defense Minister Hulusi Akar, accompanied by Hakan Fidan, the head of the National Intelligence Agency went to Moscow
twice in one week last August to meet his Russian counterpart is self-explanatory in terms of the intensity of talks in this field…
It is possible now to add the military dimension to the web of cooperation between Russia and Turkey, which has recently entered into a
meaningful political and economic rapprochement. We can equally guess that similar cooperation patterns have been established between
the intelligence services of the two countries. The current level of cooperation in the defense field… could not have been imagined… after the
Turkish Air Force downed a Russian war plane in Turkish airspace on Nov. 25, 2015.
No doubt Turkey’s decision to purchase the S-400 air defense system from Russia has given additional momentum to this rapprochement.
In the end, the emergence of close cooperation between Russia and Turkey following years of contention marked by the Cold War and the
addition of Iran to this formula is an unprecedented formation brought to the international relations system by the 21st century.

Vladimir Putin met with President of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Sochi to discuss bilateral relations and current issues on the international agenda (2017).
Source: By The Russian Presidential Press and Information Office [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Russian-Turkish_talks_in_Sochi_8.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia and China Help Egypt’s Space Industry
Move Forward
OE Watch Commentary: Egypt considers itself the Arab
pioneer in a number of fields, among them space exploration.
Having recently lagged behind wealthy Gulf monarchies in this
domain, the Egyptian government has begun relying on Russia
and China to kick-start its space industry, as highlighted in the
accompanying excerpts from local media.
In October 2018, Russia’s Space agency Roscosmos
announced that in late December Egypt’s third remote sensing
satellite (EgyptSat-A) will be launched on a Soyuz rocket from
Russia’s Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite is
a replacement for EgyptSat-2 (2014), which failed prematurely.
Egypt’s first remote sensing satellite, the 160-kilogram minisatellite EgyptSat-1 (2007), failed three years into its projected
five-year lifetime. The much larger EgyptSat-2 (1050 kilograms)
was a joint project between Russia’s RKK Energiya (RSC
Energia) and Egypt’s National Authority for Remote
Sensing and Space Sciences (NARSS). Many of EgyptSat2’s components were assembled in Egypt and its failure was
especially acute: expected to remain operational for 11 years, it
was lost the year after its launch.
In addition to the upcoming launch of EgyptSat-A, which some
media sources claim is a Russian-built “warranty replacement”
for EgyptSat-2, the Egyptian government recently established
a new R&D government entity under the authority of the
president called the “Egyptian Space Agency.” The agency’s
aim is “to push Egypt forward in the area of space and satellite
technology serving the country’s national security,” according to
the accompanying passage from Egypt Today, published in late
2017 (following parliamentary ratification of the new agency’s
establishment law). The Egyptian Space Agency’s headquarters
on Cairo’s outskirts are envisioned as a future launch site
for Egypt’s home-made satellites as well as those from other
countries, particularly African ones. The new agency’s first
project, a domestically designed and manufactured satellite,
quickly fell behind schedule, but was given a boost when in
August 2018 the Chinese government agreed to provide Egypt
with a $45 million grant to fund a project “[aimed] at transferring
Chinese technology in the satellite sector to serve the purposes
of research projects and remote sensing,” according to Egypt’s
minister of investment and international cooperation.
Egypt has no shortage of uses for a remote sensing satellite. In
addition to civilian uses for agriculture, planning/development
and resource exploration, the Egyptian government has a list of
priority hotspots to monitor, including the vast desert borders
with Libya and Sudan, the Sinai Peninsula, the oil and gas-rich
Eastern Mediterranean, and Ethiopia’s Grand Renaissance Dam.
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…This project aims at transferring Chinese technology
in the satellite sector to serve the purposes of research
projects and remote sensing…”
Source: “Space City would contribute 10% to Egypt’s GDP,” Egypt Today,
26 December 2017. http://www.egypttoday.com/Article/2/38422/SpaceCity-would-contribute-10-to-Egypt-s-GDP
During the session, Parliament’s Education and Scientific Research
Committee submitted a 25 page report about the law, saying that the law
aims to push Egypt forward in the area of space and satellite technology
serving the country’s national security. The agency will be affiliated to the
president and will be mainly responsible for drawing up a national space
technology program within the next few years.
Source: “Egypt, China sign grant for ‘EgyptSat-2’ worth $45M,” Egypt
Today, 13 August 2018. http://www.egypttoday.com/Article/3/55899/
Egypt-China-sign-grant-for-%E2%80%98EgyptSat-2-worth-45M
Egypt and China signed Monday a grant worth $45 million for the
construction of the satellite EgyptSat-2 for remote sensing applications…
The Ministry of Investment clarified in a statement that this grant comes
to perfect the satellite collection project’s grant which amounted to $23
million, in cooperation with the Chinese Space Administration. [Egyptian
Minister of Investment and International Cooperation Sahar Nasr] said
that this grant affirms the strength of the strategic relationship with China
especially in information technology and scientific research sector. “This
project aims at transferring Chinese technology in the satellite sector to
serve the purposes of research projects and remote sensing,” she noted. She
emphasized the importance of cooperating with China in this field in light of
the establishment of the Egyptian space agency.
Source: Ahmed Megahid. “Egypt pinning hopes on new reconnaissance
satellite to help military with border controls,” Arab Weekly, 2 September
2018. https://thearabweekly.com/egypt-pinning-hopes-new-reconnaissancesatellite-help-military-border-controls
A new reconnaissance satellite will help Egypt monitor its huge border
areas, assisting the military in responding to security threats, especially
from Libya and Sudan, experts said. The satellite, built by the Russian
national rocket and space corporation Energia and expected to be launched
November 22 from Russia’s Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, will
provide important images and data about border areas. “The images
will show what is happening on the borders very clearly,” said Mahmoud
Hussein, chairman of the Egyptian National Authority for Remote Sensing
and Space Sciences, the national space agency… “The presence of an
advanced reconnaissance satellite will help the security establishment
detect such infiltrations easily,” said Khaled Okasha, a member of the
Supreme Anti-Terrorism Council, an advisory body of the Egyptian
presidency. “The utilisation of space technology is indispensable if we hope
to overcome threats to our security.”

OE Watch | November 2018

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Supreme Leader’s Advisor: United States Common Enemy
of Iran and China
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article on the relationship between Iran
and China comes from MojNews.com, an outlet supported by the Economic Cooperation Organization
(ECO), which is a political and economic intergovernmental organization founded in Tehran in 1985
to develop links initially among Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan. After the collapse of the Soviet Union,
the newly independent Central Asian states joined the ECO and while the organization has been
unsuccessful in creating the type of common market which the European Union has, it is increasingly
supportive of greater political and diplomatic links between Iran, Turkey, Central Asia and China. It is
in this context that it has covered meetings between former Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati and
a visiting Chinese delegation. Of particular interest are Velayati’s discussion of China-Iran ties. While
his remarks about the historical legacy of both countries is a staple of rhetoric and a source of pride in
Tehran and Beijing, the comments about building a relationship geared against stymieing the United
States provide insight into the thinking not only of Velayati, but also Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, to
whom Velayati is the top advisor on the topic. While relations are not a zero sum game, Iranian efforts
to cultivate China also reflect a historical distrust of Russia and a desire not to become over reliant on
Moscow (See: “Iran-Russia Relations,” OE Watch, July 2016). End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“…the relationship between Iran and China is getting better and deeper
every day.”

Ali Akbar Velayati, foreign policy advisor to
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei.
Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
Category:Ali_Akbar_Velayati#/media/File:Ali_Akbar_Velayati,_28_
January_2015.jpg, CC BY 4.0

Source: “Rahbateh-i Iran va Chin Mesal Zadani Ast (The Relationship between Iran and China is an Example),” MojNews.com, 29 September
2018. https://goo.gl/1Ae9Ka
Ali Akbar Velayati, the assistant to the Supreme Leader for international affairs, in a meeting with Wang Jisi, dean of the School of
International and Strategic Studies at Peking University, said, “The history of Iran and China dates back several thousand years, and the
relationship between our countries is a historical one. Therefore, we hope very much for the future of relations between the two countries,
and relations continue to expand in various dimensions. Referring to the Peking University delegation, he said, “This trip is the fourth time to
Iran and, God willing, and we have witnessed changes in these trips.” The advisor to the Supreme Leader for international affairs argued that
the relationship between Iran and China is an example and noted, “We together have many enemies but America is at their head and, despite
America’s hostility, the relationship between Iran and China is getting better, deeper and wider every day.”

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | November 2018

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish and Iranian Cooperation to Fight Terrorism
OE Watch Commentary: Despite having different
policies and objectives in the region, especially in
Syria, Iranian and Turkish collaboration on many issues
continue as Turkey moves away from Western alliances.
The accompanying excerpted article from the progovernment think tank Seta Foundation argues that
Turkey and Iran need to collaborate in the fight against
terrorism and outlines how this collaboration can be
successful.
According to the article, the cooperation against
terrorist groups, which intend to change the map of the
region, is necessary for the security of both countries
and the Middle East. The terrorist groups that the
article referred to, and pose a threat to both countries,
are the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which has
been waging war on Turkey for nearly four decades,
the Kurdistan Free Life Party (PJAK), the offshoot of
the PKK in Iran, and the Iranian Kurdistan Democratic
Party (IKDP), which has been fighting on and off against
the Iranian government for decades and resumed its fight
against Tehran over the past few years.

A group of PJAK fighters in 2012.

Source: By Voice of America (http://youtu.be/j5W05Ijp5Yw) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PJAK_fighters.jpg.

The article argues that the success of the collaboration depends on Iran’s willingness to take a stance against groups in Iraq and Syria,
including the PKK, the PYD (or Democratic Union Party, a Kurdish political party in Syria) and its armed wing the YPG (the People’s
Protection Units) and to stop using these organizations as proxies. The article states that Iran stays away from touching the PKK in Iraq
because it tilts the balance of power in Iran’s favor. The author also believes Iran should not expect cooperation from Turkey if it continues
pulling the PYD and YPG to its side in Syria and mediates between them and the Syrian al-Assad regime. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

“Now is the time to brush aside the mistakes of the past and fight against the mutual threat of terrorism
together. It would be best for Turkey not be bogged down with the past mistakes of Iran…”

Source: Kemal İnat, “Türkiye ve İran Teröre Karşı İş Birliği Yapabilir mi? (Can Turkey and Iran Cooperate against Terrorism?),” setav.org, 3
October 2018. https://www.setav.org/turkiye-ve-iran-terore-karsi-is-birligi-yapabilir-mi/
Iran has released that not all of the terrorist groups are seen as a threat by all countries; some countries see these groups as an opportunity
and a tool. Iran has recently been a target of terror attacks…Turkey has been experiencing this for a long time…However, Iran’s attitude has
been far from showing solidarity with Ankara; in fact, Iran’s passive attitude towards the PKK at times has been viewed as indirect [Iranian]
support for [the PKK].
Now is the time to brush aside the mistakes of the past and fight against the mutual threat of terrorism together. It would be best for Turkey
not be bogged down with the past mistakes of Iran and collaborate against the PKK and FETÖ [Gülenist Terrorist Organization] since Turkey
has not received the support it expected from its western “allies”…
When the objectives and the actors who are behind the PKK/PJAK and IKDP who intend to change the map of the region are well analyzed,
the necessity of cooperation between these two countries will be seen…
One of the main conditions of the successful cooperation between Tehran and Ankara against terrorism is for Iran to take a clear stance
against the PKK/PYD/YPG in Iraq and Syria… Tehran must see the threat to its national unity and actively engage in fighting against the
PKK and its branches
…a cooptation will be possible if Iran fights against all terrorists organizations with clear objectives…

OE Watch | November 2018

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s Drilling Plan
OE Watch Commentary: The discovery of hydrocarbon reserves and drilling in the Levant Basin continue to cause escalating tensions
between Turkey and the Republic of Cyprus. Once again, Cyprus has become one of Turkey’s most sensitive security issues. The Republic of
Cyprus recently invited some energy companies to join gas exploration; however, the Turkish government believes that this disregards its rights
and those of Turkish Cypriots. The accompanying passage from the pro-government English-language newspaper, Daily Sabah, highlights
Turkey’s reaction to the recent gas exploration that was commissioned to giant energy companies by the Republic of Cyprus.
According to the article, the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement claiming that Block 7, in which the Republic of Cyprus
licensed some energy companies to conduct drilling, falls under Turkish maritime jurisdiction areas under international law. Therefore, the
Republic of Cyprus is violating Turkey’s territorial sovereignty and rights. The article further provides a quote from the ministry’s statement
saying “Turkey has never allowed and will never allow any foreign country, company or ship to conduct unauthorized research activities
regarding natural resources within its maritime jurisdiction areas” and it “will continue to take necessary measures, and will maintain all
initiatives and activities, including drilling exercises, with a view to protecting its rights and interests on its continental shelf.”
While Turkey plans to launch its drilling activities in the Eastern Mediterranean on its continental shelf and “in areas licensed to Turkish
Petroleum by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus,” which is only recognized by Turkey, ExxonMobil and Qatar Petroleum, who are
licensed by the Republic of Cyprus, are set to conduct exploratory offshore drilling off the coast of Cyprus. The natural gas reserves seem to
complicate “the Cyprus issue” further, as the tension between the Turkish and Greek Administrations escalates. As they bring the giant energy
companies in, the article shows how the Republic of Cyprus seems to be trying to find ways to reshape the power balance and curb Turkish
ambitions in the Eastern Mediterranean. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Eastern Mediterranean basins including Levant basin and oil and gas fields.

Source: By U.S. Energy Information Administration (eia) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eastern_Mediterranean_basins_including_Levent_basin_and_oil_and_gas_fields.png.

(continued)
OE Watch | November 2018

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s
Drilling Plan
“Lambasting the actions of the Greek Cypriot’s move to invite energy firms to explore oil and gas
in unilaterally declared zones, Turkey made it clear that it will not allow any hydrocarbon drilling or
exploration in parts of the Eastern Mediterranean under its jurisdiction…”
Source: “Turkey adamant that no gas around Cyprus can be extracted before deal,” Daily Sabah, 5 October 2018. https://www.dailysabah.
com/energy/2018/10/06/turkey-adamant-that-no-gas-around-cyprus-can-be-extracted-before-deal-1538774274
Lambasting the actions of the Greek Cypriot’s move to invite energy firms to explore oil and gas in unilaterally declared zones, Turkey made
it clear that it will not allow any hydrocarbon drilling or exploration in parts of the Eastern Mediterranean under its jurisdiction and it will
take appropriate measures against the usurpation of its rights.
The latest move by the Greek Cypriot administration in the Eastern Mediterranean to invite energy giants to bid for a license to explore in
the area designated as Block 7, one of the blocks located in the unilaterally declared Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), has increased tensions
over the violation and disregard of the rights of Turkey and Turkish Cypriots… In a statement issued on Thursday, the Foreign Ministry
stressed that the activities of the Greek Cypriot administration disregard the inalienable rights to natural resources of the Turkish Cypriot
people, who are the co-owners of the island.
“This attitude of the Greek Cypriot side, which does not shrink from irresponsibly jeopardizing the security and stability of the Eastern
Mediterranean region, is actually the fundamental reason behind the failure of the Cyprus settlement negotiations to produce an outcome for
the past half-century,” the ministry’s statement read…
According to the statement, Greek Cyprus’ activities also violate Turkey’s rights to the continental shelf in the region under international law.
Major parts of the Greek Cypriot license areas lie within the boundaries of Turkey’s Eastern Mediterranean region.
“An important segment of so-called License Area Number 7 subject to this decision remains within the outer limits of Turkey’s continental
shelf in the Eastern Mediterranean, as has been registered with the U.N.,” it added.
According to international maritime law, he said national territories have a continental shelf up to 200 miles, while islands have territorial
waters extending up to 14 miles.
Meanwhile, in a statement, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus said the so-called License Area
Number 7, or block number 7, is an indication that the Greek Cypriot side is continuing policies to usurp the rights of Turkish Cypriots to the
island’s natural resources.
The ministry referred to Turkey’s Notes to the U.N. dated March 2, 2014, and March 12, 2013, which designated the outer limits of Turkey’s
continental shelf. Therefore, it added any natural resource exploration activity requires Turkey’s permission.
“Turkey has never allowed and will never allow any foreign country, company or ship to conduct unauthorized research activities regarding
natural resources within its maritime jurisdiction areas,” the ministry said and strongly emphasized that Turkey will continue to take
necessary measures, and will maintain all initiatives and activities, including drilling exercises, with a view to protecting its rights and
interests on its continental shelf.
The Greek Cypriot administration decided Wednesday to invite energy giants Total, Eni and ExxonMobil to bid for a license to explore for
oil and gas in a new offshore block, officials said. Cypriot Energy Minister George Lakkotrypis said Nicosia had made the move due to “very
specific geological reasons” related to a discovery in an adjacent block, announced by ENI in February.
Turkey is also planning drilling activities on its continental shelf in the Eastern Mediterranean, as well as in areas licensed to Turkish
Petroleum by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. The country’s drillship Fatih will start drilling operations before the year’s end…
Meanwhile, a top ExxonMobil executive says the energy company will go ahead with a search for natural gas off the cost of Cyprus by the
end of the year…
In February, Turkish warships prevented Italian energy company ENI’s drillship Saipem 12000’s rigging operations… Shortly after ENI’s
ship left Mediterranean survey vessels belonging to U.S. oil giant ExxonMobil and state-owned Qatar Petroleum consortium were reported to
have arrived in the Eastern Mediterranean to conduct offshore drilling activities.
…Since 2009, a series of natural gas discoveries in the Levant Basin have shaken the dynamics in the region.

OE Watch | November 2018

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The “Soft War” on Hezbollah
OE Watch Commentary: These days, Lebanese
Hezbollah seems more concerned with information
operations and soft power measures than with
internal security threats or conventional military
attacks. In a pair of September 2018 speeches,
excerpts of which are translated alongside this
commentary, Hezbollah Secretary General Hassan
Nasrallah spelled out this concern, noting that “The
most dangerous part of what is happening now is the
war on the psyche and morale of our movement and on
our brothers and sisters.” Nasrallah’s assessment of the
soft power threat is made from what he describes as an
“important and very sensitive point, in which we are in
fact in a position of power, in a victorious position, and
in a position of deterrence.”
Hezbollah’s “victorious position” stems from its
July 2006 military engagement with Israel, which
the group considers to have effectively neutralized
Israel’s ground forces. The conflict demonstrated that
“overrunning Lebanon and reaching Beirut requires
ground forces, it cannot be done solely with an air
force or with missiles or with ships.” Rather than
threatening to invade Lebanon, Nasrallah observes, the
Israeli government now merely threatens to “destroy”
and “erase” Lebanon. These are empty threats, he
believes, for Hezbollah’s capacity to counterstrike with
long-range precision missiles and short-range rocket
barrages give the group full deterrence capabilities
against Israel’s distinct aerial and naval superiority.
Hezbollah’s deterrence has in turn forced its
adversaries to intensify their information operations,
and in response, Nasrallah calls on Hezbollah’s
followers and allies to “engage in a mobilization of
the media, of words and of conscience, by paying
attention to what is said and what is reported, in order
to not give anyone material to exploit.”
Hezbollah’s concern with soft power measures
is highlighted in a book titled “America’s Soft War
Against Hezbollah,” which was published last spring
by the Lebanese “Center for Soft War Studies” (see,
in Arabic: http://softwar-lb.org). As summarized in
the accompanying review passage from the proHezbollah Lebanese newspaper al-Akhbar, the
book “explores how top American and Zionist
intelligence agencies and cultural centers attempt to
weaken Hezbollah through soft war measures… to
ruin [Hezbollah’s] image and drag it into sectarian
quicksand that will quickly bring down the Resistance
project.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…They failed in the military war,
they failed in the security war, they
failed to impose their will, and now
they wish to strike us from within… ”

Source:
‫حد لها‬
ٍ ‫ االعتداءات اإلسرائيلية على سوريا لم تعد تحتمل ويجب وضع‬:‫السيد نصر اهلل‬
“Sayyid Nasrallah: Israeli Attacks on Syria Cannot be Tolerated and Must Be Stopped,”
al-Ahed News, 19 September 2018. https://goo.gl/jNfjDT
[Israel] knows that the strategic balance with Syria... depends on Syrian missile
power... if the Syrian Army and Syria possess qualitative and quantitative missile
power, this will create deterrence and put an end to current Israeli lawlessness…
The most dangerous part of what is happening now is the war on the psyche and
morale of our movement and on our brothers and sisters. The evidence of this is in
the efforts to bring down Hezbollah, to bring down the Resistance in the eyes of its
supporters, in the eyes of its environment, of its friends and allies, even in its own eyes,
by saying Hezbollah are drug dealers, a mafia, car thieves, money launderers….
They failed in the military war, they failed in the security war, they failed to impose
their will, and now they wish to strike us from within, in our hearts, in our selfconfidence, self-assurance, certainty and morale…
This campaign must naturally be confronted. Militarily we are ready and are always
on alert; in terms of security we are guarded and vigilant and take all the necessary
measures, and in financial terms we are managing the crisis appropriately and wisely.
On the psychological front, what I ask of you, brothers and sisters, and through you I
address everyone, first of all our confidence in ourselves, our path, our resistance, our
party, our leaders and our officials must remain very strong…
I call on you to engage in a mobilization of the media, of words and of conscience,
by paying attention to what is said and what is reported, in order to not give anyone
material to exploit. They can turn the simplest mistake by us into a regional crisis, a
small mistake that we may not even be responsible for…
This whole psychological war is aimed at affecting our morale, our will, our
resoluteness, our determination, our trust, our ability to change, to liberate, to reform,
to confront corruption, to defend the sacred…
…they will fail in this psychological war, which has been launched for some time but
which is escalating and will further escalate…
Source:
‫ مـ‬2018 .‫ هـ‬1440 ‫النص الكامل لكلمة السيد نصر اهلل في ختام مسيرة العاشر من محرم‬
“Full Text of Sayyid Nasrallah’s Speech for Closing of the 10th of Muharram (Ashura),
1440 (2018),” al-Manar, 20 September 2018. http://almanar.com.lb/4300991
...we are in fact in a position of power, in a victorious position, and in a position of
deterrence…
From 2000 until now, or from 2006 until now, has there been a day when Israelis say
“We will overrun Lebanon and reach Beirut?!” This talk is over… but why? Because
overrunning Lebanon and reaching Beirut requires ground forces, it cannot be done
solely with an air force or with missiles or with ships. This army that can overrun
Lebanon and reach Beirut no longer exists, and something else exists in Lebanon now,
so now how do they respond to us? We will destroy Lebanon, we will erase Lebanon,
meaning they bully by fire but do not dare bully using the human element.
Source:
‫تلك هي الحرب الناعمة على حزب اهلل‬
“That is the American Soft War on Hezbollah,” al-Akhbar, 15 July 2018. https://
al-akhbar.com/Literature_Arts/254171
The book “America’s Soft War on Hezbollah,” which was prepared by the “Center
for Soft War Studies, explores how top American and Zionist intelligence agencies and
cultural centers attempt to weaken Hezbollah through soft war measures.
The book is divided into 3 sections, in which it progresses from the platforms of soft
war, through the regional strategies for which it is employed, to the most prominent soft
war tools used by international and domestic Lebanese to ruin [Hezbollah’s] image and
drag it into sectarian quicksand that will quickly bring down the Resistance project.
The book presents a serious and objective reading of soft war, following the failure of
the most formidable tools possessed by the Zionists and Americans to defeat Hezbollah,
in particular following the July 2006 War…
OE Watch | November 2018

48

AFRICA
Yemen’s Civil War Fails to Discourage
Horn of Africa Refugees
OE Watch Commentary: It might not sound like the refugee path someone would expect, with
thousands from war-torn Somalia fleeing to war-torn Yemen, but as the excerpted article from African
Arguments relates, that is exactly what is happening. It is not just Somalis making the perilous journey to
Yemen; many Ethiopians and Eritreans have also been pouring across the Red Sea. In 2017, approximately
100,000 refugees arrived on Yemen’s shores and the year before that, 117,000. All this despite Yemen being
engulfed in civil war since 2015.
For decades, people from the Horn of Africa have been traveling to Yemen for trade, religious
pilgrimages, economic opportunities, and to escape troubles besetting their home countries. When the
oil market surged in the 1970s, Yemen had a tremendous need for unskilled workers, drawing even more
people from the Horn in search of a better life. Today, even though the country is in a civil war, some of
the same reasons that drew people to Yemen in the past, especially economic opportunities, continue to do
so.
The article relates how the different countries contributing to the migrant flow each have a particular
factor or factors pushing people to leave. In Ethiopia it is the growing political instability and land scarcity
that has arisen in the past few years, whereas in Eritrea it is the indefinite national service that hangs over
people’s heads, as well as the country’s political repression, that drives people to flee. As for Somalia, civil
war and an ongoing drought keep the refugee flow up.
Many plan to stay in Yemen, where they seek work in the khat industry or farming, or become domestic
or low-skilled workers. However, a large percentage use, or intend to use, Yemen as a passageway to
the more prosperous Gulf States, with Saudi Arabia being a favorite choice even though, as the article
describes, many migrants work in deplorable conditions there. Still others look to go to Europe. Migrants
starting in Somalia can travel to Yemen, head north, and then reenter Africa in Sudan before heading
further north to Europe. This allows them to bypass the difficult to cross countries of Djibouti, Ethiopia,
and Eritrea.
There have been attempts by countries, such as Ethiopia, to try to stem the flow of people to Yemen, but
so far these measures have had only limited success. Even the outbreak of war in Yemen has failed to deter
those determined to make the journey. Interestingly, as the article points out, the war has actually made
the trip more enticing, as many believe the breakdown of Yemen’s state institutions means the country has
little control over its borders and immigration. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Despite widespread insecurity that has led more than two million Yemenis to
flee their homes, migrants continue to disembark on the Gulf nation’s war-torn
shores.”

Source: Idil Osman, “Why
are migrants from the Horn
flocking to war-torn Yemen?”
African Arguments, 9 August
2018. https://africanarguments.
org/2018/08/09/why-aremigrants-from-the-horn-flockingto-war-torn-yemen/
When Yemen’s civil war erupted
in 2015, it was widely expected
that migration to the country
would nosedive. Typically when
a nation goes to war, outsiders
stay away for obvious reasons.
But in Yemen’s case, the ongoing
deadly instability was not enough
to deter the 100,000 people that
arrived last year or the 117,000
who arrived in 2016. Despite
widespread insecurity that
has led more than two million
Yemenis to flee their homes,
migrants continue to disembark
on the Gulf nation’s war-torn
shores.
Of the millions of people in the
region that migrate, the majority
move internally or to neighboring
countries. Many others travel
up the treacherous desert to
the North African coast, with
Europe the final destination. But
hundreds of thousands decide to
traverse the Red Sea.

This abandoned university in the town of Mukallah has become home to thousands of Somali refugees
and displaced Yemenis, caught up in the conflict that has engulfed Yemen since early 2015.
Source: VOA, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:This_abandoned_university_in_the_town_of_Mukallah_has_become_home_to_thousands_of_Somali_refugees_and_
displaced_Yemenis,_caught_up_in_the_conflict_that_has_engulfed_Yemen_since_early_2015-2.jpg, Public Domain

OE Watch | November 2018

49

AFRICA
Cameroon Prison Break Signals Rising
Anglophone Insurgency
OE Watch Commentary: On 26 September the accompanying
excerpted article, posted on the French-language website of Radio
France Internationale, reported on a major prison break in Wum,
Cameroon, which occurred the day before. Wum is in the Northwest
Region of Cameroon, which is Anglophone, and has been at the
center of the rising tensions between the people of that region and
the federal government over allegedly discriminatory language
policies that harm English speakers. The article notes this was the
second attack on a prison in the vicinity of Wum that has led to the
freeing of prisoners. The first one took place in July of this year.
The author believes the purpose of the prison break was obvious:
to free Anglophone separatists who had been imprisoned during
protests and other clashes during the ongoing crisis. In total, 117
prisoners were freed in this most recent prison break and the
prisoners took weapons and ammunition from the prison into the
bush when they escaped. Presumably, they will use them in future
confrontations with government forces. The prison seems to not
have been secured well: the separatists who entered the prison to
free their comrades, according to the article, simply used a ladder
to climb over the back wall in a way that prison guards in a watch
tower could not see them. The article also stated that an even greater
number, 160 prisoners, were freed in the prison break in July.
The article claims that the separatists have been suffering losses
and lack sufficient weaponry, but attacks like this continue to
astonish those following the conflict. The article attributes the
success of the separatists to their determination. Nevertheless, the
article also does not discount the role of social media, which the
separatists have used to spread their anti-government messages.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Shaded relief map of Cameroon.

Source: By CIA [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cameroon_Map.jpg.

“Despite the many losses recorded in recent weeks in the fighting against the army, these fighters have a
determination that astonishes many observers.”
Source: “Cameroun anglophone: un commando attaque la prison de Wum et libère 117 détenus (English-speaking Cameroon: a commando
attacks Wum Prison and frees 117 detainees),” RFI Afrique, 26 September 2018. http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20180926-cameroun-prison-wumattaque-liberation-prisonnier-nord-ouest-anglophone
On the evening of 25 September, in the town of Wum, an Anglophone town in Northwestern Cameroon, a commando unit attacked the city’s
prison and freed 117 detainees. Most of them are still on the run. Surprised by the violent attack, the guards, who were in small numbers,
could not resist. Once inside the prison, the assailants fired warning shots and broke down the cell doors. A total of 117 detainees were
released and immediately disappeared into the bush. The attackers also took away two weapons and a case of ammunition.
The identity of the gunmen who attacked Wum Prison is unknown. But the authorities are certain: according to them, they are separatists
from the English-speaking regions of the country. Since the beginning of the year, this is the second time that such an attack against a prison
occurs in this department.
Despite the many losses recorded in recent weeks in the fighting against the army, these fighters have a determination that astonishes many
observers. A dozen days before the presidential election, they continue to broadcast hostile messages on social networks indicating their
desire to prevent the holding of the vote in the South West and North West.

OE Watch | November 2018

50

AFRICA
South Sudan’s Civil War Death Toll Reaches 400,000
OE Watch Commentary: It was only a small notice in most African papers and websites; an
underreported story that could easily be missed…the death toll from South Sudan’s civil war has reached
an estimated 400,000 people. One of the sites it appeared on, CAJNews Africa, excerpted here, reports
that this number is even higher than originally thought by 100,000. Most of the deaths occurred in the
nation’s northeast and southern regions, with violence accounting for about half of the fatalities and hunger
much of the rest. The deaths appear to have peaked in 2016 and 2017. These findings were made by the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (see: https://crises.lshtm.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/
sites/10/2018/09/LSHTM_mortality_South_Sudan_report.pdf). They also concluded that most deaths were
of adult males, though women and children were also part of the casualty figures.
A Compromise Peace Agreement was signed in August 2015, resulting in a temporarily shared
government, but it broke down in July 2016, resulting in the conflict gaining in intensity while spreading
geographically. As a result, by early 2018 about 2 million people were displaced within Sudan and another
2.5 million became refugees, mostly to neighboring countries. This out of a population estimated in 2016 to
be approximately 12 million.
Responding to this humanitarian crisis, the international community has targeted about six million
people with a funding requirement of $1.7 billion. However, the London report says that an even stronger
response is necessary, while also calling on the warring parties to undertake steps to resolve this conflict.
As a large number of deaths are not attributable directly to violence, but rather indirectly through
insufficient access by aid workers to vulnerable populations, it was felt additional assistance could make a
significant difference.

Source: Raji Bashir, “South
Sudan: War Deaths Estimated
at 400,000,” CAJ News Africa,
29 September 2018. http://
cajnewsafrica.com/2018/09/28/
south-sudan-war-deathsestimated-at-400-000/
The five-year civil war in South
Sudan has killed about 400 000
civilians, which is higher than
initially thought.
It was initially reported 300 000
civilians have been killed during
the war and resultant hunger.
“The findings indicate that the
humanitarian response in South
Sudan must be strengthened,
and that all parties should seek
urgent conflict resolution,”
authors of the report stated.

Interestingly, the article made no mention of the most recent peace treaty, signed 12 September of this year and the twelfth agreement
between President Salva Kiir and the rebel leader and former vice president, Riek Machar, since the fighting started. There are concerns as to
the viability of this present treaty and whether the world’s newest country, having only gained independence from Sudan in 2011, will finally be
able to find peace. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The five-year civil war in South Sudan has killed about 400 000 civilians, which is
higher than initially thought.”

Sudanese combatant with G3 rifle.

Source: Steve Evans/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:South_Sudan_022.jpg, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | November 2018

51

AFRICA
Nigeria’s Chukwu on Cross-Border,
Counter-Boko Haram Operations
OE Watch Commentary: Director of Army Public Relations
Texas Chukwu has become one of the prominent voices reporting
on the Nigerian army’s efforts to counter Boko Haram. He releases
messages through, among other means, Twitter and an army website.
On 15 September the accompanying excerpted message from
Chukwu was posted on the website, Press Release Nigeria, about
joint efforts to neutralize Boko Haram members in two villages in
Borno State, Nigeria, which border Cameroon.
According to Chukwu, Boko Haram was using those villages
to launch attacks on both countries along their mutual border.
Describing the Nigerian and Cameroon troops as “gallant,” Chukwu
listed the weapons that they recovered from the Boko Haram bases,
including AK-47 rifles, improvised explosive devices, and suicide
belts. Other items found included a Boko Haram flag and several
motorcycles and bicycles and Chukwu noted five Boko Haram
members were killed. Evidently, the Boko Haram members in
these bases were not as well equipped as some of the members who
have been seen in recent Boko Haram videos with Turkish-made
Otokar tanks and rocket launchers that can shoot up to a range of 10
kilometers. Such weapons were almost certainly pilfered from the
Nigerian or neighboring armies.
Chukwu called on civilians to continue to report on suspicious
Map showing the locations of both Cameroon and Nigeria.
movements to the army, so that more trans-border operations
Source: By Aquintero82 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Cameroon_Nigeria_Locator.png.
with Cameroonian troops can be conducted. Though Nigeria’s
public relations in the counter-insurgency has been highly criticized for delays in responding to major incidents, such as the 2014 Chibok
kidnapping, and sometimes covering up or even distorting important details of Boko Haram attacks, Chukwu’s approach and constant
updates on the counter-insurgency appear to represent a shift in Nigeria’s strategic communications. At the very least, his messages help keep
the Nigerian public informed of counter-insurgency operations that otherwise might not get reported on in either Nigerian or international
media. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Members of the general public are advised to report any suspicious movements or activities to the law
enforcement agents for prompt action.”
Source: “Nigeria-Cameroonian Troops Jointly Eliminate Boko Haram Terrorists,” Press Release Nigeria, 15 September 2018. https://
prnigeria.com/2018/09/19/nigeria-cameroonian-boko-haram/
Troops of 21 Special Armoured Brigade deployed in Operation Lafiya Dole, in a joint trans-border operation with troops of the Cameroonian
Defence Forces neutralised five (5) Boko Haram Terrorists in the border villages of Yabiri Kote and Bula Dadobe of Bama Local Government
Area, Borno State. The joint operations, nicknamed “Operation Rainbow 15” which were conducted from Saturday 15 – Sunday 16 September
2018, came on the heels of the discovery of makeshift bases, established by the terrorists in Yabiri Kote and Bula Dadode from where they
launched attacks on villages in Cameroon and Nigeria. During the joint trans- border operations, the gallant troops recovered some items
from the terrorists. The trans-border operations have successfully cleared the insurgents from the general area of Kote Kura. Members of the
general public are advised to report any suspicious movements or activities to the law enforcement agents for prompt action.

OE Watch | November 2018

52

AFRICA
Environmental Crimes Reportedly Leading Funding
Source for Terrorists
OE Watch Commentary: The drug trade is no longer the major source of income for terrorist groups
and militias around the world. The main source now, as the accompanying excerpted article from the
Zimbabwean news website The Herald points out, belongs to environmental crimes. With its numerous
terrorist groups, frequently weak policing, and vast resources, Africa is one of the regions hardest hit by
this escalating crime.
Environmental crime has not just moved up on the scale of terrorist funding; it has also advanced in
the measure of how lucrative criminal activities are worldwide. It had been in fourth place, after human
trafficking, but now is third, coming in behind counterfeit goods in second place, and drugs in first place,
which remains the most lucrative criminal activity even if no longer the number one for terrorist financing.
Worldwide, according to an Interpol study which this article cites, of the $30.2 billion which flows into
conflict zones to fund groups like al Shabaab and Boko Haram, 38 percent is from wildlife trafficking;
illegal deals in timber, mining, fishing, and charcoal; and other criminal environmental activity. That
compares to the drug trade at 28 percent, illegal taxation at 26 percent, and at three percent each,
kidnappings and foreign donations. The author’s article suggests the gap between environmental and nonenvironmental terrorist funding may grow even larger as evidenced in the Great Lakes Region of Africa,
where the interest in gold and other minerals, as well as timber, is rising among the numerous armed and
criminal groups in that region.
The article does give a breakdown of where some of the money from environmental crimes goes in
Africa. Al Shabaab, located in Somalia and Kenya, receives about $20 million, with approximately half
of that from the illegal charcoal trade. Involvement in the charcoal trade also brings significant amounts
to other African countries mired in ongoing conflicts, including Mali, the Central African Republic,
and Sudan. Inside the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 8,000 rebels share in $8 million per year from
environmental crimes; a significant sum but only a small portion of the estimated $770 million a year that
is exploited from the mineral rich eastern part of the country.
The author calls for environmental crimes to be more robustly addressed by peacekeeping and other
security forces. However, he also acknowledges that many of the perpetrators of these crimes are
politicians and those in the military with connections to transnational criminal organizations. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: Jeffrey Gogo,
“Environmental crimes boost
terrorists in Africa,” The Herald,
8 October 2018. https://www.
herald.co.zw/environmentalcrimes-boost-terrorists-in-africa/
Environmental crimes such as
wildlife trafficking and illegal
logging have overtaken the drug
trade as the major income source
for militias and terrorists in the
DRC, Kenya, Mali, Somalia and
elsewhere around the world,
accounting for more than a third
of their revenue.
The seven main extremist
groups of insurgents and
terrorists receive funding of
between $1 billion and $1,4
billion each year combined.
Worldwide environmental crimes
now generate between $110
billion and $280 billion in total
each year, 44 percent above the
2016 range.
The biggest thefts occur in the
forestry industry, where illegal
logging rakes in between $51 and
$152 billion for criminals each
year.

“Environmental crimes
such as wildlife trafficking
and illegal logging have
overtaken the drug trade
as the major income source
for militias and terrorists
in the DRC, Kenya, Mali,
Somalia and elsewhere
around the world,
accounting for more than a
third of their revenue.”

A Tanzanian game reserve ranger observes a simulated poacher camp and reports findings to
headquarters during a demonstration August 24, 2016, at Rungwa Game Reserve, Tanzania.

Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. Eric Summers Jr., https://www.army.mil/article/174872/tanzania_rangers_showcase_anti_poaching_skills, Public Domain.

OE Watch | November 2018

53

AFRICA
Military Intervention for Ebola Outbreak in DRC
OE Watch Commentary: For the people of the eastern
portion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC),
particularly the provinces of North and South Kivu, already
suffering through conflict from rebel groups fighting
the military and each other, the outbreak of Ebola is one
more horrendous burden. Complicating matters, as the
accompanying excerpted article from the South African news
source CAJNews relates, is that the presence of the rebels has
prevented health professionals from both tending to the sick
and instituting public health measures to prevent the disease
from spreading.

“A deterioration of security conditions caused by armed
rebel groups is worsening the outbreak of the Ebola virus
in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).”

Beni, a city in the North Kivu Province where the DRC
Ministry of Health and its partners have established their
headquarters, has been the site of multiple attacks. At one
point it became so bad that WHO and its UN partners asked
the health care agencies to suspend medical operations there.
They have since only partially resumed, but generally not
enough to monitor and prevent the spread of the disease.
There is another threat to health care workers besides from
rebel groups. As detailed in the excerpted article published on
the Nigerian news site Vanguard, those transporting the bodies
of Ebola victims for burial have been attacked by locals.
Several Red Cross workers have already been injured in such
assaults. Responding to these attacks, the government has
decided to deploy security teams to escort the workers when
they are transporting bodies.
This is the tenth time the mineral-rich but impoverished
country has had an Ebola outbreak. So far, the death toll
for this most recent outbreak is 118, but there are fears that
without proper public health interventions, it could climb
much higher. At the same time the country is trying to combat
the rebels and deal with Ebola, it is also preparing for elections
set for December of this year. President Josef Kabila, who
was supposed to cede power in 2016, and is blamed in the first
article for the country’s instability, is ineligible to run again. It
is still uncertain whether or not he will step down.
Numerous lessons have been learned regarding how best to
contain an outbreak of Ebola since the West African epidemic
that began in 2013 and was finally brought under full control
in 2016. However, with this recent outbreak occurring in
the eastern part of the DRC, a place of ongoing violence,
the various health agencies responding are finding it hard
to implement many of them. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

Map of eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.

Source: Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kivu#/media/File:Zaire_97_kivus.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

Source: Jean Kassongo, “Rebels blamed for Congolese Ebola virus
eruption,” CAJNews, 11 October 2018. http://cajnewsafrica.com/2018/10/02/
rebels-blamed-for-congolese-ebola-virus-eruption/
A deterioration of security conditions caused by armed rebel groups
is worsening the outbreak of the Ebola virus in the eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC).
The World Health Organization (WHO) said the prevalence of rebel
groups were threatening progress made by government and humanitarian
organizations to counter the spread of the deadly virus.
Source: “Congo-Kinshasa: Ebola-Hit - Congo to Deploy Security Forces
to Protect Health Workers,” Vanguard, 10 October 2018. https://www.
vanguardngr.com/2018/10/ebola-hit-congo-to-deploy-security-forces-toprotect-health-workers/
The organization has noted the fear and distrust among those in the
communities they were trying to help in Eastern Congo, which is plagued by
conflict.
Ebola has claimed 118 lives since the outbreak started almost two months
ago in a region where numerous militia groups operate, most fighting over
the central African country’s rich natural resources.

OE Watch | November 2018

54

AFRICA
With Tight Budgets, South Africa’s Military
Strains to Meet Mandates
OE Watch Commentary: The South African National Defense Force (SANDF) is having
financial trouble…a lot of financial trouble. As the accompanying excerpted article from the
South African website, DefenceWeb, relates, SANDF, according to Defense and Military
Veterans Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, is on the path of decreased funding, placing
serious constraints on its ability to meet its many roles and commitments. She wants to see a
military budget that is mandate driven and not, as currently done, budget driven.
It is not just Minister Mapisa-Nqakula sounding the alarm; other top level defense officials
are also expressing their strong concerns regarding SANDF’s budget. Secretary for Defense
Dr Sam Gulube notes that the serious funding issue confronting SANDF is in part from
increasing compensation for the defense department’s aging workforce. He also blames the
defense department’s expensive to operate legacy information systems, including the older than
30-years financial management system as just one example.
The economic constraints created by this budgetary shortfall, according to SANDF Chief
General Solly Shoke, have resulted in numerous challenges. These include non-renewal of
equipment and personnel, facilities that are deteriorating, and backlogs in maintaining prime
mission capabilities. He gave extensive credit to members of the military for being able to
continue to function effectively despite the numerous shortcomings arising from the financial
situation. Fortunately for those men and women in uniform being praised by the general,
there are no plans at the present time to reduce their numbers in order to meet the budgetary
constraints.
It is expected that the defense budget will continue on a downward trajectory, resulting in a
defense capability that is less than envisaged in the 1998 and 2015 Defense Reviews. SANDF,
however, is looking to appeal for a larger allocation of funds from the national treasury, a
difficult task as many government agencies, not just defense, have tight budgets. Meanwhile,
the defense department is compiling a list of targeted interventions to meet its lower spending
goals. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The trio at the apex of South Africa’s military admit to financial
shortcomings but are adamant the national defence force will meet
whatever obligations are given it by the President and the executive.”

Source: “Acknowledgement all is not well
with the SANDF comes from the top,”
DefenceWeb, 5 October 2018. http://www.
defenceweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_
content&view=article&id=53337:ackn
owledgement-all-is-not-well-with-thesandf-comes-from-the-top&catid=111:sadefence&Itemid=242
The trio at the apex of South Africa’s
military admit to financial shortcomings but
are adamant the national defence force will
meet whatever obligations are given it by
the President and the executive.
“The SA National Defence Force (SANDF)
is expected to defend and protect South
Africa and to rapidly intervene during crises
on the continent. It must sustain peace
support operations and continuously secure
the land borders, the full maritime zone
and the airspace. The defence force is also
expected to support other departments when
required and to execute many international
obligations. This level of ambition is not
sustainable at the current level of funding,”
she writes…
“In terms of human resources, the budget
constraints necessitated defence to consider
a reduction of personnel. Considering
operational pressures, we made a decision
not to reduce the personnel complement.”

SANDF soldiers.

Source: John Stupart/Wikimedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Africa#/media/File:Roodewal_Weapons_Range_-_(8724689015).jpg, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | November 2018

55

AFRICA
Partisanship Alleged in Promotion of Malian Generals
OE Watch Commentary: On 27 September an author writing for the
French language Malian publication benbere.org provided a critique of
the promotion system for Malian generals. According to the author in the
accompanying excerpt of the critique, Malian president Ibrahim Boubacar
Keïta has promoted 13 generals since coming into office in 2013, which
the article notes is unjustifiable in a poor country that has lost control over
much territory in central and northern Mali to terrorists. The author’s
perspective comes from the fact he has witnessed few achievements in
countering terrorists and insurgents in Mali and that it is hard for him to
believe these promotions are based on performance. In addition, the author
claims to have interviewed foreign military personnel who stated that some
Malian officers made battlefield miscalculations that led to significant
losses.
The author also states he interviewed with Malian soldiers who claimed
that to earn a promotion to the position of a general it is necessary to have
graduated from “a War College or obtained a doctorate.” However, some of
the recently promoted generals do not have such qualifications. If promotion
is not based on credentials, the author suspects the promotions of the new
generals are based on partisan political affiliations. This, in turn, according
to the author, has led to frustration among soldiers in the Malian army.
Before concluding the article, the author also states one last concern: a
growing disconnect between senior officers who have comfortable, airconditioned offices and ordinary soldiers who have been dying at the front
lines. The author ultimately expresses concern that the politicization of the
military will only cause more problems for the military at a time when it
can ill afford it. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “L’armée malienne a-t-elle besoin de nouveaux
généraux? (Does the Malian army need new generals?),”
benbere.org, 27 September 2018. https://benbere.org/au-grin/
armee-malienne-nouveaux-generaux-besoin/
The recent appointment of new generals has caused a malaise
in the Malian army, writes author Kassim Diakité. A total of 13
generals have been promoted through the powers of Ibrahim
Boubacar Keïta (IBK). This number seems too high for a span
of only 5 years in a poor country like Mali. It also seems to me
to be unjustified. Logically, the appointment of generals should
match their achievements in the field, but we know that the state
no longer has total control over much of northern and central
Mali.
These appointments also caused discomfort within the army.
Some of the soldiers I talked to said that you have to have
attended a War College or obtained a doctorate to become a
general, whereas some of the officers who have been appointed
do not have those qualifications. All of this suggests that some
generals are appointed for political reasons, which creates
frustration within the military.
If they are politicized, they will cause more problems within the
military institution. I also do not like the fact that senior officers
have air-conditioned offices in Bamako and waste their time
bickering for senior appointments while the ‘little’ soldiers are
dying at the front.

“All this suggests that some generals are appointed for political reasons, which creates frustration within
the military.”

Members of the Malian army conduct drills to instruct new recruits during exercise Flintlock 2007 in Tombouctou, Mali, Sept. 4, 2007.
Source: By U.S. Air Force photo by Master Sgt. Ken Bergmann [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mali_army_drill_Tombouctou_070904.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

56

AFRICA
Will Corruption in South Sudan Torpedo Peace Plan?
OE Watch Commentary: With the ink barely dry on the recent
peace treaty between South Sudan’s government and the country’s
largest rebel opposition group, many are already expressing concerns
with the details, including over the transitional government, number
of devolved states, and the writing of a new constitution. However, as
the accompanying excerpted article from the South African Institute
for Security Studies describes, it is unsure if two major underlying
causes of the country’s civil war – the country’s elite racing to gather
wealth and foreign entities wanting to preserve their own interests –
will allow the necessary political and economic progress to unfold that
would let peace take root.
Regarding the elite’s scramble for money, it has led to massive
corruption, essentially creating a “kleptocracy characterized by
enormous illicit flows of funds that have impoverished” the oil rich
nation. There is great concern that the agreement President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and former vice president-turned-rebel leader Riek Machar
signed under intense international pressure leaves the present political
and economic orders in place.
For the authors of the article, the ability of the parties to maintain
the status quo with the new treaty is called into question by several
factors. The first is the uncertainty in finding resources to actually
fund the transitional government. The present government is noted
for being bloated, with 550 legislators and over 40 cabinet members
along with parliament members of devolved states and administrators.
International financial aid and oil revenues were supposed to support
the new government, however, inept governance has led to donor
fatigue. With regards to oil revenue, the second factor the authors
discuss, the nation’s tremendous drop in revenue from oil has been
well noted.
The civil war has destroyed or shut down many of the country’s oil
rigs. At the same time that was happening, international oil prices
dropped. As for diversifying the economy, few investors are willing
to risk making an investment in such an unstable country. Increased
trade would also be economically beneficial, but that brings in yet
another factor; that the country’s neighbors, Sudan and Uganda, have
supported the different factions based upon their own self-interests, at
times fueling the civil war. Thus, the 12 September 2018 peace treaty
does not change the corruption endemic in the country and relies on
potentially unrealistic economic underpinnings. It is uncertain if this
maintenance of the status quo in order to appease the elites, as well as
the incorporation of overly optimistic revenue assessments, will allow
the treaty to go forward or ultimately serve as its downfall. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Salva Kiir Mayardit.

Source: U.S. Department of State, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?search=salva+kiir&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go#/media/
File:Salva_Kiir_2014.png, Public Domain.

Source: Duncan E. Omondi Gumba and Akol Miyen Kuol, “Looting
could make South Sudan peace efforts impossible,” Institute for
Security Studies, 19 September 2018. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/
looting-could-make-south-sudan-peace-efforts-impossible
A change in approach that focuses on transparency and zero
tolerance for corruption and kleptocracy is needed to ensure social,
political and economic stability. For this, all parties need to be
genuinely committed to lasting peace. Narrow foreign interests and
a continued untamed wealth race among the elite will make this
mission impossible.
The elite’s relentless zero-sum scramble for power and profit has
given rise to corruption and kleptocracy characterised by massive
illicit financial flows that have impoverished the country.
If the current large-scale waste, misappropriation and
mismanagement continues, it is hard to imagine how the bloated
government and growing military will receive salaries on time.
Prompt remuneration will be critical to prevent discontent that can
easily degenerate into more fighting.

“If the current large-scale waste, misappropriation and mismanagement continues, it is hard to imagine
how the bloated government and growing military will receive salaries on time. Prompt remuneration will be
critical to prevent discontent that can easily degenerate into more fighting.”

OE Watch | November 2018

57

LATIN AMERICA
A Bolsonaro Brazil and the FSP
OE Watch Commentary: Brazil conducted presidential elections on Sunday 28
October. Jair Bolsonaro won convincingly with about 56 percent of the vote. The
victory ended more than a decade of rule by the far-left Workers Party. The two
accompanying references, written before the elections, if not from pro-Bolsonaro
perspectives, are definitely from anti-left perspectives. The excerpt from Eju is by an
ostensibly Bolivian writer, and the excerpt from Periódico Debate by an ostensibly
Colombian writer. The two coincide in opining that Brazil is about to make a
governmental sea change in terms of both ideology and geostrategic azimuth. The two
writers also converge in the opinion that millions of Brazilians have become actionably
disenchanted by the leadership of the Workers Party. Notable is that both writers
highlight what they consider to be the regionally toxic role of the Forum of Sao Paulo,
and how that organization is likely to be hurt by a Bolsonaro presidency. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…With Bolsonaro, the Forum of Sao Paulo, strategic center
of the disastrous Latin-American left (Castro, Lula, Chávez)
should disappear…”

Federal Deputy Jair Bolsonaro at the Brazilian Chamber of
Deputies (2016).

Source: By Agência Brasil Fotografias [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia
Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Federal_Deputy_Jair_Bolsonaro_at_the_Brazilian_
Chamber_of_Deputies.jpg.

Source: Álvaro Riveros Tejada, “El corazón del Brasil
late a la derecha (Brazil’s heart beats to the right),” Eju
tv, 10 October 2018. https://eju.tv/2018/10/corazon-delbrasil-late-a-la-derecha/

Source: John Marulanda, “Bolsonaro: a la derecha, sin uniforme (Bolsonaro: to
the right, without uniform),” Periódico Debate, 10 October 2018. http://www.
periodicodebate.com/index.php/opinion/columnistas-nacionales/item/20813bolsonaro-a-la-derecha-sin-uniforme

“In spite of having to go to a second electoral round, set
for next Sunday, October 28, Jair Bolsonaro, presidential
candidate of the great nation of Brazil, has beaten, by
more than 20 million votes, Fernando Haddad, his closest
opponent and apostle of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva…That
signifies that more than 47,000,000 Brazilians who voted
were fed up to the point of abhorrence with the nearly
12 years of a ochlocracy [mob rule] that plunged Brazil
into the most shameless corruption and, worse, was used
as a crib and platform for the ‘Forum of Sao Paulo’,
that species of Hydra ridden by its four apocalyptic
cavalrymen, Castro, Lula, Chávez and Kirchner…”

“Since the 1960s, the left has determined that the favelas were not a problem
but rather the solution. Today, those megaslums are controlled by Transnational
Organized Crime that murdered 385 police in 2017 and downed helicopters they
overflew the impoverished hills of Rio. The country of Lava Jato and Odebrecht
[shorthand names for two huge corruption scandals], registered 62,500 murders
in 2016. Facing such insecurity and corruption, millions of citizens went out
into the street asking for military intervention….With Bolsonaro, the Forum
of Sao Paulo, strategic center of the disastrous Latin-American left (Castro,
Lula, Chávez) should disappear and the support of Cuba and Iran minimize;
Venezuela would have a different border, strong and acerbically critical; ETA
and FARC members could be expelled; narco-trafficking -- it [Brazil] is the
second consumer of cocaine after the US -- could diminish; growth of the GNP,
estimated at 2.9%, could increase; …”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | November 2018

58

LATIN AMERICA
Mexican President-Elect Plans to Extend
Federal Security Presence
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted articles from
Mexico report on Mexican President-Elect López Obrador’s recent plan
to enlarge the armed forces and federal police forces and expand their
role across Mexico. Some in the country view this move positively,
considering the record levels of violent crime across Mexico and the
ongoing drug war. Likewise, there are a number of reports of local law
enforcement personnel being complicit in the drug trade and organized
crime. It is thought that Obrador’s plan could alleviate the pressure on
local law enforcement to tackle these issues.
The border town of Sonoyta is a popular place for tourists and three
years ago the town stood at the center of drug wars between rival cartel
factions. The number of civilian casualties was high and local residents
left. The government brought in 60 additional federal police officers to
help stem the violence and stabilize the situation. Although there are
additional factors to consider, the presence of federal police in the area
is believed to have been instrumental in bringing the small town back
under a semblance of the rule of law.

A young Federal Police officer from Mexico City now deployed to Sonora next to
his armored vehicle in the town of Puerto Peñasco.
Source: Dodge Billingsley, Used with Permission.

President-Elect Obrador claims this is exactly what worked when he was battling insecurity and violence in Mexico City as the mayor.
However, it will be interesting to see if Obrador will be able to scale up past success. According to the El Financiero article, at least one analyst
questioned the proposal and noted the following. First, the Secretariat of National Defense already has over 52,000 personnel spread out across
Mexico, who do not seem to be making a positive difference. Second, if Obrador’s plan were to be implemented across the 265 regions that he
has laid out, it would require nearly 120,000 personnel, more than double what has already been deployed.
There are also questions as to whether or not the number of personnel can be raised, although Obrador seems to also be aware of this fact.
He recently announced a plan to enlist another 50,000 personnel to the security services, likely part of the effort to be able to deploy the large
number of federal security personnel out to the various regions of Mexico. It is hard to say what will become of President-Elect Obrador’s plan,
but there is real pressure in Mexico to do something. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“...in each region there will be a [federal security] contingent. This idea arises from my experience when I
was [Mexico City] mayor.”
Source: “Plan de seguridad de
AMLO dividirá al país en 265
regiones con un coordinador
(AMLO’s Security Plan will
Deploy Federal Forces to 265
Regions),” El Economista,
October 17, 2018. https://www.
eleconomista.com.mx/politica/Plande-seguridad-de-AMLO-dividiraal-pais-en-265-regiones-con-uncoordinador-20181017-0056.html
‘“We’re going to regionalize the
whole country. [We’ve decided on]
265 regions so far, in each region
there will be a [federal security]
contingent. This [idea] arises from
my experience when I was [Mexico
City] mayor,’ López Obrador said.”

Source: “¿Quieres ser militar o policía? AMLO lanzará
convocatoria para contratar a más de 50 mil (New
Government Will Recruit 50,000 Youth for Military
and Federal Police),” El Financiero, October 10,
2018. http://www.elfinanciero.com.mx/nacional/lopezobrador-anuncia-convocatoria-para-reclutar-a-50-milmiembros-en-ejercito-marina-y-pf
Future public security Alfonso Durazo said in July that
the incoming government would gradually withdraw
the military from public security duties, suggesting that
“training police [and] improving their socio-economic
conditions” is a better path towards peace. But López
Obrador later moved away from the proposal, saying
in August that military forces will continue to carry
out public security duties on the nation’s streets for the
foreseeable future because neither state or municipal
police are functioning properly in the fight against crime
and the Federal Police are not ready to fill the role
currently performed by the army and navy.

Source: “Sonoyta, Sonora, vive guerra
muda: 17 muertos en un mes, 38
ejecuciones Durante 2015 (The people
of Sonoyta live in constant fear),”
Sinembargo, June 17, 2015. http://www.
sinembargo.mx/17-06-2015/1381611
Violence in the small border town
escalated in January and resulted in the
departure of a large number of families
from a community where residents live in
constant fear, hardly ever leaving their
homes. Those who remain in Sonoyta,
population 14,000, say the level of
insecurity and violence is so high that
school and work activities have been
suspended indefinitely… About 60 state
police have been deployed to Sonoyta,
and efforts are ongoing to deal with the
situation, said one state official.

OE Watch | November 2018

59

LATIN AMERICA
Worse to Come in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The two accompanying
references may fairly frame a consequential public attitude
in Venezuela. As the opinion from DolarToday reflects,
expectations are that the economy will not get better, that it
will continue to deteriorate. The reference from El Impulso
reports an opinion from a popular opposition personality,
who states that resolution of the difficulties will not be
achieved peacefully. The comment alludes to the recent
death of an opposition leader named Fernando Albán, who
was evidently murdered by the government intelligence
apparatus. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the way ahead will not be democratic,
much less peaceful…”

The seal of SEBIN (Servicio Bolivariano de Inteligencia Nacional).

Source: Editors, “Lo Peor Está por Venir… El Fondo Monetario prevé una
catástrofe económica en Venezuela (The Worst is Yet to Come…The Monetary
Fund foresees an economic catastrophe in Venezuela),” DolarToday, 10 October
2018. https://dolartoday.com/lo-peor-esta-por-venir-el-fondo-monetario-preveuna-catastrofeeconomica-en-venezuela/
“The IMF calculates that the GNP per capita in Venezuela already fell 35%
between 2013 and 2017, and that the decline could reach 60% in 2023….The
fund said that the economic forecasts for Venezuela should be taken cautiously
because of the difficulty inherent in ‘the lack of discussion with authorities,
huge lakes of data, delivery of incomplete information and the difficulty of
interpreting some indicators…”
Source: José Enrique Arévalo, “Padre Palmar tras caso Albán: En Venezuela
la salida no será democrática ni pacífica (Padre Palmar on the Albán case: In
Venezuela the way out will not be democratic nor peaceful),” El Impulso, 9
October 2018. https://www.elimpulso.com/noticias/nacionales/padre-palmartras-caso-alban-en-venezuela-la-salida-no-sera-democratica-ni-pacifica-9oc
“By this medium [Twitter] Father Palmar asserted that Venezuela will not have
a democratic or peaceful way ahead…. [He said], ‘This murder [of Fernando
Albán] inside SEBIN [Bolivarian National Intelligence Service] demonstrates
that the way ahead will not be democratic, much less peaceful. We are
struggling against a band of delinquents invested with authority and of soulless
criminals. Those who think along electoral lines are as lawless as the narcos.’”

Source: By SEBIN (Servicio Bolivariano de Inteligencia Nacional) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Seal_of_SEBIN.png.

Overton Window Shift on Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The news reported in the accompanying reference reflects
a change in the overall political-journalistic discourse regarding the way to address
social and economic grievances and under-performance in Venezuela. As little as
a year ago it would have been exceptional to read a key opinion-maker discarding
dialog as a conflict resolution means. As reported in this accompanying reference
from Panam Post, scholar and former Spanish Prime Minister (1996-2004) José
María Aznar, after direct conversation with the newly elected president of Colombia,
Iván Duque, flatly dismissed political dialog within Venezuela as a viable means for
addressing that country’s difficulties. Aznar’s dismissal of dialogs came after the
Spanish government asserted the need for, and its support of, political dialog within
Venezuela. Note that recently elected Spanish President Pedro Sánchez is a socialist
who has shifted Spanish foreign policy to support the Cuban and Venezuelan socialist
José María Aznar (2009).
Source: By Contando Estrelas from Vigo, España / Spain (José María Aznar en Vigo) [CC BY-SA 2.0 (https://
parties in power. José María Aznar would be considered in Spain a ‘rightist’, and so
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Jos%C3%A9_Mar%C3%ADa_Aznar_en_Vigo_(2009-07-14)_(3).jpg.
some of the Aznar’s positioning regarding Venezuela might be framed in the context
of Spanish politics. However, the forum of Aznar’s comments as well as their unequivocal nature suggests that international opinions on the
matter of what future steps might be taken as to Venezuela will increasingly exclude political dialog inside Venezuela as an option. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…it will not be solved with any type of political dialog…”
Source: Efe, “Aznar afirma que la crisis de Venezuela no se resuelve con diálogo político (Aznar affirms that the crisis in Venezuela will not
be resolved with political dialog),” Panam Post, 16 October 2018. https://es.panampost.com/efe-panampost/2018/10/16/aznar-venezuela/
“Today, Aznar was received into the Casa de Nariño [Colombian White House] by the president of Colombia, Iván Duque, with who he later
gave a declaration to the press in which Venezuela and the peace process in Colombia were addressed. ‘The humanitarian crisis in Venezuela
is brutal, is tremendous, and in my opinion it will not be solved with any type of political dialog absolutely counterproductive’…”
OE Watch | November 2018

60

LATIN AMERICA
Chinese Medical Aid to Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The People’s Republic of
China is strengthening its diplomatic ties with Venezuela
through medical assistance. As the first accompanying
excerpt from China Military Online points out, the
“Chinese hospital vessel the Arch of Peace (He Ping
Fang Zhou) docked at Venezuela’s La Guaira port on 22
September to carry out health operations in conjunction
with the Bolivarian National Armed Force (FANB).” As
the Chinese source explains, “the arrival of the vessel is
part of the 28 cooperation agreements signed between
Venezuela and China during Maduro’s official visit to
the Asian country last week.”
The second accompanying excerpt from the proVenezuelan government newspaper, Ultimas Noticias,
quotes the Venezuelan Minister of Defense Vladimir
Padrino Lopez, who claims that it is “a vessel for
peace” and “that peace is fostered in the world through
cooperative and diplomatic ties.” As both excerpts point
out, international and Venezuelan media have been
reporting on serious problems in Venezuela’s national
health system. Venezuela’s health sector finds itself
under strain from the country’s economic recession,
as well as from international financial sanctions that
obstruct vital medical imports. This visit illustrates that
China continues to hone its soft power arsenal to gain
influence in Central and South America. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wedman)

Source: “China’s Arch of Peace Vessel Docks in Venezuela for Health Mission,”
China Military Online, 25 September 2018. http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/201809/25/content_9297699.htm
…Chinese hospital vessel the Arch of Peace (He Ping Fang Zhou) docked
at Venezuela’s La Guaira port on Saturday to carry out health operations in
conjunction with the Bolivarian National Armed Force (FANB)…. The arrival of
the vessel is part of the 28 cooperation agreements signed between Venezuela and
China during Maduro’s official visit to the Asian country last week. He described
that visit as being a “success” and said he is willing to learn from China in
order to help improve the economic recovery efforts taking place in Venezuela….
Venezuela’s health sector finds itself under strain from the country’s economic
recession, as well as from international financial sanctions that obstruct vital
medical imports….
Source: “China Navy Hospital Treating 600 a Day,” Ultimas Noticias, 28
September 2018. http://www.ultimasnoticias.com.ve/noticias/slider/arca-de-la-pazatiende-600-pe%e2%80%8arsonas-por-dia/
…International and Venezuelan media have been reporting on serious problems
in Venezuela’s national health system, including widespread shortages of medicines
and medical equipment, as a result of the country’s economic crisis. Venezuela’s
health sector finds itself under strain from the country’s economic recession, as
well as from international financial sanctions that obstruct vital medical imports….
“The first thing we must emphasize is (the vessel’s) name. It is a vessel for peace,
and peace is fostered in the world through cooperative and diplomatic ties,” said
Venezuelan Minister of Defense Vladimir Padrino Lopez. Lopez went on to note
that the arrival of the He Ping Fang Zhou “is also a defensive operation, as the
vessel is part of an exercise involving military hospitals in the country held this
Saturday.” Venezuela should also deepen military ties with China, he said.

“The first thing we must emphasize is (the vessel’s) name. It is a vessel for peace, and peace is
fostered in the world through cooperative and diplomatic ties.”
Chinese Navy hospital ship Peace Ark (866) departs Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam following the conclusion of Rim of the Pacific 2016.
Source: Petty Officer 2nd Class Laurie Dexter, https://www.dvidshub.net/image/2772672/chinese-navy-hospital-ship-peace-ark-866-departs-joint-base-pearl-harbor-hickam-following-conclusion-rim, Public Domain..

OE Watch | November 2018

61

LATIN AMERICA
ELN and FARC Seek Sanctuary
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying references, the first regarding the National Liberation
…The National Armed
Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional, ELN) and the second regarding the Colombian Revolutionary
Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, FARC) are representative of numerous
Forces of Venezuela has
reports of the ELN and FARC consolidating a physical presence inside Venezuela. Both organizations
a control point next to the
assert support for the Bolivarian movement and enjoy the imprimaturs of the Communist Party of Cuba
(PCC) and the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV). The reference from Venepress gives several
place where the guerrillas
examples and points out that it may be difficult to make a peace agreement with a guerrilla force that is
of the ELN encamp…
harbored in, and operates from, a neighboring country. More ominous still is the reference from Costa del
Sol FM, which reports the open presence of units of the FARC. The FARC is said to be regrouping, the
suggestion being that the Colombian government’s peace accord with the FARC is falling apart. As with the first reference, the second asserts a
friendly relationship between the guerrillas and the regime in control of Venezuela’s government. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“

”

Source: Fernando Tineo, “El ELN se instaló en
el Zulia (The ELN installs itself in Zulia [State in
Venezuela]),” Venepress, 9 September 2018. https://
venepress.com/article/El-ELN-se-instalo-en-elZulia1536339159281
“The National Armed Forces of Venezuela has a
control point next to the place where the guerrillas
of the ELN encamp. The month of September began
and did not bring good news for cattle ranchers in
the state of Zulia, in western Venezuela, specifically
the Catatumbo zone, there having occurred an act of
presence of the National Liberation Army of Colombia
(ELN) that took by force and extortion various
ranches, after ejecting their owners….”

Source: Sebastiana Barraéz, “Las FARC se reagrupan en Apure, Venezuela (The
FARC regroups in Apure [State], Venezuela),” Costa del Sol FM, 28 September
2018. http://www.costadelsolfm.net/2018/09/28/sebastiana-barraez-las-farc-sereagrupa-en-apure/
“This is happening in Alto Apure, Apure State of Táchira. Guerrillas of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia have come regrouping. This is a
consequence of what has happened to the group after the peace accords. Most
dangerous is that they are recruiting youth, be they Colombian or Venezuelan…
They warn that if they get information that someone has a relationship with the
Colombian Army, ‘there will be no mercy.’ They warn that if anyone commits
a misdemeanor, they will be captured and turned over to their friends [in the
Venezuelan police or intelligence services]. The FARC placed conditions that all
contraband that passed toward Colombia had to pay a percentage because that
money goes to the armed struggle.”

Perijá Mountain Range Highlands (near Colombia-Venezuela Border).

Source: By Breyner pertuz [CC 4.0], via Wikimedia Commons, https://es.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archivo:Parte_alta_serrania_del_perija.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

62

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia May Return to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields
OE Watch Commentary: In September 2015,
President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia announced
that aerial fumigation of coca plants would not
resume in the country, even though this method had
been used since the early 1990s. The government
halted aerial spraying in May 2015 due to claims that
glyphosate, the herbicide used to kill coca plants, may
cause cancer. During a conference held in Bogota in
September 2015, Santos supported and even reiterated
his resolve on this decision by stating that aerial
fumigation has never really been successful and that
despite its use, Colombia continues to be the world’s
top cocaine producer. The accompanying excerpted
articles discuss the Colombian government’s decision
to eliminate the use of glyphosate in 2015 and the
possibility of it being used again.
There was a mixed reaction to Santos’ 2015
decision with supporters claiming that other methods,
including arresting major drug lords, attacking the
supply chain and targeting the actual labs where
drugs are processed would be considerably more
effective than fumigation efforts. These thoughts are
expressed in the excerpt from El Espectador. The
opposition to this policy change, as indicated in the
excerpt from El Tiempo, believes that banning aerial
fumigation may actually empower traffickers to grow
their coca fields without concern of it being sprayed.
There is also concern regarding the welfare of those
tasked to manually spray or pull plants from the
ground one by one, as it would require them to enter
into dangerous territories controlled by major drug
trafficking organizations and continue to expose them
to glyphosate.
Three years after Santos’ decision, the Colombian
government is once again contemplating how to
control cocaine production in the country, which is
currently at an all-time high as reported by the UN
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 2018 World
Drug Report. As indicated in the excerpt from El
Espectador, production in 2016 reached 1,410 metric
tons and has only increased since then. In response
to this information, Francisco Santos, the new
Colombian ambassador to the United States, indicated
during an interview that it is necessary to return
to the fumigation of illegal crops in the different
regions of the country with glyphosate, as indicated
in the excerpt from Periodico Amarillo. He further
indicated that in order to better protect the health of
citizens living in areas where aerial fumigation may
return, the government would spray at lower altitudes
and within tighter perimeters. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“…he stated that Colombia would consider using a product
other than glyphosate, but that it is not possible because there is
nothing else on the market that is as effective.”
Source: “El glifosato es ‘probablemente cancerígeno (Glyphosate is Likely
Carcinogenic),” El Espectador, 2 May 2015. http://www.elespectador.com/noticias/
nacional/el-glifosato-probablemente-cancerigeno-articulo-558264
Daniel Mejía, the director of the Center for Security and Drug Studies, a research
group in Bogotá, claims that spraying is inefficient and counterproductive. As an
alternative, he recommended attacking the links in the chain of drug trafficking,
the labs where cocaine is processed, and the large shipments of chemicals used to
produce cocaine. He further stated that aerial fumigation is not effective in reducing
overall cocaine production.
Source: “Pros y contras de la fumigación aérea para frenar los narcocultivos (Pros
and Cons to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields),” El Tiempo, 6 September 2016.
http://www.eltiempo.com/politica/justicia/fumigacion-aerea-contra-cultivosilicitos/16693172
Rafael Nieto, a former vice-minister of justice, questioned the rationale behind
halting spraying, saying that more fumigation workers would be put at risk. He
also claimed that if spraying is stopped, the income of the drug traffickers, criminal
gangs and guerrillas would increase substantially as would actual coca and cocaine
production.
Source: “Colombia alcanzó record histórico de cultivos de coca en 2017 (Colombia
Reached Historical Coca Production Record in 2017),” El Espectador, 25 June 2018.
https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/el-mundo/ee-uu-colombia-alcanzo-recordhistorico-de-cultivos-de-coca-en-2017-articulo-796434
Global cocaine production reached 1,410 metric tons in 2016, the highest levels ever
recorded, according to information derived from the UN Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) 2018 World Drug Report. This source also reported that various factors
are currently contributing to increased production in Colombia. Some were cited
as follows: slow progress in converting farmers previously dedicated to growing
coca plants for the FARC into legitimate farmers dedicated to growing crops such as
cacao, evolving market dynamics and drug trafficking strategies amongst criminal
groups, a reduction in Colombian fumigation practices, and finally, increased global
demand for cocaine.
Source: “Francisco Santos afirmó que las fumigaciones con glifosato tienen que
volver (Francisco Santos Affirms that Fumigation with Glyphosate Must Return),”
Periodico Amarillo, 10 September 2018. http://periodicoamarillo.com/franciscosantos-afirmo-que-las-fumigaciones-con-glifosato-tienen-que-volver/
Francisco Santos, the new Colombian ambassador to the United States, indicated
the following regarding considerations to reinitiate the use of glyphosate. “Cocaine
production in Colombia is consistently increasing. It is clear that fumigation
is essential. Justice must understand that we are facing social, economic, and
national security emergencies. Fumigation must return.” He also added that aerial
fumigation would return with restrictions and corresponding medical studies given
that glyphosate, the chemical used to destroy the cocaine fields, is believed to cause
cancer and other illnesses. Finally, he stated that Colombia would consider using a
product other than glyphosate, but that it is not possible because there is nothing else
on the market that is as effective.

OE Watch | November 2018

63

LATIN AMERICA
Protests Disturb Peace Commonly Associated with
Costa Rica
OE Watch Commentary: Violent protests and
strikes that began in Costa Rica on 9 September, have
continued, despite the fact that the country is known
for being largely free of such incidents. Video footage
of the protests provided images of flaming barricades
and clashes between thousands of demonstrators and
police. According to the accompanying excerpted
article from CRI Hoy, the protests began after
President Carlos Alvarado proposed fiscal reforms to
Congress, including new taxes, in a country that is
already plagued by a high tax rate.
In response to the proposed fiscal reforms, labor
unions have set up road blocks at multiple locations
in the country and cut fuel supplies in some parts
of the country. However, ahead of the strike’s start,
Alvarado ordered police to reinforce ports and oil
installations to keep protesters from disrupting
commercial activity and fuel distribution completely.
The excerpt from La Prensa reports that while
protests took place, labor unions worked to negotiate
with the government and agreed to have the Catholic
Church act as a mediator in preliminary meetings to
determine the conditions for a dialogue commission,
but added that before change is implemented, the
strikes would continue.
The excerpted article from Estrategia y Negocios
notes how on 21 September, after more than 11 hours
of negotiation, representatives of the Costa Rican
government and leaders of the labor unions failed
to reach an agreement. Labor unions responded by
saying that the strikes would continue and in one
incident, protesters confronted and became physically
aggressive with President Alvarado as he left the
National Theater on 3 October, as reported by the
excerpt from La Nacion. Ultimately, the Costa
Rican government has not yet found a solution to the
proposed fiscal reforms and protests have continued
in some parts of the country. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“Costa Rica’s government is
struggling with a fiscal deficit
estimated at 7.1 percent of its GDP
this year, which has pushed up the
public debt load and increased
the countries’ need for increased
revenue”

Source: “Esto es lo que el Gobierno quiere con el plan fiscal de impuestos
(Government Outlines Initial Fiscal Plan Including Tax Increases),” CRI Hoy, 26
August 2018. https://www.crhoy.com/nacionales/esto-es-lo-que-el-gobierno-quiereexonerar-de-impuestos-en-plan-fiscal/
Costa Rica’s government is struggling with a fiscal deficit estimated at 7.1 percent
of its GDP this year, which has pushed up the public debt load and increased the
countries’ need for increased revenue. In an attempt to bridge the gap of the deficit,
newly elected President Carlos Alvarado is proposing the implantation of a value
added tax to replace the existing sales tax and expand it to goods and services that
are currently exempt. One of the most controversial measures is a 1 percent duty on
basic foodstuffs. Apart from the aforementioned taxes, the government is also looking
to implement changes that would limit unemployment assistance and the payment
of some salary bonuses which have met with vigorous opposition from public sector
unions.
Source: “Costa Rica amanece con carreteras bloqueadas y escasez de gasolina (Costa
Rica Threatens to Cut Fuel Supply and Block Highways)”, La Prensa, 18 Sept, 2018.
https://www.laprensa.com.ni/2018/09/17/internacionales/2472388-costa-ricaamanece-con-carreteras-bloqueadas-y-escasez-de-gasolina
As a result of protests in the country over new taxes to cut the fiscal deficit, labor
unions are blocking highways and threatening to stop distributing gasoline. For his
part, President Carlos Alvarado said he expected a meeting with the unions to a stop
the road blockades and threats to limit or completely cut fuel supplies. He stressed
that it is not a matter of a discussion between the government and the labor unions,
but of listening to citizens. Furthermore, Labor Minister Steven Nunez said the
government is awaiting an invitation from the Church to determine the conditions for
the dialogue process.
Source: “Costa Rica llega a 12 días de huelga y el gobierno urge la refoma
fiscal (12 Days into Protests, and the Government Encourages Fiscal Reform),”
Estrategia y Negocios, 21 September 2018. http://www.estrategiaynegocios.net/
lasclavesdeldia/1218363-330/costa-rica-llega-a-12-d%C3%ADas-de-huelga-y-elgobierno-urge
President Carlos Alvarado stated earlier today that he had hope an agreement
would be reached after meetings held on September 21, 2018, and the strike would be
called off. However, he emphasized the urgency of approving the fiscal reform.“It is
necessary to solve the fiscal problem. There is not one single scenario in which Costa
Rica moves forward without this solution”, affirmed the President. Conversely, labor
union leaders have stated that “this strike is indefinite,” and will end only when the
government has the will to sit down at the table to talk with all the workers ... and
withdraw the proposed law.” According to Alvarado, the Government accepted to
sit and discuss with the labor unions the 39 proposals labor unions have presented
(none of which include cutting salary), but he also clarified that the elements
proposed by the unions are being considered as complementary, not a substitute to
the current text.
Source: “Huelguistas insultan al presidente Carlos Alvarado (Protestors Insult and
Physically Attack President Carlos Alvarado),” La Nacion, 3 October 2018.
https://www.nacion.com/el-pais/servicios/manifestantes-hicieron-zafarrancho-en-lasalida-de/5ROJJOIC65CJTFLEY45T5OIRLI/story/
Protesters confronted Carlos Alvarado as the Costa Rican president left the
National Theater in San José on Wednesday morning. According to Enrique
Arguedas, Deputy General Director of the Fuerza Pública, protesters surrounded the
building in an attempt to stop the president from leaving. When Alvarado did exit the
National Theater, protesters insulted the president and became physically aggressive
against his police escort.
OE Watch | November 2018

64

LATIN AMERICA
Student Marches as a Form of Struggle
OE Watch Commentary: Colombians recently experienced a massive expression of shared opinion in
…the immense
the form of coordinated nation-wide student-faculty marches, marches that then turned into a strike. The
fundamental grievance was overall decline (over a period of years) in government financial support to
concentration of young
education in the country. The new president, Iván Duque, quickly acceded to demands for greater funding
people in the various
by proposing a substantial budget increase. Various march organizers then claimed dissatisfaction with
the proposed manner in which the new funding was to be distributed. In Colombia as elsewhere, the ability cities of the country was
to congregate large crowds has become a widely accepted measure of political leadership. The spread of
exploited by some…
social media has increased the speed of concentration and spatial precision of crowds and marches, but the
crowd formations are not spontaneous, so the question arises who is doing the organizing. In Colombia
there exists a set number of student and teacher organizations, which have tended to be led by ideologically motivated leftists. Partly for this
reason, any huge congregations of students can be worrisome to government officials due to their destructive potential. In any case, it appears
from the excerpted references from IFM Noticias and El País that although crowd formation is a potentially explosive challenge, these marches
were orderly. The funding for education is a universally recognized conundrum in Colombia. Support for students and concern for social
control are mixed issues in terms of political and ideological support. It seems, nevertheless, that massive student protest is the first test for the
Duque presidency, rather than something directly associated with the FARC. It is perhaps worth noting, meanwhile, that what was billed as the
immense ‘Mother of All Marches’ that occurred in Venezuela in 2017 (depicted in the accompanying image) had no particular effect. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“

”

Source: Victor Hugo Galeano, “La politización de las
marchas estudiantiles (Politicization of the student
marches),” IFM Noticias, 11 October 2018. https://
ifmnoticias.com/la-politizacion-de-las-marchas-de-losestudiantes-por-parte-de-politicos/

Source: Editors, “Luego de la marcha masiva, universidades públicas entraron
en paro indefinido (After the massive march, public universities begin an
indefinite strike),” El País, 10 October 2018. https://www.elpais.com.co/
colombia/luego-de-la-marcha-masiva-universidades-publicas-entraron-en-paroindefinido.html

“The protest was intended as a call to the citizenry and
to the government about the grave budgetary deficit that
confront public universities in the country. Nevertheless,
the immense concentration of young people in the various
cities of the country was exploited by some to politicize
the march to present supporters that they had not won
[electorally]. That happened with ex-candidate [for the
presidency] Gustavo Petro…”

“After yesterday’s multitudinous marches in the principal cities of the country,
where the educational communities of the public universities congregated asking
for more resources in order to operate, one of the conclusions of the day’s effort
was that an indefinite strike was announced for those educational institutions…
In spite of what was outlined by the administration, the rector of the University
of Valle, Édgar Varela, affirmed that the 32 rectors of the public universities met
yesterday in Bogota to demand clarity from the National Government regarding
the budgetary distribution for this academic year and the next.”

Mother of All Marches - Caracas (2017).

Source: By Voice of America [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mother_of_All_Marches_-_Caracas.jpg.

OE Watch | November 2018

65

