community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #9
September 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

COUNTER
TERRORISM
EURASIA
3
6
7
9
11
12
13
14
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
24
25
26
27

Russian Heavy Artillery: Leaving Depots and Returning to
Service
Changing Attitudes toward War
Requisitioning Private Vehicles for the Russian Army Under
Martial Law
Small Boat Cruisin’ for a Bruisin’
An Overabundance of Airborne?
New Amphibious Warfare Ships…Someday
Hiding Little Green Men
WIG over the Arctic
If You Build It, Will They Come?
DOSAAF Reinstituting Pilot Training
Closing Conscript Loopholes
Developing a “Digital Potemkin Village”
Kazakhstan Deploys a Peacekeeping Company
Another Step in the Improvement of Uzbek-Tajik Relations
Russia Flexes Its Muscles in Abkhazia While Citizens Recall
Anniversary of War with Georgia
Interview with Armenia’s Minister of Defense
Moldovan Government Moves to Reduce Reliance on
Russian Power
Patriotism as Defense against Color Revolutions
Taking Note of the Chinese Trade Route Initiative in
Bulgaria and Europe

INDO-PACIFIC
28
29
31
33

China Optimistic on ‘One Belt, One Road’ Initiative
Returning Uyghur Fighters and China’s National Security
Dilemma
Ganbala Radar Station – Keeping Watch On the Skies Over
Tibet
India Cancels New Battalions for Mountain Strike Corps

AFRICA
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

“New Type” PLA Units Emphasize Mobility, Joint
Operations
Chinese Expert Looks to 5G to Create a Highly Efficient
National Defense Mobilization Network
PLA Plans to Completely Divest From Commercial Activities
Chinese AI Powered Submarines: Developing a New Era of
Sea Power
Motive for Thailand’s Submarine Program?
Moro Rebels Fight ISIS in the Philippines
Consequences of Indonesia’s Ban on Jamaah Ansharud
Daulah
Japan’s Counterterrorism Preparations for the 2020
Olympics

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
42
43
44
45
46
47
49
50
51
52
53
54
56

ISIS Adapts to Tightened Security Measures
Turkey’s Efforts to Thwart Terrorism in Iraq
Iranian Influence Extends to the Mediterranean
Hamas’s Naval Commandos
Will Iran Pivot to the East?
Russia and Iran Hamper Turkey’s Aspirations to Become
Energy Hub
Turkish and Chinese Military Cooperation
Turkey to Sell T-129 Helicopters and Four Corvettes to
Pakistan
Turkey Tests SOM-J and Bozok missiles
Iran: IAEA Shouldn’t Inspect Universities
New Government System Brings Changes to Turkish
General Staff
Russian-Druze Relations and the ISIS Attack on Suwayda
Houthi Rebels Use Iranian Qassef-1 Drone to Attack Saudi
Base

57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

A Fading Illusion of Relative Safety from Islamic Terrorism in
Senegal
Malian Militants Use Multiple Tactics to Target France
Kenya: 20 Years after Attack on US Embassy, Counterterrorism
Measures Often Hindered
Camel-Based Patrols to Combat Terrorism in Kenya
Secret Military Burials Affect Morale in Nigeria
Fleeing Nigerian Soldiers: Cowardice or a Responsible Action?
How Pressure Caused South Africa to Switch Recognition from
Taiwan to China
The DRC’s Prescription for a Nightmare…Ebola in a Conflict
Zone

LATIN AMERICA
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

Colombia Recognizes Palestine?
Alleged Assassination Attempt on Venezuelan President
Nicolás Maduro
Strategy Challenges for Ivan Duque
Human Trafficking Continues to Plague Colombia
Colombian Far Left Being Assassinated?
Cocaine Production at All-Time High in Colombia
Criminal Groups Utilize Marketing Techniques to Sell Drugs to
Children in Mexico, Central and South America

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 9

September | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Dodge Billingsley
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Robert Kurz
Matthew Stein
Tom Wilhelm

Indo-Pacific

Joseph Hope
Cindy Hurst

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Matthew Stein
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Ihsan Gunduz
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Alma Keshavarz

		
		
ON THE COVER:
A member of Iraqi counter-terrorism force scans his sector of fire
during military training in Mosul, Iraq, April 5, 2018. The Italian army
and Iraqi counter-terrorism forces have been tasked with securing and
maintaining the stability of Mosul Dam. This effort is part of Combined
Joint Task Force – Operation Inherent Resolve, the global Coalition to
defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria.
Image Source: U.S. Army photo by Pfc. Anthony Zendejas IV, https://www.dvidshub.net/image/4299453/counter-terrorismtraining, Public Domain.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Russian Heavy Artillery: Leaving Depots and
Returning to Service
OE Watch Commentary: The Soviet Union developed large caliber artillery, such as the 2S4 ‘Tyulpan’ 240mm mortar and the 2S7 ‘Pion’
203mm howitzer, to suppress lines of communication, destroy enemy headquarters, tactical nuclear weapons, logistic areas, and other important
targets and to destroy urban areas and field fortifications. After the end of the Cold War, the Russian Federation placed most of these large
caliber artillery systems into long-term storage depots for several reasons. The first is that they were intended to deliver nuclear, as well as
conventional, munitions (the end of the Cold War meant that a long-range tactical nuclear weapon delivery was no longer needed). Another
reason is that better tube (2S19M Msta-SM) and missile (MLRS/SRBM/GLCM) systems, such as new 300mm MLRS platforms, the Iskander
missile system, and the 2S19M Msta-SM 152mm howitzer, allow Russia to fulfill many of the same tasks as large caliber artillery to varying
degrees.
The 2S4 ‘Tyulpan’ self-propelled mortar is equipped with a 240mm 2B8 mortar mounted on a modified Object 123 tracked chassis (similar
to the 2S3 Akatsiya self-propelled howitzer) with a V-59 V-12, 520 horsepower diesel engine, capable of 60 km/h road speed. The Tyulpan
has a crew of four, but five additional crewman are carried in the support vehicle that typically accompanies it. The system is capable of
firing conventional, chemical, and nuclear munitions at a rate of one round per minute, although Russia reportedly now only has conventional
munitions in service. The standard shell fired by the 2S4 weighs 130 kg, and is capable of delivering a high-explosive (HE) fragmentation
munition to a maximum range of 9.5 km. The Tyulpan also fires a rocket-assisted munition (with a shell weight of 228 kg) to a maximum range
of 18 km. Tyulpan munitions have long (since the Soviet-Afghan War) been able to be equipped with a Smelchak laser-guidance system to
increase accuracy. The 2S4 is reportedly being upgraded to interface with modern Russian artillery command and control systems, to include
improved communication and fire control systems. In addition, barrels and recoil mechanisms are being refurbished or replaced.
The 2S7 ‘Pion’ self-propelled howitzer is equipped with a 203mm 2A44 howitzer mounted on a tracked chassis with a V-46, 780 horsepower
diesel engine capable of a 50 km/h road speed. The 2S7 has a crew of seven (six for the 2S7M, but seven additional crewman are carried in
the support vehicle that typically accompanies it. The system is capable of firing conventional, and nuclear munitions at a rate of 1.5 rounds
per minute, although Russia reportedly now only has conventional munitions in service. The 2S7 can fire a variety of shell and munition
combinations.
2S7M ‘Malka’ Shell/Munition Table
3OF43 (long)

3OF43 (short)

3OF44 (rocket)

3O14 (long)

3O14 (short)

3VG11 (concrete)

Propulsion Type

standard

standard

rocket-assisted

standard

standard

standard

Warhead Type

HE-Frag

HE-Frag

HE-Frag

17.8 kg

17.8 kg

13. kg

cluster munition
24x 0.23 kg
submunition

concrete piercing

Warhead Weight

cluster munition
24x 0.23 kg
submunition

Charge Type

3VO34

3VOF42

3VOF35

3VO15

3VO16

???

Charge Weight

43.2 kg

25 kg

43.2 kg

43.2 kg

25 kg

???

Range

37.4 km

25.4 km

47.5 km

30.4 km

13 km

???

???

In 1983, Russia began fielding a modernized version of the system, the 2S7M ‘Malka.’ The 2S7M is equipped with a V-84V, 840 horsepower
diesel engine, has an upgraded fire control system, and has an improved fire rate of 2.5 rounds per minute. As stated in the accompanying
excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda, laser guided munitions (such as the ‘Krasnopol’ laser guidance system) are being considered for
development for the 2S7M.
The accompanying articles from Krasnaya Zvezda and Armeyskiy Sbornik discuss Russian efforts to now draw these large caliber artillery
pieces out of storage, modernize them, and place them into Russia’s (only) 45th heavy artillery brigade, and the artillery brigades assigned to
Combined Arms Armies, Tank Armies, and (possibly) Army Corps. Typically, large caliber artillery systems are organized into battalions with
8-12 tubes (2-3 batteries) per battalion, and use the same artillery command and control systems (such as the 1V12M ‘Kharkov’ Artillery Fire
Control System) that are found in standard artillery battalions. Interestingly, although there has been much discussion about the capabilities
of large caliber artillery pieces, there has not been a mention of why they are being returned to service. Since there is little need for a tubebased nuclear artillery delivery system, and there are efforts to equip the systems with laser-guided munitions, it is likely that these systems are
envisaged to pulverize urban areas and field fortifications, tasks which are difficult for standard Russian 122mm and 152mm artillery pieces.
Another possibility about why these systems are being reintroduced are concerns about the quantity of missiles in Russian depots (magazine
depth). Although missile artillery such as the Iskander SRBM/GLCM and new 300mm MLRS platforms have greater ranges, and may be more
capable of performing certain tasks better than the 2S4 or 2S7, Russia’s industrial base and financial resources to rapidly replenish sophisticated
and expensive missiles at a level needed for large scale war may be in question (the production of 2S4 and 2S7 shells is much faster and cheaper
than the production of any missile). In short, new missile artillery systems may be better, but the 2S4 and 2S7 give Russian planners a more
sustainable and economical way of conducting heavy fires, and their use would allow the missile artillery to focus upon more specialized targets.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
(continued)
OE Watch | September 2018

3

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Heavy Artillery: Leaving Depots
and Returning to Service
“As part of the scheduled reoutfitting of military district troops, high-power self-propelled artillery
battalions in artillery brigades are being rearmed and are beginning scheduled combat training.”
Source: A. Aleksandrovich: “Оттачивая точность попаданий (Honing Impact Accuracy),” Armeyskiy Sbornik, May 2018.
Tactical exercises for rocket, self-propelled, and mortar artillery batteries have been staged at the Sergeyevskiy firing range within the
framework of training camp sessions for the 5th Combined-Arms Army’s missile troops and artillery…
The world’s largest mortar is surprisingly quiet. And it is only by virtue of how long the Tyulpan’s barrel continues to sing after firing off a
round that you realize what a heavy “gift” will be landing in a few seconds’ time on the heads of the adversary. A mortar shell weighing almost
a hundredweight and a half is loaded into the 240mm self-propelled mortar with the aid of a hoist. The sound from the discharge is relatively
quiet -- more of a clap -- but it’s such that you sense through your entire body. By that time the shell is already lost in the sky, on its way to
shortly coming down to earth on the far side of the darkening hills in the distance. The Tyulpans are also irreplaceable inasmuch as they
can dispatch their munition over a distance of 20 kilometers, and they can strike almost right up against a target, they can literally “throw”
a mortar through a multistory building. This heaven-sent surprise can penetrate a standard ‘khrushchevka’ [a common style of five-story
apartment buildings found in the former Soviet Union] from attic to basement. And this is with a conventional high-explosive warhead. But
many types of munition have been developed for the 2S4 Tyulpan -- right up to nuclear. A Tyulpan battalion has taken part in tactical exercises
for 5th Combined-Arms Army artillery at the Sergeyevskiy range in Primorskiy Kray…
The secret was confided by Lieutenant Colonel Aleksandr Polshkov, senior officer of the 5th Combined-Arms Army’s Missile Troops and
Artillery Department: “This year our army’s officers have undergone conversion training at scientific research institutes and will shortly be
instructing all artillery battery commanders in performing fire missions using the precision-guided munitions. The munitions in question will be
allocated to us for firing practice. We are ready to instruct our men for future operations in contemporary conditions, because area targets are
becoming a thing of the past. Victory in a modern engagement depends both on the objective to be hit and with what accuracy in the shortest
available time.”
The Krasnopol system directly incorporates the gun, munition, and laser target-indicator. The operator aims this device at the chosen target,
and a beam is reflected back. Ejected from the gun, in flight the munition engages a homing head, locks onto the beam reflected from the target,
and independently guides itself onto the target, thereby ensuring a hit. This can be any target, from a building to an automobile -- the munition
is guaranteed to destroy it at a range up to 30 kilometers…

2S4 Tyulpan self-propelled mortar.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Demonstration-p1/i-WF4zcrx#, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

(continued)
4

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Heavy Artillery: Leaving Depots
and Returning to Service
Source: Yuriy Avdeyev, “«Малка» – аргумент большой мощности (The ‘Malka’ is a High-Power Argument),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 16 July
2018. http://redstar.ru/malka-argument-bolshoj-moshhnosti/
As part of the scheduled reoutfitting of military district troops, high-power self-propelled artillery battalions in artillery brigades are being
rearmed and are beginning scheduled combat training. Twelve of the newest Malka 203mm self-propelled guns entered the Central Military
District…This version was developed on the basis of the 2S7 Pion system. The preliminary specifications envisaged a substantial increase in
technical, operating, and combat characteristics. An updating of the base chassis and fire control system was envisaged.
Specialists previously declared that the main drawback of Malka’s predecessor was insufficiently high accuracy and a lengthy fire control
process. This negative point has been eliminated in the new vehicle. The 2S7M Malka is equipped with automated means of communications
and command and control. The self-propelled gun was equipped with a system for receiving data from the battery senior officer. All
data received for conducting fire are output in an automatic mode to digital displays mounted at workstations of the self-propelled gun
commander and gunner. On receiving the data, they can lay and prepare the gun for firing. This is yesterday’s modernization, so to speak,
but modifications of the artillery complex continue with consideration of state-of-the-art technologies. At the present time control of artillery
subunits is exercised using modernized 1V12M command vehicles, which include optical reconnaissance devices and a system of topographic
tie-in based on the GLONASS global positioning system. The complex is designed for automated and non-automated control of fire and combat
actions of the artillery battalion (battery) of self-propelled artillery systems, and for preparation during battle in coordination with Ground
Troops units and subunits…
Meanwhile, specialists note that the self-propelled gun has good potential for subsequent modernization with consideration of capabilities of
modern innovations. Its combat capabilities will be developed along the path of using smart ammunition. At the present time laser guidance
systems are on the agenda for the ammunition, as they say. No less pertinent, according to estimates of artillerymen, is the use in the munition
of a fuse with controlled aerodynamic effect, which will permit reducing the round’s circular error probable to five meters. The use of cluster
munitions with self-aiming submunitions is considered no less promising. Add to this the round’s improved aerodynamics and the 30 percent
increase in range of targets being engaged. What appears as a result is the look of a new, advanced high-power artillery complex.

2S7M Malka self-propelled gun.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Demonstration-p1/i-WF4zcrx#, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

5

EURASIA
Changing Attitudes toward War
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past decade,
sociologists have noted a significant shift in
Russian attitudes toward the concept of “war.” The
accompanying excerpt from the centrist news source,
Gazeta.ru, traces the transformation from the Soviet
belief in peace, which was derived from the country’s
tremendous sacrifices during the Great Patriotic
War (World War II) to today’s more militaristic and
aggressive stance. The author suggests that this “clear
public move away from pacifism to the present official
militarist rhetoric perhaps appeared over 10 years ago
-- with the beginning of the new wave of the Russian
authorities’ active public anti-Western propaganda.”
The author asserts that the aggression against
Ukraine in early 2014 “finally ousted pacifist rhetoric
from the official Russian discourse.” He provides
a number of Russian memes and bumper stickers
which reflect this new bellicosity: “Don’t mess with
my Iskanders,” “a model of a missile inscribed ‘To
Washington!’” or a German car “with the inscription
‘To Berlin.’” The author points out that these not-so
subtle threats of aggression no longer “seem absurd,
stupid, or inappropriate to the majority.”

“Something has happened to us. We have ceased to fear war.
We have ceased to hate it.”

USSR stamp devoted to the 20th anniversary of the Kursk battle, 1963. CPA 2869.

Source: By Scanned and processed by Leonid Dzhepko (Personal collection) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:USSR_
stamp_1963_CPA2870.jpg.

The author concludes on a sobering note, positing that
“something has happened to us. We have ceased to fear war. We have ceased to hate it.” While he does not specifically mention the ongoing
conflicts in Ukraine and Syria, he does assert that Russians “have ceased to resist attempts to drag us into various wars which have nothing
to do with our country or which produce extremely negative long-term consequences.” And most disturbingly, the author notes that this
attitude is prevalent among the younger generation, who, according to the author, will “answer the question ‘do the Russians want war?’ in the
affirmative.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: Semen Novoprudskiy, “Хотят ли русские войны? (Do the Russians Want War?),” Gazeta.ru, 3 August 2018. https://www.gazeta.ru/
comments/column/novoprudsky/11877925.shtml
…The question is why in present-day Russia it has become unfashionable and sometimes even simply dangerous to speak out publicly against
war. And why in the past 100 years of our history the nation’s attitude toward war has changed to its direct opposite several times.
…The official Soviet rhetoric changed radically after the victory over fascism. Peace ensued, for which Soviet Russia paid an unimaginable
price and which, of course, it wanted to preserve forever…. Now the Soviet Union will “fight for peace throughout the world” fiercely and
resolutely, in words at least, until its very end…. A country which lost 27 million lives in the Second World War did not want to fight any more.
…In the first decade after the collapse of the USSR, in the 1990s, our country was clearly in no fit state for wars -- a least, no further off than
our own Chechnya….
…The initial moments of Russia’s clear public move away from pacifism to the present official militarist rhetoric perhaps appeared over 10
years ago -- with the beginning of the new wave of the Russian authorities’ active public anti-Western propaganda. And since spring 2014
militarist rhetoric has finally ousted pacifist rhetoric from the official Russian discourse for well known reasons.
Now we are living with the militarist memes “Don’t mess with my Iskanders,” “polite people,” “we can do it again” -- and they do not seem
absurd, stupid, or inappropriate to the majority.
A procession along Moscow’s central streets with a model of a missile inscribed “To Washington!” does not seem an absurdity to the majority.
Or stickers on foreign cars, including German-made ones, with the inscription “To Berlin.” In Russia now to publicly call for the end of the war
in Ukraine or the withdrawal of Russian troops from Syria means that you will immediately pass for an “oppositionist” and a “liberal” at the
very least (in today’s Russia these are terms of abuse) or a “fifth column,” at the very most….
…Today the children and grandchildren of those same “sons of soldiers who lie under the birch trees” answer the question “do the Russians
want war?” in the affirmative. Something has happened to us. We have ceased to fear war. We have ceased to hate it. We have ceased to
resist attempts to drag us into various wars which have nothing to do with our country or which produce extremely negative long-term
consequences…

OE Watch | September 2018

6

EURASIA
Requisitioning Private Vehicles for the Russian
Army Under Martial Law
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from the 24 July 2018 edition of Izvestiya discusses recent legislative
changes to Russia’s wartime private property seizure laws. In the Russian system, local military commissariats are responsible for the
fall and spring draft boards that bring hundreds of thousands of conscripts into the military. Apparently in wartime, these commissariats
have an additional duty, requisitioning materials, to include vehicles, to support the war effort. According to the new legislation, military
commissariats will have access to better listings of militarily suitable vehicles for induction, through the use of vehicle registration and tax
records. The accompanying excerpted article from the 31 July 2018 edition of Izvestiya also discusses Russian efforts to develop a capability
to war game at the operational level. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov, Aleksey Ramm, Bogdan Stepovoy, “Легковые автомобили граждан поставят на воинский учет (Citizens’
Vehicles Will Be Placed on the Military Register),” Izvestiya, 24 July 2018. https://iz.ru/769992/aleksandr-kruglov-aleksei-ramm-bogdanstepovoi/legkovye-avtomobili-grazhdan-postaviat-na-voinskii-uchet
There are plans to change the list of automotive vehicles that can be transferred to the Army in the event of martial law being introduced. A
new Defense Ministry order provides for registering all citizens’ passenger cars. Monitoring of the “census” of cars will also be strengthened.
It is expected that not only the State Inspectorate for Road Traffic Safety (GIBDD), [State Committee for Technical Oversight (Gostekhnadzor),
and Russian Statistics Agency (Rosstat), but also the tax service, will forward information on road vehicles which are in legal entities’
possession to the military…
The Defense Ministry has informed Izvestiya that the department has drafted a bill “On Making Changes to the Russian Federation Defense
Minister’s Order No 151 of 14 March 2014”…The requisition [mobilizatsiya] of private motor vehicles may begin only in the event of martial
law being declared. It is introduced only in the case of external aggression or threat of attack by a foreign state…The document indicates
that vehicles will be added to the military inventory of formations and military units which are formed for wartime purposes. In the event of
requisition, preference will be given to homeland-produced off-road vehicles. First of all, to UAZ-469, UAZ-3151, UAZ-2966, and UAZ-3163
(“Patriot”) automotive vehicles.
Requisitioned vehicles will not be dispatched to an area of combat operations. The draft order does not refer, either, to seizure of cars from
their owners. Service personnel will be able to travel in civilian cars only until regulation vehicles arrive in the unit from reserve depots. The
cars will then be immediately returned to their owners, and the owners will be paid compensation, which is calculated on the basis of the period
of use by military personnel and of any damage sustained…The draft order also says that mobile compressor and electricity stations, as well as
electric power supply plants, will now be subject to military registration. They will be needed by the Army for organizing base field camps and
supplying power to weapon systems…
In the Soviet Union, a system of motor vehicle requisitioning existed whereby all vehicles that were in the inventory of state economic
enterprises and private cars would be registered. In case of necessity, not only forest rangers’ UAZs, but also various organizations’ official
Volgas, would have been dispatched to the Army. At present, under the Defense Ministry’s 2014 order, buses, trucks, trailers, and tractors, for
example, and other vehicles are subject to requisition.
In the Soviet Union, a system of motor vehicle requisitioning existed whereby all vehicles that were in the inventory of state economic
enterprises and private cars would be registered. In case of necessity, not only forest rangers’ UAZs, but also various organizations’ official
Volgas, would have been dispatched to the Army.

Reconnaissance-in-Force Russian Style
By Lester W. Grau

“Integrated fires, rapid detect-destroy systems and the controlled, merciless
onslaught of smaller robot tanks and assault vehicles may rip through
robust defenses to determine the true nature of the defense and prepare
the main attack to totally dismantle it. To the Russian way of thinking,
the reconnaissance-in-force remains a viable method of tactical intelligence.
Learning how to employ it optimally is the current challenge.”
This paper was originally published in Armor journal’s Winter-Spring 2018
edition.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/230764
(continued)
OE Watch | September 2018

7

EURASIA
Continued: Requisitioning Private Vehicles
for the Russian Army Under Martial Law
“The document indicates that vehicles will be added to the military inventory of formations and military
units which are formed for wartime purposes.”
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov: “Для генералов создали Центр военных игр: Там можно потренироваться в развертывании фронта или
проведении крупномасштабной войсковой операции (A Center for War Games Has Been Created for Generals: There They Can Train to
Deploy a Battle Front or To Conduct a Large-Scale Military Operation),” Izvestiya, 31 July 2018. https://iz.ru/770845/aleksandr-kruglov/dliageneralov-sozdali-tcentr-voennykh-igr
The Center for Military Games (TsVI) has begun operation in the Armed Forces. It was created at the General Staff Military Academy base.
The “players” will be generals -- the academy’s students. Here one can train to deploy a battle front or to conduct a large-scale military
operation. The center is equipped taking the latest achievements in IT into account. The special simulator enables one to enact scenarios of
real military conflicts. Experts believe that this will boost the efficacy of training the operational level leaders, starting with the combined-arms
army command…
At the Center for Military Games, combat operations are modeled completely on a computer; this reminds one of a “strategy” game, where
you can move virtual armies around. This will help academy students during command-post exercises to visualize tasks of operational
deployment of troops and of conducting various-level operations with maximum authenticity.
The generals’ game differs from civilian simulators by its maximal authenticity. The Russian Army’s actually existing brigades and divisions
represent the units in it. Databases on the adversary are formed on the basis of current reconnaissance information. The battle scenarios are
developed taking the latest experience of military operations into account…The academy’s game center comprises training command posts of
the strategic and operational-strategic command and control echelons. They are equipped with up-to-date computers. All the computers are
connected into a single electronic network, which is linked with the Russian Federation National Defense Management Center’s networks.
Taking these data into account, various situations, including military conflicts and emergency situations, are enacted. Each student solves
combat-training problems depending on his staff-post category. The system operates in several modes. In one of them, artificial intelligence is
pitted against the person. There is also a two-sided drill mode, where students “fight” one another, the expert added…

УАЗ-23632 Пикап (UAZ-23632 Pickup).

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Static-p2/i-Z2cSzBZ#, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

8

EURASIA
Small Boat Cruisin’ for a Bruisin’
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has a long history of constituting river flotillas to help defend their large inland waterways. Naturally,
the riverboats have a shallower draft and smaller engines than sea-going vessels. As the accompanying excerpted articles report, Russia is
now building Kalibr cruise missile corvettes that can operate from inland lakes and rivers as well as calm seas. This gives them an edge on
the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty since they are not land based. Some Kalibr cruise missiles and launchers are incorporated into
standard Conex containers, making them difficult to identify. The 3M-14 Kalibr (NATO SS-N-27 Sizzler) comes in anti-shipping, anti-land,
anti-submarine variants and can be air delivered, submarine launched, ship-launched, rail-launched or surface-launched. The same shipyard is
building the larger Karakurts, sea-going cruise missile corvette for the Pacific and Northern Fleets, which can expect rough seas. The Russian
Navy needs to refit or replace many of its vessels and the small missile corvettes may provide the necessary coverage during this process. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Denis Komarovskiy, “Ракетный катер стратегического назначения (The Strategic Missile Boat),” Izvestia, 16 July 2018.
https://iz.ru/766965/denis-komarovskii/raketnyi-kater-strategicheskogo-naznacheniia
The Buyan-M ships have incorporated the design solutions of the Project 21630 “Buyan” Small Gunboat but, in so doing, they are
substantially larger: 949 ton displacement versus 500. Three of those gunboats, which were transferred to the Navy between 2006 and 2012,
are serving on the Caspian.
The Project 21631 has obtained a strong strike weapon: the…universal ship eight-missile launcher, which permits the employment of the
“Kalibr-NK”…long-range cruise missile. These …boats are shallow draft, essentially, these are “river-sea” class ships. Shipbuilders are
building them in the middle of Continental Russia, in Tatarstan, and the ships arrive at their future duty location along the internal water
routes…
The shortcomings are immediately obvious – poor seaworthiness. The missile “Buyans” ride roughly on the waves. Furthermore, the ship …
air defenses are minimal which means they must work within a larger air defense umbrella….The problems with seaworthiness and weapons
have been resolved rather shrewdly: Russia has developed a “seaworthy” ship, with …increased draft. This is the Project 22800 “Karakurt”
Small Missile Ship, which is in series production and is also equipped with cruise missile launchers.
The Buyans’ … precision-guided long-range cruise missiles are capable of destroying targets at a range of up to 2,600 kilometers…In the
non-nuclear configuration, the Kalibr should have a range within 1,500-1,700 kilometers, which was demonstrated on 7 October 2015, when
a group of Caspian Flotilla ships (the Missile Ship Dagestan and three “Buyans”: Grad Sviyazhsk, Uglich, and Velikiy Ustyug) conducted
a strike using 26 cruise missiles against targets in Syria. At that time, the missiles flew more than 1,500 kilometers over the south Caspian,
Iran, Iraq, and Syria.
Shallow draft…permits the “Buyans” to freely travel along the internal water routes. This means that a ship with cruise missiles can be
redeployed from the north to the south along the rivers of European Russia. And more than this – they can fight on these rivers: the range of
the main weapon permits this.
One can actually talk about the creation of mobile strategic deterrence weapons (both nuclear and nonnuclear), which are capable of
conducting precision-guided strikes in Europe, in the Middle East, and in Central Asia. Observers point out that Russia thus avoids one of
the restrictions of Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (1987). In it, the USSR and the US were banned from developing and deploying
ground based launchers for cruise missiles with a range of from 500 to 5,500 kilometers.
However, sea-launched cruise missiles have been withdrawn from the arms control treaties, which suited Washington’s position: its Navy
had those missiles at its disposal as the trump card and didn’t want to limit them. Therefore, the situation has emerged where Russia can
maneuver “using strategic missile boats” of the “river-sea” class, while utilizing internal water routes without restriction.
At this time, the “Buyans” are part of the composition of three Navy combined formations: the Black Sea Fleet, the Caspian Flotilla, and the
Baltic Fleet…Right now the Navy has six “Buyans” and just as many more will become operational in 2019-2023. It is unclear … if the series
will be continued after that. The Navy’s plans expanded construction of the seaworthy “Karakurts” for the Northern and Pacific fleets. The
Zelenodolsk shipyard is included in this effort.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2018

9

EURASIA
Continued: Small Boat Cruisin’ for a Bruisin’
Source: Artem Vladimirovich Voznesenskiy, “«Каракурт»: пистолет у виска империализма 2.0 (“Karakurt”: The Pistol to the Temple of
Imperialism 2.0),” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 27 July 2018. http://nvo.ng.ru/armament/2018-07-27/10_1006_ship.html
On 5 May 2018, the third Project 22800 “Karakurt” MRK [Small Missile Ship] “Shkval” launched at Pella Leningrad Shipbuilding Plant in
Otradnoye (Leningrad Oblast)…The specialists of St. Petersburg’s “Almaz” Central Marine Design Bureau designed the “Karakurt” and its
construction is being conducted at a number of shipyards. At present, two ships of this class – the Tayfun and the Shkval are being finished
afloat…
The ship’s hull – is steel and the superstructure is made from an aluminum-magnesium alloy. Structures made of an aluminum-magnesium
alloy, besides low specific gravity and high corrosion resistance, are infamous in the Navy for their combustibility. The intense combustion
of light alloy superstructures was one of the factors in the loss of the large Antisubmarine Warfare Ship Otvazhnyy (1974), the Destroyer
Sheffield and the Frigate Ardent (1982) and the Project 123 MRK Musson (1987)…
There are no portholes on the ship, which increases the structural strength of the hull and superstructure and the tightness and reduces
the radar and optical signature, and increases the crew’s level of protection under conditions of enemy employment of weapons of mass
destruction. In general, the architecture of the above-water portion of the hull and superstructure attests to the serious work on the reduction
of the ship’s radar cross section. The ship is not designed for sailing in ice but they are sending the “Shkval”…to the north…
Considering the ship’s seaworthiness…if the ship continues underway and the hull maintains its tightness, most likely nothing bad will
happen to it in the strongest storms. But the hull design and the ratio of the hull’s length to the width are characteristic of fast ships which
impacts negatively on lateral stability...The ship is underpowered for northern waters…
Realistically, the Karakurt can be deployed on the water of the White Sea seasonally – from May-July through October-November, when
the sea is free of ice. The White Sea is an internal sea, which reduces the danger of enemy submarines due to the…antisubmarine barrier at
the sea’s mouth. The sea’s coastline is rugged but the western portion has islands which will aid in the ship’s security…The ship can employ
Kalibr missiles, around the clock and regardless of the weather conditions, while...remaining under the coastal air defense umbrella…

“The Kalibr should have a range within 1,500-1,700 kilometers, which was demonstrated on 7 October
2015, when a group of Caspian Flotilla ships (the Missile Ship Dagestan and three ‘Buyans’: Grad Sviyazhsk,
Uglich, and Velikiy Ustyug) conducted a strike using 26 cruise missiles against targets in Syria.”

Project 22800 “Karakurt.”

Source: By Kosyak13 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%D0%A3%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%B3%D0%B0%D0%BD_%D0%BF%D1%80._22800.jpg.

OE Watch | September 2018

10

EURASIA
An Overabundance of Airborne?
OE Watch Commentary: Russia currently maintains the largest airborne (Vozdushno-Desantnye Voiska
or VDV) forces in the world, and the Kremlin regards these highly deployable and well-armed units as one of
the sharpest tools in their conventional arsenal. These forces helped to seize key objectives during the conflict
with Georgia in 2008 and again during the annexation of Crimea in early 2014. With their high state of combat
readiness, they would likely serve as the vanguard force in any future operation.
The brief accompanying excerpt, from the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya, begins with a brief description of
a massive VDV exercise which was conducted in July, reporting that “an assault force in the strength of 1,500
servicemen and 69 pieces of equipment was paradropped with the use of 45 Il-76 heavy transport aircraft” (for
a comprehensive report of the exercise, see: “Военная приемка. Рекордное десантирование,” or “Military
Acceptance. Record-breaking Jump,” https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MjTawTdfrug). It then reviews the
current size of the VDV forces and argues that given the country’s limited lift capability, it does not make sense to
maintain such a large airborne force.

Russian Airborne Patch.

Source:https://bg.m.wikipedia.org/
wiki/%D0%A4%D0%B0%D0%B9%D0%BB:Russian_
Airborne_Troops_patch.svg Copyright cleared.

The author points out that currently “two airborne and two air assault divisions, four air assault brigades,
a separate Spetsnaz brigade, and a number of support and training units are in the Russian Airborne Troops’
composition.” The primary lift platform for the VDV is the Il-76 military transport aircraft, and with the current inventory of 120 of these
aircraft, there is only “enough to paradrop less than two regiments with a standard set of weapons and military equipment using one sortie.”

The author reminds the reader that this is not a new problem, since “the shortage of aircraft for paradropping the VDV was acknowledged
already in the USSR.” Considering the current economic situation, building hundreds of new aircraft remains out of the question. Despite these
drawbacks, the author concludes that given the “VDV’s political weight… it is unlikely that anyone will undertake such a radical reform in the
foreseeable future.” While the Russian VDV may have more personnel and equipment than can be accommodated by their current air transport
capability, there’s no question that these forces will remain one of the Kremlin’s most formidable tools. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“So, the entire available fleet of Il-76 military transport aircraft is enough to paradrop less than two
regiments with a standard set of weapons and military equipment using one sortie.”
Source: Ilya Kramnik, “Границы возможностей; Почему ВДВ в России так и не поменялись (The Limits of Capabilities: Why the VDV in
Russia Has Never Changed),” Izvestiya, 18 July 2018. https://iz.ru/767550/ilia-kramnik/granitcy-vozmozhnostei
The Russian Armed Forces have conducted the latest airborne troops exercises. During the course of the maneuvers, an assault force in the
strength of 1,500 servicemen and 69 pieces of equipment was paradropped with the use of 45 Il-76 heavy transport aircraft. The conducted
exercises simultaneously demonstrate both the VDV’s capabilities and also the limits of these capabilities…
At the present time, two airborne and two air assault divisions, four air assault brigades, a separate Spetsnaz brigade, and a number of
support and training units are in the Russian Airborne Troops’ composition. In so doing, all of the combat subunits both of the parachute and
of the air assault units undergo training for parachute jumps, and the air assault units and subunits are equipped with air-droppable armored
vehicles – armored assault vehicles, assault BTRs, and so forth.
There are approximately 120 Il-76s in the composition of the Russian Air Force at the present time – this type of aircraft is the main aircraft
that is used for a parachute assault. Let’s recall that 45 aircraft were involved in the exercises that recently occurred, which were enough
for the paradrop of less than a VDV regiment, including two battalions with armored vehicles. So, the entire available fleet of Il-76 military
transport aircraft is enough to paradrop less than two regiments with a standard set of weapons and military equipment using one sortie.
The problem of the shortage of aircraft for paradropping the VDV was acknowledged already in the USSR….
…If we compare to foreign armies, today Russia possesses the largest contingent of airborne units, which clearly exceed the capabilities of the
available military transport aviation fleet. This raises definite question with regard to the effectiveness of the expenditure of budget resources,
while taking into account the high cost of specialized parachute equipment and the jump training of personnel….
…It is impossible to change the situation that has developed with the shortage of aircraft for the use of the VDV based upon its primary
designation in the foreseeable future – this would require a multifold increase of the strength of military transport aviation just like of the
strength of the helicopter transport units – for transporting air assault units.
…Meanwhile, while taking into account the Armed Forces structure that has developed and the VDV’s political weight in their composition,
we need to realize that it is unlikely that anyone will undertake such a radical reform in the foreseeable future.

OE Watch | September 2018

11

EURASIA
New Amphibious Warfare Ships…Someday
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Navy has worn out its large amphibious warfare ships in supporting the Syrian government. They
have been pulled out of the fleets, used continuously and then quickly refitted and returned to the fleets. The accompanying excerpted article
from Izvestiya notes how they were in need of replacement long before the demands of the “Syrian Express” and clearly need to be replaced now,
but there are more pressing demands on the defense Ruble. The design bureaus are going ahead and developing plans for an amphibious landing
helicopter dock and a new amphibious assault ship. These will have to fit into the concept of over-the-horizon amphibious assault as well as more
traditional amphibious operations. Apparently, they will also have to wait their turn. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Ilya Kramnik, “Уйти за горизонт (Going over the Horizon),” Izvestia, 9 July 2018. https://iz.ru/764634/ilia-kramnik/uiti-za-gorizont
Previous reports on the planned construction of new helicopter carriers for the Russian Navy reflected the Navy’s desire to obtain a landing
helicopter dock along the lines of the Netherlands’ Rotterdam class, and amphibious assault ships similar or superior…to the French Mistral
class, whose construction for the Russian Navy was thwarted in 2014.
A key difference …involves a fundamentally different concept of amphibious assault operations. The large amphibious warfare ships
currently in service with the Russian Federation Navy, whose architecture hearkens back to the tank carriers of World War II, primarily
envisage amphibious landings directly onto the shore using ramps. In rare cases, amphibious landings used floating armor in direct proximity
to the shoreline.
Assault ships directly supported the amphibious ground force with their own weaponry -- guns and multiple launch rockets. In the event of
an encounter with a strong enemy, ships of this class run the risk of becoming one-time-use vessels – an excellent target…lying in shallow
water directly beside a beach…
The key difference of the new concept is over-the-horizon amphibious assault, which does not presuppose an assault ship approaching
within visual contact of shore. Naval infantry lands by sea (using…landing cutters carried in the well deck of a landing helicopter dock or
amphibious assault ship) or by helicopter. Shallow-draft cutters, air cushion vehicles and helicopters sharply increase the number of areas
accessible to an amphibious assault compared to the classic “ramp-based” large amphibious warfare ships, which require a relatively level
beach and a level seabed by the shore.
Over-the-horizon amphibious assault landings accelerate the process and a large proportion of the assault landing can be ashore half
an hour after the amphibious assault ship/landing helicopter dock has taken up position out of sight of shore. The helicopters, cutters and
landing force provide the direct fire support…
The Russian Navy currently has 15 Project 775 large amphibious warfare ships -- which were built in Poland...during the mid-seventies
and the early nineties -- and four Project 1171 ships built in the USSR in the sixties. Within the framework of possible local conflicts close
to Russian borders, there could be a continuing need for such vessels. However, carrying out long-distance missions from our own shores
requires entirely different ships able to not only deliver … men and materiel to a requisite spot, but also to ensure long-term support,
including with air support…
The optimum composition of amphibious assault forces…could ideally include eight classic large amphibious warfare ships -- both new
builds and refitted Soviet vessels -- and six to eight new-type vessels, including four landing helicopter docks and two or four amphibious
assault ships. At the same time, this kind of amphibious assault grouping will require for its own support a corresponding number of longrange maritime and oceangoing warships, whose series production for the Russian Navy is proceeding with great difficulty…

“The Russian Navy currently has 15 Project 775 large amphibious warfare ships -- which were built in
Poland...during the mid-seventies and the early nineties -- and four Project 1171 ships built in the USSR in the
sixties.”

Project 775 Ropucha-I class russian tank landing ship Yamal. The Black sea, Sevastopol bay (2009).
Source: By George Chernilevsky [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Project_775_YAMAL_2009_G1.jpg.

OE Watch | September 2018

12

EURASIA
Hiding Little Green Men
OE Watch Commentary: The moniker “little green men” was
developed by journalists and Kremlin officials to describe the
unmarked Russian soldiers who appeared in Ukraine in early 2014.
Having removed any Russian insignia from their uniforms and
equipment, Kremlin leaders could assert that these forces were not
under their command. Even though most were able to see through this
maskirovka (deception), the Russian military continues to place a high
priority on camouflage and deception.
The accompanying excerpt from the government newspaper,
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, purportedly describes “a special camouflage
coating that changes color depending on the environment.” The article
quotes a senior Russian defense industry official who alleges that “a
variety of coatings have been created that mimic, like a chameleon,
the color of the surrounding environment.” These coatings “almost
completely conceal the thermal and electromagnetic radiation
emanating from a combat vehicle and absorb the radar waves of
foreign radars,” which “should hide military equipment better and
make soldiers on the battlefield more invisible to the enemy.”

Little Green Men (aka Russian soldiers), Crimea, Feb 2014.

Source:https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VOA-Crimea-Simferopol-airport.jpg Source: voanews.com. Public Domain.

The article goes on to describe a specially designed uniform that “literally merges with the surrounding nature.” While it’s not clear whether
these uniforms have been fielded, the article does point out that “Russian army special units have begun to receive sets of Tuman-R camouflage
paste,” which not only paints faces in the desired color but also “reduces infrared radiation, making them invisible to thermal imaging
surveillance devices.” Besides absorbing “up to 95 percent of the heat radiation of the human body,” this wonder paste also has “medicinal
properties” helping to heal wounds and ward off insects. Alongside deception and camouflage, those in charge of the Russian military have also
been known to exaggerate and misinform observers on the capabilities of the country’s armed forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“...a variety of coatings have been created that mimic, like a chameleon, the color of the surrounding
environment.”

Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “Каска-невидимка; Новое покрытие позволяет бойцам и технике сливаться с местностью (Invisible Helmet;
New Coating Allows Soldiers and Equipment to Blend With Terrain),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 17 July 2018. https://rg.ru/2018/07/17/v-rossiirazrabotano-novoe-maskiruiushchee-pokrytie.html
The company Rostekh has developed a special camouflage coating that changes color depending on the environment. This should hide military
equipment better and make soldiers on the battlefield more invisible to the enemy.
Rostekh chief Sergey Chemezov told the TASS news agency about this. According to him, cited by the agency, “a variety of coatings have been
created that mimic, like a chameleon, the color of the surrounding environment.”
…Of course, it will not be possible to make a soldier’s clothing or a tank completely invisible. But overall concealment can be improved
significantly. Classic camouflage coatings do not always match the color of the locality where military action might take place. But if they
change color depending on the environment, they will actually merge with the surroundings and become really almost invisible, especially in
the heat of battle….
…Back at the Army-2016 forum a very interesting example of camouflage was demonstrated by the Sevastopol Nina Onilova garment factory
which sews uniforms for the Black Sea Fleet. The secret was that specially designed drawings make a kind of animated canvas which “comes
to life” at the slightest fluctuation of the fabric. And the human eye ceases to see a static object, instead of which there is a kind of moving
picture, similar to the fluctuations of grass, foliage, and branches. A man dressed in such camouflage, when moving, literally merges with the
surrounding nature. Moreover, even when lying in ambush a sniper is invisible, as the wind sways his camouflage and he also merges with the
terrain.
…It was reported that Russian army special units have begun to receive sets of Tuman-R camouflage paste, which not only paints faces in the
desired color but also reduces infrared radiation, making them invisible to thermal imaging surveillance devices.
Applied to human skin, the Tuman-R ointment absorbs up to 95 percent of the heat radiation of the human body and retains its properties for
about two weeks after application. In addition, the ointment has medicinal properties, accelerating the healing of wounds, is not toxic and does
not irritate the human skin, and yet deters insects and bloodsuckers….
We have created very good protective coverings for armor. They also have camouflage colors. And, in addition, they almost completely
conceal the thermal and electromagnetic radiation emanating from a combat vehicle and absorb the radar waves of foreign radars. That is, the
vehicles become invisible to both normal and so-called technical vision….
OE Watch | September 2018

13

EURASIA
WIG over the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The wing-in-ground effect (WIG) refers to the dense cushion of air that develops between a wing and the water (or
ground) surface when they are close together. Seabirds use the WIG effect to skim the water’s surface for hours at a time, while barely flapping
their wings. Every aircraft experiences the WIG effect as it takes off and lands. Pilots of damaged aircraft conserve energy or use the power
of remaining engines more efficiently by dropping down to sea-skimming level to use the WIG effect. Specially-designed WIG craft can move
heavy loads rapidly across the ocean and land on water, undeveloped beach or inland. Flying from 3 to 90 feet above the surface, they are hard
to detect by radar, infrared and satellite. They can fly at 400 miles per hour, carry over 500 tons with a 12,000 mile range. Howard Hughes
developed the Spruce Goose WIG aircraft in 1947, but it was never adopted by the US Air Force or US Navy (For a detailed discussion of WIG,
see Lester W. Grau and Jacob W. Kipp, “The Tyranny of Time and Distance: Bridging the Pacific,” Military Review, July-August 2000, http://
cdm16040.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/singleitem/collection/p124201coll1/id/286/rec/2). The Soviets built several of these aircraft starting in the
1960s and used them to transport, troops, tanks and heavy artillery long distances, so as the accompanying excerpted articles from The Barents
Observer and China Military Online report, WIG aircraft seem ideal for the vast expanses of the Arctic. While the Chinese and Norwegian
sources report different names for the craft, they both agree that the Russians will soon be “WIGing out” over the Arctic. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“After the construction of the vehicle is completed in 2019-20, it will be deployed in the Arctic region.”

Lun-class (harrier) ekranoplan (2010).

Source: By Fred Schaerli [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lun-class_ekranoplan_4.jpg.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
(continued)

OE Watch | September 2018

14

EURASIA
Continued: WIG over the Arctic
Source: Thomas Nilsen, “To protect the Northern Sea Route, Russia gives rebirth to missile-armed ekranoplans,” The Barents Observer,
31 July 2018. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security-kirkenes/2018/07/protect-northern-sea-route-russia-gives-rebirth-missile-armedekranoplans
It was nick-named the “Caspian Sea Monster” - the massive missile carrying half-boat, half-plane looking construction. First flown in 1987,
the Lun-class ekranoplan with a wingspan of 38 meters flew for just a few years. After the Cold War, this combat aircraft was mothballed and
is now stored in Kaspiysk in Dagestan.
A more modern version, named Orlan, is now included for development in the 2018-2027 state armament program. Deputy Prime Minister
Yuri Borisov announced that a prototype craft armed with missiles, will be built. “The state armament program for 2018-2027 includes the
Orlan research- and development work, which stipulates the construction of the wing-in-ground-effect craft. The prototype will be created as
part of this armament program and it will carry missile armament.”
The craft will be used to protect the Northern Sea Route where infrastructure today is weakly protected. Ekranoplans have the advantage
of flying at lower altitude than ordinary aircraft but move at a higher speed than a ship. In 2015, TASS reported that the navy expected to get
a standardized ekranoplan with a lifting capacity of up to 300 tons by 2020. The craft could also perform patrol, transport and search- and
rescue duties.
Conceptual designing and development work is being carried out by the Central Design Bureau for the Alekseyev Central Hydrofoil
Company.
Quote: “Under the current plan, the construction of “Rescuer” will be completed by 2020. Various flight tests and trials will be carried out
during the period of 2020-23 and it will enter the Russian military’s order of battle in 2025.”
Source: Zhao Yan and Liu Lili, “Russia’s Development of New Ground Effect Vehicle Targets Future Warfare,” China Military Online, 20
July 2018. http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2018-07/20/content_8095192.htm
The Alekseyev Central Hydrofoil Design Bureau of Russia is developing the next-generation super-heavy airborne transport ground effect
vehicle (GEV) named “Rescuer”. After the construction of the vehicle is completed in 2019-20, it will be deployed in the Arctic region…
A GEV, also known as a wing-in-ground-effect vehicle (WIG), takes advantage of the lift, which is similar to an air cushion formed between
the fuselage, the wing and the water surface or the ground. It is a multi-purpose device integrating the advantages of both warships and
aircraft as it can fly several meters above the water or ground surface.
According to current data, the design of “Rescuer” is based on the Lun (Harrier) class ekranoplan, but with better airworthiness and ice
combat capability. “Rescuer” is known as the “Arctic Monster” due to its outstanding polar suitability.
“Rescuer” uses wheels as landing gear for take-off and landing on ice surface. The previous GEVs developed by the former Soviet Union
could only take off and land on water... The aircraft also features a special air cushion to help it slide on the surface of the sea and frozen
land. With this, it can help Russia’s Northern Fleet and Pacific Fleet form rescue units and deliver supplies to Russian garrisons in remote
regions.
Under the current plan, the construction of “Rescuer” will be completed by 2020. Various flight tests and trials will be carried out during the
period of 2020-23 and it will enter the Russian military’s order of battle in 2025.
Fang Xiaozhi, deputy director of the Center for Foreign Military Research at the college of International Relations of the National University
of Defense Technology of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA), said that the new GEV will play an active role in strengthening
Russia’s national defense and improving the overall combat capability of the Russian military once it is commissioned.
Fang stated that it will help the Russian military meet urgent needs for high-speed delivery and strategic penetration in the era of
information-based warfare. The GEVs can quickly deliver reinforcements and supplies to polar forces, which will greatly alleviate Russia’s
military security pressure due to insufficient delivery capacity.
At present, the world’s major military powers, including the US, Russia and Australia, are all actively developing GEVs and have made
great progress in this respect. The main reason for the great importance attached to the development of the aircraft is that this kind of vehicle
features small resistance, high speed, large load, good invisibility and strong adaptability to “triphibian warfare”.
Fang stated that, with the continuous advancement of cutting-edge high-tech, the new GEVs will use advanced technologies such as stealth
ability and artificial intelligence, and adopt a more advanced integrated electric superconducting propulsion system to eliminate noise and
reduce radar, infrared, acousto-optic, electromagnetic and other physical signal features. It will also be equipped with a variety of anti-air,
anti-surface, and anti-ground weapons and equipment for omni-directional fast attacks. As a result, its stealth ability, rapid maneuverability
and penetration capabilities will be greatly improved. In the future, the new GEV will become an important weapon for operations at ultralow-altitude airspace and can help promote profound changes in future combat styles.

OE Watch | September 2018

15

EURASIA
If You Build It, Will They Come?
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian State Corporation Rosatom is a $300 billion energy
company that controls Russia’s nuclear energy, while Rosatomflot is a subsidiary that operates and
maintains Russia’s five nuclear powered icebreakers. According to the accompanying excerpted
article from The Barents Observer, the Russian government is planning to build the world’s largest
icebreaker to keep the Northern Sea Route open for traffic; however, the major Arctic development
companies do not want to be tied to Rosatomflot, who could hike the price for their essential services
with little or no recourse. They want to buy their own purpose-built icebreakers. The other issue
is that Russia likes big vessels, but constructing them is not their forte and frequent delays have
plagued large ship construction in the past. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Rosatom Logo.

Source: Rosatom Website, https://www.rosatom.ru/en/press-centre/corporate-identity/.

“Gazprom Deputy CEO Vadim Yakovlev underlined that his company is building its own fleet of tankers and
icebreakers because it wants ‘independence from external conditions and capacity limitations imposed by
shipping companies’.”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “The Monster-icebreaker that might reshape Arctic shipping,” The Barents Observer, 16 July 2018.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/2018/07/monster-icebreaker-might-reshape-arctic-shipping
The 120 Megawatt icebreaker Лидер [Leader] is not only super-powerful, but also super-expensive, and Russia’s ability to cover the bill is
in question. However, the country’s authorities continue to state that the vessel will be built. Several yards are competing to build the ship….
Russian nuclear power company Rosatom …confirmed that an investment decision will be taken late 2018 or early 2019.
“This unique icebreaker - which is without peer in the world - will allow us to develop northern fields at a speed which meets the objectives
of natural resource developers like Novatek,
Rosatom leader Aleksey Likhachev told President Vladimir Putin in a meeting in the Kremlin.
The 209 meter long and 47 meter wide vessel, designed by the Iceberg Company, has a draft of 13 meters and will be able to break through
four meters of thick ice at 12 knots speed. It will be powered by two RITM-400 reactors with a total 120 MW capacity. It has unlimited range
and can operated round-the-year…
Vyacheslav Ruksha, the head of Rosatomflot states the ship is needed for Russia to strengthen its presence in the global markets of liquefied
natural gas, as well as to provide for Arctic expeditions…Лидер will enable Russia to open direct access to the Asian-Pacific countries. Two,
perhaps even three of these vessels will be built.
However, the leading natural resource developers in the Russian Arctic might actually not want the new super-powerful ships. Instead, they
intend to build their own fleets of icebreakers.
Recently, Novatek announced that it is establishing its own shipping company, which ultimately will transport LNG from the company’s
plants in the Arctic. The company has indicated that it wants its own fleet of icebreakers, possibly fueled by LNG.
Novatek now accounts for the biggest volume shipped out of the Russian Arctic. A growing number of top-class ice-class tankers shuttles
to and from Sabetta, the terminal serving the Yamal LNG project, and more will come when the company opens its second LNG project, the
Arctic LNG 2 in a few years.
Gazprom Neft is also signaling that it prefers to go its own way, without the involvement of Rosatom. The company has just launched the
Александр Санников [Aleksandr Sannikov], a powerful 121-meter-long icebreaker capable of breaking through two meters of thick ice. It
will assist tankers shuttling to and from the company’s Arctic Gate oil terminal in the Gulf of Ob…
…Gazprom Deputy CEO Vadim Yakovlev underlined that his company is building its own fleet of tankers and icebreakers because it wants
“independence from external conditions and capacity limitations imposed by shipping companies.”
…Another major Arctic stakeholder, Nornickel, is independently operating its shipments of nickel ore between Dudinka in the Yenisey
River and Murmansk. With their bids for independent shipments, the companies challenge the growing power of Rosatom in the Arctic. The
state nuclear power company has got the Kremlin’s blessing for a leading role in the development of the Northern Sea Route, and plans are
ambitious.
According to Rosatom leader Likhachov, traffic on the Northern Sea Route will multiply in only few years. By 2030, at least 70 million tons of
goods per year will be shipped…towards the East Asian markets. However, Rosatom is dependent on the natural resource developers that are
generating the growing volumes of goods that are shipped across the region.

OE Watch | September 2018

16

EURASIA
DOSAAF Reinstituting Pilot Training
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
Izvestiya discusses how Russia is, for the first time since the Soviet
era, making flight training available to students through the Voluntary
Society for Promotion of the Army, Air Force, and Navy (DOSAAF)
program. In addition, this new program is envisioned to train other
flight personnel (navigators, among others) and aviation technicians.
Although a pilot training for children may seem like an inefficient
use of state resources, it does have some advantages. As described
in the article, in the Soviet Union, military and civil aviators were
plucked from these programs, ensuring that cadets selected to attend
military (flight) academies were already proficient pilots. According
to Izvestiya, DOSAAF flight programs could become a precursor for
some Russian Aerospace Forces academy students.
In terms of aircraft, Russia has opted for quantity over quality, by
opting to build or refurbish more modestly priced aircraft rather than
building just a few very expensive aircraft. This practice has likely
led to the Russian Aerospace Forces being short some 1,300 flight
personnel, as mentioned by Izvestiya. DOSAAF flight programs may
help to fill these shortages, with not only pilots, but also other flight
personnel and technicians. In addition, DOSAAF flight programs
create a large strategic reserve of flight personnel and technicians
that may be called to service in times of need. As can be seen in the
accompanying excerpted article from Rossiyskaya Gazeta, DOSAAF
is an increasingly important component of Russia’s military training
system. In the spring draft, approximately 16,000 conscripts entered
the service with a military occupational specialty obtained through
DOSAAF. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“On completing DOSAAF courses, young people
will help form a good reserve of pilots for the
Armed Forces…”
Source: Sergey Ptichkin, “Армия стала умней: Весенний призыв в
Вооруженные силы завершен (Army Getting Smarter: Spring Armed
Forces Draft Completed),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 16 July 2018. https://
rg.ru/2018/07/16/v-minoborony-rasskazali-o-rezultatah-prizyvnojkampanii.html
A total of 128,000 recruits have been drafted for military service…
This was stated by Lieutenant General Yevgeniy Burdinskiy, chief
of the Russian Federation Armed Forces General Staff Main
Organization and Mobilization Directorate.
The statistical results of the draft as reported by the Defense Ministry
are extremely interesting. For instance, 15 percent of the conscripts
have a higher education. The number of science companies has been
increased -- from 12 to 16 -- and the two science and production
companies set up to operate at defense industry complex enterprises
are fully manned for the first time. As of today more than 750 people
are serving in science or science and production companies…
More than 23,000 citizens trained in military occupational
specializations were sent to the formations and military units in the
spring of 2018, including around 16,000 from DOSAAF programs…
There were draft evaders too. The number of those summoned but
failing to present at the military commissariats did not exceed 0.3
percent of the total number of draftees.

Source: Roman Krechul, Bogdan Stepovoy, “Российские школьники впервые смогут пройти летную подготовку: Система обучения
на базе ДОСААФ поможет сэкономить миллионы рублей и обеспечить воздушно-космические силы кадровым резервом (Russian
Schoolchildren Will Be Able To Take Flight Training for the First Time: The Training System at DOSAAF Facilities Will Help Save Millions of
Rubles and Provide the Aerospace Forces With a Cadre Reserve),” Izvestiya, 20 July 2018. https://iz.ru/766245/roman-kretcul-bogdan-stepovoialeksei-ramm/rossiiskie-shkolniki-vpervye-smogut-proiti-letnuiu-podgotovku
The DOSAAF Press Service told Izvestiya that the Voluntary Society leadership decided to establish multifunctional Military-Patriotic
Indoctrination and Military Service Centers in all federal districts where young pilots will be trained. DOSAAF now is holding talks with the
VKS about how and to what extent to train predraft personnel. The Defense Ministry informed Izvestiya that the question of basic flight training
of predraft personnel now is being studied. There already have been several conferences for this purpose involving the department leadership.
The Voluntary Society recently summed up a pilot project for training young people to fly. In two years over 500 youths of boarding schools and
cadet corps took basic flight training at DOSAAF airfields. This resulted in the majority of flying course graduates entering military and civilian
aviation higher educational institutions. Now DOSAAF is preparing to accept ordinary schoolchildren for the courses as well…
Construction of one of the first aviation and sports centers named for Valentina Tereshkova is concluding in Yaroslavskaya Oblast. The site was
not chosen by chance. Two runways and certain other structures that belonged to the Society in Soviet times have been preserved there since the
1930s…
Experts believe that present-day applicants who have taken the basic flight training course in the DOSAAF system should be given preference on
entering flight schools. And in the future it will be possible to return to the old system and train officers for the VKS at Voluntary Society facilities,
as was the case in Soviet years.
In recent years the VKS experienced a shortage of trained cadres because of the reduced number of cadets training in flight schools in the late
2000s. An increased demand also spurred the activation of new air units. The VKS will receive around 400 aircraft per year under the new State
Armaments Program 2018-2025…The shortage of flight personnel in the VKS was estimated to be 1,300 persons in 2017. On completing DOSAAF
courses, young people will help form a good reserve of pilots for the Armed Forces, believes Major General Vladimir Popov, former chief of the
Federal Directorate of Aerospace Search and Rescue under the Defense Ministry…
According to the expert, it is of no small importance that this system will help the state save substantial money in training pilots. Cadets begin
taking flight training in the second or third year in military academies, but only during such training does it become clear that a particular cadet
is incapable of mastering the flight program for psychophysiological or emotional reasons. The money spent on their training cannot be gotten
back. The DOSAAF program will help avoid such “add-ons.”
OE Watch | September 2018

17

EURASIA
Closing Conscript Loopholes
OE Watch Commentary: Despite the persistent
Kremlin propaganda claiming that Russia is
increasingly threatened by external enemies, and that
military service to defend the motherland is a sacred
duty, the Ministry of Defense (MoD) continues to
experience difficulties conscripting young Russian
men to complete their required one-year term of
military service. Besides staying in school (education
deferments), young Russian men try to dodge the
draft by hiding their whereabouts. The accompanying
excerpt from the relatively centrist news source,
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, describes proposed legislation
which will close two loopholes for those hoping to
evade mandatory military service.
The article describes a new requirement which will
“oblige conscripts to come to military commissariats
themselves for their summons to serve in the army,”
rather than having military officials track down and
deliver the draft notice to the often unwilling young
men. The second measure to tighten the draft deals
with how the MoD registers those young Russians who
have evaded military service and have passed the draft
age (27 years). Up until now, such individuals were
issued a “certificate in exchange for a military ticket,”
which precluded such individuals from working in
“large state institutions and commercial companies
that select personnel based on government standards.”
However, these military certificates have recently been
deemed as unlawful by the “Supreme Court of the
Russian Federation,” and are therefore no longer being
issued “in a number of regions.” In response, the MoD
has turned to the Russian legislature to pass a law to
close this loophole, and as the article points out, “it is
expected that in September this bill will be adopted as
a whole and signed by the president.”
The allusion to “wolf tickets” in the title of the article
refers to the certificates which document that a Russian
male has evaded military service. As the article points
out, such a black mark will make “it difficult to find a
job,” and “will affect the interests of several hundred
thousand educated young people.” Many of these
young Russian males remained in school during their
draft period (ages 18-27). An expert quoted in the
article maintains that such a penalty will induce future
college educated Russian men “to choose to serve in
the army or the navy.”
The article concludes by referring to the country’s
current economic strains and how the shortage of
funding has hampered military plans to “transition to a
contractual basis.” For the foreseeable future, military
service via conscription will remain an essential
requirement for young Russian men, even the most
highly educated, and as this article illustrates, avoiding
this duty will incur significant penalties. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Despite the optimistic reports of the RF Ministry of Defense
on the results of the spring draft, the army still has a shortage of
conscript soldiers.”
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Военкоматы продолжат выдавать уклонистам
‘волчьи билеты,’” (Military registration and enlistment offices will continue to issue
evaders ‘wolf tickets’),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 7 August 2018. http://www.ng.ru/
politics/2018-08-07/8_7283_ticket.html
Despite the optimistic reports of the RF Ministry of Defense on the results of the
spring draft, the army still has a shortage of conscript soldiers. This is due not only
to the demographic pit, but also to the fact that a large number of young people
continue to evade conscription. According to military sources, in connection with this,
the military department has developed a number of measures related to increase the
number of conscripts.
…Nezavisimaya Gazeta has already written that the Duma Defense Committee
is preparing amendments to the legislation that will oblige conscripts to come to
military commissariats themselves for summons to serve in the army.…
The Ministry of Defense also introduced a measure (Order No. 495) whereby
a certificate was issued to “citizens who, having reached the age of 28, avoided
conscription into the army and under the law, can no longer be called upon.
According to open sources, such certificates have been issued to several tens of
thousands of young people….
At first glance, a purely departmental change has occurred, but obtaining such a
certificate deprives a young person of the opportunity to work for 10 years in the
government, as well as in large state institutions and commercial companies that
select personnel based on government standards….
Parents of such young men naturally began to write to all departments to petition
about the alleged illegality of Order No. 495. And this year the Supreme Court of the
Russian Federation, considering specific cases on this matter, recognized as unlawful
the decision of one of the conscription commissions to issue “evader references” to
young people. In fact, now the issuance of such certificates in a number of regions is
frozen. But in the military, the situation is viewed with optimism. As early as March
2018, a group of members of the Federation Council submitted to the State Duma
amendments to the Federal Law “On Military Duty and Military Service,” which
proposed the introduction of electronic documents for military registration of citizens
subject to military registration, as well as issuing certificates instead of a military
ticket (proof of service)….
On July 12, 2018, Duma deputies almost unanimously considered and approved the
relevant amendments to the law “On Military Duty and Military Service” in the first
reading without any special commotion…. It is expected that in September this bill
will be adopted as a whole and signed by the president. Thus, the military registration
and enlistment offices will have legal grounds for issuing “draft-dodger certificates”
to young people.
“I call these certificates ‘wolf tickets’ for young careerists. With them, even a male
school teacher will find it difficult to find a job. What will he teach the children if he
himself has avoided military service for 10 years?” said the military expert Colonel
Alexander Sekachev. In his opinion, this legislative initiative of the Ministry of
Defense will affect the interests of several hundred thousand educated young people.
“This is a very large penalty. Therefore, I think, many guys in our country who want
to make a good career, will think better and will themselves find a reason to serve in
the army or the navy,” Sekachev said.
The army’s transition to a contractual basis requires money. In our country, under
conditions of sanctions and economic crisis, there is clearly not enough. At the same
time, an increase in the recruitment base in Russia solves many, including economic,
problems in ensuring the country’s defense….
OE Watch | September 2018

18

EURASIA
Developing a “Digital Potemkin Village”
OE Watch Commentary: Not that long ago, some in
the West were hailing new digital technologies as tools
to help strengthen civil society and build democracy
in repressive countries. These digital platforms would
allow citizens to freely voice their views and to coalesce
to demand political, economic and social change.
Not surprisingly, repressive governments were also
working with these new technologies to both monitor
and respond to these digital “threats.” In the brief
accompanying excerpt from the liberal weekly, Novaya
Gazeta, the author describes a new digital tool which
will permit the Russian authorities to not only monitor
local grievances on social media traffic, but which will
allegedly encourage local leaders to respond to these
citizen complaints.
The author begins by pointing out that because
local “media are controlled by the governors… it is
increasingly difficult for the federal center to derive
useful information from that source.” Instead of
encouraging free speech in the regions, the Kremlin is
in the process of developing the “Incident Management
system” which will “automatically monitor five social
networks -- VK, Odnoklassniki, Twitter, Facebook,
and Instagram -- on the basis of certain keywords.” If
something negative begins to trend on these platforms,
an incident report is generated and sent to both regional
and federal officials. According to the article, “regional
authorities will have to respond to complaints on social
media and a copy of their response will go to the
program administrator.” Moreover, “statistics will be
compiled on all ‘incidents,’ and both the local authorities
and the Presidential Staff will have access to the
figures.” The author suggests that since federal officials
will be able to monitor how regional officials handle
these complaints, local officials will be more solicitous
in resolving problems.
Given the nascent protest mood in Russia today, the
author suggests that the rationale behind this new digital
tool is twofold: “an attempt to minimize ‘politicization’
in the regions…[and] centralized monitoring of the
regional authorities’ activities.” He further explains that
such a system is predicated upon “the total lack of trust
that is widespread in society” where there is mutual
mistrust between the people and the authorities. To
ensure their digital reputations remain high, the author
posits that local leaders will merely develop “their own
Internet troll factories ready to load the correct subjects
into the ‘Incident Management’ system.” The author
concludes on a negative note, claiming that because
the authorities “are scared to death of democracy,”
they are “pumping large amounts of money into
developing a digital Potemkin village.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“People will go to any lengths if they are scared to death of
democracy.”
Source: Kirill Martynov, “Ручное управление мышкой; Кремль ищет цифровой
эрзац демократии (Manual Government Using Mouse. Kremlin Seeks Digital
Facade of Democracy),” Novaya Gazeta, 24 July 2018. https://www.novayagazeta.
ru/articles/2018/07/24/77264-ruchnoe-upravlenie-myshkoy
As of 2019 the Kremlin intends to monitor the situation in the regions in a new
way. The current system for monitoring sentiment in the country is based mainly
on reports in the local press. But it is increasingly difficult for the federal center
to derive useful information from that source. The media are controlled by the
governors, and, consequently, the picture is rather a smarmy one. The Kremlin has
absolutely no interest in the fact that local newspaper front pages always carry
reports on the latest successes and a picture of the gubernatorial leader, but there
is nothing they can do about it. Consequently, the “Incident Management” system
is being invented.
A program of that name has been developed by the Medialogiya company and
is currently being introduced in practice. It makes it possible to automatically
monitor five social networks -- VK, Odnoklassniki, Twitter, Facebook, and
Instagram -- on the basis of certain keywords. The innovation in this instance is to
not simply analyze the situation but to force the local authorities to respond to it.
The results of the monitoring go to the system’s regional administrator, who
decides which cases require attention from the relevant departments, regional
ministries, or municipalities. Within the “Incident Management” framework,
representatives of the regional authorities will have to respond to complaints on
social media and a copy of their response will go to the program administrator….
RBK reports that statistics will be compiled on all “incidents,” and both the local
authorities and the Presidential Staff will have access to the figures. And regional
officials will face some tough demands on their time -- all “incidents” will have to
be processed within 24 hours….
…It is clear that “Incident” has a dual purpose. On the one hand, it is an attempt
to minimize “politicization” in the regions. A certain unpleasant event will happen,
people will write about it on the Internet, and they will call on the local authorities
to intervene; and, in that situation, the robot from the Presidential Staff will appear
and introduce the dissatisfied parties to the officials they need, making it possible
for the latter to offer a response…. The other aspect of the issue is no longer about
nipping protests in the bud, but about centralized monitoring of the regional
authorities’ activities. Although the majority of “incidents” will be processed
locally, the system makes provision for the position of a federal censor who can at
any time see how much bad news there is in a region and how the governors are
coping with the problem.
In other words, we are facing the digitization of manual control of the country on
a permanent emergency footing and the reequipping of this practice with the last
word in technology.
“Incident Management” has been made necessary, on the one hand, by the horror
that leaders have of their own citizens and, on the other, by the total lack of trust
that is widespread in society (the Kremlin does not trust reports from local level,
the people do not trust the governors, and so forth)….
…Judging by everything, the Presidential Staff’s reading of governors’ panegyrics
will be repeated, but at a new technological level…. Correspondingly, all governors
will need their own Internet troll factories ready to load the correct subjects
into “Incident Management.” The state is pumping large amounts of money into
developing a digital Potemkin village. People will go to any lengths if they are
scared to death of democracy.
OE Watch | September 2018

19

EURASIA
Kazakhstan Deploys a Peacekeeping Company
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Kazakhstan has discussed
deploying a unit on a UN peacekeeping mission for several years, but only sent
individual observers to a couple of missions in Africa. As the accompanying
excerpted article reports, a company of Kazakh peacekeepers is now making
final preparations for a deployment in support of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and there are a couple of important things to note.
The article comes from the Russian-language version of Tengri News, a news
website in Kazakhstan, and it mentions how “the training of Kazakhstan’s
‘Blue helmets’ is being handled by experienced officers of the Indian
peacekeeping contingent of the UN.” The UNIFIL deployment is scheduled to
begin sometime in September-October and the Kazakh company will be under
an Indian command. The article also mentions how “Kazakhstan took part in
peacekeeping in Iraq from 2003 to 2010,” though it does not mention that this
upcoming deployment will draw a company from Kazakhstan’s Peacekeeping
Battalion (KAZBAT). According to previous reports, KAZBAT’s mission in
Iraq actually ended in 2008. Regardless, the Kazakh government considered
it a valuable experience for the overall development of the battalion and the
UNIFIL deployment marks another step in the government of Kazakhstan’s
efforts to be more involved in international peacekeeping missions. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: “Как миротворцы Казахстана готовятся к
миссии в Ливане (How the peacekeepers of Kazakhstan
are preparing for the mission to Lebanon),” Tengri News,
3 August 2018. https://tengrinews.kz/kazakhstan_news/
kak-mirotvortsyi-kazahstana-gotovyatsya-k-missii-vlivane-350779/
The company of Kazakhstan’s peacekeepers continues
intensively training before deploying for the mission to
Lebanon…The training of Kazakhstan’s “Blue helmets”
is being handled by experienced officers of the Indian
peacekeeping contingent of the UN…Each of them has a
number of years of experience in Lebanon…
“The training includes the general provisions and structure
of the UN, and the particular aspects of the peacekeeping
mission in Lebanon…The company of Kazakh peacekeepers
will leave for Lebanon in the fall. Previously, the “blue
helmets” of Kazakhstan took part in peacekeeping in Iraq
from 2003 to 2010 (sic)…

“The training of Kazakhstan’s ‘Blue helmets’ is being handled by experienced officers of the Indian
peacekeeping contingent of the UN.”

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | September 2018

20

EURASIA
Another Step in the Improvement of Uzbek-Tajik Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Since the governments of Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan improved relations following the death of longtime
Uzbek President Islam Karimov in 2016, several notable things
have taken place, including the resumption of flights and rail
traffic between the two states. The accompanying excerpted article
reports on an additional development in Tajik-Uzbek relations and
it shows how the reconciliation continues to progress as well as
potentially close a chapter from the Tajik Civil War.
The article from Fergana News, a Russian-language news
website based in Moscow with a focus on Central Asia, reports
that Colonel Mahmud Khudaiberdiyev (a well-known and powerful
figure from the Tajik Civil War) reportedly left Uzbekistan
following Karimov’s death and that the Uzbek government recently
shared this information with the government of Tajikistan. The
article covers Khudaiberdiyev’s activities during and after the war,
including incidents of clashing with Tajik government forces, the
last of which in 1998 caused significant damage to Tajik-Uzbek
relations.
The article notes that the strain in relations over Khudaiberdiyev
centered on how the “Tajik Prosecutor General’s Office repeatedly
requested the extradition of the colonel and his men to the then
leadership of Uzbekistan, but these requests went unanswered.”
After the 1998 incident, Khudaiberdiyev disappeared and rumors
spread about his death, exile or involvement in other regional
conflicts. It is notable that the recent report of Khudaiberdiyev’s
whereabouts over the years and departure from Uzbekistan did not
come from the office of either president, but no one refuted it. In
any case, this is likely the last time the topic of Khudaiberdiyev
will influence Tajik-Uzbek relations. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“The head of the Interior Ministry in the
Khatlon Oblast, Tajikistan, Iskandar Solekhzoda,
confirmed that the colonel is alive and well and
had been forced to leave Uzbekistan following the
death of Islam Karimov.”

Source: Aleksander Rybin, “По новым данным разведки. Полковник
Махмуд Худойбердыев покинул Узбекистан? (According to new
intelligence. Colonel Makhmud Khudaiberdiyev left Uzbekistan?),”
Fergana News, 26 July 2018. https://www.fergananews.com/
articles/10079
The security services of Tajikistan have suddenly remember the most
famous field commander of the 1990s in Central Asia – the rebellious
Colonel Makhmud Khudaiberdiyev. The head of the Interior Ministry
in the Khatlon Oblast, Tajikistan, Iskandar Solekhzoda, confirmed that
the colonel is alive and well and had been forced to leave Uzbekistan
following the death of Islam Karimov…According to Solekhzoda,
Khudaiberdiyev went to Turkey…It appears that the era of rebellious
colonels in Central Asia has passed.
…At the end of 1995, Khudaiberdiyev became a very popular and
influential commander among the units of the Popular Front…From
1996 to 1998, the colonel carried out three attempts to overthrow
the government in the capital. In 1996, his rebellion was somewhat
successful – Rahmon agreed to remove some of the ministers who
Khudaiberdiyev did not like. In 1997, government forces defeated
(his) rebels. The colonel, with some supporters, was able to escape to
Uzbekistan.
On 4 November 1998, Khudaiberdiyev, with a force of around a
thousand men, crossed into Khujand and captured the strategic
Shahristan pass, which is the main road between Dushanbe and
Khujand…the incident did not last long. Rahmon’s superior numbers and
better equipped forces defeated Khudaiberdiyev’s units in less than a
week. The colonel again fled to Uzbekistan…it was obvious that without
Karimov’s implicit consent, the colonel and his men could not have
attacked Khujand…
…the Tajik Prosecutor General’s Office repeatedly requested the
extradition of the colonel and his men to the then leadership of
Uzbekistan, but these requests went unanswered…Abdurakhim Kahorov,
the Secretary of the Security Council of Tajikistan, said that the criminal
case against Mahmud Khudaiberdiyev on charges of treason and
attempting to overthrow the government is not closed…
…Solekhzoda added that “neither Khudaiberdiyev or his group can
influence the friendly relations with Uzbekistan anymore.”…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | September 2018

21

EURASIA
Russia Flexes Its Muscles in Abkhazia While Citizens
Recall Anniversary of War with Georgia
OE Watch Commentary: Twenty-six years ago, Georgian National Guard and
paramilitary forces launched a military campaign against the small breakaway region of
Abkhazia. A year and a half later Georgian forces were driven from the region. Abkhazia
has remained a breakaway region, independent of Georgian rule, ever since. During the
anniversary month of August, local Abkhazian newspapers like the accompanying excerpt
from Nuzhnaya Gazeta, have been full of stories detailing the heroism of citizen defenders
from Abkhazia, and the entire Caucasus region, against the far numerically superior
Georgian force. At a special ceremony commemorating the conflict, Hero of Abkhazia,
Mzia Beya recently stated, “On the second day of the war… the first group of our brothers
from Kabardino-Balkaria… arrived to help a small republic in the fight against armed
aggression of the State Council of Georgia.”
The commemoration also coincided with a series of Russian military exercises in
Abkhazia under the direction of the Russian 7th Military Base headquartered in the
Abkhazian capitol of Sukhumi, with bases also located in Guadata and Ochamchira.
According to the accompanying excerpts from Sputnik, “more than 2,500 personnel and
more than 600 units of military equipment took part in joint exercises of servicemen of
the 7th Russian military base of the South Caucasian Military District, the Black Sea
Fleet, the Fourth Air Force and Air Defense Forces of Russia.”
The exercises included a number of tactical operations, including helicopter air assault
and amphibious landing. Although neither Georgia nor Abkhazia have much of a navy, the
1992-1993 conflict featured a Georgian amphibious landing to reinforce the coastal city
of Gagra, and an Abkhazian amphibious landing (led by Chechen Shamil Basaev) cutting
the Georgian supply line outside of Ochamchira.
The annual exercises also punctuate an uncomfortable strategic truth of Abkhazia’s
breakaway status from Georgia with continued repercussions for the Black Sea region.
Russian military support is a significant factor in Abkhazia’s ability to remain separated
from Georgian rule. The 7th Military Base, like the 4th Military Base located a few
hundred miles to the east in South Ossetia, was established in strength following the
Russian-Georgian war of 2008.
Today there are roughly 9,000 Russian soldiers permanently stationed in the Georgian
separatist regions, 4,500 at the 7th Military Base and another 4,500 at the 4th Military
Base. Immediately following the initial wars for South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the early
1990s, Russian military power was limited to a few small units and “peacekeepers”
along the de-facto separatist borders. During that time Georgian paramilitaries continued
to harass Russian and Abkhazian positions along the de-facto border, while Georgian
officials never gave up the political rhetoric to regain its breakaway territories.
The 2008 war between Georgia and Russia, largely fought in South Ossetia, provided
a reset on the status of Abkhazia. While there are multiple factors, the 4,500 or more
Russian military personnel in Abkhazia have helped put an end to Georgian paramilitary
probing of Abkhazian territory on the southern Gali sector or from the Svan valley in
the northwest into the Kodori Corridor (the two most probable Georgian invasion routes,
excluding an amphibious landing on the coast). The locally-based Russian forces are also
close to and provide a springboard to Russian military operations in Ukraine and Syria.
While Russian forces continue to utilize the temperate climate offered in the coastal
regions of Abkhazia to more or less train year round, the number of Russian military
personnel permanently stationed in Abkhazia act as a deterrent to Georgian. End OE
Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

Source: “В ряды защитников Абхазии вступили
лучшие сыны (The Best Sons Joined the Ranks
of the Defenders of Abkhazia),” Nuzhnaya
Gazeta, 15 August 2018. https://abh-n.ru/v-ryadyzashhitnikov-abxazii-vstupili-luchshie-syny
The best sons of Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Lithuania, Poland, Transdnistria, Estonia,
Ukraine also came to the ranks of the defenders
of Abkhazia, who regarded the misfortune that
befell our people as their own. Our brothers who
volunteers made a huge contribution to the victory
of Abkhazia in the domestic war of 1992-1993.
Source: “Дать ‘левиафану’ по зубам: как
российские военные отбили ‘атаку’ на Абхазию
(To give ‘leviathan’ teeth: How did the Russian
military repel an ‘attack’ on Abkhazia),” SputnikAbkhazia, 13 August 2018. https://m.sputnikabkhazia.ru/Abkhazia/20180813/1024707107/kakrossijskie-voennye-otbili-ataku-na-abxaziyu.html
More than two and a half thousand personnel
and more than 600 units of military equipment
took part in joint exercises of servicemen of the
7th Russian military base of the South Caucasian
Military District, the Black Sea Fleet, the Fourth
Air Force and Air Defense Forces of Russia, told
reporters…”The exercises will be held for another
three days, where we will work out two stages that
will be held at the training grounds, including the
mountain range, where together with the units of
the Republic of Abkhazia we will hold events,” said
Major-General Vladislav Ershov Commander of
the 49th Army…The military-tactical exercise was
acknowledged by the Major-General as effective,
largely due to the commanders, who, he said, used
the experience gained in Syria and demonstrated
non-standard solutions at all stages.
Source: “В учениях принимают участие
около 2,5 тысячи военнослужащих и более
600 единиц вооружения и военной техники
(About 2,500 servicemen and more than 600
units of weapons and military equipment take
part in the exercise),” Sputnik-Abkhazia, 2
August 2018. https://m.sputnik-abkhazia.ru/
Abkhazia/20180802/1024611425/rossijskiemotostrelki-ucheniya-abxazii.html
…During the first stage, units completed a march
with equipment from the “Tsabal” base…The
second stage will involve a defense of the Black
Sea coast, during which an episode of defending
the coast from a sea-assault by the enemy will be
played out…

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2018

22

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Flexes Its Muscles in Abkhazia While
Citizens Recall Anniversary of War with Georgia
“More than two and a half thousand personnel and more than 600 units of military equipment took part in
joint exercises of servicemen of the 7th Russian military base of the South Caucasian Military District, the
Black Sea Fleet, the Fourth Air Force and Air Defense Forces of Russia.”

Map of Georgia showing the autonomous republics of Abkhazia (de facto independent) and Adjaria, and the de facto independent region of South Ossetia.
Source: By United Nations Cartographic Section, with amendments by User:ChrisO (United Nations Cartographic Section) [Public domain or Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | September 2018

23

EURASIA
Interview with Armenia’s Minister of Defense
OE Watch Commentary: Armenian Prime Minister Nikol
Pashinyan’s appointment of David Tonoyan as Defense Minister
in May of this year was not necessarily seen as rebuke of the
defense policies under the previous administration, but as the
accompanying excerpted article highlights, the new defense
minister is facing the same issues as his predecessor in addition
to an increased threat of a conflict with Azerbaijan. The article
features an interview with Defense Minister Tonoyan and
he notes how Azerbaijan’s armed forces are becoming more
active “not only on the line with Artsakh (Nagorny Karabakh),
but also on the border between Armenia and Azerbaijan,
particularly in the direction of Nakhichevan.” The activity refers
to claims by the government of Azerbaijan that it took control
of several areas near the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhichevan,
which had previously been neutral territory. There have been no
reports of any additional Azerbaijani activity toward Nagorny
Karabakh, but many in Armenia are concerned with what they
see as the Azerbaijani government aggressively testing the new
administration.
The article includes Tonoyan’s response to the question
of what lessons the Armenian armed forces learned from
the April 2016 clash with Azerbaijan, specifically that the
Ministry of Defense “made necessary changes in areas such
as the operational deployment of units and the provisioning of
weapons and equipment.” Azerbaijani forces gained a small
amount of territory as a result of the clash over two years
ago and while it is not mentioned in the article, it very likely
impacted the changes discussed. Lastly, the interviewer brings
up the possibility of the Armenian government acquiring
Russian Su-30SM fighters. While this would be a significant
leap in capabilities considering Armenia’s current inventory
includes only Su-25s (in close air support roles), Tonoyan’s
answer of “looking at several models of aircraft with different
modifications and configurations” and having plans “to not
have just fighter aircraft, but multifunctional air units” does not
mention any Russian, or other aircraft, that would fulfill this
role. Officials in Armenia claim to be looking for acquisition
options outside of Russian weapons and equipment, but it
remains to be seen where the Armenian government is heading
on this. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Conclusions were drawn on a number of
issues at the operational and tactical levels.
As a result, we made necessary changes in
areas such as the operational deployment of
units and the provisioning of weapons and
equipment.”

Source: Arshaluis Mgdesyan, “Армения готовится к войне с
Азербайджаном — интервью с министром обороны (Armenia is
preparing for war with Azerbaijan – an interview with the minister
of defense),” EurAsia Daily, 22 July 2018. https://eadaily.com/ru/
news/2018/07/22/armeniya-gotovitsya-k-voyne-s-azerbaydzhanomintervyu-s-ministrom-oborony
EurAsia Daily correspondent interviewed Defense Minister David Tonoyan
about the issues and tasks of the defense industry of Armenia, the plans to
develop fighter aircraft and the growing tension in the Karabakh conflict
zone on the Armenian-Azerbaijani border.
(Mgdesyan): Mr. Tonoyan, as Minister of Defense of Armenia, what do
you see as the main tasks that require a quick resolution in ensuring the
country’s security?
(Tonoyan): …Taking into account the openly militaristic rhetoric of the
enemy (Azerbaijan) and continuous statements about the possibility of
resolving the conflict through the use of force, the Armenian Armed Forces
must provide a sobering impact on the enemy and assist the army of Artsakh
(Nagorny Karabakh) in curbing the aggression of the opposing side…By
the way, you can become familiar with the priorities of the armed forces
and, generally, Armenia’s defense circles in my vision of developing defense
systems as part of a government program. It was recently published…
(Mgdesyan): Reports of the massing of Azerbaijani soldiers on the front
line in the Karabakh conflict zone have recently become more frequent. Is
this true? How big is the threat of the resumption of large-scale military
operations with Azerbaijan?
(Tonoyan): Reports of the activation and groups of Azerbaijani units are
correct, and similar action is being seen not only on the line with Artsakh,
but also on the border between Armenia and Azerbaijan, particularly in the
direction of Nakhichevan…
(Mgdesyan): A lot has been discussed about the need for changes in
ensuring the defense of Armenia and Karabakh after the April 2016 clash.
What findings were made from the “ four-day war” and what has Armenia
changed in strategy since then?
(Tonoyan): …Conclusions were drawn on a number of issues at the
operational and tactical levels. As a result, we made necessary changes
in areas such as the operational deployment of units and the provisioning
of weapons and equipment…I should note that despite its importance,
the “April War” should not be at the center of attention of our military
thought…we are preparing for probably military actions and not just taking
into consideration the experience of the past…
(Mgdesyan): Russian media recently reported on the possible acquisition of
Russian Su-30SM fighters by Armenia. Are negotiations with Russia taking
place on this? Is Armenia developing fighter aircraft (capabilities)?
(Tonoyan): …at the moment we are planning to develop an air component
of the armed forces. We are looking at several models of aircraft with
different modifications and configurations for acquisition…It is important
that we planning to not have just fighter aircraft, but multifunctional air
units…

OE Watch | September 2018

24

EURASIA
Moldovan Government Moves to Reduce Reliance
on Russian Power
OE Watch Commentary: On 15 August,
Moldova’s pro-European government published
a draft resolution to withdraw from the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Electric Energy Council, to which it has
belonged since February 1992. The Council,
established following the dissolution of the Soviet
Union, coordinates electric energy agreements
between ten post-Soviet states. Moldova stopped
participating in the Council’s meetings in 2016
and its complete withdrawal would reflect the
government’s intense efforts to sever its reliance
on Russia for energy. Just one month earlier,
Moldova’s government ratified two major
contracts intended to connect the country’s power
grid directly with Romania’s and increase its
compatibility with European energy standards.

Moldovan President Igor Dodon (2016).

Source: By http://en.publika.md/igor-dodon-vows-to-cancel-association-agreement-with-eu-will-turn-moldova-to-federation_2629556.html [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons.

As a small, economically poor, post-Soviet
country, Moldova’s energy challenges are very closely tied to its political and security issues. Russia – a major trade partner – has often
retaliated against Moldova’s European integration efforts by banning Moldovan products and threatening to cut energy supplies to the country.
Moldova imports 98 percent of its energy, relying almost solely on Russian gas and electricity transferred through its Russian-backed,
separatist Transnistrian region. In fact, Russia purchases gas from Transnistria and converts it to electricity for Moldova proper, often at
double the cost, forcing Moldova to indirectly finance the separatist regime. These Moldovan-Russian tensions are only one component of a
broader political and security struggle wherein Moldova is pressing for the withdrawal of Russian troops from Transnistria, whose breakaway
status remains unresolved.

The accompanying excerpted articles from sources in the region accentuate Moldova’s longstanding, internal debate over its future. Will
it be a country increasingly integrated into European economic structures – including its energy sector – or a state that retains strong ties to
Russia and the CIS? The excerpt from the Government of the Republic of Moldova news site explains that Moldova’s efforts and reasons for
connecting to Romania’s electrical grid are parallel with objectives for its gas supply: to decrease dependency on Russia. The excerpt from
Russia’s Interfax news agency (dated 15 August) states the Moldovan government’s expectation to completely break from the CIS Electric
Energy Council one year after its draft resolution is approved. The other excerpt from Russia’s Interfax news agency (dated 16 August) quotes
pro-Russia Moldovan President Dodon’s position that the government’s plan to leave the CIS Electric Energy Council is merely a ploy to please
its pro-European political base ahead of the country’s 2019 parliamentary elections. End OE Watch Commentary (Kurz)

“This project comes after we started the natural gas interconnection, which ensures security of our
country…we will not be dependent on one source.”
Source: “Guvernul împrumută de la BERD și BEI câte
80 milioane euro pentru interconectarea la rețeaua
electroenergetică din România (Moldovan Government
Approves Ratification of Loan Agreements with EBRD,
EIB for Interconnection to Romanian Power Grid),”
Government of the Republic of Moldova, 11 July 2018.
https://gov.md/ro/content/guvernul-aprobat-ratificareaacordurilor-de-imprumut-cu-berd-si-bei-pentruinterconectarea
The project will increase the security of Moldova’s
electricity supply. This project comes after we started
the natural gas interconnection, which ensures security
of our country…we will not be dependent on one source.

Source: “Moldova Plans to
Withdraw from CIS Electric
Energy Council,” Moscow
Interfax, 15 August 2018.
…the agreement between
the CIS countries … in the
electric energy sector do not
meet the Republic of Moldova’s
energy security priorities . . .
After Moldova terminates the
document . . . the decision will
automatically take effect [in] 12
months… . . .

Source: “Dodon calls Moldovan Govt’s
Decision to Leave CIS Electrical Energy
Council Attempt to Escalate Tensions in
Relations with Russia,” Moscow Interfax, 16
August 2018.
“The Moldovan government is trying to
escalate relations with Russia yet again
with the republic’s withdrawal from the CIS
Electrical Energy Council . . . they want to
create public tensions shortly before the 2019
parliamentary election, reinstate geopolitical
items on the agenda, and escalate tensions . .
. to please pro-European unionists.”

OE Watch | September 2018

25

EURASIA
Patriotism as Defense against Color Revolutions
OE Watch Commentary: Contemporary Russian military publications frequently discuss
the importance of defending against hybrid threats from the US. They often point to American
schemes to manipulate both economic and information systems in order to spark domestic
protests, which could ultimately lead to a “color revolution.” One influential Russian military
expert, Colonel-General Andrey Kartapolov has specifically stated that the US remains intent
upon using everything within its arsenal (e.g. information, economic, diplomatic, military,
etc…) to prevent Russia from becoming a peer competitor. For instance, according to General
Kartapolov in an article published in 2015, the US instigated regime change in Ukraine in early
2014 to both foster anti-Russian sentiments in Ukraine and to gain a strategic foothold to further
weaken Russia.
General Kartapolov is an experienced officer who has commanded from the platoon to
the Military District level. Most recently, while serving as the Commander of the Western
Military District, he was placed in charge of the Russian forces operating in Syria. As the brief
accompanying excerpt from the centrist daily, Nezavisimaya Gazeta, points out, in late July,
General Kartapolov was appointed as Deputy Minister-Chief of the Main Military-Political
Directorate of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (formerly, GlavPUR). In this position,
according to the excerpt, General Kartapolov will be responsible for “the organization of
military-political work in the Armed Forces… and military-patriotic activities...”
The GlavPUR directorate dates from the Soviet period and was designed to maintain morale
Colonel-General Andrey Kartapolov.
Source: : https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Andrey_Kartapolov. CCA-SA 4.0.
within the military and adherence to communist party doctrine. When the USSR collapsed, this
department was eliminated, and was rebranded using chaplains and morale officers to help with
discipline and esprit de corps. Kartapolov’s appointment suggests that these earlier initiatives proved insufficient to today’s threats, or as the
article points out, “this choice is fully justified, since in our difficult time, when the country, as they say, is ‘encircled by enemies’…”
The article concludes on a cautious note, recalling a debate within Russian military circles from the last century, which dealt with the role
of the armed forces and politics. One side argued that “the military is outside parties, the military is outside politics, it is for the law,” while
the other side insisted that the military is simply too large to remain outside of politics. Kartapolov’s appointment may suggest that the current
Kremlin leadership wants to ensure that the military knows which side to remain on in the event of a “color revolution.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“What military-political work, and most importantly - in the interest of which political party will be held
by the revived GlavPUR - is not entirely clear. After all, Russia is not a one-party political system.”
Source: Vladimir Scherbakov, “Возвращение ГлавПУРа (Return of GlavPUR [Main Military-Political Administration]),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 30 July 2018. www.ng.ru/armies/2018-07-30/2_7277_glavpur.html
…According to two decrees signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin yesterday, a new post of Deputy Minister-Chief of the Main MilitaryPolitical Directorate of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (Decree No. 454) is appointed to the Ministry of Defense of the Russian
Federation. Colonel-General Andrey Kartapolov (Decree No. 456) is appointed to this position. The main administration itself, apparently, is
recreated and will soon begin to work.
…From now on, the list of powers exercised by the Defense Ministry includes the organization of military-political work in the Armed
Forces… and military-patriotic activities….
…As you can see, Andrei Kartapolov is a real military general, not a political worker…. This choice is fully justified, since in our difficult
time, when the country, as they say, is “encircled by enemies,” it is a combat rather than a parquet general who should be appointed to such a
position.
However, the main question is this. During the Soviet era, GlavPUR actually worked as a department of the Central Committee of the CPSU,
being the director in the field of party political work in the Armed Forces. What military-political work, and most importantly - in the interest of
which political party will be held by the revived GlavPUR - is not entirely clear. After all, Russia is not a one-party political system.
…In general, Colonel Ivan Bolotnikov turned out to be wrong: “The military is outside parties, the military is outside politics, it is for the
law.” Even then, the staff captain Vsevolod Korotkevich in ‘Army and Peace’ responded to this: “At best, we will be advised that the army does
not interfere with politics. This advice is so often repeated to us that the true essence of it has long ago become obliterated, and the advisers
recommend the lifelessness of the army in both foreign and domestic politics. But the army is too large to be lifeless.? Who is right? – time will
tell.
OE Watch | September 2018

26

EURASIA
Taking Note of the Chinese Trade Route Initiative
in Bulgaria and Europe
OE Watch Commentary: According to Dr. Mariana Malinova Tian, a Sinologist
at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, the Chinese “One Belt, One Road” initiative
is a new phase in economic globalization with potential benefits as well as risks. Dr.
Tian highlighted the scope of the Chinese effort as well as characterizing risk in the
Bulgarian daily Trud by saying that “China is trying to penetrate any crack that appears
in Europe. That is why we in Europe must be united. I would like us to have the most
successful policy and to counter these two giants, the US and China. They [China]
advance confidently in all Eastern Europe: in Hungary, Poland, in the Balkans: in
Serbia, Montenegro, even Bosnia and Herzegovina.” She further noted that “Bulgaria
ranks last-but-one in their economic contacts…China is a super power and if it decides
something, nobody can stop it….The Chinese are in Serbia and Macedonia because they
are not EU Member States whereas EU laws apply in Bulgaria. And they find it far more
lucrative - financially and especially politically - to go to those countries.” Meanwhile,
the Bulgarian Economy Ministry announced that the Chinese-CEE (Central and East
European) Investment Fund would invest $1 billion in the region on top of $435 million
previously invested, as reported by the Bulgarian БТА Daily News. Often the focus of
the Chinese One Belt, One Road initiative is seen as it develops in Asia. These articles
are a reminder of the efforts at the European terminus. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wilhelm)

“China is a super power and if it
decides something, nobody can stop
it.”
Source: Mariela Baleva, “Доц. д-р Мариана
Тиен, китаист в Института по исторически
изледивания при БАН, пред ‘Труд’: Битака в
света не е за Китай, а за Европа (Assoc. Prof.
Mariana Tien, PhD, Institute of Historical Studies
at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, for ‘Trud’:
The world is not for China but for Europe),” Trud,
13 August 2018. https://trud.bg/доц-д-р-марианатиен-китаист-в-институ/
Source: “Chinese Fund to Invest 1B USD in
Central and Eastern Europe,” БТА Daily News, 16
August 2018, p 4.

One Belt One Road: China in red, Members of the AIIB in orange, the six corridors in black.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belt_and_Road_Initiative#/media/File:One-belt-one-road.svg, Wikipedia, CC By-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

27

INDO-PACIFIC
China Optimistic on ‘One Belt, One Road’ Initiative
OE Watch Commentary: It has been five years since China announced its “One
Belt, One Road” (OBOR) initiative (also known as “Belt and Road Initiative,” or
BRI). The accompanying excerpted article from Xinhua revealed the government’s
continued confidence in the initiative based on an analysis of a speech by the former
deputy minister of the Ministry of Commerce.
There appears to be no slowing the initiative down. Indeed, one of the original
concerns about the OBOR initiative from a Chinese perspective was the possibility
that insecurity in Central Asia or Southeast Asia could undermine it. However, the
article makes little mention of security issues because, for the most part, there has
not been a major breakout of violence in either of those two regions in the past five
years. In addition, clashes or terrorism in China’s westernmost Xinjiang Province,
which is vital for the initiative, has ebbed, although there are international concerns
about China’s treatment of the Uyghur minority there.
The article argues that the initiative is essential for world economic growth
because the US cannot be the only force driving economic growth and the initiative
is more inclusive than other global development models. In fact, the article suggests
that by bridging the gap between rich and poor, the initiative will contribute to
reducing terrorism. The article, however, notes that there are problems the initiative
may face from local interests and people, especially as Chinese investments
supersede local industries. In addition, the article cites China’s relative inexperience
in the global economy as a weak point.
From the article, one can discern that the OBOR is clearly a Chinese national
priority. Because security threats are minimal for the time being, the focus of the
initiative is strictly on economics. So long as this relative regional stability remains
one can expect further Chinese economic expansion in areas that are part of the
OBOR initiative, but even as far afield as East Africa and Eastern Europe, which are
also envisioned to be part of the initiative. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “商务部原副部长陈健：准确理解“一带
一路”倡议推进民企参与国际合作 (Chen Jian,
former deputy minister of the Ministry of Commerce:
Accurately understand the ‘One Belt, One Road’
initiative to promote private enterprise and participate
in international cooperation),” Xinhua, 1 August 2018.
http://jjckb.xinhuanet.com/2018-08/01/c_137360651.
htm
After the U.S. financial crisis, although the global
economy began to recover, it lacked a sufficient driving
force for economic growth. Development needs a more
inclusive balance. The current gap between the rich
and the poor between countries is growing, and the
gap needs to be bridged. Regional hotspots continue to
be turbulent and terrorism is still spreading.
When we achieve development, we need to fully
consider the interests of local people, local businesses
and third-party markets. But Chinese companies have
really entered the market for less than 30 years. They
still don’t know the rules of the market, laws, and rules.
“One Belt, One Road” is a project, but it is far more
than just a project. Accurate understanding of the “Belt
and Road Initiative” requires attention: It is a vision,
not a plan; it is an idea that deals with international
relations and economic cooperation, including
openness, tolerance, inclusiveness, and equality, a winwin situation.

“Accurate understanding of the ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ requires
attention: It is a vision, not a plan; it is an idea that deals with
international relations and economic cooperation, including openness,
tolerance, inclusiveness, and equality, a win-win situation.”

Shenzhen City Planning Exhibition Hall world map one belt band one road Jan 2017 Lnv2.

Source: Yauaaisnhaongwaix, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SZ_%E6%B7%B1%E5%9C%B3%E5%9F%8E%E5%B8%82%E8%A6%8F%E5%8A%83%E5%B1%95%E8%A6%BD%E9%A4%A8_Shenzhen_City_Planning_Exhibition_Hall_world_map_one_belt_band_one_road_Jan_2017_Lnv2.jpg,
CC-BY-4.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Returning Uyghur Fighters and China’s National
Security Dilemma
by Joseph Hope
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 13, dated 25 July 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/returning-uighur-fighters-and-chinas-national-security-dilemma/

OE Watch Commentary: In early 2017, CCP Secretary General President Xi Jinping announced his desire to build a “Great Wall of Iron”
to apparently promote security and peace in China’s Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. This is likely a continuation Beijing’s focus on
implementing strict security measures in the region since deadly 2009 riots in the region’s capital city of Urumqi. However, it also comes at the
same time that China faces a new challenge in the form of Syrian-trained Uyghurs potentially returning to Xinjiang.
Western nations also face challenges with radicalized fighters returning to their home countries, as the war in Syria winds down. China’s
returning fighter challenge, however, is also linked with the al-Qaeda affiliated Turkestan Islamic Party (TIP) which has been active in Syria. The
Islamist radicalization of some of these fighters while abroad has also helped build links of solidarity between them and the broader global Islamic
terror community.
Pressure may be increasingly mounting on Uyghurs in Syria as Idlib, the location where they are believed to be concentrated, remains the last
major rebel-held area and therefore a key focus of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, especially after government forces recently took control of
the Golan Heights front in Syria’s southwest. On July 18, the Syrian government agreed to release a large number of prisoners in an agreement
with rebel forces in exchange for an evacuation of pro-government civilians into a government controlled zone. Idlib is within a multi-party
de-escalation agreement that should be an end to conflict between rebels and government forces there. However, Syrian government forces
have violated the agreement in other areas, and the evacuation may possibly precede an increased pressure campaign on rebel groups. As Assad
consolidates power, Chinese nationals fighting alongside al-Qaeda may leave the fighting and attempt to return to China. How Beijing responds to
these returning fighters may dramatically alter the security situation in Xinjiang and the rest of China.
China has long accused the TIP and the East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM), the two main Uyghur terror groups, a highly suspect
assertion prior to 2009. At the time the majority of Uyghur fighters and terrorists espoused separatism instead of Islamic fundamentalism. Shortly
after Islamic State (IS) leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi’s declaration of the Caliphate in 2014, IS released the first edition of their main propaganda
magazine, Dabiq, in which they singled out China and several other nations as threats. A wave of Uyghur-language propaganda and Uyghurs
leaving China for Syria have helped to deepen the connection between Xinjiang and Syria.
Estimates of the number of Uyghurs this connection has drawn to Syria vary. While ETIM and TIP have traditionally espoused separatism from
China, some Uyghurs in Syria appear to have become indoctrinated in Islamic militarism. There have been several indications that some Uyghurs
in Syria consider China as a target. In early 2017 an Islamic State video depicted a group of Uyghurs making threats to China before ending
with an Uyghur fighter executing a prisoner. Another Uyghur also states that, “we didn’t care how the fighting went or who Assad was… We just
wanted to learn how to use the weapons and then go back to China.” Notably, Malhama Tactical, a for-profit Jihadist military training group, also
made a threat against China in early 2017 and claimed to have added Chinese nationals to its instructor ranks. Importantly, the group is known to
operate in Idlib, where there may be a large Uyghur population. While actual figures on fighters returning to Xinjiang are likely withheld from the
media, Jacques Neriah of the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs claims that the Chinese government has arrested around 100 returning fighters
as of the end of 2017.
Furthermore, ongoing harsh treatment of Uyghurs may sharpen extremist groups abroad’s focus on China. Stabilizing Xinjiang and neutralizing
the effects of radicalization is made more difficult by the social conditions and discrimination that Uyghurs face, including pervasive economic,
workplace, and even interpersonal discrimination. The post-2009 era in Xinjiang is a time of increasingly strict and comprehensive security
measures. Policy escalation has aimed at limiting movement of Uyghurs, strictly controlling their potential weapons, and removing their meeting
areas where radicalization, organization and attack planning may take place.
In addition to the already ubiquitous “convenience police stations” which enforce a high level of community penetration, Xinjiang also saw
a massive recruitment of informal security agents in 2016. Many of the more than 30,000 new hires were positioned in the convenience police
stations, where they closely monitor surrounding communities. China is also known to have a large scale re-education program in Xinjiang,
as well as pervasive electronic surveillance. Re-education in many cases may not be permanent detention, and if the program is not successful
in disengaging the individual from violence, they may simply re-engage upon release because of a lack of reintegration and community-based
programs. Moreover, prisons around the world are known for providing fertile radicalization environments rather than deradicalizing individuals.
While it is known that a large number of Chinese Uyghurs have travelled to Syria to fight, how many of them are still alive and will be returning
to China is as of yet unknown. To be clear, China does not face a threat of thousands of fighters returning to wage an open battle. Rather, the
risk of foreign fighters returning is in the potential for a small few to slip through the security cracks and re-enter their communities, or to exit
detention programs without disengaging from violence. Once returned, they can become powerful force multipliers who may introduce leadership,
technical and tactical knowledge, resources, and radicalization methods to the community.
While a high level of community penetration and the use of community members as security agents may prove effective in detecting returned
fighters, it will do little to counter the religious undertones which may motivate a new face of terrorism in Xinjiang or to neutralize the influence
of those who are not apprehended. Given its traditional preference for coercive measures, it is unlikely that Beijing will adopt a softer approach
that promotes reintegration, community bonds, and religious education. Instead, heightened security measures may be in store for Xinjiang, as
(continued)
well as heightened threat levels and heightened tensions. End OE Watch Commentary (Grace)
OE Watch | September 2018
29

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Returning Uyghur Fighters and China’s
National Security Dilemma
“He also stressed guiding people of different ethnic groups to enhance their sense of identity with the
motherland, the Chinese nation, Chinese culture, the CPC and socialism with Chinese characteristics.”
Source: “Xi calls for building ‘great wall of iron’ for Xinjiang’s stability,” Xinhua, 10 March 2017. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/201703/10/c_136119256.htm
Chinese President Xi Jinping said Friday that the “great wall of iron” to safeguard national unity, ethnic solidarity and social stability should be
fortified in China’s Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region…Xi called for safeguarding ethnic unity, and reinforcing solidarity between the military
and government, soldiers and civilians, police and the public, as well as between the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps and local
communities.
Xinjiang is an important “security barrier” in northwest China which holds a special strategic position and faces special issues, Xi said, adding
that governing the region well is of great significance…He also stressed guiding people of different ethnic groups to enhance their sense of identity
with the motherland, the Chinese nation, Chinese culture, the CPC and socialism with Chinese characteristics…

Map showing the location of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.

Source: By MrPenguin20 [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_the_Turkistan_Islamic_Party_in_Syria.svg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | September 2018

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Ganbala Radar Station – Keeping Watch On the Skies
Over Tibet
OE Watch Commentary: The Ganbala [甘巴拉] radar station is located on a mountain peak in the Tibet Autonomous Region [西藏自治区]
of China and is part of a group of radar stations stretching over southern Tibet, the furthest of which is more than 1200 km from its HQ, the
closest over 110 km. The station, which is frequently highlighted in Chinese media and in the accompanying excerpted article from PLA Daily,
is notable for its height and strategic position. Situated at an elevation of 5374 meters, it is the highest military station in the world. Established
in 1967, the station plays an important role in monitoring the airspace over the southern portion of Tibet, where much of the population of the
Autonomous Region is located.
Ganbala is 71 km Southwest of Lhasa, the capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region, roughly 30 km southwest of a PLA air base at Gonggar
and 170 km east of Xigazê. Xigazê and Lhasa together have 1.3 out of Tibet’s 3 million people. Nyingchi, with roughly 200,000 inhabitants,
is another sizable and strategically significant town 360 km to the east and is home to several large PLA units. To the south are Bhutan and
strategically important (and contested) areas such as Arunachal Pradesh and Doklam, which was previously the sight of Chinese-Indian clashes.
In 2016 a CCTV program called Paths of Glory [《军旅人生》] profiled a PLA Air Force Master Sergeant, 2nd Class technician named Wang
Shengming who helped maintain the radars at Ganbala (see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BXmJzimYFAE). The segment went into
detail about the living conditions on the mountain, which due to its altitude and remoteness can be quite difficult. Water has to be transported
up the mountain and is kept in cisterns. According to Wang, winds can reach 11 on the Beaufort Scale (64–72 mph), temperatures can reach
a low of -30° Celsius, and due to the altitude, soldiers frequently have trouble breathing. Ganbala was used to test the first unmanned radar
station systems in 2007 due to conditions there and as the PLA modernized, it began to receive more advanced radars. The video program from
CCTV shows Master Sergeant Wang servicing what appears to be multiple, mobile long-range surveillance radars both inside and outside a
weather-proof geodesic dome. These remote stations, despite the risks associated with their location, provide monitoring of civil air routes and
strategically important airspace. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)
Source: “甘巴拉，不老的青春 (Ganbala, Forever Young)” PLA Daily, 16 November, 2017. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2017-11/16/
content_191994.htm
Scientists assert that the region above the altitude of 4,500 meters on Earth is a forbidden zone that humans cannot survive, and this is the
extreme of 5,374 meters above sea level! The oxygen content of the air is less than half of that [at sea level], and the maximum wind force is
Grade 11.
Ganbala is connected to the Gangdise Mountains in the east and the Himalayas in the south. The barrier-like separation of Tibet into
“ forward”- and “behind-Tibet [lower, the more densely populated southern part of Tibet and the northern part] is the most important support
point for supporting the “air bridge” in Tibet. Since then, the soldiers of Gambala firmly “riveted” in the breathless, snow-capped mountains,
and the “old Tibetan spirit” that has extended the hard struggle and selfless dedication with youthful blood has created “willing to endure
hardship, silent dedication, dedication, and hard work. The “Gambala Spirit” inspires generations of officers and men to risk their life in this
harsh environment to guide military and civil aviation in the restricted area of life, and has mastered the reporting on 470,000 flights, making
the dangerous Sichuan-Tibet route a safe air corridor.

Yamzho Yumco, Shannan, China.

Source: By Yan Bolun, Unsplash License (Unrestricted) (https://unsplash.com/license), https://unsplash.com/photos/8U3bcGG1v4M.

OE Watch | September 2018

(continued)
31

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Ganbala Radar Station – Keeping Watch On
the Skies Over Tibet
“The barrier-like separation of Tibet into ‘ forward’- and ‘behind’-Tibet [lower, the more densely
populated southern part of Tibet and the northern part] is the most important support point for supporting
the ‘air bridge’ in Tibet.”

Source: By Peter Wood, used with permission.

OE Watch | September 2018

32

INDO-PACIFIC
India Cancels New Battalions for Mountain Strike Corps
OE Watch Commentary: The government
of India’s efforts to counter the Chinese military
presence and road construction near the IndianChinese border took a new turn when the Indian
Ministry of Defense (MoD) recently announced
that it canceled the formation of new battalions as
part of a “Mountain Strike Corps,” which had been
established in response to Chinese activities over
the past several years. While some in India and
across the region immediately saw this as a sign of
the Indian government continuing to reconcile with
the Chinese government and/or an unwillingness to
counter the threat from China, the accompanying
excerpted article examines the reasons for the
cancellation and the outlook for the unit.
The article comes from The Wire, an independent
English-language news website in India, and the
author of it notes how anonymous sources in the
government believed the “decision to raise the
MSC was a result of institutional factors rather
than strategic necessity” and that “the army
officer corps saw the MSC as a way of accessing
a greater slice of the defence budget.” The author
also brings up how the previous administration
(the UPA Party under former Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh) “very reluctantly and rather
late in its tenure…had sanctioned the corps.”
While the change of administrations in India
likely led to the cancellation of new battalions, the
author also mentions how the MoD is looking at
how “manpower for the completion of the MSC
can be created from within existing resources
rather than by an increase in recruitment.” He
believes that the “MSC is not quite shelved” and
cites equipment that has already been acquired,
including “145 ultra-light howitzers cleared for
purchase” back in 2016. It is important to note that
the recent announcement was for canceling new
battalions, but a couple of them have already been
established in addition to the howitzers already
acquired. Domestic political considerations aside,
if the Indian government later decides to revive the
MSC, it appears there are already elements in place
to build around. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“While the two defensive divisions
that were formed in 2009-10 enabled
defensive deterrence or deterrence
by denial, an offensive corps would
provide the punch for deterrence by
punishment.”

Source: Ali Ahmed, “Decoding the Logic Behind the Shelving of India’s Mountain
Strike Corps,” The Wire, 22 July 2018. https://thewire.in/security/decoding-the-logicbehind-the-shelving-of-indias-mountain-strike-corps
The media has reported that the Indian army’s much vaunted mountain strike corps
(MSC) has been put in cold storage. An insinuation attributed by the media to unnamed
sources has it that the decision to raise the MSC was a result of institutional factors
rather than strategic necessity.
According to these sources, the army officer corps saw the MSC as a way of accessing
a greater slice of the defence budget. By blaming the army for inflating the threat
perception in order to make itself the primus inter pares among the three services
suggests, however, that the sources are set on diverting attention away from the
implications of the decision for Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government…
The government, well past its honeymoon period, has been coming in for criticism
lately. Its actions following the prime minister’s end-April dash to Wuhan for an ‘informal
summit’ with Xi Jinping…Further, the government downsized the defence budget to its
lowest proportion this year in terms of gross domestic product since 1962. Mindful of
the unforeseeable consequences of a diplomatic or military crisis in an election year, the
government apparently has developed cold feet on its policy of standing up to China. It
therefore needed to send a signal to Beijing that it is drawing its claws back.
…The MSC had been cleared by the previous UPA government very reluctantly and
rather late in its tenure, when, in its second avatar, too weak to fend off the army’s pitch
for the MSC any longer, it had sanctioned the corps. The May 2013 Chinese intrusion in
the Depsang sector perhaps forced the government’s hand…
The Modi government took a view of the new raising early in its tenure…While on the
one hand the BJP-led government wanted to project a tough-on-security image, the prime
minister had indicated at the combined commanders’ conference that the army should
turn to technology rather than compensating for capacity voids with manpower, as it was
wont to do. The decision came despite the Chinese intrusion early in the Modi tenure in
the Chumar sector…
Immediately prior to the 73-day stand-off with the Chinese at Doklam last year, the
second division of the MSC was reportedly under raising at Pathankot. The army had to
dig into its war reserve stocks to equip it, thereby depleting those stocks as the defence
public service utilities and ordnance factories could not keep pace…
It appears that the government has finally taken a call and clamped down on further new
raisings, affecting the corps gaining its full complement. Hopes are now pinned on the
study underway by the army training command on ‘optimisation’, whereby manpower for
the completion of the MSC can be created from within existing resources rather than by
an increase in recruitment…
In other words, the MSC is not quite shelved. It can be completed without expanding the
size of the army. In any case, the completion date had been projected at 2021…Weapons
acquisition has been underway for some two years now, with the 145 ultra-light howitzers
cleared for purchase at the cost of $750 million under the fast track foreign military sales
route in June 2016…
In what is now an election year, Modi knows he needs to focus on the domestic and can
do without the distraction of a border crisis, especially with a superior foe. He does not
need China in the political strategy underway of internal polarisation as he approaches
the 2019 elections…
The army had advanced a strategic rationale for the MSC, arguing that India faced a
‘two front’ threat. While India had the offensive capability to tame its western neighbour,
the army argued that it required a similar capability for tackling its neighbour to the
north. The army wished to move from dissuasion to deterrence. While the two defensive
divisions that were formed in 2009-10 enabled defensive deterrence or deterrence by
denial, an offensive corps would provide the punch for deterrence by punishment…

OE Watch | September 2018

33

INDO-PACIFIC
“New Type” PLA Units Emphasize Mobility,
Joint Operations
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2016 the PLA has undertaken significant reforms that changed both
top-level command “Neck and Above” [脖子以上] and “Below the Neck” [脖子以下]. While the higherlevel reforms have fundamentally changed how the PLA operates by transferring many functions to a
new joint command structure, the “Below the Neck Reforms” are similarly radical. Most division-level
infantry units have been changed to combined arms brigades. Army aviation has also seen significant
changes with regiments set up to support each group army and expanded to brigades. For units like the
one mentioned in the accompanying excerpted article from China Daily, another major shift has been
the shift from traditional motorized role to mechanized warfare.
Units in the Northern Theater Command have responsibility for guarding the borders with Mongolia,
Russia and North Korea. The four provinces that make up the Northern Theater Command together
have a population of roughly 130 million. For much of China’s modern history, PLA units were arrayed
in such a way that they would fall back toward Beijing against the then-expected Soviet advance from
the Northeast and North. While the politics on its borders have changed, the geography of this vast
frontier has not, and in this space, modern concepts of firepower and maneuver are taking shape. The
PLA has embraced a concept of networked, mobile warfare. The entire PLA has been instructed to
“basically complete” mechanization [机械化] by 2020. This has included the rapid introduction of new
equipment, which has caused problems as personnel are forced to get up to speed and develop tactical
maintenance procedures.
Another unit, also based in Northeast China, under the 78th Group Army (formerly 16th Group
Army based in Changchun, Jilin) was the first in the PLA to be reorganized as a combined arms
battalion. The battalion has undertaken much more extensive joint training than in the past, particularly
with the air force, integrating information from reconnaissance and calling on fire missions. Another
new element of training is rapid deployment of their infantry fighting vehicles from transport aircraft.
The PLA hopes to use these fast response elements in conjunction with heavier mechanized units to
give it greater firepower and maneuverability than ever before. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The new troop is compact, nimble and fast, meeting the demands of modern
warfare…Compared with the commonplace motorized infantry that’s strong in
defense, with heavy-duty weapons, the new battalion is capable of slashing the
opponents’ weak spot like a sharp sword and tearing apart their defense.”
- Senior Colonel Jia Xiaonan, a professor at the PLA’s Army Infantry Academy

Source: “PLA battalion transforms
into nimble fighting force,” China
Daily, 15 August, 2018. http://
english.chinamil.com.cn/view/201808/15/content_9253242.htm
An infantry battalion of the People’s
Liberation Army Ground Force
has been honing its ability to move
quickly and efficiently for about four
years in northeastern China to forge
a new fighting force that is highly
mobile and lightly armored. On
July 27, during a military exercise
simulating rapid deployment, the
battalion dispersed into smaller
groups, on full combat alert and
under camouflage, in just a few
minutes…The battalion, based in the
northeast, was designated on Aug 1,
2014, as a new type of unit dedicated
to experimenting with command
structures and a suite of brand-new
infantry fighting equipment including
assault vehicles, drones and
electronic reconnaissance devices.
Officers from the battalion said that
over the past four years it has greatly
improved its combat capability
compared with conventional infantry
units. It has also added to its arsenal
of precision attack weapons and
strengthened its counter-strike
capability, they said. The soldiers
are now improving their skills in
live-fire combat drills.

[陆军步兵学院]

ZBD-04A步兵战车” (ZBD-04A Infantry Fighting Vehicle).

Source: By Tyg728, CC-BY-SA-4.0 7 16 July 2017. https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5c/ZBD-04A_IFV_20170716.jpg.

OE Watch | September 2018

34

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Expert Looks to 5G to Create a Highly Efficient
National Defense Mobilization Network
OE Watch Commentary: With the groundwork for fifth
generation (5G) wireless technology being laid down, China
could be looking to use it as a platform to run its national
defense mobilization system. The accompanying excerpted
article, published in Zhonggua Guofang Bao, argues that China
should not miss an opportunity to use 5G to weave a smart
mobilization network. The article is based off an interview with
Xue Zhiliang, associate professor of the Strategic Campaigns
Department of China’s Army Command Academy.
The 5G network technology is meant to be faster and
more reliable, having a higher capacity and a lower latency
than the previous generation communication technologies
(3G and 4G). It could possibly make use of much higher
frequencies (between 30-300GHz) and shorter wavelengths,
which are currently used for military applications such as
communications and radar.
The key is to try to achieve “smart mobilization.” At this
stage, according to Xue, smart mobilization is “not (yet) smart.”
While there has been some progress toward “intelligentizing
the mobilization process, the degree of progress is still
relatively low. Some aspects still lagging behind include
“resource organization, linking of supply and demand, and
transportation handover,” according to the article. Xue explains
that “true smart mobilization needs to be supported by an
intelligent network with interoperability, real-time information
interaction, and self-organization capabilities.” He sees 5G
technology as an avenue to achieve those functions. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Cheng Rong, “国防动员如何拥抱5G时代 (How the National
Defense Mobilization Should Embrace the 5G Era),” Zhongguo Guofang
Bao, 27 June 2018. http://www.sohu.com/a/237963830_628598
Xue Zhiliang… an expert in the field of national defense mobilization
theory, he believes that it is imperative to realize smart mobilization.
However, at this stage, smart mobilization is not “smart.” Even though some
cities have intelligentized the real-time updating of mobilization capacity
data and providing of information support for mobilization decision-making
and command, the degree of intelligentization is still relatively low in terms
of aspects and actions such as more complex resource organization, linking
of supply and demand, and transportation handover.
“True smart mobilization needs to be supported by an intelligent
network with interoperability, real-time information interaction, and selforganization capabilities. The 5G technology will make this requirement
possible,” Xue Zhiliang said.
…Not only routes can be interconnected in highway, railway, aviation, and
maritime systems but also ground and air, ground and sea, and sea and air
can be interconnected. Even cars and cars, cars and ships, cars and planes,
and ships and planes can interconnect to form networks.
“… utilizing 5G networks to weave a smart mobilization network is a
good opportunity to realize leapfrog development in national defense
mobilization. We should not miss the opportunity.”
… In essence, national defense mobilization is an activity oriented to
meet the needs of war. The main conflict to be resolved is the conflict in
mobilizing supplies to meet demands.
Xue Zhiliang believes that once the smart mobilization network based
on the 5G technology is built, it will fundamentally change the form of
mobilization.

“…once the smart mobilization network based on the 5G technology is built, it will fundamentally change the
form of mobilization.”
China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | September 2018

35

INDO-PACIFIC
PLA Plans to Completely Divest From Commercial
Activities
OE Watch Commentary: Between 1985 and 1998 the Chinese Central Military
Commission, China’s leading military organization, allowed the PLA to engage in
commercial activities to supplement its budget. By 1998, China’s strategic environment
had changed, requiring a faster modernization, greater professionalism and a crackdown
on corruption that had flourished under the old system. At the same time, China’s economy
grew significantly, meaning that the PLA had greater resources. General Party Secretary,
Jiang Zemin, required the PLA to begin divestiture—spinning off wholly owned ventures
into the private sector and closing others. However, this divestiture, which involved transfer
of assets and companies to local governments, was incomplete and the PLA has continued
to operate hospitals and nurseries, rent property, and run warehouses and publishing houses.
With poor oversight of these programs, corruption has been a major issue.
In 2015, Xi Jinping made it clear that changes to the system were coming, including
transfer of most hospitals to the private sector as the accompanying excerpted article
reports. Additional measures were judged insufficient and earlier this year the Central
Military Commission decided to completely cease paid work to focus on the PLA’s mission
of “fighting and winning wars” [能打仗，打胜仗]. In June 2018, the General offices of
the CCP, State Council and Central Military Commission issued Guidance Regarding
Deepening Advancement of Complete Cessation of Paid Services in the Military (see: http://
paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2018-06/12/nw.D110000renmrb_20180612_4-01.htm).
According to the notice, where possible, any existing contracts will be resolved with the
help of local governments or transferred. The Central Military Commission has taken direct
responsibility for adjusting the transfer of property. If successful, the reforms will mark the
end of a long and complicated cycle, and be part of a major reorientation of the PLA toward
building its core capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “习近平强调坚决做好全面停止军队
有偿服务工作 (Xi Jinping Requires Complete
Cessation of Military’s Paid Services)”
Xinhua, 31 July, 2018. http://www.gfdy.gov.cn/
topnews/2018-07/31/content_9246163.htm
On July 31 the Politburo of the CCP held the
Seventh Group Study Session on Complete
Cessation of Military Paid Work. Xi Jinping,
general secretary of the Communist Party of
China (CPC) Central Committee, stressed
resolute efforts to terminate all paid services
provided by the armed forces.
The decision allows no exception or
compromise, Xi said, noting that such work
is a major decision made by the CCP Central
Committee and the Central Military Commission
(CMC) aiming to strengthen the armed forces as
well as an important part in reforming national
defense and the armed forces. He also stressed
that ending military paid services would create
a sound environment for building a strong
military in the new era…
Xi said [since 2015 ] major advances had been
achieved in this regard, and the military has
generally relinquished commercial activities. Xi
highlighted the move’s significance of purifying
the political ecosystem in the armed forces,
maintaining its nature, implementing the Party’s
goal of building a strong military in the new era,
building the forces into world-class forces in an
all-round way, and strengthening the Party’s
ruling status and ensuring the country’s longterm stability.

“The decision allows no exception or compromise, Xi said, noting that such work is a major decision
made by the CCP Central Committee and the Central Military Commission (CMC) aiming to strengthen
the armed forces as well as an important part in reforming national defense and the armed forces.”

People’s Liberation Army (PLA) cadets meet with U.S. Army Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, not shown, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at a PLA Aviation Corps academy near Beijing.
Source: D. Myles Cullen, Public domain, April 24, 2013,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:People%27s_Liberation_Army_(PLA)_cadets_meet_with_U.S._Army_Gen._Martin_E._Dempsey,_not_shown,_the_chairman_of_the_Joint_Chiefs_of_Staff,_at_a_PLA_Aviation_Corps_academy_near_Beijing_April_24,_2013_130424-D-VO565-043.jpg.

OE Watch | September 2018

36

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese AI Powered Submarines: Developing a New Era
of Sea Power
OE Watch Commentary: China is developing unmanned AI
submarines that, according to the accompanying excerpted article
published by the South China Morning Post, are meant to one day
rival Western naval powers. These systems are expected to join
the country’s other autonomous military systems on water, land,
and orbit “to carry out missions in coordinated efforts,” according
to researchers cited in the article. The “912 Project” is a classified
program to develop new-generation military underwater robots in
time for the Chinese Communist Party’s 100-year anniversary in
2021. These systems are expected to open a new era of sea power
in China. According to the article, the submarines are aimed at
countering capabilities currently being developed by the United
States and are expected to perform tasks that include reconnaissance,
mine placement, and even kamikaze-style attacks against enemy
vessels. They could be used in strategic waters, such as the South
China Sea and the western Pacific Ocean. The AI submarines are
intended to be able to cope with complex changing environments
at sea, such as the need to change routes to avoid detection or
distinguishing between civilian and military vessels. The artificial
intelligence is intended to help commanders make better informed
decisions more rapidly when necessary. While these systems will be
controlled through artificial intelligence, final key decisions, such as
whether or not to attack a target, are expected to lie in the hands of
commanders. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“(China’s) new class of unmanned submarines
will join the other autonomous or manned
military systems on water, land and orbit to carry
out missions in coordinated efforts...”

Source: Stephen Chen, “China Military Develops Robotic Submarines
to Launch a New Era of Sea Power,” South China Morning Post, 23
July 2018. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2156361/
china-developing-unmanned-ai-submarines-launch-new-era-sea-power
Unmanned AI subs, expected in the 2020s, could challenge the
advantage Western naval powers have in strategic waters like the South
China Sea
China is developing large, smart and relatively low-cost unmanned
submarines that can roam the world’s oceans to perform a wide range
of missions, from reconnaissance to mine placement to even suicide
attacks against enemy vessels, according to scientists involved in these
artificial intelligence (AI) projects.
… The robotic subs are aimed particularly at the United States forces
in strategic waters like the South China Sea and western Pacific Ocean,
the researchers said.
Military researchers are also developing an AI-assisted support
system for submarine commanders. … that system will help captains
make faster, more accurate judgments in the heat of combat situations.
The new class of unmanned submarines will join the other autonomous
or manned military systems on water, land and orbit to carry out
missions in coordinated efforts, according to the researchers.
…To attack or not to attack, the final decision will still be in the hands
of commanders, the researchers said.
The robotic submarines rely heavily on artificial intelligence to deal
with the sea’s complex environment…China is developing a series
of extra-large unmanned underwater vehicles… 912 Project, (is) a
classified program to develop new-generation military underwater
robots in time for the 100-year anniversary of the Chinese Communist
Party in 2021.

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | September 2018

37

INDO-PACIFIC
Motive for Thailand’s Submarine Program?
OE Watch Commentary: Thailand has not possessed
any submarines since the early 1950s. While officials have
expressed an interest in acquiring submarines on many
occasions since then, the desire to have them has been most
heavily voiced since 2014. According to the accompanying
article from the Nikkei Asian Review, Thailand opened a
$17.3 million submarine headquarters and training center
in Sattahip, a naval base in the Gulf of Thailand, after the
military Junta took control of the country in July of that
year. The country also approved a bill in January 2017 to
buy the first of three Chinese Yuan-class S26T submarines,
a modified version of the Chinese Yuan-class submarine.
As part of the contract, China agreed to provide free CM208 missiles, which can be fired at any surface (land or sea)
target within 290 kilometers.
According to the accompanying article from the Bangkok
Post, both sides signed a contract in May 2017 for Thailand
to purchase three of these submarines. The first submarine is
expected to be delivered in about six years. To accommodate
them, the Thai navy had reportedly planned to build docking
facilities in the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea.
Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha had expressed his
interest in purchasing submarines on at least one occasion.
According to the Nikkei Asian Review, during a 2016 press
conference, he had said that Thailand would buy submarines,
“not for battle, but so that others will be in awe of us.” In
addition, as both articles point out, neighboring countries
(Malaysia, Singapore, and Vietnam), already possess
submarines.
Today, Thailand appears to be changing course. According
to the other article from the Bangkok Post (dated 18 July
2018), Thailand is now seeking to develop and construct its
own indigenous fleet of “midget” submarines. These are
expected to have a surface displacement of between 150 to
300 tons and a crew of 10. The project is expected to take
about four years to design and another two years to construct
and will cost well over $30 million. Thailand is reportedly
sending approximately 25 navy officers, all graduates in
naval architecture and other fields from schools in Europe,
to England for training. While Prayuth claims to be trying
to maintain pace with his neighbors, Thailand could be
designing midget submarines because of their better
suitability for navigating the shallow waters in the Gulf of
Thailand. Midget submarines are also stealthier and have
fewer manning requirements. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

“Thailand will buy submarines ‘not for
battle, but so that others will be in awe of
us…’ Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha.”

Source: Marwaan Macan-Markar, “Thailand and China: Brothers in
Arms,” Nikkei Asian Review, 2 February 2017. https://asia.nikkei.com/
magazine/20170202/Politics-Economy/Thailand-and-China-Brothers-in-arms
Thailand will buy submarines “not for battle, but so that others will be in awe
of us,” Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha, the nation’s former military chief
and current head of its ruling junta, said at a 2016 press conference. Prayuth’s
regime took a decisive step toward that muscular view in January after
the National Legislative Assembly, the country’s rubber-stamp parliament,
approved a bill to spend 13.5 billion baht ($383 million) to buy a Chinese
submarine -- the first of an expected three-boat, $1 billion deal.
The Yuan-class S26T submarine will be delivered in about six years to the
Thai navy’s submarine squadron, which trained in Germany and South Korea
but had no vessel to operate. That became glaringly obvious in July 2014,
two months after the military seized power, when a $17.3 million submarine
headquarters and training center was opened in Sattahip, a naval base on the
Gulf of Thailand.
The new submarine order brings Thailand on a par with neighbors Malaysia,
Singapore and Vietnam, which have all acquired submarines…
Source: Wassana Nanuam, “Chinese Submarine Deal Signed,” Bangkok Post,
5 May 2017. https://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1244259/chinesesubmarine-deal-signed
The navy has plans to buy three of the Yuan Class S26T submarines
eventually from China at a total cost of 36 billion baht spread over 11 years.
The “T” designates the version being sold exclusively to Thailand.
Opponents of the procurement earlier criticized the cabinet’s quiet approval
of the deal on April 18. They also doubt whether the navy really needs a
submarine, citing the shallowness of the Gulf of Thailand.
However, defense authorities insist submarines are necessary because
neighboring countries already have them. They also argue that the mediumsized submarine will be able to navigate through the Gulf.
Under the contract, China will also provide free CM-708 missiles which can
be fired from the submarine at targets on the water’s surface or on land over
a range of 290 kilometres. The sub also comes with other weapons including
torpedoes and a two-year warranty.
The navy has announced plans to build docking facilities for submarines both
in the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea.
Source: Wassana Nanuam, “PM Approves ‘Midget’ Subs for Navy,” Bangkok
Post, 18 July 2018. https://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1505206/pmapproves-midget-subs-for-navy
Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha has approved a 193-million baht project
to design a so-called “midget” submarine -- the first step in the planned
construction of a prototype for the Royal Thai Navy.
The design will take four years and construction of the first mini-submarine
another two, to be followed by seaworthiness checks and training for one year,
Capt Sattaya said.
Some 25 navy officers, all graduates in naval architecture and other fields
from schools in Europe, were sent for training in England.
The first mini-submarine in the unofficially named “Chalawan Class”
would have a surface displacement of 150-300 tonnes, a crew of 10 and a
300-nautical-mile range, he said.

OE Watch | September 2018

38

INDO-PACIFIC
Moro Rebels Fight ISIS in the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: The emergence of an ISIS-loyal faction in the Philippines
caused much devastation last year when it battled the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)
in the city of Marawi. The accompanying excerpted article from ABS-CBN discusses the
growing influence of foreigners on the ISIS-loyal faction one year later and what the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) intends to do to thwart them. The article proved to have
foresight because only two days after it was published, a foreigner from Morocco carried out
a rare type of attack in the Philippines—a vehicle-borne suicide bombing that killed more
than 10 people in Basilan.
Although for decades the AFP and the MILF battled each other, they have been observing
a peace deal called the Bangsamoro Organic Law since 2014, which grants autonomy to the
MILF in Muslim areas of Mindanao. However, according to the article, foreign ISIS-loyal
militants have no interest in this peace deal and would like to see it disrupted. At the same
time, the MILF chairman interviewed in the article recognizes that some poor or crimeridden communities that do not see their problems addressed through the peace deal may
begin to sympathize with the ISIS-loyal militants. As a result, the MILF is taking on three
responsibilities: first, to educate civilians about the peace deal; second, to explain to civilians
that the ISIS-loyal militants are trying to sabotage the peace deal; and, third, to win the
support of the people by addressing their employment, health, education and other concerns.
The article shows that not only have the AFP and MILF reached what has thus far been a
viable peace deal, they also see eye-to-eye when it comes to rooting out ISIS-loyal militants
in the south of the country. Since MILF is better suited to combat the ISIS-loyal militants and
to engage with the country’s Muslim population than the AFP, much of the future success of
the peace deal and security in southern Philippines appears to depend on the MILF. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Murad said successfully implementing the new Bangsamoro

Source: “New Bangsamoro law to ‘isolate’
terrorists: MILF leader,” ABS-CBN, 29 July
2018. http://news.abs-cbn.com/news/07/29/18/
new-bangsamoro-law-to-isolate-terroristsmilf-leader
Foreign terrorists continue to “penetrate”
areas in southern Philippines, a Muslim rebel
leader admitted Sunday, but he said a new law
implementing its peace agreement could help
root out violent extremism. The Moro Islamic
Liberation Front (MILF) began galvanizing
public support behind the Bangsamoro
Organic Law, with its head saying it would
eventually “isolate” extremists. Poverty,
crime, and the lack of opportunities in
areas in the south have made many young
Muslims susceptible to recruitment by violent
extremists, experts warned. Last year, ISISaffiliated terrorists from the Maute family
seized the Islamic city of Marawi, waging
a five-month battle that killed close to a
thousand of them. Murad said successfully
implementing the new Bangsamoro law would
later convince communities to consider them
as “saboteurs.”

law would later convince communities to consider them as
‘saboteurs’.”

MILF militant lying prone.

Source: Keith Kristoffer Bacongco, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MILF_militant_lying_prone.jpg, (CC BY-SA 2.0).

OE Watch | September 2018

39

INDO-PACIFIC
Consequences of Indonesia’s Ban on Jamaah
Ansharud Daulah
OE Watch Commentary: On 1 August, the accompanying
excerpted article from the Indonesian language publication
beritajowo.com reported on an Indonesian court’s decision
to declare Jamaah Ansharud Daulah (JAD) as a terrorist
organization. According to the article, the decision comes
amid other crackdowns on JAD, including sentencing its
leader to death. JAD has pledged loyalty to ISIS and been
responsible for sending some Indonesians abroad to fight with
that group. The decision also comes less than three months
after an Indonesian family riding on two motorcycles carried
out suicide bombings at churches in Surabaya, killing more
than 10 people.
The article states that the prosecutors have noted important
issues that may arise as a result of the designation. JAD is
not an organization with formal membership and as such, it
will be difficult in the future to prosecute alleged members.
The risk, according to the prosecutors, is that individuals who
hold JAD’s ideology but who are not members of the group,
may be accused of being a member and face prosecution.
However, the designation is not intended to combat
ideological leanings, no matter how extreme they are, but
instead establish the vaguely defined membership in JAD.
The article also highlights the problem of prison
recruitment. JAD, in fact, was founded in a prison. In
prisons the group can recruit and then operationalize new
members once they are released. Therefore, if members of
JAD, or even those holding extreme ideologies like JAD, are
increasingly imprisoned it could actually lead to the spread of
the group’s ideology. The article does not, however, mention
whether Indonesia has considered a response to this issue.
While the article makes clear Indonesia wants to tackle
the problem of JAD and extreme ideologies in the country,
there is still apparently a lack of clarity on whether the
method of designating JAD as a terrorist organization
has been well thought out. While the prosecutors want
convictions of terrorists, there is some indication that they
are also concerned about the unintended consequences of
the designation of JAD as a terrorist group. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“The prosecutor said under Article 12
of Law No. 5 of 2018 on Criminal Acts of
Terrorism, anyone who becomes a member
of an organization that has been declared
prohibited by a court decision may be
arrested and prosecuted.”

“Bali bomb monument.”

Source: By Hobe / Holger Behr [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Karta_CN_SouthChinaSea.PNG.

Source: “Putusan PN Jaksel Bekukan JAD dan Dinyatakan Organisasi
Terlarang (South Jakarta District Court Decides JAD will be Declared a
Banned Organization),” beritajowo.com, 1 August 2018. https://beritajowo.
com/news/detail/18713/Putusan-PN-Jaksel-Bekukan-JAD-dan-DinyatakanOrganisasi-Terlarang
In a verdict held at the South Jakarta District Court, a panel of judges
read the verdict against JAD. The judges decided to ban the group formed
by Aman Abdurrahman and declare JAD as a banned organization in
Indonesia. The panel of judges declared JAD had been proven convincingly
guilty of acts of terrorism, committed by or on behalf of a corporation. In
the trial, JAD was represented by its leader Zainal Anshori aka Abu Fahry
who was appointed to head JAD in place of Marwan aka Abu Musa who
went to Syria.
The prosecutor said under Article 12 of Law No. 5 of 2018 on Criminal
Acts of Terrorism, anyone who becomes a member of an organization that
has been declared prohibited by a court decision may be arrested and
prosecuted. Even so, he asked law enforcement officials to be careful in
declaring a person to be a terrorism suspect.

OE Watch | September 2018

40

INDO-PACIFIC
Japan’s Counterterrorism Preparations for the
2020 Olympics
OE Watch Commentary: In 2020, Japan will host the Summer Olympics and Paralympics in
Tokyo. Although Japan is not a common target of terrorist attacks, it is making preparations to defend
against possible attacks in 2020. According to the accompanying excerpted article from The Mainichi,
Japan opened a counterterrorism information center to enable government entities to exchange
information from 2018 through to the event in 2020. Among the entities taking part are the Defense
Ministry, the Public Security Intelligence Agency and the Japan Coast Guard as well as officials from
11 other ministries and agencies, including the National Police Agency and the Foreign Ministry.
The threat scenarios vary. For example, in 1995 the domestic terror group, Aum Shinrikyo, carried
out a sarin gas attack in Tokyo, but that group’s violence has mostly been neutralized and in July the
group’s founder was executed after years on death row. Japan also has nuclear plants, which could
be targeted, although the article mentions no specific threat to them. What the new counterterrorism
information center will mostly address, according to the article, is international terrorism, specifically
Islamic militants. This threat assessment was based on guidelines that the government’s task force on
international organized crime and terrorism approved last December.
The article also notes that in addition to the Olympics, Japan will be hosting a number of other major
international events in the coming two years, such as the “Group of 20,” which comprises the world’s
20 largest economies, and the Rugby World Cup. The article therefore emphasized that Japan should
prepare both internally (within the Japanese government) and together with international partners
to address terrorism concerns about the Olympics and other major events that will take place in the
country. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Tokyo 2020 Olympics logo.

Source: Asao Tokolo, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tokyo_2020_
Olympics_logo.svg, CC-BY-2.0.

Source: “Japan launches body to share terrorism information ahead of Olympics,” The Mainichi, 1 August 2018. https://mainichi.jp/english/
articles/20180801/p2g/00m/0dm/053000c
Japan opened a counter-terrorism information center in Tokyo to enable government entities to exchange information and strengthen
antiterrorism measures in the run-up to the 2020 Olympics and Paralympics in the capital. The center brings together officials from 11
ministries and agencies, including the National Police Agency and the Foreign Ministry. “Amid a severe international terrorism situation
surrounding Japan, it is the most important task of the government to protect people’s peaceful lives and livelihoods,” Chief Cabinet Secretary
Yoshihide Suga said in a ceremony marking the opening of the center.
The new center, which will handle information on Islamic militants and other perceived threats, is at the core of a set of counterterrorism
guidelines approved in December by the government’s task force on international organized crime and terrorism.

“Japan opened a counter-terrorism information center in Tokyo to enable government entities to
exchange information and strengthen antiterrorism measures in the run-up to the 2020 Olympics and
Paralympics.”

View of Shinjuku skyscrapers and Mount Fuji as seen from the Bunkyo Civic Center in Tokyo (2009).
Source: By Morio - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=5794297.

OE Watch | September 2018

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
ISIS Adapts to Tightened Security Measures
OE Watch Commentary: Three recent reports from
Egypt’s Observatory for Monitoring Takfiri Fatwas and
Extremist Ideologies argue that ISIS and related terrorist
groups are adapting to their increasingly constrained
operational environment. Each of the three reports
highlights a mechanism used by ISIS and related
groups to compensate for the military setbacks and
tightened security measures that have forced them to
retreat and regroup.
The first report details ISIS’s increased employment
of children, who are indoctrinated at a young age “to
ensure that [ISIS’s] extremist ideas remain even if its
leaders disappear.” Minors help ISIS overcome security
measures, since they are less likely to be targeted as
suspects and can thus more easily get past security
barriers or ambulate in public spaces without arousing
suspicion. The study highlights a contingent of 200
children suicide bombers in Hajin, in eastern Syria, and
the estimated 400 children of French jihadists who were
either brought to or born in Syria and Iraq. In Raqqa and
Mosul, the study adds, ISIS abducted “no less than 300
children ranging in age from 11 to 17.”
The second study highlights ISIS’s sustained efforts
to conceal its fighters amidst refugee populations and
smuggle them into training camps “in EU countries
and the Balkans.” It claims that ISIS “collaborates with
smuggling and human trafficking gangs” and engages
in “determined efforts to convince young men to join
the group and emigrate to Europe.” In addition to
being susceptible to recruitment, the study notes, refugees
have the added benefit of being “unknown to security
services.”
The third study looks at the phenomenon of “family
terrorism,” which garnered international attention
following the May 2018 collective suicide attack by an
Indonesian family of six. The study highlights the security
advantages of family cells, which provide “secrecy and
safety” and “the ability to plan and coordinate closely
during the execution of terrorist attacks.” As with
children and refugees, entire families are also better
able to “circumvent the tight measures taken by security
services.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… By recruiting extremist families in their entirety, terrorist
groups can circumvent the tight measures taken by security
services in various countries…”
Source: ‫مرصد اإلفتاء يصدر دراسة جديدة حول عمليات خطف األطفال وتجنيدهم لتعويض خسائر تنظيم داعش‬
2018 ‫في‬
“Fatwa Observatory Publishes New Study on Child Kidnapping and Conscription to
Compensate for ISIS Losses in 2018,” Observatory for Monitoring Takfiri Fatwas
and Extremist Ideologies, 18 July 2018. http://www.dar-alifta.org/ar/Viewstatement.
aspx?sec=media&ID=5906
The study also highlighted how the organization seeks to draw in new generations
using this strategy, in order to ensure that its extremist ideas remain even if its
leaders disappear... Relying on children to carry out terrorist attacks also increases
the chances of success given the ease with which they can cross security barriers
with lax security or in public spaces given that they are normally not suspects…
The study noted that the organization recently used 200 children suicide fighters
in the area of Hajin, in eastern Syria. They were called the “Cubs of the Lions of
Hajin.” The phenomenon of French children is also widespread, as the organization
has 400 French children in its ranks, according to international estimates. The
group has also smuggled children from battlefronts in Raqqa and Mosul, where the
organization captured no less than 300 children ranging in age from 11 to 17, in
order to ensure the continuity of the organization.
Source:
‫مرصد اإلفتاء في دراسة جديدة األوضاع اإلنسانية الصعبة لالجئني تدفعهم نحو داعش‬
“Fatwa Observatory Publishes New Study: Difficult Humanitarian Situation Pushes
Refugees Toward ISIS,” Observatory for Monitoring Takfiri Fatwas and Extremist
Ideologies, 31 July 2018. http://www.dar-alifta.org/ar/Viewstatement.
aspx?sec=media&ID=5945
The study noted that ISIS exploited the refugee crisis to smuggle terrorist cells from
Syria to European countries. The group provided them with special forces training
camps in EU countries and the Balkans, in order to train recruited refugees to carry
out terrorist attacks...
The study also explains that ISIS is working to take advantage of refugee camps
that some countries have set up in their territory to recruit members, whether via
humanitarian camps or path to emigrate to Europe and countries with large refugee
populations... More often than not, the group uses children as spies amidst the
refugees and in areas under its control.
The study found that the organization collaborates with smuggling and human
trafficking gangs to reach young men fleeing conflict in Africa, in addition to
determined efforts to convince young men to join the group and emigrate to Europe.
The study added that ISIS exploits the fact that refugees are unknown to security
services…

Source:
‫مرصد اإلفتاء في دراسة جديدة الضربات واملالحقة األمنية تدفع التنظيمات التكفيرية إلى اللجوء إلى اإلرهاب العائلي كتكتيك للتجنيد واالنتشار‬
“Fatwa Observatory Publishes New Study: Strikes and Security Measures Push Takfiri Organizations to Rely on ‘Family Terrorism’ as a Tactic
for Recruitment and Spreading,” Observatory for Monitoring Takfiri Fatwas and Extremist Ideologies, 7 August 2018. http://www.dar-alifta.org/
ar/Viewstatement.aspx?sec=media&ID=5958
The study warns of the difficulty in dealing with “ family terrorism” given the secrecy and safety that comes along with it, in addition to the
ability to plan and coordinate closely during the execution of terrorist attacks. The observatory added that terrorist groups have developed their
tools for penetrating social structures, and they may see siblings and relatives join to some degree; however, what has emerged recently is for
children of a family or an entire family to carry out a terrorist attack…
By recruiting extremist families in their entirety, terrorist groups can circumvent the tight measures taken by security services in various
countries, as the terrorist family link makes coordination between them easier, especially when preparing to carry out an attack. It also makes it
harder for security services to monitor their movements.
OE Watch | September 2018

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Efforts to Thwart Terrorism in Iraq
OE Watch Commentary: While the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) further destabilized Iraq
after taking over some of its cities, the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) seized the opportunity to
expand its reach into other areas as it took on the
fight against ISIS. The PKK took control of a large
swath of the territory in Iraq including Sinjar,
Khanaqin, Tuz Khurmatu, and even some areas of
Kirkuk to the east of Baghdad. The accompanying
excerpted passage from the Center for Middle
Eastern Strategic Studies (ORSAM in Turkish), a proTurkish government think tank, states that despite
the PKK’s presence in these territories, the Iraqi
government has not taken any action against the
PKK. Since the PKK poses a threat to the national
security of Turkey, Turkey’s cross border operations
against terrorist organizations, including the PKK,
are likely to continue.
According to the passage, after the National
Security Council meeting, Turkish officials stated
that Turkey perceives the existence of the PKK as
a threat not only in the Qandil Mountains, but also
in Sinjar and other territories. The author further
states that if Iraq does not eliminate this threat, it is
likely that Turkey may launch operations similar to
those it has carried out in Syria. Turkey conducted
air strikes on Sinjar in April 2017 and Turkey’s
operation on the Qandil Mountains where the PKK
has its bases has been ongoing since March 2018.
Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan
stated that “the PKK threat in Iraq is becoming
increasingly uncontrollable.” According to the
author, the PKK is not only a security threat to
Turkey, but also it poses a threat to the national
security of Iraq and undermines its territorial
integrity. Therefore, Turkey has voiced its concern
over Iraq’s security and as it supported Iraq in its
fight against ISIS, the Turkish government believes
it is imperative for both countries to collaborate to
mitigate their shared security challenges. End OE
Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“The PKK threat in Iraq is becoming
increasingly uncontrollable…Turkey
has shown its determination to
prevent a terrorist corridor along its
border and thus to diffuse threats to
its national security.”

Female Yezidi resistance fighters of the Êzidxan Women’s Units (YJÊ), September 2015 in Sinjar.
Source: By Kurdishstruggle (Yezidi YBŞ Fighters) [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Female_Yezidi_resistance_fighters_-_YJ%C3%8A.jpg.

Source: “Irak’ta PKK Varlığı ve Türkiye’nin Terörle Mücadelesi (PKK Presence in
Iraq and Turkey’s Fight Against Terrorism),” Orsam, 12 July 2018. http://orsam.org.tr/
orsam/DPAnaliz/14605?dil=tr
The PKK has made efforts to increase its activities and widen its operational territory
in Iraq. As a result of the instability and power vacuum created in Iraq with ISIS taking
over Mosul in June 2014, the PKK has become active in the territory controlled by the
Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq (KRG)… from Sinjar to Khanaqin to the east
of Baghdad…In January 2015, the PKK announced that it was establishing a canton in
Sinjar and installing an organization called Sinjar Reconstruction Council to control
local administration…
The PKK also established an office in the Daquq district of Kirkuk. Despite such
activities by the PKK in Iraq, the Iraqi government and state apparatus have yet to
take any action against the PKK. Instead of taking any steps against the PKK, the Iraqi
government has been giving logistical, material and military support to the Sinjar
Resistance Unit (YBS) that was set up for Yazidis in Sinjar under the leadership of the
PKK…it would not be wrong to say that the Iraqi government has been turning a blind
eye to the PKK and even indirectly aiding it.
…the PKK threat in Iraq is becoming increasingly uncontrollable. In a statement…
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan clearly expressed that the PKK is trying to
lodge itself in Iraq, especially in Mosul region and it poses a threat to Tal Afar and the
Turkomans there.
Turkey has shown its determination to prevent a terrorist corridor along its border
and thus to diffuse threats to its national security. This was clearly expressed in the
statement released after the National Security Council meeting held on 28 March
2018… in this statement…was underlined that operations against terrorist threats
across the border would continue.
The PKK presence in Iraq is growing…As it has clearly displayed in Sinjar and
Kirkuk, the PKK is openly targeting Iraqi territory. The Turkmen in Tal Afar and Kirkuk
are directly threatened by the PKK presence in Sinjar.
As expressed in the National Security Council statement, the PKK presence in the
Northern Iraqi region of Qandil as well as its presence in Mosul’s Sinjar district are
a direct threat to Turkey. Unless this threat is diffused by the Iraqi state, an operation
against Sinjar, such as operations Euphrates Shield and Olive Branch in Syria, is likely.
To ensure stability, one of the most important tasks is to clear the region of terrorist
organizations such as the PKK and ISIS. The PKK threatens Iraq’s territorial
integrity…it is to the benefit of all concerned [parties] for this threat to be neutralized.
OE Watch | September 2018

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Influence Extends to the Mediterranean
“

OE Watch Commentary: In 2007, Mohammad Ali Jafari
The Islamic Revolution has expanded its strategic
succeeded Yahya Rahim Safavi as the head of the Islamic
influence to the Mediterranean Sea.
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), and immediately set upon
restructuring it. Because Jafari calculated that the greatest
threat to the Iranian regime would come from inside the Islamic
Republic rather than outside it, he reorganized IRGC units so
that there would be one in each province (and two in Tehran).
On 23 July 2011, Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei delivered a
speech to Iranian sailors at Iran’s main Persian Gulf port of
Bandar Abbas, telling the Iranian Navy that they were “symbols
of the might of the Iranian nation” and the vanguard of Iranian
force projection. Three months later, Ali Fadavi, commander of
the IRGC Navy, said “The military power of the United States
is maritime,” he explained, “Naturally, the main battlefield
is the sea and so the Revolutionary Guards Navy will be the
center of resisting and defending and safeguarding the Islamic
revolution.” Iranian leaders and military officials began talking
about Iran not only as a regional power, but a pan-regional
power as well (See, “Iran’s Navy Expands Operational Range,”
OE Watch, January 2013). On 24 November 2014, Deputy IRGC
Deputy Commander of the Armed Forces General Staff Mehdi Rabbani.
Source: Tasnim News, https://goo.gl/rLfffC, CC 4.0.
chief Hossein Salami declared, “While, one day, our nation was
fighting the enemy at the shore of Karkheh River [in the Iranian province of Khuzistan], now it has expanded its strategic borders in this fight
against enemies to the Eastern Mediterranean and Northern Africa.”

”

While Iranian officials have previously described Iran’s strategic boundaries as the Eastern Mediterranean (“Strategies Underlying Iranian
Soft Power,” OE Watch, March 2017), the comments by General Mehdi Rabbani, deputy commander of the Armed Forces General Staff, in the
accompanying excerpted article, seem to focus more on extension of Iranian boundaries in a manner broader than its naval exploits. Against the
backdrop of Iranian-directed militias in Iraq, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s recent offensive against opposition forces, Houthi expansion in
Yemen, and Hezbollah’s unprecedented grip over the very top reaches of Lebanese state institutions, it is the IRGC rather than the Iranian Navy
which is at the vanguard of Iranian power projection. His remarks also stand in sharp contrast to those of many Iranian diplomats, who downplay
Tehran’s regional involvement.
That Rabbani speaks of the spread of the Islamic Revolution highlights the ideological and revisionist nature of Iranian regime ambitions.
Tehran’s goal is not only to have allies, but rather to have clones. It also suggests that if Bashar al-Assad is able to consolidate his power in Syria,
Iran plans to extract an ideological price in greater Islamism. Indeed, the ideological ambition of Iranian leaders and the IRGC has also been
recently demonstrated by repeated efforts to proselytize in Morocco.
Also of note is the paranoid tone of Rabbani’s remarks. He views the entire world plotting against Iran, and refuses to recognize the agency of
Iran’s own leaders in the Islamic Republic’s failings. Hence, the 2009 post-election unrest becomes foreign-sponsored sedition, rather than the
result of blatant election manipulation and widespread Iranian distrust toward their leadership. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Sardar Rabbani: Enghalab-e Islami Nafuz-e Estratezhik Khod ra ta Mediteraneh Gosteresh Dadeh Ast (General Rabbani: The Islamic
Revolution has Extended its Strategic Influence to the Mediterranean),” Tasnim News Agency, 12 June 2018. https://goo.gl/1Zjb6b
According to the defense correspondent of the Tasnim News Agency, Brigadier General Mehdi Rabbani, deputy commander of the Armed
Forces General Staff, speaking to the special unit staff of Khorasan Razavi province, pointed out that the enemy has short, medium, and longterm projects to address the Islamic Republic, and stated that proxy war and the use of terrorists in the region was a short-term strategy of
the enemy to confront the Islamic Republic. He added, “The enemy used a combination of unconventional weapons in its wars and today, in
addition to diplomatic wars, it uses economic and ethnicity [strategies] and imposes sanctions. To confront us, the enemy has a short-term
strategy of creating and supporting terrorists. In the medium term, it looks for social weakness and, in the long-term, it seeks to undermine
the system.”
The head of the Armed Forces General Staff assessment team continued: The enemy began their threats with terrorist groups at the time of
the Islamic Revolution, and after that imposed eight years of unequal war against us. After that, the elements of the terrorist groups managed
the sedition of 2009 against us and then the enemy turned to economic threats and cultural invasion.
General Rabbani stated: “While the enemy has mobilized all its capabilities against the Islamic Republic, the Islamic Revolution has
expanded its strategic influence to the Mediterranean Sea and has extended its defensive borders in the form of a resistance axis to all parts
of the region.”
OE Watch | September 2018

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Hamas’s Naval Commandos
OE Watch Commentary: On 10 June 2018 Israel announced
that it had launched airstrikes the previous week to demolish a
Hamas “naval terror tunnel” along the Gaza coast. The tunnel
was reportedly 2-3 meters deep and linked the Mediterranean
Sea to a structure located about 3 kilometers from the de
facto Israeli border. It was likely employed for training
purposes, and Israeli intelligence had known about it for some
time. Its targeting drew renewed attention to Hamas’s Naval
Commandos, as detailed in the accompanying Israeli news
sources.
Hamas’s Naval Commandos first gained notoriety in 2014,
when a five-man team made it to the Israeli beach of Zikim.
Once ashore they were spotted and killed before reaching their
purported target, a nearby Israeli military base. Both Hamas
and Israel have cited the 2014 amphibious attack as a qualitative
advance for Gaza militants, whose capabilities in this domain
have likely grown over the past four years. Israel has taken
measures of its own, most prominently the construction of a
200-meter long barrier jutting into the Mediterranean Sea.
According to a “senior Israeli naval officer” cited in the
passage from the Jerusalem Post, the naval tunnel destroyed
in early June was used to enter the sea undetected. The officer
explains that Hamas frogmen use “civilian diving equipment
that allows undetected movement underwater without creating
bubbles” and, more interestingly, “civilian, underwater
motorized scooters which can bring the frogmen out several
kilometers to sea.” The article’s author claims that “Hamas has
significantly expanded their naval commando unit in the four
years since the last conflict, with a reported 1,500 frogmen,”
though no source is given for this figure. The second excerpt,
from al-Monitor, cites “a political analyst close to Hamas” who
explains that the naval power of Hamas’s military wing (the
al-Qassam Brigades) “remains undocumented in the media,
and it is difficult to know their capabilities and what equipment
they have available, because Hamas is trying to keep this
information from becoming public for security reasons.”
The third accompanying excerpt comes from a June 2018
interview with Lt. Col. Boris Schuster, published on the
English-language website of Israel’s popular daily Yedioth
Ahronoth. Schuster was at the time the departing head of the
Israeli Navy’s 916th Fleet, which is tasked with patrolling the
sea between Israel and the Gaza Strip. He takes Hamas’s Naval
Commandos seriously, qualifying them as having “improved
immensely recently” and becoming “one big, well-trained unit
equipped with a variety of weapons and most of all, they have
a lot of courage.” In addition to amphibious attacks, Schuster
highlights their capacity to damage Israeli naval assets using
quadcopter and/or small vessel swarms, as well as “boats and
rafts packed with explosives, and floating explosive devices.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…al-Qassam Brigades’ naval power remains
undocumented in the media…”
Source: Anna Ahronheim. “In operational first, IDF destroys Hamas
underwater terror tunnel,” Jerusalem Post, 10 June 2018. https://www.jpost.
com/Arab-Israeli-Conflict/IDF-neutralizs-Hamas-naval-terror-tunnel-559616
“We estimate that there may be more such naval tunnels,” the senior officer
said, and that Hamas’ naval commando unit has dozens and dozens of
fighters with “civilian diving equipment that allows undetected movement
underwater without creating bubbles. Such measures are effective in the
three kilometers between the tunnel and the border.”
According to the senior officer the navy estimates that Hamas also has
civilian, underwater motorized scooters which can bring the frogmen out
several kilometers to sea…
Hamas has significantly expanded their naval commando unit in the four
years since the last conflict, with a reported 1,500 frogmen.
Source: Entsar Abu Jahal. “Israel announces destruction of underwater
Hamas tunnel,” al-Monitor, 19 June 2018. https://fares.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2018/06/israel-destroy-underwater-tunnel-hamas-gaza.html
Ibrahim al-Madhun, a political analyst close to Hamas… said al-Qassam
Brigades’ naval power remains undocumented in the media, and it is
difficult to know their capabilities and what equipment they have available,
because Hamas is trying to keep this information from becoming public for
security reasons.
Madhun noted that the underwater tunnel clearly points to the ability of
Hamas to develop its land, air and naval strategy and equipment, and that it
can make weapons and have a research and military equipment development
unit…
Source: Matan Tzuri. “IDF officer: Hamas ‘immensely’ improves its naval
commando unit,” Yedioth Ahronoth, 28 June 2018. https://www.ynetnews.
com/articles/0,7340,L-5298748,00.html
“Terror organizations in the Gaza Strip understand that they are losing
their strategic assets in light of tunnel closures and are focusing on
establishing a strong naval commando unit,” he said…
“Terror organization are practicing the use of quadcopters in order to
bomb our Navy ships”…
“Their naval unit has improved immensely recently and they are training to
carry out attacks in Israeli towns and to damage facilities. Today they’re one
big, well-trained unit equipped with a variety of weapons and most of all,
they have a lot of courage”…
“We assess there are other underwater terror tunnels, but they’re also
preparing other options such as boats and rafts packed with explosives,
and floating explosive devices,” he explained. “Today we can say we won’t
encounter isolated attacks anymore but rather attempts to carry out attacks
that involve several vessels storming one ship.”

OE Watch | September 2018

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Will Iran Pivot to the East?
OE Watch Commentary: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s 1979 Islamic Revolution
was meant to set Iran on a radically different course. For more than 150 years, Iran—or
Persia as it had been known before 1935—was the subject of great power competition
between the United Kingdom and first Russia and then the Soviet Union. Such history
left an indelible mark on the Iranian consciousness: the accompanying excerpted article
makes clear the continued sense of Iranian grievance surrounding the 1828 Treaty of
Turkmenchay, in which Russia forced Iran to cede the Caucasus. For a quarter century
before the Islamic Revolution, the United States dominated Iran’s foreign relations.
Khomeini’s revolutionary slogan “Neither East nor West but Islamic Republic” was
meant as a declaration of independence for a new system and foreign policy. The Islamic
Revolution and subsequent hostage crisis might have ended Iran’s close Cold War
partnership with the United States, but Khomeini wanted to make clear to the Soviet
Union that Washington’s loss would not be Moscow’s gain.

“Neither East nor West: Islamic Republic” graffiti in Tehran.
Source: Young Journalists Club, yjc.ir
https://cdn.yjc.ir/files/fa/news/1394/11/20/4125005_766.jpg.

The article from Jomhuri Eslami, a broadsheet close the intelligence ministry,
examines an ongoing debate about whether Iran should continue a strict “Neither East nor West” policy or align more closely and formally with
Russia. The article argues that those celebrating Iran’s recent rapprochement with Russia (See “Iran-Russia Relations,” OE Watch, July 2016) is
a mistake. The main argument is that Russia can still not be trusted. It quotes Hossein Ala’i, former head of Aseman Airlines, as relating that
the Russian ambassador to Tehran informed him that Russia would not allow the Iranian government to purchase three Super Jet-100s as had
previously been negotiated, because 10 percent of the parts were US-manufactured, and uses that anecdote to suggest that the Kremlin is not
loyal in their partnership or truly a supervisor as they are afraid to defy the United States. That Russia also supported the nuclear sanctions in
the run-up to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is seen as further evidence that an alliance with Russia is unwise. The article also
seeks to dismiss those who say Russia has changed, pointing out (without naming President Vladimir Putin) that senior Russian officials began
their careers in the KGB and only changed uniforms or titles out of convenience.
The essay concludes that Khomeini’s vision and policy was wise. While it notes that Khomeini himself subsequently reached out to Soviet
chairman Mikhail Gorbachev, it warns that Iran must continue to prioritize its independence rather than rely too much on Russia. While that
does not mean severing relationships, it seems to send a shot across the bow of those who seek to develop Russo-Iranian ties further. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“There is no difference between the former Soviet Union and the current Russia as far as its broader
policies are concerned.”
Source: “Taghsir-e Sahih Siyasat ‘Neh Sharghi, neh Gharbi’ (The Correct Interpretation of the Politics of ‘Neither East nor West’),” Jomhuri
Eslami, 21 July 2018. http://jomhourieslami.net/index.php?newsid=177913
With the comings and goings of Russian and Iranian envoys to Moscow, discussion of the permissibility of the relationship with the East and
its comparison with the West once again is circulating in political and media circles and especially in cyberspace. Some people condemn the
“Look to the East” policy because the Russians have never proved faithful to their promises and, in addition to imposing some treaties such
as Turkmenchai and supporting the Shah during the [Constitutional] Revolution [of 1906-1911].
In the course of the imposed war [the Iraq-Iran War], they also supported Saddam and cooperated with the United States in the outrageous
sanctions before the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action….
Referring to these issues and other actions of the Russians, whether during the period of the Tsars or the Soviet Union, those who are
opposed to strengthening our relations to Russia say that Russia cannot be trusted and so say we should not be moving toward a policy of
“looking to the East.” It is also possible to see the same argument for denying the strengthening of relations with China in the remarks and
writings of the opponents of the “Look to the East” policy….
Some of those people [urging outreach to Russia] even see some differences between today’s Russia and the Soviet Union, and based on
that insight they say that the issue of East and West now does not apply to Russia. Therefore, we should not rely on the strategic principle of
“neither East, nor West” that Imam Khomeini initiated, because the time of that policy has come to an end, and at the moment we have to
confront America and the Western bloc.
But if these people look at the background of the current Russian rulers and study their files, they will see that nearly all of them were the
members of the KGB in the former Soviet Union, and today too they approach their macro-management of their country and their foreign
policy with the same outlook. Therefore, there is no difference between the former Soviet Union and the current Russia as far as its broader
policies are concerned.

OE Watch | September 2018

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia and Iran Hamper Turkey’s Aspirations
to Become Energy Hub
OE Watch Commentary: While Turkey occupies a perfect location to become a potential energy corridor, its poorly regulated energy sector
with its state owned BOTAS (Petroleum Pipeline Corporation) may prevent it from achieving its potential. Russia and Iran play a significant
role in Turkey’s energy sector and they are important partners for Turkey’s ambitions to become a natural energy hub because of its geographic
location. The accompanying excerpted passage written by a Turkish journalist for Al-Monitor, a news website with analysts from the Middle
East, argues that the strategy that Russia and Iran follow affects Turkey’s plans to become an energy hub for “energy routes from the Caspian
and the Middle East.”
According to the author, while Turkey has deepened its ties with Russia at the expense of its Western allies, it is likely to “suffer a major
setback,” since the five Caspian littoral states including Russia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan are about to end their 27year dispute. These states are set to sign the “14th article of the Caspian Sea convention” on 12 August that will give “littoral states a say
on the pipeline that will traverse their territorial waters.” Turkey hopes that as the European Union will look for ways to reduce its energy
dependence on Russia, which would cause it to “make Turkey an energy corridor” through the energy pipelines originating in Turkmenistan
and Kazakhstan going through Azerbaijan before reaching Turkey.
However, Iran and Russia may have ways to delay the Trans-Caspian Pipeline that “will carry Turkmen gas and Kazakh oil to Europe in the
following years” through Turkey. The author states that the Trans Anatolian Natural Gas Pipeline (TANAP) project, the Turkish Stream, and “a
possible Israeli natural gas pipeline,” will be determinative factors in Turkey’s desire to become an energy corridor. The author quotes a former
BOTAS official stating “when we look 10 years ahead, we see that our Caspian strategy has lost relevance, Iran doesn’t want us to be an energy
corridor.” When it comes to Russia, the author quotes the same Turkish official suggesting that Turkey and the Western camp should “impede
Northern Stream in the Baltic and Black seas” if Russia obstructs Turkmen gas and Kazakh oil flowing to Turkey and Europe. Turkey has
remained silent on this issue to avoid endangering its other important projects and the agreement for the Turkish Stream gas pipeline it has with
Russia. The five Caspian littoral states ended a long-standing dispute by signing an agreement on 12 August that has the potential for Russia
or Iran to inhibit Turkey’s aspirations. Ultimately, how this agreement will affect Turkey’s aspiration to be an energy corridor will depend on
Turkey’s relations with Russia and Iran as it moves away from Western alliance. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)
Source: Fehim Tastekin, “Will Russia, Iran dash Turkey’s hopes of becoming energy corridor?” Al-monitor, 1 August 2018. https://www.almonitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/08/turkey-russia-iran-may-obstruct-ankara-energy-projects.html
Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan insisted the pipeline should be regulated by countries whose territorial waters are used, but Russia and Iran
insisted on approval from all of the five states. Russian and Iran voiced environmental concerns…
The accord that was agreed on in the previous 50 meetings appears to be removing barriers on the energy lines that will start [in]
Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan and [end in] Europe [as it flows] through Azerbaijan and Turkey.
Ankara was hoping the European Union, which has been trying to reduce energy dependence on Russia, would make Turkey an energy
corridor. But the Environmental Impact Assessment Protocol that will be signed as an annex of the convention makes all five littoral states
equal partners, thus casting doubts on the strategic calculations of the EU and Turkey.
…Russia and Iran could delay the Trans-Caspian Project that will carry Turkmen gas and Kazakh oil to Europe in the following years.
What is important at this point is how all this will affect Turkey’s plans to be an energy corridor. “This strategy that Iran supports is
delivering blows to Turkey’s plans to become a transit route for energy routes from the Caspian and the Middle East.
Turkey’s aspiration to be an energy corridor depends on the Trans Anatolian Natural Gas Pipeline (TANAP) project, which will bring gas
from Azerbaijan’s Shah Deniz gas field to Turkey, the Turkish Stream, which was developed as a Russian move against the EU, a possible
Israeli natural gas pipeline... TANAP will [initially] carry 10 billion cubic meters to Europe and later[ increase to] 25 billion cubic meters.
“When we look 10 years ahead, we see that our Caspian strategy has lost relevance, Iran doesn’t want us to be an energy corridor…” a
former BOTAS official said.
“We were hoping to be the East-West Energy Corridor, and we are confined only to Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan plays a double game…They can
meet only half of the 31 billion cubic meters of the TANAP capacity… At the end, while we were dreaming of being an energy corridor, we
became a country with increasing dependence on Russia,” he added.
Isn’t there anything Turkey and the Western camp can do? The official suggests using the US-EU solution plan for the Caspian as a deterrent
to give the Russians a message: If you inhibit Turkmen gas and Kazakh oil, we can then impede Northern Stream in the Baltic and Black seas.
…It is interesting to note that despite the improvement of its strategic position, Turkey is choosing to keep silent. This silence could be
attributed to Ankara’s reluctance to endanger the Turkish Stream and other important projects.
If the international atmosphere changes with anti-Russia US-EU pressure, Turkey may find it easier to work together with the Western
alliance. Ankara may use the Western pressure to bargain with Russia for joint projects.
Despite all, Russia has always managed to be several steps ahead in the energy war.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2018

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia and Iran Hamper Turkey’s
Aspirations to Become Energy Hub
“If the international atmosphere changes with anti-Russia US-EU pressure, Turkey may find it easier to
work together with the Western alliance. Ankara may use Western pressure to bargain with Russia for joint
projects.”

Nabucco Gas Pipeline.

Source: By Nabucco_Gas_Pipeline-fr.svg: Sémhur (Nabucco_Gas_Pipeline-fr.svg) [FAL or CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nabucco_Gas_Pipeline-en.svg.

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | September 2018

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish and Chinese Military Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: While Turkey and China have had
some level of security cooperation since the 1990s, in the past two
years Chinese and Turkish officials have repeatedly expressed their
willingness to organize high-level delegation meetings in order to
plan more comprehensive security and defense cooperation efforts.
The accompanying excerpted passage from Al-Monitor, a news
website with analysts from the Middle East, provides insight into
the rapprochement of China and Turkey with a focus on security
and military cooperation.
The article states that Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan
and his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping recently met at the BRICS
summit in Johannesburg, South Africa. Turkish diplomatic sources
told the author that “Turkish and Chinese officials discussed
how to strengthen cooperation between the two countries in the
defense and security sectors.” Additionally, on 23 July 2018, a
Chinese military delegation visited the Turkish National Defense
University. A large number of Chinese officers were present at
the Turkish military’s Ephesus 2018 military exercises in May
2018 and they “were particularly interested in new military
technologies displayed by the Turkish Armed Forces during the
maneuver.” According to the article, there is a strong indication
that high level meetings between the two countries’ militaries will
increase in the future while focusing on “boosting cooperation
in professional military education, military training, the defense
industry, terrorism, intelligence sharing, robotic systems, artificial
intelligence and cyberwarfare.”
According to the article, security and military cooperation
between China and Turkey will “address their common issues of
security concerns” and build upon strengthening the foundation
of their relationship. Both countries have expectations for the
future besides their security concerns. On one hand, as the Turkish
economy plummets, it expects China to be a major source of
investment. On the other hand, Turkey’s importance for China is
its location at the heart of the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: Metin Gucan, “Following Deals with Russia, Turkey now
expands military cooperation with China,” Al-Monitor, 3 August 2018.
https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/08/turkey-chinaintensifying-defense-security-partnership.html
When the Chinese military attaché stationed in Turkey said on July
28 that cooperation between the Turkish and Chinese militaries will
produce “ fruitful results,” his words didn’t [go unnoticed in] defense
circles...
Erdogan had recently met with his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, on
the sidelines of the BRICS summit held in Johannesburg, South Africa,
and the two leaders frequently talk on the phone.
…According to Turkish diplomatic sources speaking to Al-Monitor,
during the meeting in Johannesburg, Turkish and Chinese officials
discussed how to strengthen cooperation between the two countries in
the defense and security sectors.
Frequent visits and talks between the two sides indicate that both
countries desire to expand their economic, security and defense ties. The
latest visit was on July 26 when a Chinese military delegation headed
by Maj. Gen. Licun Zhou, the political commissar for the Joint Warfare
Institute of the PLA at National Defense University, visited the Turkish
National Defense University.
The number of high-level meetings between the Chinese and Turkish
militaries will increase in the coming months, the same sources
added. According to the sources, the discussions will cover boosting
cooperation in professional military education, military training, the
defense industry, terrorism, intelligence sharing, robotic systems,
artificial intelligence and cyberwarfare.
…In May 2018, a large number of Chinese officers attended the
Ephesus 2018 military exercise held in Izmir as observers. The sources
said officers were particularly interested in new military technologies
displayed by the Turkish Armed Forces during the maneuver…
It is clear that the international society will witness more intense
military cooperation between Ankara and Beijing in the coming months.

“It is clear that the international society will witness more intense military cooperation between Ankara
and Beijing in the coming months.”

Location of PRC and Turkey.

Source: By Turkish Flame [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html), CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) or Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:People%27s_Republic_of_China_Turkey_Locator.svg.

OE Watch | September 2018

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Sell T-129 Helicopters and Four Corvettes
to Pakistan
OE Watch Commentary: The Turkish defense
industry reached a deal to supply Pakistan with 30
T-129 ATAK attack helicopters and four corvette class
ships. Former Turkish National Defense Minister
Nurettin Canikli stated that “this will be the largest
single export in the history of the Turkish defense
industry.” This deal signifies the Turkish defense
industry’s entry into a major market and as the author
of the accompanying passage from state owned
Anadolu Agency puts it, the Turkish defense industry
has entered “a different league.” The excerpted
passage describes the military hardware Turkey will
be exporting to Pakistan and why Pakistan has chosen
to purchase these products from Turkey.
According to the author, T-129 ATAK helicopters
have shown their combat effectiveness and this
provides various advantages in successfully marketing
them to other countries. Turkey’s forces tested these
helicopters against domestic and foreign (in Operation
Olive Branch) terrorism, and it has gathered data
on them regarding their effectiveness. Also, T-129
helicopters successfully passed difficult tests in the
mountainous geography of Pakistan as its military
has been dealing with state and non-state actors that
pose threats to its national security. Additionally,
the Turkish defense industry has been strategizing
to export products that the Turkish Armed Forces
(TAF) used in combat to countries with which Turkey
has built good relations. Lastly, Turkey was able to
export these attack helicopters even though Pakistan
has both American and Russian made helicopters
in its inventory. China has been trying to dominate
the Pakistani market with its Z-10 attack helicopter
and this indicates that Turkey was able to compete
in a market with giants of the defense industry.
Exporting T-129 ATAK helicopters is subjected to the
permission of the United States because of the rights
over the use of LHTEC T800-4A turboshaft engine.
Turkey also will be exporting four corvettes to
Pakistan. These “Ada-class” naval corvette warships
will be 326 feet in length and are designed by the
Turkish navy’s MILGEM project with the capability
of carrying out surface warfare, anti-submarine
warfare, air defense, surveillance and reconnaissance,
command-control and asymmetric defense warfare
missions.
The author states that turning the success of the
TAF in combat using national weapons into profit
for the Turkish defense industry shows an important
vision and the Turkish defense industry appears to
be capable of making various complex electronic
platforms and systems to meet end-user requirements.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“...let’s underline that the most important marketing advantage
of a weapon system in the defense market is successfully being
used in real conflict situations.”

BG12-1001.

Source: By wiltshirespotter (BG12-1001) [CC BY-SA 2.0 , https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/51/BG12-1001_%2814662033896%29.jpg.

Source: Dr. Can Kasapoglu, “Türk savunma sektörü artık farklı bir ligde: Pakistan
atılımı ve kazanımlar (The Turkish defense industry is now in a different league:
Pakistan’s breakthrough and gains),” Anadolu Ajansi, 2 August 2018. https://www.
aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/turk-savunma-sektoru-artik-farkli-bir-ligde-pakistanatilimi-ve-kazanimlar/1220790
In the past days, two serious successes of the Turkish Defense Industry towards
the Pakistan market caught attention. Projects including 30 T-129 ATAK attack
helicopter and MILGEM Ada-class 4 corvettes worth billions of dollars show [the
Turkish defense industry] passing a very serious critical juncture.
First of all, let’s underline that the most important marketing advantage of a
weapon system in the defense market is successfully being used in real conflict
situations. T-129 ATAK attack helicopters have been used both in domestic
counterterrorism missions and outside the borders of Turkey in one of the most
critical anti- terrorism operations, in operation Olive Branch.
Second, the Pakistani Armed Forces are an army that has been struggling with
many national security threats, both from state-level actors and none-state actors…
in tough geographical conditions for decades. This is an important reference for the
Turkish defense industry. It should also be underlined that the T-129 has successfully
passed the most challenging test procedures in the high mountainous region of
Pakistan.
Third, it is noteworthy that Turkey has managed to parlay the momentum of good
political relations to defense projects… The Turkish defense industry exporting
the systems that the Turkish Armed Forces have used in real combat situations to
countries to which Turkey has built good relations with is the right strategy.
Finally, the conditions under which the Turkish defense industry has attained this
success must be analyzed well. In the inventory of the Pakistani Armed Forces, there
are attack helicopters built by both the US and the Russian Federation.
…Another critical project between Turkey and Pakistan is a deal of 4 MILGEM
Ada-class corvettes.
The success achieved with MILGEM is more remarkable. First of all, … these war
vessels are important platforms for Turkish Naval Forces…The experience gained
from building MILGEM will be used to design more advanced war ships…In sum,
for the Turkish defense industry a deal with Pakistan, as pointed out, is more critical
than it seems.
OE Watch | September 2018

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey Tests SOM-J and Bozok missiles
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey’s defense
industry showcase continued with the testing of
SOM-J and Bozok missiles. The accompanying
excerpted passage from the state-owned TRT Haber
reports on a statement from Turkey’s Minister of
Industry and Technology, Mustafa Varank, where
he announced the successful testing of the SOM-J
standoff missile for the F-35 and Bozok, a new mini,
laser guided unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) missile.
Both of them have been designed and developed by
the national TUBITAK SAGE. The article states that
the Bozok provides effective offensive capabilities
for UAVs in asymmetrical warfare. A 31.10-inch
Bozok weighs slightly over 35 pounds and has a
target range of nearly six miles. On the other hand,
SOM-J is an air-to-surface missile to be used against
heavily defended land targets and naval vessels. It
weighs 1000 pounds and has a range of over 7 miles.
It was developed for F-35 fighter jets, though it is
projected to be used by F-16 fighter jets by 2019. It
has the capability to be undetected by radar and it
has high precision navigation with INS/GPS/TRN/
IBN, marking additional developments in the Turkish
defense industry. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

Source: “SOM-J ve Bozok füzeleri başarıyla test edildi (SOM-J and Bozok missiles
were successfully tested),” TRT Haber, 28 July 2018. https://www.trthaber.com/
haber/bilim-teknoloji/som-j-ve-bozok-fuzeleri-basariyla-test-edildi-377448.html
Minister of Industry and Technology, Mustafa Varank provided information on his
social media accounts regarding recent tests of BOZOK, a new mini laser guided
UAV missile and SOM-J Stand Off Missile for JSF F-35.
Varank in the [statement said] our projects of Undersecretariat for Defense
Industries are developed by TUBITAK... successfully completed the first tests.
TUBITAK SAGE developed Bozok for UAVs…it has partnered with the
manufacturer of Bayraktar TB2, Baykar…With Bayraktar TB2 the first firing of
Bozok successfully hit the target.
…Bozok provides effective defense without jeopardizing friendly elements in an
asymmetric warfare environment by giving attacking power to UAVs. Its lightweight
and miniature design offers flexibility to aircrafts with limited carrying capacity.
With its unique design, Bozok is ahead of its competitors thanks to its robust
operational capabilities.
Tests for the development of SOM-J have been successfully carried out.
SOM-J was developed with the aim of enabling pilots to strike long range targets
while maintaining critical invisibility during the secret flights of F-35…
The SOM-J especially has capability towards tightly protected land and sea targets
without being detected. With a navigational system that can keep itself following the
earth’s shape, it is able to hide itself to reach its targets with a high precision rate.

“SOM-J was developed with the aim of enabling pilots
to strike long range targets while maintaining critical
invisibility during the secret flights of F-35...”

SOM Cruise Missile Mockup.

Source: By Noblemouse [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SOM_cruise_missile_mockup_on_MSPO_2014.jpeg.

OE Watch | September 2018

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: IAEA Shouldn’t Inspect Universities
OE Watch Commentary: The 2015 Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) was meant to resolve a more than
decade-long dispute revolving around Iranian nuclear
activities and goals, including the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which had referred problems
regarding Iranian non-compliance with its Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty Safeguards’ Agreement, to the United
Nations Security Council in 2005. In the accompanying
excerpted article from the semi-official Students News
Network, Fereidoun Abbasi, a nuclear scientist and former
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran chief between 2011 and
2013, explains the JCPOA to an audience. He explains that
Iranian negotiators were forced to admit violations that had
occurred under the administrations of both Ali Akbar Hashemi
Rafsanjani (1989-1997) and Mohammad Khatami (1997-2005)
for the purpose of the JCPOA. Interestingly, Western observers
and many Iranians considered Rafsanjani and Khatami as
pragmatists and moderates, while Ali Khamenei, Rafsanjani’s
predecessor (1981-1989) and Khatami’s successor Mahmoud
University of Tehran.
Ahmadinejad (2005-2013) who were both more hardline, are
Source: Gholamreza Baqeri, Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported, goo.gl/NvauUe.
not singled out for illicit nuclear activities. This raises questions
about whether Western notions of reform in Iran can extend into the national security sphere.
Despite Iran’s public embrace of the JCPOA and against the backdrop of a reported IAEA inspection of the Iran University of Science and
Technology and Sharif University of Technology earlier in July, Abbasi warned against offering inspectors free access to all nuclear sites, and
called IAEA inspections of Iranian universities and offices “wrong and unacceptable.” His defensiveness about Iranian universities and the
implicit acknowledgment of their work in nuclear technologies may have ramifications upon debates about visas for, and presence of, Iranian
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers studying in overseas universities before returning to Iran. While Abbasi questions the scope
of inspections, he does get some details wrong: While he is correct that the Iran’s parliament has not ratified the Additional Protocol of the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, he is wrong that the Iranian government has not signed it. On 18 December 2003, Ambassador Ali Akbar
Salehi of Iran signed the Additional Protocol in the presence of IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei. Hassan Rouhani, then SecretaryGeneral of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council, promised to abide by the Additional Protocol even without ratification, but subsequently
walked away from his pledge. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The laboratories of our university professors will be inspected by the IAEA inspectors?”

Source: “Beh Jaye Moghabeleh ba Amrika, Darb-e Daneshgah-ha ra baraye Bazrasan-e Azhens Baz Mikonand! (Instead of Confronting the
US, they open the door of universities to Agency inspectors!),” Student News Network, 23 July 2018. https://goo.gl/TBQuFM
One of the guests asked, “Have we come to the conclusion that laboratories of our university professors will be inspected by the IAEA
inspectors while we have officially rejected the Additional Protocol?”
[Atomic Energy Organization of Iran director Fereidun] Abbas, in answer to the question, said, “No, this is not clear from the text, but our
dear people know, the punishment for Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action [JCPOA] violations is based on guilt. From the point of view of the
countries that tried us and according to the [International] Atomic [Energy] Agency, we have violated the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
and are guilty, and that’s why all these restrictions have been imposed upon the country’s nuclear technology. I understand this. And in the
discussions that were not public, cases have been discussed and resolved that we are guilty. In 2015, [IAEA Director-General Yukiya] Amano
and the board of governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency issued a report, the basis for the JCPOA, [UN Security Council]
Resolution 2231, and the statement of the European Union. The former head of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran explained to the
Board of Governors about Amano’s report. According to it, before 2003, the governments of Hashemi Rafsanjani [1989-1997] and Mohammad
Khatami [1997-2005] were carrying out organized work on the construction of a nuclear weapon. In the negotiations, they relaxed a little,
and they said that scientific and feasibility studies could occur. Go and see this report, for this comes from the text of Amano’s 2015 report on
which the JCPOA is based…!
With reference to the Additional Protocol, he said: “We have not accepted and signed it. The Additional Protocol should be brought before
to the Islamic Consultative Assembly and be ratified. We have agreed to cooperate steadfastly with the IAEA beyond the Additional Protocol,
however.” Abbasi explained but the IAEA inspectors are examining university professors, and behind-the-scenes, they seem to have accepted
the IAEA Additional Protocol.

OE Watch | September 2018

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
New Government System Brings Changes to
Turkish General Staff
OE Watch Commentary: After transitioning from a
parliamentary government to an executive presidency system,
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan restructured the
Turkish general staff to operate under the Ministry of National
Defense. The Turkish General Staff was previously under
the prime minister until the failed coup attempt of 2016 and
then it moved to be under the president. A decree on 9 July
defined the duties and authority of the chief of the general
staff, whose authority had come under scrutiny after the failed
coup attempt. The accompanying excerpted passage from the
pro-government daily Milliyet provides insight into why these
changes were made.
According to the author, the Turkish Armed Forces went
through a difficult time after the failed coup attempt. Several
high-ranking officers were either purged from the military
or arrested. The article notes how new changes aimed to
Hulusi Akar with President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, 22 July 2016.
Source: By simsek hb (hakar) [CC BY-SA 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
achieve several goals. The first goal was to prevent similar
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hakar_(28338755964).jpg.
coup attempts. The government wants to tightly regulate the
“chain of command, personnel training system, appointment and promotion system.” Second, regional and global issues force Turkey to have
powerful and effective armed forces. The efforts to focus on improving the defense industry’s capacity to innovate new military hardware are
the extension of increasing the Turkish military’s effectiveness internationally. Third, the appointment of Chief of Staff Hulusi Akar to the
Ministry of National Defense was a step towards accelerating decision-making processes through the chain of command.
The author states that the Ministry of National Defense must focus on three problems during this transition. First, non-state actors determine
the security environment, since the nature of war is changing. Therefore, the capacity of land, naval, air, and special forces consistently
working jointly can be improved as the land forces, navy and air force commands will be under the defense minister. Second, civilian-military
cooperation should be improved to include media, civil society and the private sector. Lastly, military personnel have to acquire technical and
planning capacity to understand the importance of technical skills and collaboration. The ministry assumes new responsibilities of recruitment
for the military, purchasing of weapons and other military hardware, and all logistical needs. How these new changes will affect the Turkish
Armed Forces’ capabilities will unfold as Turkey adapts to the new government system. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“The fact that the Chief of General Staff became the Minister of National Defense during the transition
period is the correct approach within the scope of the military culture, rapidly overcoming the problems and
timely implementing decision-making processes.”
Source: Nihat Ali Özcan, “Yeni dönem, MSB ve TSK (New Period, MND [Ministry of National Defense and TAF [Turkish Armed Forces]),”
Milliyet, 13 July 2018. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yazarlar/nihat-ali-ozcan/yeni-donem-msb-ve-tsk-2705670/
Turkey turns a new page in its history of painful and controversial civil-military relations. President Erdogan announced that the General
Staff could be governed by the Ministry of National Defense…
The TAF [(Turkish Armed Forces)] suffered major trauma after the July 15 coup attempt. A large number of generals, officers, and petty
officers were arrested or purged. In order to prevent similar attempts, the government has tightly regulated the chain of command, personnel
training system, appointment and promotion systems.
Current global and regional developments require Turkey to have powerful and effective Armed Forces irrespective of which party governs…
The fact that the Chief of General Staff became the Minister of National Defense [MND] during the transition period is the correct approach
within the scope of military culture to rapidly overcome the problems and to timely implement decision-making processes. As a matter of fact,
while the measures taken after the July 15 [failed coup attempt] weakened the chain of command system of the Turkish Armed Forces, and
increased the compartmentalization and disconnection between MND, the General Staff and the other forces. Continuing relations in this
manner could have caused great harm to the TAF and the country.
Non-state actors and the geopolitical realities of Turkey determine the security environment. Land, naval, air, and special forces constantly
must work together to increase their collaborative capacity.

OE Watch | September 2018

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russian-Druze Relations and the ISIS Attack on Suwayda
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 July 2018, at around 0430 local time,
ISIS gunmen coming from the Syrian Desert approached several villages
in northeastern Suwayda Province. Split into groups of between 20 and
50 men, according to eyewitness accounts, they rampaged through seven
villages located at the edge of the desert. Another group made its way
into the city of Suwayda and used suicide bombers to inflict as many
casualties as possible at that early morning hour, when most people were
asleep. Syrian Army units had been active in the desert east of Suwayda
until the month before, but had since been redirected to the neighboring
provinces of Daraa and Quneitra. Armed local residents and provincial
self-defense militias were eventually able to fend off the ISIS attack
without help from the Syrian or Russian militaries, though not before ISIS
had killed over 250 people and kidnapped 30 women and children from
one of the villages.
Suwayda Province is inhabited by the Druze, a religious minority with
a population of over half a million in Syria (and smaller communities in
Lebanon and Israel). Suwayda has remained neutral in the ongoing Syrian
War, though it is nominally on the government side, given the presence of
government institutions, employees and security agents in the province.
The government’s writ is limited, though, and rather than joining the
Syrian Army or forming loyalist militias, the province’s military aged
males have mostly (though not exclusively) armed themselves and
established independent communal defense groups, most notably the
“Rijal al-Karama” (Men of Dignity).
A Russian delegation met with leaders from Suwayda last June, as
Syrian forces were beginning their campaign to retake the neighboring
provinces of Daraa and Quneitra. According to the first accompanying
excerpt, from the Lebanese news website al-Modon, the Russians accused
the Rijal al-Karama of being a “terrorist organization” in part due to their
refusal to allow the Syrian Army’s “Tiger Forces” to establish a base in
a town on the outskirts of Suwayda. Following the meeting, the Rijal alKarama’s leadership responded with a “strongly worded statement” that
described Russia as “a sponsor and creator of terrorism that is also an
occupying country.”
Another Russian delegation visited Suwayda in mid-July, shortly before
the ISIS attack and on the heels of the Syrian government’s recapture
of Daraa and Quneitra. The Russian envoy offered a reconciliation
agreement to some of the province’s more than 50,000 military aged males
wanted for compulsory military service by the Syrian government. The
reconciliation offer would allow then to join the Syrian Army’s Russianbacked “5th Legion” (5th Corps), and specifically, a military force that
would hold Daraa and Quneitra for the government. Suwayda’s leaders
were noncommittal.
Throughout the conflict, the Alawite-controlled Syrian government has
been unable to entice the majority of Syria’s Druze to fight on its side.
Russia, as the second accompanying excerpt from al-Modon claims, is
now “committed to end the dodging of military service in Suwayda, using
both carrots and sticks.” They are not the only party seeking to deepen
its influence among Syria’s Druze. As claimed in the third accompanying
article from the Syrian opposition media source Enab Baladi, Iran and
Hezbollah have also sought to make inroads in the province, though with
limited success. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…The Russians seem committed to end the
dodging of military service in Suwayda, using
both carrots and sticks… ”
Source:
‫بعدما صنفتهم تنظيم ًا إرهابي ًا‬..‫السويداء مشايخ الكرامة يعتبرون روسيا قوة إحتالل‬
“Suwayda: al-Karama Leaders Consider Russia an Occupation
Force after it Described them as a ‘Terrorist Organization’,”
al-Modon, 24 June 2018. https://goo.gl/13miVr
The Rijal al-Karama Forces in Suwayda issued a strongly
worded statement accusing Russia of being an “occupation
force,” following a noteworthy meeting between a Russian
delegation and Suwayda notables. In it, the Russians described
the areas under the control of the Rijal al-Karama Forces as
controlled by a “terrorist organization.”
According to the statement: “Russia’s latest statements regarding
the presence of terrorist organizations in the Jabal al-Arab
area are a very dangerous escalation. How can a sponsor and
creator of terrorism that is also an occupying country describe as
terrorists those who carry weapons to defend their land?”…
The Russian delegation offered the Suwayda notables a
reconciliation agreement with the Rijal al-Karama, apparently
in response to the group’s recent forbidding of massive military
reinforcements from the “Tiger Forces” from basing in the village
of al-Mazraa, in parallel with the launch of a limited military
operation in eastern Daraa Province… [the Suwayada notables]
turned down the Russian proposal and the accusation of Rijal
al-Karama of being a terrorist group, considering that the armed
group had not carried out any terrorist attacks against the state
or civilians.”
Source:
‫تصنيف فصائل درزية بـاإلرهاب خطة روسية لتس ّويق الفيلق الخامس‬
“Druze Factions Classified as ‘Terrorists’: Russian Plan to Market
the ‘5th Legion’,” al-Modon, 16 July 2018. https://goo.gl/
WR9ecM
A source told al-Modon that Russia seeks to create a military
formation in the south, including Suwayda, under the banner of
the “5th Legion” (5th Corps), overseen by Russian and regime
officers, in addition to commanders of loyalist militias from the
local community.
The “reconciliation mechanisms” extend to those wanted
for military and reserve service, as well as deserters, but not
those wanted for criminal or political proceedings or those on
the terrorist list. Those enlisting would serve in the southern
provinces: Daraa, Suwayda and Quneitra, although their contract
stipulates service throughout Syrian territory…
This is not the first Russian offer in Suwayda. In May 2017 a
Russian military envoy accompanied by a delegation of Syrian
political and military leaders met in the Suwayda cultural center
with religious and civilian leaders from the province. The Russian
envoy offered a solution to those behind on their service…
The Russians seem committed to end the dodging of military
service in Suwayda, using both carrots and sticks.

(continued)
OE Watch | September 2018

54

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russian-Druze Relations and the ISIS Attack
on Suwayda
Source: “‘Black Wednesday’ Heralds New Phase in Sweida Governorate,” Enab Baladi, 30 July 2018. https://english.enabbaladi.net/
archives/2018/07/black-wednesday-announces-new-phase-in-sweida-governorate/
Activists from Suwayda accused the Syrian regime of planning the attacks implemented by ISIS, under the many indicators that suggest this,
including the military reinforcements that the regime has formerly withdraw from the desert towards the eastern countryside of Daraa, a
step that was preceded by transporting ISIS troops from Yarmouk Camp, in southern Damascus, to the eastern desert of Suwayda under an
unannounced deal…
A civil activist from the city, on the condition of anonymity, told Enab Baladi that the “Islamic State” is the wining card the Syrian regime
is utilizing to enter the governorate as a “savior,” after it lost much of its influence within its borders, turning into a mere title, in addition to
stressing its role as a “protector of minorities” in front of the international community…
Journalist Malek Abu al-Khair… said that Suwayda has, for five years, been having a political war with Iran, under the table; however, today
the conflict has been turned into an open military war through the “Islamic State.”
According to Abu al-Khair, Iran is seeking to deepen its presence in the governorate, and tried, in the past a few years, to open Hussiniat,
Shiite religious centers, “a thing that the people refuse;” they then tried to exploit people’s poverty, buying lands and convincing some of the
Druze young people to become Shia and join the Lebanese militia of “ Hezbollah”, which they also failed to achieve.

Suwayda Province with districts on Syria Map.

Source: Berkaysnklf [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:As-Suwayda.png.

OE Watch | September 2018

55

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Houthi Rebels Use Iranian Qassef-1 Drone
to Attack Saudi Base
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying
excerpted article from Tasnim News Agency, an Iranian-based
news source, Houthi rebels—also known as the Ansarallah
Movement—used an Iranian Qassef-1 drone to attack a Saudi
base in Yemen. The attack occurred on the western coast of
the country after rebel forces monitored the Saudi and coalition
base. Drone activity has been rampant in the Hodeidah Province.
An unnamed military source stated that there was also ground
fighting between the rebels and Saudi forces in Jahfan in the Jizan
province. Yemeni rebel forces have repeatedly targeted Saudi and
coalition positions since the beginning of the conflict and this is
only the latest example of Iranian drones being used in Yemen
by rebel forces. On 24 July 2018, United Arab Emirates (UAE)
Armed Forces intercepted two Iranian Qassef-1 drones, according
to the article from Iran Online. The drones were allegedly carrying
explosives, with one traveling towards the Al Mokha district, while
the other was traveling towards the Al Khokha district in Hodeidah
Province. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

Source: “Yemen: Hamleh pahpadee be movazeh motejavezah dar sahel
gharbee (Yemen: Drone attacks against aggressors in Western coast),”
Tasnim News Agency, 1 August 2018. https://goo.gl/WPGFiU
…Yemeni forces used a Qassef-1 against aggressors in Western coast…
Yemeni forces have repeatedly targeted enemy positions and defended
against Saudi Arabia’s aggression against this country with drones…
Source: “Shoye zedayer ahee jaded maghamat emirate pas nakamee dar
eshghal pandar Hodeidah + tasaveer (New anti-Iranian exhibitions by
UAE after they failed to capture Hodeidah port + images),” Iran Online,
24 July 2018. http://www.ion.ir/News/374848.html
…Emirates held an exhibition of weapons seized from the battle in
Hodeida port in Yemen and claimed that the weapons were Iranian…

“Yemeni forces have repeatedly targeted enemy
positions and defended against Saudi Arabia’s
aggression against this country with drones.”

Qassef-1 Specs Infographic.

Source: Ansarollah Website, http://www.ansarollah.com/archives/78748.

OE Watch | September 2018

56

AFRICA
A Fading Illusion of Relative Safety from Islamic Terrorism
in Senegal
OE Watch Commentary: Senegal, a country that is over 90 percent
Muslim, has generally been spared from threats of radical Islamic terrorism,
unlike some other West African countries. Some ascribe this peaceful situation
to Senegal’s Muslims being relatively moderate, in large part because of Sufi
influences. However, as excerpts from the accompanying article published
online by IRIN reveal, Senegal’s days of having escaped the violence that has
plagued its neighbor Mali may now be over. A trial of 29 Senegalese citizens
accused of trying to establish an extremist cell in the Casamance region, while
only a mixed success for the prosecution, did reveal that Senegal is not immune
from Islamic terrorism despite its peaceful tradition.
There are several reasons Senegal has attracted extremists. To begin with, the
country has military agreements with both the US and France. Additionally,
Senegal is a major supplier of troops to the UN peacekeeping mission in Mali
known as MINUSMA. While Senegal has been a traditional ally of the West,
many of its people oppose Western intervention in Mali and are particularly
angry that Senegal has sent troops there to serve. Compounding the situation
has been foreign money flowing into Senegal to build mosques and Koranic
schools that preach an alternative interpretation to the religious texts than had
previously been taught. As a result from this interference in Senegal’s school
system, more conservative Salafi and Wahhabi influences are taking root.
The problem is not just homegrown terrorists from rising religious
conservatism within Senegal. In 2017, several groups in northern Mali merged
to form Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin (JNIM), which has been busy
since then launching numerous attacks, including on the French embassy
and the national army headquarters in Burkina Faso’s capital, Ouagadougou.
JNIM’s leader, Iyad Ag Ghali, confirmed that Senegal is also on its list of
countries that would be targeted by the terrorist group. Boko Haram is also a
factor in Senegal, with numerous defendants in the terrorism trial supposedly
having links to the terrorist organization. This includes the Senegalese group’s
alleged ringleader, Makhtar Diokhané. He received one of the stiffer sentences,
20 years in prison for terrorist acts by criminal association.
Senegal thus finds itself with numerous influences causing a rise in
extremism. However, as the article notes, it has been relatively hesitant to act to
counter this phenomenon, in large part because while the country is secular, its
political leaders are dependent upon religious leaders to deliver the vote. Thus,
the political leaders tend to leave the religious leaders and their institutions
unsupervised and unregulated. As the trial reveals, such complacency has
come with a tremendous price. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Unlike other nearby West African countries like Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, and Mali, Senegal has so far been
spared a major attack by Islamist extremists. But experts
say an unprecedented trial of dozens of Senegalese terror
suspects that concluded two weeks ago in Dakar is a timely
wake-up call about a nascent and growing threat.”

Children studying the Koran in Touba, Senegal. Foreign influences have
resulted in a more conservative interpretation of the teachings.
Source: Ho Visto Nina Volare/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Touba3.jpg, CC BY-2.0.

Source: Lucinda Rouse, “High-profile terror trial speaks to
an emerging threat in Senegal,” IRIN, 1 Aug 2018. http://
www.irinnews.org/analysis/2018/08/01/high-profile-terrortrial-speaks-emerging-threat-senegal
Unlike other nearby West African countries like Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, and Mali, Senegal has so far been
spared a major attack by Islamist extremists. But experts
say an unprecedented trial of dozens of Senegalese terror
suspects that concluded two weeks ago in Dakar is a timely
wake-up call about a nascent and growing threat.
As the regional hub for numerous international
institutions, Senegal is “a luxury target... like the jackpot
for terrorist groups,” said Bakary Sambe, director of the
Dakar-based Timbuktu Institute, which tracks violent
extremism.
Islam in Senegal, which is followed by some 94 percent of
the population, is dominated by a moderate, tolerant form
of Sufism headed by powerful brotherhoods that have long
been considered the country’s principal defence against
extremism.
Another shortcoming in Senegal’s response may be a
general unwillingness to acknowledge the problem. The
jihadist threat is not a common topic of discussion, and few
Senegalese journalists cover the issue.

OE Watch | September 2018

57

AFRICA
Malian Militants Use Multiple Tactics to Target France
OE Watch Commentary: On 1 July the accompanying excerpted article from
the French-language Nord Sud Journal discussed the guerilla tactics of Malian
militants. In late June, according to the article, a car bomb exploded in Gao
targeting French soldiers, injuring four civilians and destroying two French tanks.
The article noted this was the third attack targeting troops in Mali in a short period
of time. Only three days before that attack, two soldiers from the G5 Sahel and
one civilian were killed in another car bombing. In another attack before that one,
a mine exploded killing four Malian soldiers. The trend line from these attacks is
that the insurgents are becoming more skilled in using explosives to demobilize the
armored vehicles of the French, G5 and Malian soldiers.
The article also shows that French soldiers rely on crucial intelligence from
civilians on the ground to counter the threats from insurgents and arrest insurgents.
An officer in the French-led Operation Barkhane, for example, stated that after
a car bomb in Gao, the soldiers shared the details about the car with civilians in
hopes that they would be able to identify who the car belonged to or who drove it
into the city. Like any counterinsurgency, therefore, success will largely depend on
the civilian population siding and cooperating with the counter-insurgents.
The article notes that this latest series of attacks by the insurgents are but the
most recent in an insurgency that started in 2012. More than five years since the alQaeda-affiliated militants conquered territory in northern Mali, they are no longer
threatening to conquer territory again. However, if their plan is to gradually wear
down the counterinsurgent forces, then these types of attacks against French, G5
and Malian soldiers and their vehicles that were seen in recent weeks appear to be
having that effect. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Gao: Au moins 4 morts et 31 blessés dans
l’explosion d’une voiture piégée (Gao: At least 4 dead
and 31 wounded in a car bomb explosion),” Nord Sud
Journal, 1 July 2018. https://www.nordsudjournal.
com/2018/07/01/gao-au-moins-4-morts-et-31-blessesdans-lexplosion-dune-voiture-piegee/
A patrol of French soldiers from Barkhane was the
target of a car bomb attack in a district of Gao. The
explosion caused several injuries, witnesses were told.
The blast of the explosion destroyed two French armored
vehicles and houses around the scene of the bombing.
French helicopters were dispatched to the area to
evacuate the soldiers to Barkhane’s base hospital in
Gao. “We shared the information with the population so
that it will help us to identify this car that was carrying
the bomb,” said a source of Barkhane in the city of Gao.
Since last Friday, this is the third attack targeting
military forces in Mali. In 2012, northern Mali was
occupied by jihadist groups linked to Al Qaida before
being chased a year later by French soldiers. Since then,
military forces have been regularly attacked by jihadist
groups.

“We shared the
information with the
population so that it will
help us to identify this
car that was carrying
the bomb.”

Equipe cynophile au Mali (Opération Barkhane).

Source: 132CDC, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Equipe_cynophile_au_Mali_(Op%C3%A9ration_Barkhane).jpg, (CC-by-4.0).

OE Watch | September 2018

58

AFRICA
Kenya: 20 Years after Attack on US Embassy,
Counterterrorism Measures Often Hindered
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 August 1998, suicide bombers attacked
the US embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
with explosives-laden trucks. Now, 20 years later, as excerpts from
the accompanying article published on the South African website The
Conversation reveal, Kenya is reflecting on how the blast in its capital that
took over 200 lives has influenced changes in its security operations, not just
with respect to the original terrorist group that launched the attack, but also
to latter day ones, particularly the Somalia-based al Shabaab.
Because of the frequency and intensity of terrorist attacks in Kenya,
particularly those from al Shabaab, the Kenyan government has developed
several counterterrorism policies and strategies. These included new
legislation as well as changes in law enforcement and border security
operations. Efforts were also made to counter both extremism and terrorism
financing. Additionally, international and regional cooperation was sought
in order to have a more unified approach to the problem. However, despite
these new policies and strategies, three interrelated factors have hindered
Kenya’s efforts, according to the author: a lack of cooperation between
agencies, radicalization of Somalis living in Kenya, and one Kenya has been
battling for a long time on issues not just related to terrorism…corruption.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: Oscar Gakuo Mwangi, “How Kenya is managing
security 20 years after the Nairobi blast,” The Conversation,
7 Aug 2018. https://theconversation.com/how-kenya-ismanaging-security-20-years-after-the-nairobi-blast-101143
Kenya still has a long way to go before it fully manages the
threat of terrorism. Despite the strategies it’s put in place, the
country’s counter-terrorism efforts have been hampered by
three key interrelated factors. These are a lack of cooperation
between agencies, corruption and the radicalization of Somalis.
Before 2010, Kenya’s efforts were hampered by the absence
of a legal framework to prosecute acts of terrorism. Since then
it’s passed several new laws. These include the Prevention of
Terrorism Act, Proceeds of Crime and Anti Money Laundering
Act and Prevention of Organized Crime Act.
These security agencies now have the constitutional and
legislative mandate to take counter-terrorism measures to
safeguard national security. Some are repressive and punitive.
For example, the Anti-Terrrorism Police Unit has been accused
of using excessive force.

“Despite the strategies it’s put in place, the country’s counter-terrorism efforts have been hampered
by three key interrelated factors. These are a lack of cooperation between agencies, corruption and the
radicalization of Somalis.”

Terrorists bombed the US Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya in August 1998, leaving hundreds dead and wounded.
Source: By Office of the Director of National Intelligence 1998 Press Releases, now not further online. Contact: John M. Robinson, Chief EEO, ODNI [Public domain], via Wikimedia
Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Us-embassy-nairobi-bombing-1998.jpg.

OE Watch | September 2018

59

AFRICA
Camel-Based Patrols to Combat Terrorism in Kenya
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Kenya faces the difficult task of patrolling remote
sections of rugged terrain along its border with Somalia while combating bandits and terrorists, who
plant improvised explosive devices along routes typically used by vehicles. The answer that the Kenyan
government came up with is camels, or more specifically as excerpts from the accompanying article
published on the Shabelle News website explain, the Kenyan Border Patrol of the Administration Police
Unit riding camels.
With approximately 70 police officers over the past two years having been killed by IEDs while
patrolling, the launching of this camel-based unit is being greeted with hope that the number of future
fatalities can be significantly reduced. Besides being able to cover terrain that vehicles cannot, camels,
according to the article, are intelligent and have good eyesight, and thus, when well-trained, can alert their
riders to upcoming dangers.
Although this is Kenya’s first camel-based border patrol unit, at least in recent times, other nations are
already using these hardy animals for security work. Australia, New Zealand and India have such units,
and 100 Kenyan officers will visit that last country to see how it uses camels to patrol its Himalayan
border. Besides guarding the Kenya-Somali border, the Kenyan unit will also be used to patrol areas prone
to cattle-rustling. Since cattle-rustling is often associated with violence (see: “Africa’s Deadliest Group:
Militant Herders,” August 2018, OE Watch), such patrols might help reduce the number of human victims
associated with this criminal activity.
The addition of the camel-based unit is part of a broad restructuring of certain security services
currently underway, that includes potential additional changes in the future. Not surprisingly, as often
happens in large government organizations, there is significant disagreement regarding aspects of this
restructuring, including whether one component should absorb a significant portion of another. However,
if all goes well, many of those changes will be worked out by next year’s Madaraka Day celebrations in
Nairobi, commemorating the day Kenya achieved internal self-rule. There will be parades where people
will see security services marching, including the dog and horse units as well as another one just invited
that terrorists along the Kenya-Somali border should soon be fearing, the camel unit. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“Sources say creation of the

Source: “Camels join police in
new border patrol unit,” Shabelle
News, 6 August 2018. http://
radioshabelle.com/camels-joinpolice-in-new-border-patrol-unit/
A new police unit has been
unveiled to patrol remote
sections of the Kenya-Somali
border in efforts to combat
banditry.
The pioneer camel patrol unit
under the Border Patrol Unit of
the Administration Police Service
will be based in Isiolo County
and will involve 50 camels that
are currently being trained.
Sources say creation of the unit
was informed by rising cases of
terror attacks targeting security
personnel on patrol in far-flung
areas.
The camels will be used to
patrol parts of North Eastern
region as well as areas prone
to cattle rustling. The concept
has been borrowed from India,
Australia and New Zealand,
where thousands of camels are
deployed to police borders.

(camel patrol) unit was informed
by rising cases of terror attacks
targeting security personnel on
patrol in far-flung areas.”

There is a long history of using camels, such as the one pictured here, for military patrols in Africa.
Kenya will soon be joining those ranks as its first modern day unit is stood up.
Source: ACEI Cheung/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Inatès_In_uniform_(385070505).jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

60

AFRICA
Secret Military Burials Affect Morale in Nigeria
OE Watch Commentary: On 31 July, Nigeria’s Premium Times reported that
the leadership of the #BringBackOurGirls movement is protesting alleged secret
burials of hundreds of Nigerian soldiers. The movement, which began to pressure
the government to secure the release of the more than 200 schoolgirls that Boko
Haram kidnapped in Chibok, Nigeria in April 2014, now engages in protests for other
issues related to the insurgency, such as military transparency. Most of the Chibok
schoolgirls have been released in exchanges, while the remaining ones with Boko
Haram reportedly have chosen to stay with the group (perhaps through coercion or
after forcible marriage). Secret military burials are the latest issue the movement has
adopted.
According to the accompanying excerpted article, the military has also denied
several Boko Haram attacks have taken place in recent weeks, only to have the media
later report on the attacks. The military has then claimed the media has exaggerated
the attacks and that the attacks were smaller in scale than the media reported. The
media has also criticized the government for claiming Boko Haram was defeated
several times, only to have major attacks occur thereafter. One recent attack in July
saw Boko Haram attack a military barracks in northern Nigeria. Some reports claim
up to 600 soldiers, who had recently deployed from southern Nigeria, died in the
attack.
Amid media speculation about the military not providing information to the public
about Boko Haram attacks and alleged secret burials, the military appears to be facing
a possible crisis of confidence from the media, if not the public at large, as this article
indicates. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Boko Haram: Stop ‘secret’ burial of fallen
soldiers, BBOG tells Nigerian govt,” Premium Times,
31 July 2018. https://www.premiumtimesng.com/
news/top-news/278397-boko-haram-stop-secretburial-of-fallen-soldiers-bbog-tells-nigerian-govt.
html
A pressure group, Bring Back Our Girls (BBOG),
has asked the federal government to stop the secret
burials of soldiers killed on the battlefield. The group
made this call while reacting to photos of mass
burials of some fallen soldiers days after the Nigerian
military denied its soldiers were attacked. Premium
Times had reported how the Nigerian military denied
that about 23 soldiers and eight trucks went missing
after the troops suffered an ambush attack by Boko
Haram gunmen in Bama local government area of
Borno State on July 16. The attack which occurred
three days earlier, was not made public by the
military until the media published it.
The movement also listed new demands: “The
Military Authority should immediately confirm the
number of our soldiers that have died within this
month of July 2018. We take exception to what is in
all intent a secret burial of our fallen heroes.”

“Premium Times had reported how the Nigerian military denied that about 23 soldiers and eight
trucks went missing after the troops suffered an ambush attack by Boko Haram gunmen in Bama local
government area of Borno State on July 16.”

Nigerian Army Boko Haram demonstration.

Source: Nicolas Pinault, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nigerian_Army_Boko_Haram_demonstration.jpg. (CC BY 2.0).

OE Watch | September 2018

61

AFRICA
Fleeing Nigerian Soldiers: Cowardice or
a Responsible Action?
OE Watch Commentary: On the heels of a damning report from an
international organization accusing the Nigerian military of human rights
abuses, comes yet another condemnation directed at parts of that country’s
armed forces. This time the accusation is cowardice, specifically, abandoning
positions when confronting the terrorist organization, Boko Haram, and the
person making the accusation, as reported in excerpts from the accompanying
article published online at the Nigerian website Premium Times, is Chief of
Army Staff Tukur Buratai.
The 180 word memo Buratai sent to commanders at all levels followed
recent attacks by Boko Haram on military targets that resulted in two officers
and 43 enlisted soldiers being killed. Reportedly, there were also troops
maimed by the terrorist group. The failure of some in the military to stay and
fight during these enemy attacks is what caused Buratai to write the stinging
memo. He did this amidst fears that the terrorist group, despite regular
pronouncements from the Nigerian government that it has defeated them, is
actually undergoing a resurgence. Buratai’s memo comments that the soldiers’
actions of abandoning their posts when facing enemy fire portrays them as
“incompetent and cowardly.” He goes on to state that a soldier responsible for
such actions could be subject to a court-martial and liable to the death penalty.
Field commanders, while not named, described the memo not only as being
intimidating and distracting, but also as unfair. They point out that as Chief
of Army Staff he is supposed to provide the troops with timely strategic
intelligence, but instead has previously described Boko Haram as completely
Nigerian Chief of Army Staff, Lieutenant General Tukur Buratai (2015).
Source: By NAweb [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://
defeated. Additionally, commanders complained of a lack of adequate supplies,
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lt_GenTY_Buratai.fw.png.
including food, arbitrary deductions from paychecks, T72 tanks broken
down because the government has not maintained them and reinforcements, who during combat, either arrive too late or not at all. That last
issue has resulted in Nigerian troops who come under fire sometimes calling for reinforcements from neighboring countries. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“The Chief of Army Staff, Tukur Buratai, has circulated a set of operational guidelines warning Nigerian
Army commanders of grave consequences should they abandon their positions in the face of firepower from
Boko Haram insurgents.”
Source: Samuel Ogendipe, “Boko Haram: Army Chief Buratai spits fire; warns commanders against fleeing from terrorists,” Premium Times,
3 August 2018. https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/278792-boko-haram-army-chief-buratai-spits-fire-warns-commandersagainst-fleeing-from-terrorists.html
The Chief of Army Staff, Tukur Buratai, has circulated a set of operational guidelines warning Nigerian Army commanders of grave
consequences should they abandon their positions in the face of firepower from Boko Haram insurgents.
“Recent occurrences in” ‘Operation Lafiya Dole’ “where units abandon their positions cowardly in the face of action” from Boko Haram
terrorists “without reasonable resistance is worrisome,” Mr Buratai said in the July 27 memo to all commanders, adding that it “portrayed”
them as “incompetent and cowardly”.
Political and security analyst Chris Ngwodo told PREMIUM TIMES Mr Buratai should be interrogating the apparent and remote causes of
the renewed Boko Haram exploits that suggested the insurgents have regrouped after months of relative success by the military.

OE Watch | September 2018

62

AFRICA
How Pressure Caused South Africa to Switch Recognition
from Taiwan to China
OE Watch Commentary: There is only one country in Africa that still recognizes
Taiwan, the tiny Kingdom of eSwatini, perhaps better known by its former name,
Swaziland. It was not always like this. Previously many African nations recognized
Taiwan, but as the excerpt from the accompanying article published in the South
African online journal The Conversation relates, pressure from China is responsible
for the switch. This article focuses on the South African experience with China, and
how its initial desire to maintain good relations with both Taiwan and China faded
under Chinese demands.
China and South Africa did not initially have such a close relationship. Back in
May 1994, when Nelson Mandela first took office, he inherited from the apartheid
government South Africa’s recognition of Taiwan, which at that time was the
country’s sixth largest trading partner. With the world’s largest population, a rapidly
growing economy, and significant international influence that included a seat on the
UN Security Council, China was a rising power that many nations wanted to benefit
from by associating with it. At the time of Mandela’s inauguration, 159 countries had
diplomatic relations with China, compared to only 29 for Taiwan.
Still, despite the overwhelming number of countries in China’s camp, Mandela
wanted to have good relations with both countries. Unfortunately for Mandela, under
China’s “One China principle” that insists Taiwan and mainland China are one nation,
he was finding it increasingly difficult to deal with both of them as equals. However, it
took him 30 months before he finally announced the change from Taipei to Beijing.
The article presents an interesting analysis as to why Mandela was so slow to go
with China when so many other countries had already done so. To begin with, Taiwan,
as an already established major trading partner, stated it was anxious to provide
economic assistance to post-apartheid South Africa, so long as South Africa continued
to recognize it. Additionally, Taiwan had provided ten million dollars to the 1993 ANC
election campaign, and Mandela was not anxious to dump such a loyal and generous
friend. Mandela was also rather uncertain about China’s future. The Soviet Union
had collapsed just a few years earlier, and he was concerned that China might share a
similar fate.
Those were the pressures against recognizing only China, but there were also
numerous pressures to recognize it, though that would mean no longer recognizing
Taiwan. One reason for the change was that a high level ANC delegation to China
reported that this was the way South Africa should go. However, it was not just
internal pressure from the ANC that was weighing on Mandela, there was also external
pressure, and it was intense. China had informed South Africa that if it did not make
the switch, it might lose its “most favored nation” trading status. Thus, after lengthy
negotiations, Pretoria switched to Beijing in 1998. In the end, despite the widespread
popularity and respect Mandela enjoyed, it was not enough to overcome the
internal and external pressures to recognize China and only China. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“South Africa’s China choice shows how political and economic
clout can aid a state in achieving its objectives.”

Nelson Mandela-2008.

Source: South Africa The Good News / www.sagoodnews.co.za [CC BY 2.0], via Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nelson_Mandela-2008_(edit).jpg.

Source: Christopher Williams, “A tale of two
Chinas: the story of South Africa’s switch from
Taipei to Beijing,” The Conversation, 24 July 2018.
https://theconversation.com/a-tale-of-two-chinasthe-story-of-south-africas-switch-from-taipei-tobeijing-100348
South Africa’s China choice shows how political
and economic clout can aid a state in achieving
its objectives. In the mid-1990s South Africa had
large reserves of moral authority derived from
its relatively peaceful transition, and Mandela’s
widespread popularity and respect. But this was
not enough to overcome China’s global influence,
importance, and insistence on the One China
principle.
When President Nelson Mandela took office in May
1994, he was immediately confronted with a vexing
foreign policy problem: how to balance the country’s
diplomatic relations with Taiwan – inherited from
the apartheid government – with Beijing’s “One
China principle”.
Our analysis shows that internal pressure from
the African National Congress (ANC) as well as
external pressure from China influenced Mandela’s
choice.

OE Watch | September 2018

63

AFRICA
The DRC’s Prescription for a Nightmare…
Ebola in a Conflict Zone
OE Watch Commentary: If the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
(DRC) latest outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus in early August seemed rather
underreported in the Western press, it would be understandable. The country has
had nine previous outbreaks, so another one, especially in the initial stages, might
not be considered particularly newsworthy. Besides, thanks to lessons learned from
previous outbreaks and a promising vaccine, the last one was contained relatively
quickly. However, as excerpts from the accompanying article from AllAfrica.
com point out, this outbreak poses a particular problem because of the presence of
armed groups in the area. Additionally, the wide distance the disease has already
spread makes public health control measures, such as vaccination campaigns,
extremely difficult.

“The WHO said the presence of armed
groups and the wide-distance spread of
the disease, could make vaccination ‘near
impossible’ in North Kivu.”

The outbreak is in North Kivu, a politically unstable province that has been
the site of numerous conflicts for over a decade. One of the main groups fighting in
North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), was originally based in Uganda,
but then expanded into neighboring DRC. The group has radical Islamic leanings,
but not a particularly strong and coherent message. It is, however, quite deadly,
having killed 15 UN peacekeepers in late 2017. ADF is not alone in North Kivu;
the province is home to other militant groups, making this a dangerous area for
those who would venture in for public health measures.
The presence of religious extremist groups in a region often makes
vaccination campaigns dangerous. Public health vaccinators are looked at as
possible government spies or enemies deliberately spreading, not preventing,
disease. As such, several have been killed in Pakistan and Nigeria in recent years
as they tried to immunize people against polio. Now that there is a vaccine, or at
least an experimental vaccine against Ebola, vaccinators face a tough decision
when confronted with the disease being present in dangerous areas. Whether
vaccinators trying to prevent Ebola in North Kivu would be targeted for their
activities or just caught in the crossfire is unknown, but either way it would be
quite risky for them to attempt a vaccination campaign there.
Ebola treatment centers are once again being established in the
Compounding the difficulties of controlling Ebola is that it is over a
DRC. This time, however, the disease is in North Kivu, a province with
widespread area and near international borders, increasing the likelihood it will
numerous armed groups, making it extremely difficult to implement
spread to another country. Under these circumstances, implementing a ringpublic health control measures there.
Source: CDC Global, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Treatment_center_sign.jpg, CC BY 2.0.
vaccination campaign, which involves vaccinating those most likely to be infected,
becomes extremely problematic. After numerous outbreaks in several locations, it is not that the world has become complacent to Ebola, a word
when uttered during the early outbreaks brought great fear and a large international response to combat it. Indeed, it is still a dreaded disease,
but now when an outbreak occurs effective measures are immediately brought to bear to control its spread, that is unless you have the present
situation, rendering such measures quite difficult to implement. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: “Congo-Kinshasa: Latest Ebola outbreak in DR Congo Poses high regional risk, says WHO,” AllAfrica.com, 3 August 2018. https://
allafrica.com/stories/201808030003.html
The WHO said the presence of armed groups and the wide-distance spread of the disease, could make vaccination “near impossible” in
North Kivu. It’s the tenth outbreak in DRC since Ebola was discovered.
The North Kivu outbreak comes just over a week after Congo had declared the end of an outbreak in the northwest of the country that began
in May, and in which 33 people died. The World Health Organization (WHO) has dispelled the notion that the two outbreaks are linked.
For ring-vaccination to be effective, health workers must reach all those potentially infected with the deadly virus.

OE Watch | September 2018

64

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia Recognizes Palestine?
OE Watch Commentary: One of the last things that former president of Colombia Juan Manuel Santos
…the government will
did before the expiration of his term and the inauguration of Ivan Duque on 7 August, was to recognize
Palestine as a state in the international system. The move apparently came as a surprise to most of the
cautiously examine its
public and to the incoming president. The reasons for the move are being hotly debated, but it appears
implications…
that Manuel Santos wanted to put a final exclamation mark or signature on his personal move toward the
progressive left. According to the accompanying references, the maneuver puts the new president in a bit
of a bind in that the United States and Israel are key allies. The incoming Colombian administration is reviewing the decision and may reverse
or qualify it. Meanwhile, former president Santos left the country soon after the inauguration, contravening Colombian law which requires the
head of state to get Senate permission for external trips, including within the first year after the end of the presidential term. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“

”

Source: Editors, “Colombia
reconoció a Palestina como
un Estado, dice “embajada”
(Colombia recognizes
Palestine as a State, says
‘embassy’),” El Espectador,
8 August 2018. https://www.
elespectador.com/noticias/
el-mundo/colombia-habriareconocido-palestina-comoun-estado-dice-embajadaarticulo-804948
“In a communique
emitted this Tuesday, the
diplomatic representation
of Palestine in Colombia
assured that the [Colombian]
Administration decided to
recognize ‘Palestine as a
free State, independent and
sovereign.’…”

Source: Eduardo Mackenzie,
“Santos y su gesto de traición
a Israel (Santos and his
treasoneous gesture toward
Israel),” El Mundo, 16
August 2018. http://www.
elmundo.com/noticia/Santosy-su-gesto-de-traicion-aIsrael/374356

Source: Khaled Abu Toameh
and Tovah Lazaroff, “Colombia
reviews decision to recognize
Palestinian state,” Jerusalem
Post, 9 August 2018. https://
www.jpost.com/Arab-IsraeliConflict/Columbia-reviewsdecision-to-recognizePalestine-564430

“…The late decision of
Santos leaves Iván Duque
a toxic inheritance: a
diplomatic agenda of castrochavist character in which
Colombia says to the world
that it awards the Palestinian
leadership’s deployment of
hate and violence against
Israel and the jews, and …
is opposed to the new plan of
peace from Washington…”

“…the newly installed
government would review
a surprising declaration by
outgoing President Juan
Manuel Santos…’Given possible
omissions that could come to
light about the way in which
this decision was taken by
the outgoing president, the
government will cautiously
examine its implications and will
act according to international
law,’…”

Source: Editors, “Juan Manuel
Santos salió de Colombia sin permiso
del Senado y violó la Constitución
(Juan Manuel Santos left Colombia
without permission and violated the
Constitution),” IFM Noticias, 13
August 2018. https://ifmnoticias.com/
juan-manuel-santos-salio-del-paissin-permiso-del-congreso-y-violo-laconstitucion/
“…Ex-president Juan Manuel Santos
would have violated constitutional
requirements by not asking for
permission to leave the country from the
Senate of the Republic in accordance
with article 196 of the fundamental
law….The Colombian juridical
framework does not contemplate a
sanction regarding this violation,
depends [rather] on the ethic of the chief
executives and ex-chief executives…”

Israeli aid delegation departs for Colombia (December, 2010).

Source: Israeli Defense Forces, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flickr_-_Israel_Defense_Forces_-_Israeli_Aid_Delegation_to_Colombia,_Dec_2010_(1).jpg, CC 2.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

65

LATIN AMERICA
Alleged Assassination Attempt on Venezuelan
President Nicolás Maduro
OE Watch Commentary: On 4 August 2018 two drones equipped
with explosives allegedly attempted to assassinate Venezuelan President
Nicolás Maduro. According to the accompanying excerpted article
from TeleSUR, a Caracas-based news outlet, Maduro was delivering a
televised speech commemorating the 81st anniversary of the Bolivarian
National Guard during a military parade in Caracas, Venezuela.
Per TeleSUR, the drones were a model DJI M600, each armed with
one kilogram of C-4. Venezuela’s Communications Minister, Jorgé
Rodriguez, confirmed that the attack occurred near the end of the event
on Bolivar Avenue in Caracas. The drones were allegedly diverted by
state military forces using radio frequency jammers, during which
one drone lost control and exploded near the Don Eduardo apartment
complex, damaging a portion of the building. According to the article
from El Universal, a Caracas based newspaper, the attack wounded
seven state security officials. Venezuelan Interior Minister Néstor
Reverol stated that six individuals have been detained and are being
questioned. President Maduro released a statement hours after the
attack blaming “ultra-right Venezuelans and ultra-right Colombians”
and former Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos for the attempt on
his life. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

Source: “¿Qué se sabe del atentado contra el presidente Nicolás
Maduro? (What is known about the attack against President Nicolas
Maduro?),” TeleSUR, 5 August 2018. https://www.telesurtv.net/
multimedia/maduro-claves-atentado-venezuela-20180805-0035.html
…They were two remotely piloted aircrafts [Drone model
DJIM600], each loaded with 1kg of explosives. Signal jammers were
used to disorient the first drone that was flying around the perimeter
to attack…
Source: “Maduro asegura que involucrados en atentado en su
contra se entrenaban con personal colombiano (Maduro said that
those involved in the assassination attempt trained with Colombian
personnel),” El Universal, 7 August 2018. http://www.eluniversal.
com/politica/17050/maduro-asegura-que-involucrados-en-atentadoen-su-contra-se-entrenaban-con-personal-colombiano
…It is clear and there is enough evidence that shows it was the
Colombian administration of Juan Manuel Santos. We have their
location, we have their names—in Chinácota, north of Santander,
where they trained with other Colombian assassins and terrorists…

“They were two remotely piloted aircrafts [Drone model DJIM600], each loaded with 1kg of explosives.”

Security using shields to protect President Nicolás Maduro (8/7/18).

Source: Nestor Reverol - Government of Venezuela, https://es.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archivo:Caracas_drone_explosions_-_Maduro_shield.png, CC 3.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

66

LATIN AMERICA
Strategy Challenges for Ivan Duque
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 August, Colombians inaugurated the term of their new President Ivan
…will present a
Duque. The accompanying article from El Mundo notes that Duque stated during his inauguration speech
that he would seek to legally disallow drug trafficking and kidnapping being lumped in with political
legislative bill so that
offenses. One of the criticisms levied against the power-sharing agreement (that the FARC negotiated
kidnapping and drug
with the previous administration of Juan Manuel Santos) regarded the conflation of those two crimes
with political offenses for which FARC leaders would receive amnesty. The author of the article also
trafficking have no
notes that there were no surprises in President Duque’s inauguration day speech, all of it reflecting points
connection as political
made during his campaign. (The article provides the approximately 54 minute inauguration speech in its
entirety in Spanish). The accompanying reference, written after the election but before the inauguration,
offenses…
is an editorial from Alponiente touching on the most significant geopolitical challenges the new president
will likely face. The author lists four, as follows: Venezuela, Nicaragua, Cuba and narcotics trafficking (the three countries might fairly be
lumped together under the heading Bolivarians). The article from Infobae is an observation from an Argentinean analyst about the relationship
between the Venezuelan regime and Colombia’s government under Duque. Venezuela’s dictator Nicolas Maduro has gone straight to saber
rattling. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“

”

Source: Editors, “Ivan Duque buscará
entendimientos y consensos (Ivan
Duque will look for [common]
understandings and consensus),” El
Mundo, 7 August 2018. http://www.
elmundo.com/noticia/Duque-buscaraentendimientos-y-consensos/374130
“…He announced that he will present
a legislative bill so that kidnapping and
drug trafficking have no connection
as political offenses, and will promote
a legal program to severely punish
corruption….This 42 year-old lawyer
gave a speech that lasted 54 minutes
in which he was totally coherent about
all of his proposals that he prescribed
for the country during the electoral
campaign….”

Source: John Marulanda, “Cuatro
retos geopolíticos (Four geopolitical
challenges),” Alponiente, 29 June
2018. https://alponiente.com/cuatroretos-geo-politicos/
“To feel out the new government,
these militarist buffooneries of
the worried chavist regime could
carry out a skirmish in the border
area across which moves almost
40% of the cocaine we produce
-- in Apure where the ELN is in
fortified encampments and in
Catatumbo where the EPL has been
resuscitated….the principal dynamic
that the new administration should
confront is Narcotics Trafficking.”

Source: Editors, “‘Nuestros Sukhoi van a dividir a
Colombia en dos’: el chavismo amenaza con la guerra
(Our Sukhoi are going to divide Colombia in two: chavism
threatens war),” Infobae, 9 July 2018. https://www.infobae.
com/america/venezuela/2018/07/09/nuestros-sukhoi-van-adividir-a-colombia-en-dos-el-chavismo-expuso-su-plan-encaso-de-guerra/
“‘If Venezuela is attacked militarily from Colombia, the
country is within its rights to respond to the attack, Our
Sukhoi will have the responsibility to knock down the seven
bridges of the Magdalena River that bridge Colombia from
north to south in order to divide it in two,’ said Carreño
[Pedro Carreño, a legislative leader in the ruling PSUV
party] during an interview on a Venezuelan [TV program…
Later he described the Venezuelan defense system that,
according to what he said, would permit the downing of
enemy aircraft in Colombian territory…”

Sukhois of the Bolivarian National Aviation of Venezuela (photo taken circa 2009).
Source: Big Bosstt, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DosSu-30mk2Venezuela.jpg, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | September 2018

67

LATIN AMERICA
Human Trafficking Continues to Plague Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: Spanish media has been
reporting that Colombia is a country of origin for human
trafficking and the prevalence of this activity continues
to thrive despite government efforts to stop it. Accurate
statistics regarding the number of human trafficking victims
in Colombia are difficult to discern, because some sources
report as few as 223 victims per year, while NGOs report
up to 70,000 victims a year, 70 percent which are said to be
women according to the accompanying excerpted article
from RCN Noticias. This same source indicates that although
authorities are currently investigating 430 cases, 99 percent of
them will never be prosecuted as human trafficking is a crime
committed with nearly complete impunity.
Colombia has been classified as having the second highest
number of human trafficking victims in Latin America
following Brazil. In terms of prevalence, the majority of
human trafficking victims are taken from the coffee growing
regions. Once in the hands of traffickers, victims are
commonly sent to countries including China, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Argentina, Mexico, Paraguay, and the
United Arab Emirates according to the excerpt from El
Tiempo. Since 2014, the Colombian Chancellery has responded
to 338 cases from Colombian women abroad looking for
help to return home. In terms of ending this phenomenon,
Colombia has implemented multiple laws and decrees but
according to the excerpt from El Heraldo, many are not
enacted nor is there a budget to effectively fight human
trafficking in the country. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“At present time, more than 480 human
trafficking cases are actively being
investigated, but according to this source,
99% of human trafficking cases are carried
out with complete impunity and never
prosecuted.”

Source: “Más de 480 investigaciones por trata de personas se adelantan en
Colombia (More than 480 Human Trafficking Investigations Underway
in Colombia),” RCN Noticias, 30 July 2018. https://www.rcnradio.com/
colombia/mas-de-480-investigaciones-por-trata-de-personas-se-adelantanen-colombia
Human trafficking in Colombia remains an issue despite steps authorities
have taken to thwart this activity. At present time, more than 480 human
trafficking cases are actively being investigated, but according to this
source, 99% of human trafficking cases are carried out with complete
impunity and never prosecuted.
Source: “Colombia es origen, tránsito y destino de trata de personas
(Colombia is an Origin, Transit and Destination Source for Human
Trafficking Victims,” El Tiempo, 17 January 2017. http://www.eltiempo.
com/politica/justicia/trata-de-personas-en-colombia/16791863
Those departments within Colombia with the highest numbers of
reported human trafficking cases include Valle del Cauca, Antioquia,
Risaralda, Quindío, Cauca, Cundinamarca, Córdoba and Nariño. Of
these departments, six are located in what is known as the “coffee region”
of Colombia. Las Paisitas gang actively recruits in these regions and
promises girls modeling contracts, fame, and fortune. Once recruited,
they are generally sent to Bogota or out of the country. The most common
destinations for human trafficking victims taken from Colombia are reported
as China, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Argentina, Mexico, Paraguay,
and the United Arab Emirates.
Source: “Cancillería ha atendido 338 víctimas de trata de personas entre
2014 y 2018 (Chancellery Assists 338 Victims of Human Trafficking
between 2014 and 2018),” El Heraldo, 30 July 2018. https://www.elheraldo.
co/colombia/cancilleria-ha-atendido-338-victimas-de-trata-de-personasentre-2014-y-2018-524934
Although the Colombian Chancellery actively works to bring human
trafficking victims back to Colombia, lack of funds dedicated to this activity
are scarce. Secondly, laws and decrees dedicated to minimizing human
trafficking in the country (Law 985 and decrees 1069 and 1066) are not
as effective as the Colombian government would like. However, NGO’s
who work with trafficking victims claim that the Colombian government is
actively attempting to implement a better plan to thwart this phenomenon.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter

OE Watch | September 2018

68

LATIN AMERICA
Colombian Far Left Being Assassinated?
OE Watch Commentary: Gustavo Petro lost his bid for the Colombian presidency to Ivan
Duque in the final electoral round this May. Petro’s candidacy was remarkable, however,
in that he was a left-socialist and the most progressive, pro-Marxist candidate to have ever
reached the final round. Both his failure and some of his electoral success can be ascribed
to what was the main issue of the campaign: the future of the power-sharing accords that
the FARC had negotiated with then president Juan Manuel Santos. It appears that to the
extent the election was a referendum on those accords, and even though the Colombian
electorate rejected them, the left enjoys a sizable quantity of political support. Petro has been
vociferously, angrily in favor of having the government maintain adherence to all details
of the accords. Since immediately after the election, the Petro political apparatus and the
Colombian left generally have pointed to what they claim to be an accelerating number
of murders of leftist political leaders by the re-ascending Uribistas (followers of former
President Álvaro Uribe). The left is apparently trying to present itself as a victim of violent
rightist extremism. With that appeal, pro-FARC elements apparently hope to gain as much
international sympathy as possible in order to save as much of the accords as possible.
The accompanying excerpted references are representative of a wide range and number of
opinion pieces that see the situation that way. These editorialists express doubt about the
Petro argument, seeing it as a cynical and dubious piece of propaganda. They opine that the
murders are not the result of a campaign, but are subject of an array of motives. These authors
prominently include organized criminal competition as a factor, with the so-called social
leaders willfully enmeshed in that competition. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Ivan Duque (2018).

Source: By Tokota [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], from Wikimedia
Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ivan_Duque_2018_(cropped).jpg.

“…They were doing drug deals and were killed by men of the ELN…”
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Petro: la estrategia
de un perdedor (Petro: the strategy of a loser),” El
Mundo, 9 July 2018. http://www.elmundo.com/
noticia/Petrola-estrategia-de-un-perdedor/373134
“The enormous pendulum that Petro put in motion
to suggest that the murders of ‘social leaders’ is
the result of a ‘return to Uribeism to power’…One
journalist who knows the subject well, Jineth Prieto,
of La Silla Vacía, recently wrote: ‘The reality is that
the murders of [social] leaders has been increasing
since the FARC demobilized in 2016 (311 to June of
this year, according to numbers from the Office of
the People’s Defender), and in none of the 12 most
recent cases has it been shown that they had to do
with political militancy, but rather, in several of
those, other stronger hypotheses exist regarding
the motives…This odd conduct is born of the
commitment Gustavo Petro has with the FARC: to
oblige the new government by all means legal and
illegal, to implement the entirety of the infamous
Havana pacts…”

Source: Vanesa Vallejo, “Lo que
nadie dice sobre los líderes sociales
asesinados en Colombia (What
nobody is saying about the murder
social leaders in Colombia),”
Panam Post, 6 July 2018. https://
es.panampost.com/vanessaaraujo/2018/07/07/lo-que-nadiedice-sobre-los-lideres-socialesasesinados-en-colombia/
“The murder of social leaders is
happening in places where there
is a war among drug traffickers…
According to declarations of the
commander of police in charge of
the seven men, they had belonged
to a ‘residual group of the old Eight
FARC Front, commanded by alias
Andrés, or Crazy Face’. They were
doing drug deals and were killed by
men of the ELN.”

Source: “Asesinato de líderes o el fracaso
del posconflicto (Murder of leader or failure
of the postconflict),” El Nuevo Siglo, 8 July
2018. http://www.elnuevosiglo.com.co/index.
php/articulos/07-2018-asesinato-de-lideres-oel-fracaso-del-posconflicto
“Across the escalade of deaths of
community activists, of human rights
[activists], community workers and victims
of displacement, two facts are clear: first,
there does not exist a systematicity in terms
of motives, or material or intellectual authors.
On the contrary, the victims and the causes
are quite distinct…second, the State did not
recover control of the zones abandoned by
the FARC, which ended up in the hands of
the ELN, [FARC] dissidents, BACRIM, and
even local political mafias, which fight over
drug traffic, illegal mining and other illicit
business…”

OE Watch | September 2018

69

LATIN AMERICA
Cocaine Production at All-Time High in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: Global cocaine production
reached 1,410 metric tons in 2016, the highest levels
ever recorded, according to information derived from
the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 2018
World Drug Report. This information was subsequently
reported in the accompanying excerpted article from
the Nicaraguan news source Diario Las Americas.
It is important to note that this report cites cocaine
production statistics from 2016 in mid-2018, as data of
this nature is derived from multiple sources and takes
time to analyze. However, this does not mean the data
is not still relevant today as all of the factors are still
occurring.
As discussed in the excerpt from the Colombian
news source El Espectador, there are various factors
that are currently contributing to increased production
for cocaine in Colombia specifically. Some of these
include slow progress in converting farmers previously
dedicated to growing coca plants for the FARC into
legitimate farmers dedicated to growing crops such as
cacao, evolving market dynamics and drug trafficking
strategies amongst criminal groups, a reduction in
Colombian eradication practices, and finally, increased
global demand for cocaine.
Another possible factor that may relate to increased
production in the coming years is the fact that South
American-based producers are looking to move
production further north in order to circumvent
extended maritime and air routes, all of which lead
to increased possibility of interdiction. This idea is
indicated in the excerpt from Prensa Libre, which
discusses a coca field discovered by Guatemalan
authorities on 26 May 2018 in Cobán, Alta Verapaz.
The finding in and of itself is significant, because it
represents the first ever coca field to be discovered in
Guatemala. However, Guatemala is not the only country
in the region looking to grow their own coca plants.
This idea is evidenced by the fact that in late April 2017,
Honduran authorities discovered the first ever coca
plantation in the Olancho Department of Honduras.
Overall, cocaine production appears to be at an all-time
high and the articles indicate the multiple facets of the
problem. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Global cocaine manufactured in 2016 reached the highest
level ever reported.”

Erythroxylum coca, Erythroxylaceae, Coca, leaves. The alkaloid cocaine is used in homeopathy as
remedy: Cocainum purum (Cocain-p.).
Source: By H. Zell [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Erythroxylum_coca_001.JPG.

Source: “La ONU alerta de que el mercado mundial de drogas está en máximos
históricos (UN Warns that the World Drug Market is at Historic Highs),” Diario Las
Americas, 26 June 2018. https://www.diariolasamericas.com/mundo/la-onu-alertaque-el-mercado-mundial-drogas-esta-maximos-historicos-n4155717
Global cocaine manufactured in 2016 reached the highest level ever reported, with
an estimated 1,410 tons produced. An estimated 70% of this quantity was produced
in Colombia.
Source: “Colombia alcanzó record histórico de cultivos de coca en 2017 (Colombia
Reached Historical Coca Production Record in 2017),” El Espectador, 25 June
2018. https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/el-mundo/ee-uu-colombia-alcanzorecord-historico-de-cultivos-de-coca-en-2017-articulo-796434
Coca production in Colombia has been steadily increasing since 2013, when
negotiations with the now demobilized Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
got underway. The FARC had been one of Colombia’s biggest drug trafficking
organizations, and many had hoped after the signing of the peace accord in 2016
that the country would put an end to the scourge for good.
Instead, new illegal armed groups have moved into the desolate jungle previously
controlled by the rebel band and taken control of drug trafficking routes. Parts of
the peace accord dedicated to eradicating coca and providing poor Colombians
who make a living growing coca with a viable alternative also have struggled to
get off the ground. Combined with Colombia’s decision to end aerial spraying of
herbicides on illicit crops in 2015 over health concerns, the amount of coca in the
countryside continues to grow.

Source: “Localizan por primera vez plantación de coca y laboratorio para procesarla (Authorities Found First Ever Coca Plantation and
Processing Lab),” Prensa Libre, 26 May 2018. http://www.prensalibre.com/ciudades/alta-verapaz/pnc-localiza-por-primera-vez-plantacion-decoca-y-laboratorio-para-procesarla
The crops were found in a mountainous region six hours by foot from the central city of Cobán, which is the capital of the department of
Alta Verapaz. The finding in and of itself is significant because it represents the first ever coca field to be discovered in Guatemala. A small
laboratory was also found near the coca farm. It contained materials commonly used for turning coca leaves into cocaine base, such as
gasoline, cement and acid.

OE Watch | September 2018

70

LATIN AMERICA
Criminal Groups Utilize Marketing Techniques to Sell Drugs
to Children in Mexico, Central and South America
OE Watch Commentary: Drug trafficking organizations in Mexico,
Central and South America consistently change tactics to traffic
their product both internationally and domestically. However, as the
accompanying excerpted article from Tiempo Digital points out,
authorities throughout the region are reporting a new and growing
trend in which local gangs are utilizing multiple marketing techniques
to addict younger consumers to their product and to commercialize
different types of drugs.
For example, the excerpt from El Tiempo notes how adolescents
and teenagers are the target of new marketing strategies that involve
selling drugs shaped as gummy bears or other types of candy. This type
of marketing is unique as it appears innocuous to youth who believe
they are buying candy instead of drugs. Other methods have also been
detected and involve the use of patches with the insignia of cartoon
characters or small tattoos. These are unique in the sense they do not
draw attention to teachers or parents and can be easily applied to the
skin where the drug is absorbed into the system.
In terms of marketing strategies, the excerpt from El Universal
discusses that gangs throughout the region to include Honduras,
Colombia, Mexico and Costa Rica look at what is readily accessible,
ease of purchase (kids do not have to travel and can pay for drugs)
and the popularity of specific products. Gangs are also known to ask
kids what type of high they are looking for and conduct actual surveys
to garner information. For these reasons, dealers commonly operate
in nightclubs, schools, soccer fields, malls and other areas in which
teenagers tend to spend their time in order to maximize their marketing
campaigns. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Gangs in Honduras and Bogota dedicated to
marketing drugs to kids work diligently to sell their
product in the form of candy or gummy bears which
are attractive designs for young people and have a
harmless appearance.”

Source: “Alerta! Drogas en forma de caramelos son un peligro para
los niños en Honduras (Alert! Drugs Sold as Caramel Represent
Danger to Children in Honduras),” Tiempo Digital, 2 August 2018.
https://tiempo.hn/alerta-drogas-en-forma-de-caramelos-son-unpeligro-para-los-ninos-en-honduras/
The idea that local drug trafficking organizations are using new
marketing strategies to sell their product to children has been
confirmed by authorities in Mexico, Central and South America.
The newest method to conceal drugs for sale to children is to
camouflage the product in candy that can easily be taken into homes
and schools without teachers or parents noticing.
Source: “A mi hija la indujeron en la drogadicción con golosinas’
(My Daughter Became a Drug Addict after Purchasing Drugs
Camouflaged as Candy),” El Tiempo, 13 April 2018. http://www.
eltiempo.com/bogota/consumo-de-droga-a-traves-de-dulces-encolegio-de-kennedy-en-bogota-204672
Gangs in Honduras and Bogota dedicated to marketing drugs to
kids work diligently to sell their product in the form of candy or
gummy bears which are attractive designs for young people and
have a harmless appearance. In Bogota, one mother reports that
her 12-year-old daughter became rebellious and stopped caring
about her personal appearance over a six month period of drug use
after she began purchasing what she believed to be candy at school.
Source: “Dulce Droga. Inducen a niños a adición (Sweet Drugs.
How Kids are Swayed into Addiction),” El Universal, 18 September
2017. http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/nacion/seguridad/dulcedroga-inducen-ninos-las-adicciones
Authorities in Honduras and Mexico report that gangs use
marketing strategies to distribute and sell drugs to kids. These
strategies involve conducting surveys, investigating which drugs are
most popular in what neighborhoods, and acting as sales managers
at places where kids normally hang out. For this reason, dealers
spent extensive amounts of time at nightclubs, schools, soccer fields,
and any other places young adults are known to frequent.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | September 2018

71

