community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #4
April 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

RUSSIA’S
AMBITIONS

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
3
4
5
6
7
9

10
11
13

Russia Looks to Expand Its Influence in Africa
Russian Influence in the Levant Basin
Escalation in Syria?
Iran: Supreme Leader Advisor Lauds Russian Strategic Ties
The Growth of Russia-Thailand Relations: What’s Next?
A Chinese Perspective on Pakistan-Russian Cooperation in
Afghanistan
Covert Supply Lines
A Militarized Silicon Valley in Russia?
Russia Forms Two New Divisions in the Southern Military
District

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
14
15
16
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
27

“Holy Defense:” Hezbollah’s New First-Person Shooter
Video Game
War in Syria Turned Hezbollah into a Powerful Army
The Tiger Forces in Damascus
Syria: Who are the Loyalist Forces on the Eastern Banks of
the Euphrates?
A Turkish View of the Wagner Group in Syria
Turkey’s Balancing Act with Armed Rebels in Northern
Syria
Turkey and Power Play in Syria
Iran: Muslims Supported by US, UK are Illegitimate
Iran Unveils New Anti-Armor Missile
Police Chief Demands Death for Sufi Protestors
Iranian Environmentalists Arrested as Spies
Iran: Israel’s Missile Defense Can Be Overwhelmed
13 Million Users of Domestic Messaging Apps in Iran
Arresting Iranian Cyber Criminals

AFRICA
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Nigeria’s Environmental Devastation Drives Conflict
Boko Haram Repeats Chibok Kidnapping, Now in Dapchi
Who are the Anglophone Secessionists in Cameroon?
Protests Against Foreign Militaries in Niger
South Sudan’s President Scapegoats US for Failed Peace
Talks
South Sudan: Buying Peace Does Not Work
Local Debate on AMISOM: Should It Stay or Should It Go?
Is China Practicing “Debt-Trap Diplomacy” in Africa?

LATIN AMERICA
36
37
38
39
39
40
41
42
42
43
44
45

Brazil Has a Border Problem
Security Issues in Ecuador
Impact of Odebrecht Scandal on Peruvian Economy
Elections in El Salvador
Elections in Cuba
Elections in Colombia
Cristina Fernández’s Legal Jeopardy
Colombian Forces Fight the ELN
Cracks in Bolivarian Military Morale
Stabilizing Venezuela: Strategic Objective for Bolivarians
Continuing Violence in Mexico Fuels Armored Car Business
Bombs Detonated on Ferry and Tourist Vessel in Mexico

ASIA-PACIFIC
46
47

China’s Focus on the Development of “High-Quality
Weapons and Equipment” for the Navy
Fact or Psychological Warfare? China’s Development of the
World’s Strongest Individual Firepower System

49
50
51
52
54
55

China Commits to Building Global Satellite Communication
Network by 2023
Xi Jinping Promotes Civil-Military Integration, Technological
Innovation
Reopened Chinese-Built Railways Link Coastal Angola with the
Interior of Africa
Beyond Bitcoin: Could China Embrace Blockchain for Defense
and Security Applications?
China Seeks Extradition of Detained Uyghurs in Malaysia
Vietnam’s Military Modernization

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
56
57
58
59

Concern in Kazakhstan over Returning Foreign Fighters from
Syria
Uzbekistan Reopens Border Checkpoints with Tajikistan
Azerbaijan and Georgia Increase Bilateral Security Cooperation
Pakistan’s Training Mission to Saudi Arabia

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
60
61
62
64
66
67
68
69
70

A Russian Approach to Interagency Cooperation
New Russian Officer Code of Conduct
Russian Operational Reserve Will Enhance Active Component
Readiness
The Drel Gliding Gravity Bomb with Independently Targetable
Submunitions
The Kinzhal Air Launched Missile is a Modified Iskander SRBM
Stock up on Baking Soda Before the Acid Fog Descends
Russian Arctic Oil Vital to Russian Economy
The New Chinese Silk Road May Run Through the Arctic
Interview with Russian Navy Commander Admiral Korolev

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 4

April | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gunduz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

Zach Kelsay
		
Asia-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Spencer Shanks
Wilson VornDick
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

		
Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Matthew Stein
Jacob Zenn

		
Russia, Ukraine

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Kaitlyn Johnson
Boris Vainer
Tom Wilhelm

ON THE COVER:
At the Luzhsky training ground during the main stage of the Zapad-2017
joint Russian-Belarusian strategic exercises.
Source: President of Russia, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/55644, CC 4.0.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Russia Looks to Expand Its Influence in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: Russian influence in Africa is
not a new phenomenon. Back in the days of the Cold War the
Soviet Union had deep ties to the continent, providing arms,
training, and ideological support to African independence
movements. However, with the dissolution of the Soviet
Union in 1991, Russia partly turned away from its African
relationships. Now, as the accompanying article from the
Institute for Security Studies relates, Russia is renewing old ties
and forging new ones on the continent.

“Through energy diplomacy, military might and soft
power, Russia will gradually increase its influence in
Africa.”

According to the accompanying article, Russia’s involvement
in the continent is often most welcome. From an African
perspective, having yet another player in the areas of trade and
politics helps to level the playing field. Additionally, Russia
does not place the preconditions on trade such as respecting
human rights that the West frequently insists upon. The result
has been significant growth in trade between Russia and Africa,
with one report stating it grew 185 percent between 2005 and
2015.
Some of that trade can be ascribed to arms sales. Indeed,
Russia has a long history of being a major supplier of weapons
to Africa. One need only look at the flag of Mozambique,
emboldened with the image of an AK-47, to know how
important and longstanding Russian-supplied weapons are to
the continent. That history continues as Russian weapons are
often the ones that appear in countries with arms embargoes.
Russian military influence is not limited to arms sales. Large
numbers of Russian soldiers serve as peacekeepers and trainers
in Africa. Additionally, numerous African countries attend
Russian-hosted military exercises, either as participants or
observers, with those countries that are major trading partners
with Russia more likely to attend. Nor should it be overlooked
that many of Russia’s investments in Africa are related to
energy – oil, gas, and nuclear – through its state-owned firms
that often have military ties.

Vladimir Putin and the President of Guinea, Alpha Condé.

Source: Kremlin/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Putin_and_Alpha_Condé_(2017-09-28)_1.jpg, CC By 4.0.

Source: Ronak Gopaldas, “Russia and Africa Meet Again,” Institute for
Security Studies (South Africa), 13 March 2018. https://issafrica.org/isstoday/russia-and-africa-meet-again
Through energy diplomacy, military might and soft power, Russia will
gradually increase its influence in Africa.
Indeed, as Stephanie Wolters of the Institute for Security Studies notes,
‘Russia’s position hasn’t really changed much in the past few years – i.e.
bargaining for African support in multilateral institutions in return for UN
Security Council vetoes.’
However, through strategic energy diplomacy, military might and
soft power, Russia will gradually increase its influence in Africa on an
incremental, rather than an exponential, level.
Russia’s push to level the playing field and create a more equitable power
balance in international relations is likely to appeal to Africa’s leaders.

Russia’s Africa connections have not been without
controversy. The country has been accused of exacerbating
conflicts through its ignoring of arms embargoes and undermining governance through lack of transparency in economic deals. Still, despite
these problems and competition with the bigger Chinese player, Russia is gradually increasing its influence in Africa. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

OE Watch | April 2018

3

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Russian Influence in the Levant Basin
OE Watch Commentary: The Eastern Mediterranean’s “Levant Basin,” home
to massive untapped offshore natural gas deposits, is on track to becoming a key
flashpoint in the region’s tangle of crises and conflicts. The Levant Basin’s gas
deposits represent an economic challenge for Russia, which is currently the top
exporter of natural gas in the world. According to the accompanying passage from the
Saudi daily al-Hayat, “Russia is ready to wage a world war in order to maintain its
influence and safeguard its interests in this vital region.”
As the region’s countries scramble to claim and exploit resources within their
respective Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ), Syria’s EEZ remains untouched save
for a 2013 agreement with Russia to explore parts of these waters. While Russia and
its allies in Syria remain preoccupied by operations to regain territory from rebel
forces, the importance of littoral projection has not escaped their planning and military
thought. Several articles in recent issues of the Syrian Ministry of Defense’s quarterly
journal Military Thought (al-Fikr al-Askari) are dedicated to coastal defense. Russia’s
49-year renewable lease on the Tartous Naval Facility is now in effect, and the facility
will be expanded manifold, to eventually hold 11 warships. In August 2017, Russia
added two submarines to its permanent Mediterranean naval presence.
Russia has also helped the Egyptian government protect and exploit resources
within its own EEZ, including by purchasing a 30 percent share in the Egyptian
“Zohr” Field and by outfitting Egyptian ships, most notably the two French-built
Mistral-class helicopter carriers that were originally intended for the Russian Navy.
Russian companies have also negotiated with the Italian company Eni for rights to
explore and develop Lebanon’s offshore gas resources, some of which are along a
contested maritime boundary with Israel. The shifting web of enmity and alliances
in the Middle East is compounded in the Eastern Mediterranean by the Turkish-Greek
conflict. The second accompanying passage, from the Egyptian semi-official al-Ahram,
argues that Russia is “the new rising star in the Middle East” and has now joined the
United States as a “party that can mediate between Ankara and Nicosia.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫سيطرة روسيا على غاز املتوسط‬
Adnan Karima, “Russian Control of Mediterranean
Gas,” al-Hayat, 13 February 2018. https://goo.gl/
wGWJg7
The Mediterranean Basin has among the world’s
richest natural gas deposits and he who controls
Syria controls the Middle East, the gateway to Asia,
the keys to Russia (according to Catherine II) and
the first Silk Road (according to Chinese strategy).
He who controls Syria can control the world
economic system. Thus, we can understand the true
reasons for Russian commitment to its presence in
Syria, which may last for over 100 years according
to the agreement signed with the Bashar al-Assad
regime. Russia is ready to wage a world war in
order to maintain its influence and safeguard its
interests in this vital region…
Source:‫ روسيا النجم الساطع الجديد فى‬..‫أطماع تركيا تشعل الصراع‬
‫الشرق األوسط‬
“Turkish Ambitions Spark Conflict… Russia the
New Rising Star in the Middle East,” al-Ahram, 22
February 2018. http://arabi.ahram.org.eg/
News/132870.aspx
Analysts conclude that compared to 2017, more
incidents will occur in the Eastern Mediterranean,
and the party that can mediate between Ankara and
Nicosia is not only Washington but also Russia, the
new rising star in the Middle East.

“...the party that can mediate between Ankara and Nicosia is not only Washington but also Russia, the
new rising star in the Middle East...”

“Permanent Russian naval group in the Mediterranean provides air defence over Syria.”
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://syria.mil.ru/en/index/syria/photo/gallery.htm?id=27388@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

4

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Escalation in Syria?
OE Watch Commentary: The official, Kremlinsupported media had little to say regarding the 7-8
February losses incurred by the Wagner Private
Military Company (PMC) near Dayr az Zawr, Syria.
The Kremlin’s reticence stemmed not only from
the unwillingness to admit the losses of Russian
mercenaries, but that Russian PMCs still don’t officially
exist. As discussed in last month’s OE Watch (“Pros
and Cons of Legalizing Private Military Companies”)
Russian legislators have yet to pass legislation
authorizing the development of PMCs. While denying
the existence of Russian PMCs presents no grave
challenges for the Kremlin, covering up the deaths and
injuries of Wagner personnel, particularly given the
spread of digital technology and alternate channels for
information in Russia, has proven more difficult.
The accompanying excerpt from the semiindependent news source, Rosbalt, describes how even
without official Kremlin recognition of the Wagner
PMC losses, Russian defense officials are preparing
to escalate to avoid further personnel and reputation
losses. The article begins by suggesting that “the
current standoff between Russia and the West…
could make the Cuban missile crisis and other critical
moments of the Cold War… seem like child’s play.” It
reminds readers of the US strike against “the Syrian
Government forces’ Shayrat airbase” in April 2017 and
the February 2018 attack which “destroyed a column
of the Wagner private military company… near Dayr
az Zawr.” The source alleges that Russian military
personnel did not intervene during these two attacks,
“but now everything could change.” Having recently
declared Russia’s superpower pretensions, “the Kremlin
needs to make at least some attempt to restore its
reputation.”
The author supports this assertion by quoting the
recent statement of General Valeriy Gerasimov, Chief
of the Russian Army General Staff, who stated on
13 March that, “in the event of a threat arising to our
servicemen’s lives, the Russian Federation Armed
Forces will take retaliatory measures, both against
the missiles and against their delivery vehicles.” The
author queries a number of Russian military experts to
gauge their assessment on the likelihood of escalation,
with the responses ranging from not very likely to the
possibility of direct conflict. One expert summed it up
by saying “we are moving in a dangerous direction.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The situation in Syria is such that ‘uncontrollable escalation
is always possible if hostilities suddenly begin locally, because
no one is prepared to lose. And that could lead to anything’.”
Source: Aleksandr Zhelenin, “Неконтролируемая эскалация возможна,”
(Uncontrollable Escalation Possible) Rosbalt, 14 March 2018. https://www.rosbalt.
ru/world/2018/03/14/1688403.html
Journalists love shocking headlines and preambles that excite the imagination,
but today it will probably be no exaggeration to say that never since World War II
has the world come closer to the brink of the abyss. Recent statements by official
representatives of the United States and the Russian Federation could make the
Cuban missile crisis and other critical moments of the Cold War -- to which people
like to compare the current standoff between Russia and the West -- seem like child’s
play….
…Let us recall that recently the Americans, after a similar warning, destroyed a
column of the Wagner private military company, which shortly before this had been
firing at the headquarters of the Kurdish armed opposition near Dayr az Zawr.
In both cases no response or attempts at counteraction were observed on the part
of the Russian Federation Armed Forces. But now everything could change. First,
because the rout of the Wagner private military company was received extremely
painfully by the Russian public, and second, because the Russian presidential
election is literally upon us and the Kremlin needs to make at least some attempt to
restore its reputation, which has been shaken by these American strikes….
…The very next day after Haley’s statement at the UN, Valeriy Gerasimov, Chief
of the Russian Army General Staff, stated that, in the event of “a threat arising to
our servicemen’s lives, the Russian Federation Armed Forces will take retaliatory
measures, both against the missiles and against their delivery vehicles.”
…The expert’s [Mikhail Magid ]explanation for Gerasimov’s statement is that “the
Russian Federation would like to ensure the safety of its troops in Syria. They have
already suffered major losses: the rout of the column containing representatives
of the Wagner private military company, the plane with dozens of servicemen
that crashed near the Humaymim airbase. Fresh losses would be extremely
disadvantageous to the Kremlin just before the election. Nevertheless, for the
exact same reason the Russian Air Defense Forces will most likely not fire at the
Americans: No one wants another rout.”
…Novaya Gazeta military observer Pavel Felgengauer assesses the danger of
a direct Russian-American military conflict in Syria as close to zero. The mutual
threats currently being heard from both the Russian and the American sides,
according to him, are “not so terrifying.” But we are moving in a dangerous
direction,” he commented, even so.
Aleksandr Khramchikhin, deputy director of the Institute of Political and Military
Analysis, holds the directly opposite opinion. According to him, “there is a certain
‘red line,’ beyond which it will be necessary to join battle, because it will be
impossible not to do so.” …The situation in Syria is such that “uncontrollable
escalation is always possible if hostilities suddenly begin locally, because no one is
prepared to lose. And that could lead to anything.”

OE Watch | April 2018

5

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Iran: Supreme Leader Advisor Lauds Russian Strategic Ties
OE Watch Commentary: Over the course
of the last decade, Iran-Russia relations have
undergone an unprecedented rapprochement. For
much of Iranian history, after all, Iranians have
viewed Russia with distrust if not disdain. Prior
to the nineteenth century, successive shahs and
dynasties looked down upon Russia as backward
and uncouth. As the Russian Empire became a
growing military power in the nineteenth century,
resentment brewed, especially after the Russian
army seized what is now Armenia, Azerbaijan,
and Georgia from Iranian control and later
encroached upon Iranian claims in what is now
Turkmenistan. In 1907, Russia and Great Britain
formally divided Iran into spheres of influence
and as Iranians struggled for some semblance of
constitutional democracy, it was the tsar in St.
Petersburg who sought to stymie their efforts.
So far as most Iranians were concerned,
Ali Akbar Velayati, the Supreme Leader’s Advisor on Foreign Affairs.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://farsi.khamenei.ir/photo-album?id=29319, CC 4.0.
the Soviet Union was not much better. Soviet
policies were just as exploitative as Tsarist Russian
What Russia has shown…is the growing strategic relationship
policies before them, and Soviet imperial interests
between the two countries.
manifested in support for Kurdish and Azerbaijani
separatism further imperiled Iranian sovereignty
and independence. In the first months of the Islamic Revolution, revolutionary leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini railed against both the
United States and the Soviet Union and promised a foreign policy independent from both Cold War rivals.

“

”

Russian President Vladimir Putin, however, has actively courted Iran. After the nuclear accident at Chernobyl and the fall of the Soviet
Union, the Russian nuclear industry had difficulty competing against industry giants in the United States and Europe and so began to pursue
business in places like Iran, which Western companies by law or decision chose to avoid. Russia’s atomic energy company took over work to
construct Iran’s Bushehr nuclear plant and, at various times, has promised to build several new reactors. As Russo-Iranian relations tightened,
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei swept previous animosity toward Moscow under the rug in order to better counter the West and its regional
proxies despite residual animosity toward Russia on the part of ordinary Iranians (see “Iran-Russia Relations,” OE Watch, July 2016).
It is in this context that the excerpted interview with the conservative Mehr News Agency by Ali Akbar Velayati, post-revolutionary
Iran’s longest serving foreign minister (1981-1997) and the current chief foreign affairs advisor to Khamenei, is of interest. Velayati hails
the “growing and strategic ties” with Russia. The interview comes after Russia vetoed a UN Security Council Resolution, sponsored by the
United States and the United Kingdom, which sought to sanction Iranian violations of an arms embargo placed upon Houthi insurgents in
Yemen. While Velayati’s comments touched on a broader array of foreign relationships, his praise for Iran’s growing ties with Russia seem
designed to counter those who say that such ties risk too much. Rather, he implies that Russia’s willingness to defend Iran at the United
Nations justifies Khamenei’s strategy. The danger moving forward would be if an assumption or reality of Russian protection leads the
Islamic Republic to believe itself immune to the consequences of its support for insurgency across the Middle East. In such a case, Iranian
weapons transfers and sponsorship of insurgency could quickly get worse. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Veto-ye Qata’nameh ‘Aliyeh Iran Namayanegar Ravabat-e Rahbaradi Iran va Rusiyeh Ast” (“The veto of the resolution against Iran
represents the strategic relationship between Iran and Russia”), Mehr News Agency, 28 February 2018. https://goo.gl/9sEg1b
The international affairs advisor to the Supreme Leader said that by vetoing this resolution, Russia has shown the growing relations and
strategic ties. According to the Mehr correspondent, Ali Akbar Velayati, international affairs advisor to the Supreme Leader of the Islamic
Revolution, in a meeting with Syria’s Minister of Religious Endowments Muhammad Abdul-Sattar, reportedly said, “We had a very good and
important meeting with Syrian religious scholars and it was very good and important and we both believed that the nation and state of Syria
and Iran had strategic relations which allowed them to survive against the common enemy of the Americans and Zionists, and this victory
could not have been achieved but for the struggle of the warriors of Iran, Iraq, Syria, and every place where the Muslims would be free….”
And, in response to a question regarding the British government’s efforts in the Security Council against Iran and Yemen, he stated: British
policy has a negative impact on the Iranian people, and it [British actions] were not contrary to our expectations. What Russia has shown in
the veto of this resolution is the growing strategic relationship between the two countries.

OE Watch | April 2018

6

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
The Growth of Russia-Thailand Relations: What’s Next?
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has set its eyes on
Thailand and is clearly striving to gain more influence
in the region. According to the excerpted article from
The Nation, Russia is pursuing a strategy to boost trade
and other ties with Southeast Asian nations, particularly
Thailand. Some of the areas in which both countries are
hoping to strengthen ties include transport, logistics,
energy, biotech, robotics, information technology, cyber
security, terrorism, and military. The article cites Russian
Deputy Minister of Economic Development, Alexei
Gruzdev, as calling Thailand a possible “hub in ASEAN”
and “a key trading bloc and an important member of
the international community.” Additionally, Gruzdev
expressed a willingness to “take part in infrastructure
development (within Thailand), including for a high-speed
railway, port development, and air traffic control system
for U-Tapao airport.” The excerpted article published in the
Bangkok Post discusses recent commitments to cooperate
in combatting international terrorism and transnational
crimes and there are clear indications that Russia could
be preparing to play a bigger role in the region. For
example, Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha expressed
hopes Russia will participate in meetings and dialogues
initiated by Thailand, once Bangkok assumes the ASEAN
chairmanship next year.
According to the excerpted articles from The Diplomat
and RIA Novosti, Russia and Thailand have been
cooperating in the military and defense industries as well.
In May 2016, Prayut visited Russia in what was said to
be the first formal visit by a Thai premier in more than a
decade. During the visit, both sides signed an agreement on
military cooperation. Following the visit, reports emerged
claiming Thailand planned on buying Russian helicopters
and tanks and a “jointly run production and maintenance
facility in Thailand (was planned) to support the Mi-17V5
helicopters and other Russian systems in Thailand.” The
article from RIA Novosti mentions Russia-Thai cooperation
in security and that the two sides are developing military
ties to strengthen regional security and stability in the
Asia-Pacific region.
Overall, Russia offers Thailand an alternative to China
and the United States for support, while for Russia, firming
up relations with Thailand is a strategic move to increased
trade and influence in the ASEAN region. Thailand also is
strategically located by the entrance to the heavily traveled
Strait of Malacca. Additionally, there has been ongoing talk
of trying to build the Kra Isthmus canal, which would cut
through Thailand, and be a huge benefit to Russian trade.
Finally, Russia’s growing presence in Southeast Asia could
counterbalance that of the United States and China. End
OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Wang Weidong, Asina Pornwasin, “Thailand Moves up in Russia’s
Sights,” The Nation, 22 February 2018. http://www.nationmultimedia.com/
detail/Economy/30339403
Russia sees Thailand as a key focus for the country in Asia as part of its
strategy to boost trade and other ties with Southeast nations, said Alexei
Gruzdev, Deputy Minister of Economic Development.
“… Thailand may be considered a hub in Asean. There are a lot of fields to
explore and that’s why we were here,” said Gruzdev, who led a trade mission to
Thailand.
In regards to the country’s Eastern Economic Corridor, Gruzdev said that
Russia was ready to take part in infrastructure development, including for a
high speed railway, port development and air traffic control system for U-Tapao
airport.
“All these fields that mention transport, logistic, energy, biotech,
pharmaceutical, medical equipment, financing, robotic, IT, and Internet
technology, we are interested in.
“We think that we need to explore new areas like in petrochemicals,
pharmaceuticals, medical equipment, robotics, IT and cyber security. Russia is
a s leading country in term of cybersecurity, technology and software,” Gruzdev
said.
Gruzdev said that Asean is a key trading bloc and an important member of the
international community.
Source: Wassana Nanuam, “Thailand, Russia Unite to Fight Terror,” Bangkok
Post, 1 March 2018. https://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1420067/
thailand-russia-unite-to-fight-terror
Thailand and Russia confirmed yesterday a joint commitment to strengthen
security cooperation in combatting international terrorism and transnational
crimes, and enhancing cyber security.
Source: Prashanth Parameswaran, “What’s Next for Russia-Thailand Military
Ties?” The Diplomat, 20 January 2017. https://thediplomat.com/2017/01/whatsnext-for-russia-thailand-military-ties
But cooperation between Moscow and Bangkok has been on the uptick in
recent years. Thailand has been looking to boost relations with several other
nations following a coup in May 2014, which complicated its ties with the United
States and other Western nations. Meanwhile, Russia under Vladimir Putin –
ambitious abroad and increasingly isolated from the West — has been looking to
boost its presence in the Asia-Pacific, including in Southeast Asia.
In a key step towards boosting ties, in May 2016, Thai Prime Minister Prayut
Chan-o-cha made a trip to Russia in May 2016, the first formal visit by a Thai
premier in more than a decade. Though Prayut had downplayed the defense
component of the relationship, his visit last year came amid reports that
Thailand planned on buying Russian helicopters and tanks, and an agreement
on military cooperation was one of six pacts inked by the two sides during his
trip
Interestingly, one of the topics discussed was the setting up of a jointly run
production and maintenance facility in Thailand. The facility, according to
unnamed sources who spoke to IHS Jane’s, would reportedly support the Mi17V5 helicopters and other Russian systems in Thailand but also potentially look
to provide maintenance support to other Mi-17V5 operators in Southeast Asia.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2018

7

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Continued: The Growth of Russia-Thailand Relations:
What’s Next?
“Russia sees Thailand as a key focus for the country in Asia as part of its strategy to boost trade and
other ties with Southeast nations…”
Source: Yevgeny Belenky, “Военное сотрудничество РФ и Таиланда становится фактором стабильности в АТР (Military Cooperation
between Russia and Thailand is becoming a Factor in the Stability of the Asia-Pacific Region),” RIA Novosti, 20 March 2017. https://ria.ru/
defense_safety/20170320/1490368903.html
Russia-Thai cooperation in security, developing military ties, military-technical cooperation is an important element in bilateral relations
and factors in to strengthening regional security and stability in the Asia-Pacific region.
In 2016, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense of Thailand, General Prawit Wongsuwan, visited Russia twice. In 2015 and 2016,
detachments of military ships from the Russian Navy’s Pacific Fleet, visited Thailand, the ambassador recalled.
… it was a question of exporting and importing modern weapons and military equipment, cooperation in locating production, assembling
Russian weapons in Thailand, serving Russian military equipment – primarily aviation – having dual use-military and civilian purposes.

Russian President Vladimir Putin Meeting with Prime Minister of Thailand Prayut Chan-o-cha.
Source: Russian Presidency, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/51941, CC 4.0.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | April 2018

8

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
A Chinese Perspective on Pakistan-Russian Cooperation
in Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: On 21 February the Pakistani
publication, The News International, published an article about
statements that a Chinese expert on international affairs made to
China Global Television Network. According to the article, the
Chinese expert is supportive of Russian and Pakistani involvement
in Afghanistan because they both have security interests in the
country. The expert also expected that since Russia and Pakistan
are members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
they could utilize the SCO to increase dialogue with both the
Afghan government and the Taliban. In addition, the Chinese
expert argued that the US decision to suspend security funding to
Pakistan “has driven Pakistan and Russian relations even closer,”
especially on issues related to security and stability in Afghanistan.
The Chinese expert also hinted at economic implications of
the warming Russian-Pakistani relations. He said that the two
countries agreed to build a pipeline from Russia to Pakistan to
provide natural gas to Pakistan and that this is also driving their
greater security cooperation. This pipeline could overlap with the
Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–Pakistan–India Pipeline, or TAPI,
which is set to be completed in 2019. It would therefore inevitably
have to pass through Afghanistan as well as other Central Asian
countries that are SCO members. Turkmenistan is an exception,
however, in that it has attended SCO fora but because of its official
policy of neutrality in foreign affairs, it is the only Central Asian
country to not have joined the SCO.
The Chinese expert made one final point—the long-standing
“all-weather friendship” between China and Pakistan would not be
affected by Pakistan’s relations with either Russia or the US. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“He said that Pakistan was now a full member of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), hence both
Russia and Pakistan could use this new channel to step
up their dialogue concerning Afghanistan and try to
bring the Taliban back to the negotiating table.”
Source: “Pakistan, Russia have shared interests to see peace, stability
in Afghanistan: Chinese expert,” The News International, 21 February
2018. https://www.thenews.com.pk/latest/283921-pakistan-russia-haveshared-interests-to-see-peace-stability-in-afghanistan-chinese-expert
While commenting on closer relations between Pakistan and Russia,
a Chinese expert on international affairs said that both countries could
play a constructive role to bring peace and stability to the region
including Afghanistan. He opined that the two countries could also use
multilateral channels to enhance their dialogue as Russia, China and
Pakistan had a trilateral dialogue concerning Afghanistan. He said
that Pakistan was now a full member of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), hence both Russia and Pakistan could use this new
channel to step up their dialogue concerning Afghanistan and try to
bring the Taliban back to the negotiating table.
He also said “Russia and Pakistan have warmed up relations for
several years but certainly the latest U.S. move concerning Pakistan has
driven Pakistan and Russian relations even closer.” He said that both the
countries had not only agreed to enhance their political consultations
but also to increase their cooperation in economic, trade and investment
areas. To yet another question, he remarked that Pakistan and China
enjoyed an all-weather friendship regardless of Pakistan’s relations
with other countries, adding that “China welcomes friendship between
Pakistan and Russia.”

Valley in Samangan Province in northern Afghanistan.

Source: US. Army, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%81%D8%BA%D8%A7%D9%86%D8%B3%D8%AA%D8%A7%D9%86#/media/File:Samangan_Province.jpg, (CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

9

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Covert Supply Lines
OE Watch Commentary: The title of a recent article from the pro-government Russian daily
Izvestiya says it all: “Ministry of Defense to Offer Private Carriers Stealth Contracts: Transport
Companies will Ship Military Cargoes Expeditiously and Under Conditions of Secrecy.” Where in
the past, these military transportation contracts had to go through a competitive bidding process
and were not classified, under the new regulation, they “will be drawn up in an expedited manner
following a simplified procedure and the documents will be totally classified.” While the experts
quoted in the article claim that this new procedure “will allow the delivery of military materials
within compressed schedules and without excessive bureaucratic delays,” it says nothing about the
lack of oversight and an almost certain increase in corruption.
Oddly, the article asserts that this new covert procedure “will also be used for supplying Russian
troops participating in peace-keeping operations beyond the country’s borders” and that Russia’s
new National Guard “will acquire the right to purchase transport services under the simplified
procedure.” The article quotes a military expert who suggests that defense officials need to resort
to clandestine methods because “transportation of army cargoes is constantly being analyzed by
foreign intelligence services,” but doesn’t explain why domestic transport services should also
be secret. This new regulation will make tracking Russian military shipments more difficult for
both foreign observers and Russians with an interest in what their government is doing. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

Map of the Donbass region.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_the_Donbass.png, CCA-SA 3.0.

“Izvestiya was told by the Ministry of Defense that the ministry intends to accelerate and classify
outsourcing transportation of military cargoes.”
Source: A. Kruglov, N. Surkov and B. Stepovoy, “Минобороны предложит частным перевозчикам ‘стелс-контракты’: Транспортные
компании перевезут военные грузы оперативно и в условиях секретности (Ministry of Defense to Offer Private Carriers ‘Stealth
Contracts:’ Transport Companies will Ship Military Cargoes Expeditiously and Under Conditions of Secrecy),” Izvestiya, 27 February 2018.
https://iz.ru/708891/aleksandr-kruglov-nikolai-surkov-bogdan-stepovoi/minoborony-predlozhit-chastnym-perevozchikam-stels-kontrakty
In the event of war or foreign army operations transport companies will ship Russian military cargoes under “stealth contracts.” For this
purpose the Ministry of Defense has developed a new regulation for working with private carriers. Contracts with them will be drawn up in
an expedited manner following a simplified procedure and the documents will be totally classified. In the opinion of experts this will allow the
delivery of military materials within compressed schedules and without excessive bureaucratic delays.
Izvestiya was told by the Ministry of Defense that the ministry intends to accelerate and classify outsourcing transportation of military
cargoes…. The new regulation for purchasing transport services should ensure the necessary expeditiousness of military shipments under
special circumstances. The time for signing the state contracts under such conditions will be significantly shortened. It will not be necessary
to wait for the ten days specified under [current] law.
This plan will be put into effect in the event of threats to Russia’s military security. It will also be used for supplying Russian troops
participating in peace-keeping operations beyond the country’s borders. The minister of defense and the director of the Federal Service of
National Guard Troops will acquire the right to purchase transport services under the simplified procedure.
The issue of secrecy is given special attention in the new regulation. The carrier must have a license to conduct work using information
containing state secrets. All of the enterprises, institutions and organizations familiar with the military plans will be obligated to not divulge
this information.
It is being affirmed in the Ministry of Defense that the new process will not require additional expenditures from the federal budget. The cost
of the “stealth contracts” should not exceed the costs of similar contracts executed under the standard procedure.
Viktor Murakhovskiy, chief editor of the magazine “Arsenal Otechestva” told Izvestiya that the new regulation will allow military shipments
to be significantly accelerated. Today a state customer calling for the purchase of services must go through a lengthy competitive procedure.
“The Russian Army has long used the services of civilian carriers. During large exercises a great amount of transportation for the
deployment or regrouping of troops is engaged under outsourcing contracts,” reported Viktor Murakhovskiy….
…In the opinion of the expert the ensuring of secrecy is extremely important for covert transportation of troops and logistics items. “The
transportation of army cargoes is constantly being analyzed by foreign intelligence services,” said Viktor Murakhovskiy. “The military know
this and therefore they systematically take measures to protect this information. Even in peacetime the corresponding documentation is
maintained under classified access….”

OE Watch | April 2018

10

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
A Militarized Silicon Valley in Russia?
OE Watch Commentary: Perceived technological
backwardness has been a recurrent theme throughout
much of Russian history. Some suggest that the country’s
political and economic systems have contributed to this
seeming lag in technology. The Kremlin leadership has
often directed considerable resources to compensate
for this technological lag, particularly in the realm of
defense armaments. In a recent interview from Russia’s
main military newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda, Deputy
Defense Minister General Pavel Popov described the
plans for a new “technopark” which will allegedly
“provide for the search, development, and pioneering
of advanced ideas and developments and breakthrough
technology in the defense sphere.”
Ever since Putin returned to the presidency in
2012, there has been much discussion within Russian
defense circles about developing and harnessing all of
the country’s technological assets (military, civilian,
academic) to restore and modernize Russia’s defense
capabilities. According to the excerpt, this new
“Technopark-Era” will apparently encompass “foremost
scientific employees, promising young scientists, and
the best specialists of scientific companies of the Armed
Forces.” Moreover, the facility will be co-located with
representatives of Russia’s top arms manufacturers
which will “facilitate the growth of the efficiency of
interaction among educational, industrial, and research
organizations.” By bringing together the best and
brightest in the field of “breakthrough technology,” the
Russian leadership hopes to see “development in such
fields as nanotechnology and biotech, information and
telecommunications technology, and data protection.”
The new technopark will reportedly be constructed
near the city of Anapa (Krasnodar Region) on the
northern coast of the Black Sea. The more favorable
climate and resort reputation of the region will likely
be an added incentive for employees and military
personnel. The new facility will not be operational until
2020 (at the earliest). As the excerpt points out, this new
technopark “will be a base for the development and
pioneering of a model of the interaction of scientific,
educational, and industrial organizations,” which
will “ensure a synergetic impact in the field of an
enhancement of the quality of the training of personnel,
primarily for catering for the requirements of military
science and enterprises of the defense industrial
complex.” It will be interesting to see if the enthusiastic
rhetoric surrounding this new research and development
project achieves its lofty objectives. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

Source: Dmitriy Semenov, “Эра заряжена на прорыв в будущее (Era Is Primed
for a Breakthrough into the Future),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 28 February 2018.
http://www.redstar.ru/index.php/component/k2/item/36313-era-zaryazhena-naproryv-v-budushchee
One of the principal objectives of the Defense Ministry of Russia when it comes
to state support for innovation activity for 2018 is the building of the Era Military
Innovation Techopark….
…The project is essentially to shape an innovation infrastructure which provides
for the search, development, and pioneering of advanced ideas and developments
and breakthrough technology in the defense sphere. Execution of this initiative, the
Defense Ministry of Russia notes, will make it possible to enhance the efficiency
of applied scientific research, create a base of new technology, and provide for
the pro-active development of military systems. Foremost scientific employees,
promising young scientists, and the best specialists of scientific companies of the
Armed Forces will work in the technopark…. How the idea of the building of the Era
Military Innovation Technopark is being embodied in practice was described for
your Krasnaya Zvezda correspondent by General of the Army Pavel Popov, deputy
RF defense minister.
[Semenov] Pavel Anatolyevich, the project which the Defense Ministry of Russia is
currently bringing to fruition is undoubtedly a requirement of the times. What is the
main goal, the arterial line, of the building of the military technopark?
[Popov] I will say for a start that this concept is fully in keeping with the priorities
of policy in the sphere of state support and development of innovation activity….
The format of the technopark itself will make it possible to shorten the time from
the inception of innovative scientific projects to their materialization in the form
of the building of specific models of arms and military and special equipment.
This project, which is being executed on the initiative of the Defense Ministry of
Russia, is designed to further the development of applied science and upgrade the
scientific and production base of enterprises of the defense industrial complex and
other enterprises and organizations, including medium-sized and small business
engaged in the field of military and dual-purpose technology. The development of
the Era project is also to facilitate the growth of the efficiency of interaction among
educational, industrial, and research organizations and to create the conditions for
productive interdepartmental and interbranch cooperation….
[Semenov] Pavel Anatolyevich, what main types of activity are scheduled for
exercise in the technopark?
[Popov] The key areas, like I say, involve the search, development, and
implementation of advanced ideas and developments and breakthrough technology
corresponding to the interests of consolidation of the country’s defense capability.
We are talking about scientific research and development in such fields as
nanotechnology and biotech, information and telecommunications technology, and
data protection….
As a whole, Era will be a base for the development and pioneering of a model of
the interaction of scientific, educational, and industrial organizations such as will
afford an opportunity for use of the resources and results obtained in various fields.
I would note also that the building of a production, scientific and educational, and
social infrastructure and the pooling of production and scientific and educational
resources will make it possible to ensure a synergetic impact in the field of an
enhancement of the quality of the training of personnel, primarily for catering
for the requirements of military science and enterprises of the defense industrial
complex….

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2018

11

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Continued: A Militarized Silicon Valley in Russia?
“The format of the technopark itself will make it possible to shorten the time from the inception of
innovative scientific projects to their materialization in the form of the building of specific models of arms
and military and special equipment.”

President Putin and Defense Minister Shoigu being briefed on Technopark-Era, Kremlin, 23 Feb 2018.
Source: Russian Presidency, http://kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56923, CC BY 4.0.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | April 2018

12

RUSSIA’S AMBITIONS
Russia Forms Two New Divisions in the Southern
Military District
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying excerpted
article from Izvestiya, the 19th Motorized Rifle Brigade and the 136th
Motorized Rifle Brigade, in the 58th Combined Arms Army (Chief of
the General Staff, General Valeri Gerasimov’s former command), will be
converted back into divisions. These units were converted from divisions
to brigades during the 2008 ‘New Look’ reforms. The general consensus
of Russian opinion on the reason for this conversion is that antiterrorist
operations are now less of a concern (for which the brigade is better
suited), while the possibilities of peer-to-peer conflict are on the rise (for
which the division is better suited).
The location of where these new Russian divisions are, or are not,
is of particular interest. All of these new divisions are in the Southern
Military District and the southern half of the Western Military District.
These dispositions should be expected, as the Southern Military
District is adjacent to, or contains, hotspots and/or territorially disputed
areas such as Abkhazia and South Ossetia (two breakaway regions
of Georgian territory occupied by Russia since the end of the August
2008 Russo-Georgian War), conflict areas in Eastern Ukraine, and the
Crimea. Although a few divisions have been formed in the Western
Military District, near the Ukrainian and Belarussian border, curiously
no divisions have been formed near the Baltics, despite Russian claims
these divisions are intended to combat NATO. The Russians have been
adamant that they have no desire for territorial expansion in the Baltics
and the decision not to place divisions near this area may be a way of
messaging this intent.
The exact structure of these divisions has yet to be announced, but it
is likely these units will not be fully manned. The typical structure of a
motorized rifle division consists of three motorized rifle regiments, one
tank regiment, one artillery regiment, one air defense regiment, and a
few separate battalions, companies, and platoons. (Tank divisions have
a similar structure, but one motorized rifle regiment, and three tank
regiments.) In current practice, most divisions are missing one or more
motorized rifle or tank regiments. There is a high likelihood that these
“missing” regiments are intended to be fleshed out with reservists in
the event of large-scale mobilization, similar to the cadre system the
Russians maintained before the 2008 New Look reforms. This may
appear to be rolling back the 2008 reforms, but this is not the case. Prior
to 2008, most divisions had a very low level of combat readiness and had
difficulty even fielding a single battalion tactical group for operations in
Chechnya and the 2008 Russo-Georgian War. Today, all brigades and
divisions are considered “permanently ready,” usually having manning
levels of over 80 percent, with each maneuver brigade and regiment
(supposedly) capable of forming at least one battalion tactical group.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“…two new motorized rifle divisions will be
activated in the 58th Combined-Arms Army at the
end of 2018. They will be established on the basis
of the currently existing 19th and 136th separate
motorized rifle brigades by including additional
battalions and regiments.”
Source: Nikolay Surkov, Aleksey Ramm, Yevgeniy Andreyev,
“Северный Кавказ укрепили дивизиями (The North Caucasus Has
Been Strengthened with Divisions),” Izvestiya, 16 February 2018.
https://iz.ru/705714/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm-evgenii-andreev/
severnyi-kavkaz-ukrepili-diviziiami
The Defense Ministry has begun an unprecedented reorganization
of 58th Army, the main striking force in southern Russia. It will
be strengthened considerably through the activation of two new
motorized rifle divisions equipped with BMP-3s and the newest
T-72B3 tanks. Existing military posts will be took out of mothballs
and new ones created in Mozdok and Vladikavkaz. A portion of
58th Army will be redeployed to Stavropol and Krasnodar regions.
Experts note that in this way Russia is forming general-purpose
forces that will deter the threat from NATO.
…two new motorized rifle divisions will be activated in the 58th
Combined-Arms Army at the end of 2018. They will be established
on the basis of the currently existing 19th and 136th separate
motorized rifle brigades by including additional battalions and
regiments. It is proposed to arm them with BMP-3 infantry fighting
vehicles and T-72B3 tanks.
Viktor Murakhovskiy, editor-in-chief of the journal Arsenal
Otechestva, told Izvestiya that the reinforcement of 58th Army is
a portion of the measures for creating the nucleus of combinedarms armies based on division structures in the Southern and
Western districts. According to him, it is necessary to activate
general-purpose forces that will deter the threat from NATO on a
guaranteed basis.
“The experience of combat operations and exercises has shown
that the division is a more self-sufficient formation [соединение]
than the brigade. The latter usually requires reinforcement by
combat and logistic support assets and weapon assets,” the expert
noted. “The division is more adapted to the physical geographic
features of the European part of Russia, where there are large
expanses and a considerable length of lines of contact and of
fronts.”…

OE Watch | April 2018

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
“Holy Defense:” Hezbollah’s New First-Person Shooter
Video Game
OE Watch Commentary: First-person combat video games have emerged
as a cheap way for militaries and armed groups across the globe to recruit, train
and indoctrinate. Recently, Lebanese Hezbollah’s “Electronic Media Division”
released a first-person shooter game set in contemporary Syria and called “Holy
Defense: Protecting the Nation and Holy Sites.” The game’s character, named
Ahmed, moves through increasingly difficult levels by completing missions
based on actual events in Syria. The game begins at the Sayyida Zaynab shrine,
the defense of which has become a rallying cry for Iranian-backed militias in
Syria. After fending off ISIS attackers and neutralizing their mortar fire in the
Damascus suburbs, Ahmed goes to Qusayr, the site of Hezbollah’s first overt
action in the Syrian conflict, where he and his comrades are tasked with rescuing
hostages and then taking full control of the town. The game’s final two levels
consist of hunting down an ISIS suspect and expelling jihadist groups from the
Syrian-Lebanese border.
The game was released at a ceremony held in the southern suburbs of Beirut.
Speaking at the ceremony, Lebanese Minister of Youth and Sports Mohammed
Fneish, a Hezbollah party member, noted the “soft power” value of the enterprise,
which employs “electronic media and entertainment” to spread the culture of
“The Resistance” (al-Muqawama), as Hezbollah often refers to itself. Fneish
emphasized “the importance of innovative methods,” with video games held up
as a prime example.
“Holy Defense” is not the first game to be released by Hezbollah’s media
center, though it is the first in which Israelis are not the enemy. Nor is it the first
video game set in the Syrian conflict: Slightly over a year ago, a Russian video
game company released a “Real-Time Tactics” game (in which players control
squads or units rather than an individual) titled “Syrian Warfare.” Video games
have insinuated themselves into the conflict in other ways too: ISIS propaganda
videos are said to echo the aesthetics of the first-person shooter game “Call of
Duty,” and in 2014 ISIS supporters created a user-modified version of the popular
first-person shooter video game Arma 3. This is the same game, incidentally, from
which Russian military officials used a snippet to allege evidence of US support for
ISIS. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…to illuminate facts using these means
of entertainment in order to spread a
culture…”
Source:
‫تقرير موقع العهد حول لعبة الدفاع املق ّدس‬
“Report from the Al-Ahed Website on the ‘Holy Defense’
Game (Video),” Holy Defense Video Game Official
Website, 1 March 2018. http://www.holydefence.com/
article.php?id=20&cid=13&catidval=0v
“Why did the Resistance (Hezbollah) intervene in Syria?
What was the Resistance’s cause in Syria? We need to
rewrite the course of events. When did the Resistance
intervene? How did the Resistance intervene? Where
did the Resistance intervene? And what was the impact
of this intervention?… This is not an imaginary game,
it constitutes the employment of electronic media and
entertainment to shed light on facts that took place
in Syria, to illuminate facts using these means of
entertainment in order to spread a culture.
Source:
‫فنيش خالل اطالق لعبة الدفاع املقدس‬
“Fneish at the Release of Holy Defense Video Game,”
National News Agency (Lebanon), 28 February 2018.
http://nna-leb.gov.lb/ar/show-news/330939/
Speaking at the ceremony, Fneish noted “the importance
of innovative methods and using them for soft power, as
our people have no other choice other than the Resistance
if they wish to have freedom of decision and protect
their holy sites … The name ‘holy defense’ comes from
the fact that we are truly in a defensive position and the
sacredness of our defense comes from the sacredness of
the values we hold.”

“Holy Defense: Protecting the Nation and Holy Sites.”
Source: Holy Defense Website, http://www.holydefence.com/, Publicity Image.

OE Watch | April 2018

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
War in Syria Turned Hezbollah into a Powerful Army
OE Watch Commentary: While Lebanese Hezbollah has
long sought to depict itself as a Lebanese nationalist organization
seeking to defend Lebanon and ‘resist’ Israeli aggression, the
civil war in Syria has belied this notion. It has been noted that
Hezbollah’s deployment into Syria alongside Iranian advisors
to defend Syrian President Bashar al-Assad against the Syrian
opposition had nothing to do with Lebanese sovereignty and
everything to do with acting upon Iranian commands to preserve
the Tehran-Damascus-Hezbollah axis.

“A powerful united Islamic army has arisen in
Syria.”

While Hezbollah has lost hundreds (if not thousands) of
fighters in Syria, the accompanying excerpted article from the
Mehr News Agency reports how former Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps commander Yahya Safavi assessed that the
experience has augmented Hezbollah’s military capabilities.
After all, Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon in May 2000 ended
the active phase of Hezbollah combat. The Israel-Hezbollah war
in 2006 was less a ground fight than an aerial campaign, with
Hezbollah seeking to survive Israeli bombardment. This meant
that between 2000 and the start of the Syrian civil war in 2011,
a new generation of Hezbollah fighters effectively had no real
combat experience. Syria, however, has become both a trial by
fire for Hezbollah recruits, where only the strong and competent
survive, as well as a laboratory to test tactics and weaponry
against a potent enemy.
Safavi’s comments suggesting that Hezbollah is the vanguard
of “a powerful united Islamic army” raises the prospect that Iran
might use Hezbollah as a mercenary force to be used elsewhere
(possibly in Yemen or Iraq) as a proxy to undermine adversaries
and advance Iranian interests while maintaining the fiction of
Iran’s own non-intervention. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

Hezbollah flag flying over an abandoned artillery piece on the grounds of the former
SLA prison in Khiam.
Source: Paul Keller - Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/paulk/354323204/, CC 2.0.

Source: “Jang Suriya Hezbollah ra beh yek Artesh Qodratmand Tabdil Karad” (“The War turned Hezbollah into a Powerful Army”), Mehr
News Agency, 17 February 2018. https://goo.gl/8e1d84
[Former Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Commander Yahya] Safavi stated, “Lebanese Hezbollah was both a guerrilla organization and
a movement. And as a result of the Syrian war, it has transformed into a powerful regular army that stands up to the Zionists alongside the
Lebanese Army to defend the people and the land of Lebanon. It is true that the Syrian war has lasted 83 months and has produced a number
of martyrs, but Hezbollah has become an army, much like before the eight-year [Iran-Iraq] War the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
wasn’t a military organization but as a result of the war, we became a powerful army. Now Hezbollah is a powerful military arm… A powerful
united Islamic army has arisen in Syria.

AVAILABLE AT:

http://online.fliphtml5.com/tqvn/mcja/#p=32

by LUCAS WINTER, FMSO
OE Watch | April 2018

15

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Tiger Forces in Damascus
OE Watch Commentary: Syrian Army Brigadier General
Suheil al-Hassan recently took command of the loyalist campaign
to retake the rebel-held enclave of Eastern Ghouta, on the outskirts
of Damascus. Al-Hassan (aka “The Tiger”), a former paramilitary
commander in the regime’s Air Force Intelligence, has risen to
become the loyalist camp’s most effective military commander.
He leads the so-called “Tiger Forces,” the regime’s most capable
strike force which is credited with key battlefield victories in Idlib,
Aleppo, Hama, the Syrian Desert and Deir Ezzor. Al-Hassan
has also emerged as Russia’s favored Syrian commander. When
President Vladimir Putin and Russian military leadership visited
the Hmeimim Airbase in Syria in December 2017, al-Hassan was
the only Syrian at the table besides President Bashar al-Assad.
Al-Hassan’s appointment to lead the Ghouta offensive, according
to the first accompanying article, came at Russia’s behest. The
article, published in the Saudi daily al-Sharq al-Awsat, cites an
exchange on Facebook in which Alexander Ivanov, the spokesman
for the Russian forces in Syria, calls al-Hassan’s appointment
“necessary given his abilities to lead battles that many others have
been unable to.” The statement came in response to a comment
from a supporter of Colonel Ghayath Dallah, from the Syrian
Army’s 4th Armored Division, whom the comment’s author
insinuated was “as capable if not more so than Suheil al-Hassan”
and that if the Russians “[provided] Colonel Ghayath Dallah with
half of what you gave al-Hassan” they would be able to see it for
themselves.
The deployment of the Tiger Forces to Damascus will have an
impact on Syrian military politics. The Republican Guard and the
4th Armored Division, which are considered the Syrian Army’s
elite units, traditionally guard the capital’s various entry points,
increasingly with help from allied and dependent militias. In early
January, rebels took terrain from Republican Guard forces in
Harasta, a strategically located Damascus countryside suburb that
had been under an informal truce for some time. According to the
second accompanying passage, from the pro-opposition Lebanese
news site al-Modon, the losses in Harasta meant that “legions of
militias came to the city and its surroundings to regain what the
Republican Guard had lost.” Harasta became a “site to display
victories, earn the trust of leaders and marginalize others.” The
field commander for the Tiger Forces’ deployment to Damascus,
the article notes, is a collaborator of Suheil al-Hassan’s from
Harasta.
The Ghouta Front is considered among the most complicated and
treacherous from within, given the multitude of competing interests
and goals within both the loyalist and opposition camps. Al-Hassan
and his forces are to operate in tandem with elite Syrian Army
formations, Shi’i militias, local militias (of uncertain loyalties),
private militias and regime paramilitary forces, all of whom seek
to curry favor with their backers and hope to control the spoils and
terrain that would result from loyalist advances. Russia has placed
its bet on al-Hassan succeeding in this complex environment,
which is why he is now being shadowed by a Russian personal
security detail, as the third passage from the pro-opposition news
network Orient News describes. End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

Source:
‫موسكو تدعم النمر القتحام الغوطة‬
“Moscow Supports ‘The Tiger’ to Storm the Ghouta,” al-Sharq alAwsat, 24 February 2018. https://goo.gl/5QZYGa
In a message posted on the [Hmeimim] Center’s Facebook and
Telegram account, a member of the “Ghayath Forces” led by Colonel
Ghayath Dallah… alleges that “There are officers that are as
capable if not more so than Suheil al-Hassan, but unfortunately you
marginalized our campaign and halted the attack when the rebels
were on the brink of defeat… [you should provide] Colonel Ghayath
Dallah with half of what you gave al-Hassan”… The Hmeimim Center’s
Spokesman Alexander Ivanov responded that “The land forces
mentioned in the message were given sufficient opportunity to end the
presence of extremists, and they were excluded following the end of a
predetermined period for doing so.” Ivanov praised “the appointment
of Syrian officer Suheil al-Hassan as commander of the operations
to destroy the terrorist Nusra Front in Eastern Ghouta [which] was
necessary given his abilities to lead battles that many others lack”…
Source:
‫مليشيات النظام إلى حرستا الخالف على زعامة املحشر‬
“Regime Militias to Harasta: Disputes on Leading the ‘Insectarium’,”
al-Modon, 4 January 2018. https://goo.gl/PTR2jq
Areas around Harasta, in Damascus’s Eastern Ghouta, saw hundreds
from loyalist militias head to the area over the past several days, with
names that do not suggest belonging to a national military, but rather
resemble small groups, each with their own leader… For loyalist
militias, Harasta became a site to display victories, earn the trust of
leaders and marginalize others… The Republican Guard, through
its 104th and 105th Brigades, has been considered the true military
force in charge of Harasta for some time, but the blows that it received
during the second stage of the “They Were Wronged” battle, and its
loss of sensitive positions, made the regime leadership lose trust in
it... Legions of militias came to the city and its surroundings to regain
what the Republican Guard had lost. The first of these militias was
the “Qalamoun Shield”… [but many of its] fighters defected [to the
opposition], fought the Republican Guard, and handed areas over
to the opposition. The “Qalamoun Shield” was unable to absorb
opposition attacks and a campaign by loyalist and backers of the 4th
Division began against the “Qalamoun Shield” and those who had
entered truces with the government… As soon as the [4th Division’s
“Ghayath Forces” arrived] the disagreements with the Republican
Guard began, and they recurred in every battle that joined the two,
regarding deployment and movement as well as leadership over the
battle. The “Ghayath Forces” took over the area of “al-Balaa” in
Qaboun… [and] began their shelling independently of other formations
and without coordinating with them, which increased tensions between
the groups amidst constant recriminations against the Republican
Guard and assertions that their positions should be handed over to the
4th Armored Division…
The Harasta highway has in the past few days become an arena to flex
one’s muscles. A group linked to Suheil al-Hassan’s “Tiger Forces”
arrived in the area, led by Abu Arab Shuhaymi, a regime loyalist from
Harasta and former confidant of Dhu al-Hima Shalish who has worked
with Suheil al-Hassan for years. Having always been associated with
fronts in the north and the east of the country, the Tiger Forces sought
to make their presence felt in rural Damascus, to have a seat reserved
in Damascus.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2018

16

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: The Tiger Forces in Damascus
“…Legions of militias came to the city and its surroundings to regain what the Republican Guard had
lost…”
Source:
“Special Russian Protection for Suheil al-Hassan,” Orient News, 4 March 2018. https://goo.gl/3W8FTu

‫حماية روسية خاصة لسهيل الحسن‬

Pages loyal to Suheil al-Hassan, nicknamed “the Tiger,” posted images of him on the Eastern Ghouta front accompanied by a Russian
bodyguard alongside a regime bodyguard… This is not the first time that al-Hassan appears accompanied by Russian protection, as he also
did so in a recent video which shows him near the Eastern Ghouta, addressing a large group of his militia members…

“Russian Armed Forces Supreme Commander-in-Chief visits the Khmeimim airbase.”
(Suheil al-Hassan in foreground on left side - hands visible, face obscured)
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=49303@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

Suheil al-Hassan and the Syrian Army’s Tiger Forces
By Lucas Winter

This paper looks at the genesis, evolution and growth of the Syrian Army’s “Tiger
Forces” and their leader Suheil al-Hassan. The paper shows how Hassan has played
an important role since conflict began in 2011. It attributes his transformation from
special forces commander to leader of military campaigns to an ability to harness the
Syrian Army’s full infantry, artillery and airpower better than any other loyalist field
commander. Given the Syrian Army’s manpower shortages, rampant corruption and
rivalry-laden bureaucracy, this is no small feat. Al-Hassan has become a key symbol in
the Syrian loyalist camp, able to project more combined arms power than anyone else
in Syria. His success on the battlefield comes less from tactical or strategic insights
than from his ability to thrive within the loyalist camp’s opaque and rivalry-laden
bureaucracy. For this he has become a symbol to regime supporters, proof that the
war can be won by working within the system. (July 2016)

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194882

OE Watch | April 2018

17

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syria: Who are the Loyalist Forces on the Eastern
Banks of the Euphrates?
OE Watch Commentary: The small strip of territory on the eastern bank of the Euphrates River, directly across from the Syrian city of
Deir Ezzor, is currently controlled by an estimated 3,000 soldiers, militiamen and mercenaries variously linked to Russia, Iran, and the Syrian
government. This toehold is linked to Deir Ezzor on the western banks of the Euphrates via a metal bridge laid down last year by Russian
military engineers. It is the only pocket on the eastern bank of the Euphrates that the Syrian government and its allies were able to control
following the collapse of ISIS. According to the accompanying excerpted article, published in March 2018 on the Syrian opposition news website
Ayn al-Madina, Iranian-backed militias make up the majority of the force in this pocket (1,200-1,500), while Russian military and private
contractors are the best-equipped. Each unit has its turf, though they collaborate to secure al-Salihiyya at the edge of the territory under their
control. The article describes how the armed groups contract “middlemen and influencers” to recruit volunteer fighters by offering truces to the
displaced population. The article describes the truces, which have been successfully implemented by the loyalist camp in other parts of Syria,
as “basically consist[ing] of the refugees turning themselves in and providing one family member to join up with the militia, in exchange for
the cancelling of their prosecution order.” In good capitalist fashion, the author adds: “The middlemen compete with one another to bring in the
largest number of recruits to the militia for which they work.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…The middlemen compete with one another to bring in the largest number of recruits to the militia for
which they work… ”
Source:				  			
‫ من جنود النظام وأتباع إيران والروس‬،‫) آالف لص وقاتل وقاطع طريق‬3( ‫جيب علي بابا في يسار الفرات‬
“Ali Baba Pocket in Euphrates Right Bank: 3,000 Thieves, Killers and Road-Blockers from the Regime Soldiers and Followers of Iran and
Russia,” Ayn al-Madina, 10 March 2018. https://goo.gl/Xu3G9E
There are three main types of forces deployed in the pocket nominally held by the regime on the right bank of the Euphrates River, which
were identified to Ayn al-Madina by confidential sources, as follows:
1. Russian-linked forces. This includes units from the regular army and a large number of mercenaries. They all work under the command
of an officer called “General Moul.” Their numbers are estimated to be 500 soldiers and fighters. These forces are well armed, with heavy
weaponry including artillery, tanks and rocket launchers, in addition to APCs, mine-clearing equipment, armored vehicles and military
engineering equipment.
2. Iranian-linked forces. These include Shi’i militias from the village of Hatlah led by Yassin al-Mayyuf and another led by Hassan Ali
Moussa al-Moullah Ayad, who enjoys close relations with Lebanese Hizbullah and whose militia flies their banner. There is also the alBaqir militia headed by “Hajj” Khaled al-Marai and Nawaf al-Bashir via his son Asaad. Each of them has a group they directly lead in
these militias. Recently there has been a gradual turn by Nawaf al-Bashir from Iran’s Revolutionary Guard to the regime’s Republican
Guard, although it has not yet reached the level of a defection from the Iranians. All of these forces operate under the command of a small
Revolutionary Guard unit, estimated to number 100. The total number of Iranian-linked militias is estimated at 1200-1500, making them the
most numerous as compared to their Russian and regime counterparts.
3. Regime-linked forces. This includes a group from the Syrian Army that belongs primarily to the so-called “5th Assault Corps,” supported
exclusively by the Russians, in addition to smaller groups from the Republican Guard, Military Intelligence, and Air Force Intelligence, which
seems to follow Brigadier General Suheil al-Hassan. This in addition to groups from the soon-to-be-formed “Self-Defense Forces,” currently
known as “Popular Committees,” led by Azzam al-Tair (Secretary of the Second Rural Branch of the Baath Party). In total there are estimated
to be 1,000 fighters, with 300-400 of them reserve forces. They are commanded by two officers known by their first name, Brigadier General
Jamal and Colonel Ibrahim.
Within the area nominally controlled by the regime on the eastern bank of the Euphrates River, there is distinct presence and influence
depending on the forces in the area. The regime is relatively strong via the Russian-backed 5th Corps in the village of al-Hassiniyah. Shi’i
militias control Hatla and Marat. Russian deployment is focused on the villages of Khusham and al-Tayiba, in addition to a small presence in
the village of al-Salihiyya, as they opened a base and a coordination office there. Russian helicopters are used to secure logistical supplies to
these forces from bases in the Military Airbase east of Deir Ezzor. Nearly all of them work together to control al-Salihiyya.
There is a similar distinction in terms of the roadblocks and main checkpoints. The Russians and the regime control the Halibiyya
Roundabout checkpoint and control the main checkpoint in al-Salihiyya in conjunction with Iranian-backed militias, after which the SDFcontrolled area begins. The regime and Iranian-backed militias together manage another checkpoint in al-Salihiyya, while Iranian-backed
militias run 5 checkpoints in Hatla.
Immediately after crossing the Euphrates last September, regime and militia forces executed tens of civilians that they captured. Some of
the victims’ rotting corpses are still strewn in the open til this day. There was widespread looting, to the extent that doors, windows, and
copper electrical wiring were taken from the walls of houses. Members of the “Tribal Army” militia, which came from Raqqa as one of the
militias linked to Air Force Intelligence and crossed the river before retreating, left vulgar messages on the walls of homes. These days,
local middlemen and influencers linked to regime intelligence services and Iranian-backed militias work alongside military commanders. A
middleman backed by the al-Bustan Foundation, owned by Bashar al-Assad’s cousin Rami Makhlouf, also has appeared alongside them. The
middlemen in essence encourage refugees to return under a so-called “truce,” which basically consist of the refugees turning themselves in
and providing one family member to join up with the militia, in exchange for the cancelling of their prosecution order. The middlemen compete
with one another to bring in the largest number of recruits to the militia for which they work.
OE Watch | April 2018

18

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
A Turkish View of the Wagner Group in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The Wagner Group is a
Russian private military company that has played a
role in Russian operations in Syria. While the Russian
Government has not yet officially acknowledged the
existence of this paramilitary group, it gained attention
on 7 February when personnel from the company carried
out an attack on Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) in
Deir Ezzor. The accompanying excerpted article from
the Turkish newspaper Haberturk reports on the Wagner
Group and it provides some insight into the Turkish
perspective of its activities in Syria. The article notes
several things about the group, but it only provides
information that has been published in a number of other
media outlets around the world. Despite actively engaging
in the Syrian civil war, the Turkish government has not
made any comments on the presence of the Russian
mercenaries in Syria. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

Source: “Rusya uzmanları Putin’in paralı askerleri olan Wagner Grubu’nu
anlattı (Russian experts talked about Putin’s mercenaries of Wagner Group),”
Haberturk, 26 February 2018. http://www.haberturk.com/wagner-grubu-nedirrusya-uzmanlari-putinin-parali-askerleri-olan-wagner-grubu-nu-anlatti-1853055
The Russian media refers to the group as a paramilitary unit equipped with
heavy weapons and armored vehicles, but without officially acknowledging
it. However, it is believed that it operates under the directives of the Russian
Ministry of Defense. Then why doesn’t this paramilitary unit officially exist?
Professor at Moscow State University Kerim Has provided Nalan Koçak from
the Habertürk newspaper with answers: “Private paramilitary companies in
Russia are prohibited by law. However, the Kremlin allows its citizens to work
as mercenaries abroad. Knowingly they [the Kremlin] create legal loopholes.
However, these mercenaries are not allowed to work inside the country. These
mercenaries first appeared in Ukraine as Slavic paramilitary units. Later,
around 2015 these paramilitary units formed the Wagner Group. I want to
point out that this information has not been officially confirmed by [Russian
Government].”

“Private paramilitary companies in Russia are prohibited by law. However, the Kremlin
allows its citizens to work as mercenaries abroad.”

Battle of Khasham, Hatched box shows location of clashes.

Source: By Derived from work by MrPenguin20, Kami88, and others - Based on https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2014_Eastern_Syria_offensive.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=66281280.

OE Watch | April 2018

19

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Balancing Act with Armed Rebels in
Northern Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey’s incursion into the Syrian
city of Afrin (Operation Olive Branch) has sparked a fight
between various Syrian rebel groups in a local power struggle.
Clashes have broken out between Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS)
and the Syrian Liberation Front (SLF) which consists of Ahrar
al-Sham and the Nour al-Din al-Zenki Movement. Fighting
started in the Aleppo Governorate and spread to the Idlib
Governorate, which is a stronghold of HTS. HTS was formed
by merger of five Salafist groups, including Jabhat Fateh alSham (formerly the Al-Nusra Front) in 2017. The accompanying
excerpted article, written by a Turkish journalist and researcher
and published in Gazete Duvar, sheds light on how this power
struggle might play out.
The article states that when Turkey launched Operation Olive
Branch, it coordinated with HTS in Idlib in the outskirts of
Afrin. This was a tactical alliance made by both groups against
the common Kurdish enemy. The tactical alliance’s end was
inevitable, because HTS was at the same time fighting for
dominance of Idlib with Syrian rebel groups that were closer
allies of Turkey, in particular Ahrar al-Sham. The Turkish
military’s sudden presence on the outskirts of Idlib threatened
HTS, and the plan which Ankara, Moscow, and Tehran reached
during negotiations in Astana, Kazakhstan to create deescalation zones also included eliminating HTS.
Turkey has positioned its soldiers in various areas of Idlib
with the help of HTS, giving the group assurances that it will
not be attacked. According to the author, Turkey’s challenge
will be what to do when HTS is attacked by Turkey’s proxies
and allies in Syria. Assessing the situation, HTS issued a
statement claiming Turkey is going to encourage other Free
Syrian Army groups from Afrin to fight against them. As such,
Turkey’s tactical alliance with HTS will likely break soon.
The author argues that although the leader of Al-Qaeda,
Aymen al-Zawahiri, is not in a position to give orders to HTS,
his latest warning to those in Idlib is very important. Zawahiri
called on “the mujahideen” to spread across the region and
prepare for guerrilla warfare, which may last for a number of
years. The author concludes that in light of all this, the future
for HTS looks dark. Russian fighter jets, Iranian militias, and
the Syrian Army will likely try to root them out of Syria. Also,
while the SLF will continue clearing them from cities, towns,
and villages, the possibility of HTS and Ankara’s confrontation
is likely. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“Ahrar al-Sham and some other groups saw this as AlQaeda’s attempt to swallow them.”

Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) fighters gathered before deployment.

Source: By Takinginterest01 (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HTS_fighters.png, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: Umit Kivanc, “Cihatçılar arası savaşta da taraf olmaya doğru
(Towards picking a side in war between jihadists),” gazeteduvar.com,
24 February 2018. https://www.gazeteduvar.com.tr/yazarlar/2018/02/24/
cihatcilar-arasi-savasta-da-taraf-olmaya-dogru/
The relationship between Ankara and HTS is not one of friendship, their
alliance is tactical and is based on mutual interest. Let’s remember who
HTS is.
In July 2016, Al-Nusra announced that it had severed ties with Al-Qaeda
central and formed Jabhat Fateh al-Sham with other small groups…
However, at the beginning of 2017, Al-Nusra took one more step, further
expanding the coalition of organizations and this time renamed itself as
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham [HTS]. It affirmed delinking itself from Al-Qaeda…
As a matter of fact, HTS, shortly after announcing its establishment, called
upon all other armed opposition groups including Ahrar al-Sham to unite.
Ahrar al-Sham and some other groups saw this as Al-Qaeda’s attempt to
swallow them. In fact, Nour al-Din al-Zenki Movement, one of the important
organizations that participated in the establishment of the HTS announced
that they left the alliance. Thus, HTS started its attacks on the small groups
in Idlib.
By this means HTS became dominant in Idlid. When it did, it faced an
unwanted guest: Turkish military. Why didn’t it want [this guest]? Because
Moscow, Tehran, and Ankara reached an agreement in Astana and
projected to establish de-escalation zones in Idlib. This included getting rid
of HTS.

OE Watch | April 2018

20

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey and Power Play in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey’s Operation Olive Branch to enter the Syrian
city of Afrin raises the risk of direct military confrontation between Turkey and the
Syrian regime. An article from the Turkish daily Hurriyet states that on 20 February
Turkey launched rocket attacks on al-Assad forces en route to Afrin to help the People’s
Protection Units (YPG) to defend Afrin. Any military confrontation could result in a shift
of power dynamics in Syria between Russia, Iran, and Turkey.
As the accompanying article suggests, Iran could use its military proxies in an
engagement between Damascus and Ankara. Therefore, Turkish gains in Syria will
threaten its objectives. By the same token, if Turkey and the Syrian regime engage in a
direct military confrontation, Russia might not just stand by. As it did after Turkey shot
down its fighter jets in 2015, Russia may close Syrian airspace to Turkish fighter jets
in support of the al-Assad regime. The article states that this will derail Russian plans
in Syria as it is the biggest supporter of the Syrian Regime; however, there is a strong
possibility that Russia will use its influence over Turkey and prevent a possible military
engagement.

Source: Sedat Ergin, “Afrin’de her ihtimale
hazırlıklı olmak (To be ready for every
possibility in Afrin),” Hurriyet, 9 March 2018.
http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sedat-ergin/
afrinde-her-ihtimale-hazirlikli-olmak-40766053
One of the consequences of confrontation
between the Assad regime and Turkey will be
Russian and Turkish relations coming under
serious pressure. A development in this direction
will overturn the entire game plan of Russia,
a number one supporter of al-Assad regime in
Syria.
If such a possibility emerges, al-Assad regime’s
another supporter, Iran will not be a spectator on
the scene, and it will enable its proxies in Syria.

The article notes that military confrontation is the worst-case scenario. Despite all
the disagreements between Iran, Russia, and Turkey, the good relations they established
without interruptions during the Astana process, a series of negotiations between parties involved in the conflict in Syria which took place in
the city of Astana, Kazakhstan. This provides assurances. However, the article cautions against unanticipated possibilities of things getting
out of control because of the presence of different armed groups that are waging proxy wars. For example, there is the possibility of friction
between Shia elements in areas under the control of the Syrian government in southern Afrin and Turkish forces. The author cites a recent
report from the Turkish think-tank EDAM, stating that Shia militias supported by Iran might be bothered by the Turkish supported Sunni Free
Syrian Army. In essence, Turkey might face some difficult choices in Syria with Moscow and Tehran. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“One of the consequences of confrontation between the Assad regime and Turkey will be Russian and
Turkish relations coming under serious pressure.”

Map of the Turkish operation against Kurdish-held territory in northern Syria (January 2018).
Source: By Derived from work by MrPenguin20, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Operation_Olive_Branch.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

21

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Muslims Supported by US, UK are Illegitimate
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic
Republic of Iran has, since the 1979 Islamic
Revolution, positioned itself as defender
of Shi’ites worldwide. The concept of
guardianship of the jurists (velayat-e faqih)
imposed upon Iran by the late revolutionary
leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini,
however, imposed a minority interpretation
of the role of clergy in the state that placed
the Islamic Republic at odds with the
majority of Shi’ites worldwide. Many of the
most influential Shi’ite theologians oppose
velayat-e faqih and thereby challenge the
legitimacy of Iran’s Supreme Leader itself.
It is in this context that the accompanying
excerpts of a recent speech by the current
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, which
appeared on his website, are interesting. As
Western countries focus on listening to if
not empowering voices in the theological
debate long overshadowed by extremists,
Supreme Leader Khamenei greets Mohammed Abdul-Sattar al-Sayed, Syrian Minister of Religious Endowments.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://farsi.khamenei.ir/ndata/news/39077/C/13961210_0939077.jpg, CC 4.0.
Khamenei’s dismissal of the legitimacy
of any Shi’ite leader maintaining an office
The Shi’ites that London supports? We don’t accept those Shi’ites.
in London is a shot across the bow of
mainstream practitioners of Shi’ism, most of whom embrace traditional Quietism which eschews any clerical role on everyday governance.
After all, while Qom, in Iran, and Najaf in Iraq remain the major centers of Shi’ite scholarly studies, many Shi’ite leaders have established
offices in London in order both to take advantage of the freedoms inherent in British society and to remain outside the reach of Iranian
intelligence and security services, which control discourse inside Iran and have influence in Iraq. By raising the issue of and dismissing the
legitimacy of independent Shi’ites, Khamenei conversely shows that Shi’ite leaders who do not subordinate themselves to his views are an
increasing concern to the Iranian leadership and are effectively challenging Khamenei’s own legitimacy.

“

”

That said, Khamenei’s accusations that Shi’ites speaking from or meeting in London are under foreign influence, or that moderate Muslims
engaging with the United States or Israel are likewise compromised, signals the future of Iranian influence operations. Talk of Sunnis on
whose behalf “Israel advocates” is also a broad swipe at Saudi Arabia, which is undergoing an unprecedented rapprochement with Israel.
The rest of Khamenei’s speech was boilerplate: Beseeching the “liberation” of Jerusalem and the destruction of Israel, accusing the
United States and Israel of being behind the Islamic State, and praising Iran’s own record of “extending the resistance front” from Tehran to
Damascus and Lebanon. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Biyanat dar Didar Vazir-e ‘Awqaf va Jame’ah az Ulama-ye Suriya” (“Statement in a Meeting with the Minister of Religious
Endowments and a group of Syrian Religious Scholars”), Khamenei.ir, 1 March 2018. http://farsi.khamenei.ir/speech-content?id=39080
The Shi’ites that London supports? We don’t accept those Shi’ites. Those Sunnis for which the United States and Israel advocates? We don’t
see those Sunnis as Muslim. Islam opposes disbelief and oppression and arrogance. We subscribe to ourselves. Our common thoughts are
tawhid [the oneness of God]. Our common thoughts are the Ka’bah [in Mecca]. Our common thoughts are the Holy Prophets. And we share in
common our affection for the Ahl al-Bayt [the family of the Prophet Muhammad]….
We have entered the fortieth years of the Islamic Revolution. From the very first day, all the world’s leading powers spoke against us: The
United States and the Soviet Union, NATO, and Arab and regional states, and yet we did not go away and instead grew. What does this mean?
First, what the great powers want does not necessarily come true, that is, everyone decided we should go away but we would not be lost. The
survival of Iran’s Islamic Revolution proved that whatever America, Europe, and the world’s atomic powers want does not necessarily come
true. And if all of us and the Resistance Front’s elements are decisive in the region, then enemies cannot do a damn thing.”

OE Watch | April 2018

22

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Unveils New Anti-Armor Missile
OE Watch Commentary: Iran continues to invest heavily in its domestic military
industry. Announcements with regard to new products and development occur on
a monthly basis. While Iranian leaders often exaggerate the capabilities of their
products, the announcements nonetheless give insight into future challenges in
the operational environment. It is against this backdrop that Tasnim, an Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps-affiliated outlet, reports on the unveiling announcement of
a new missile.
The Azarakhsh (Lightning) missile is designed for short-range tactical missions.
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps commander Mohammad Ali Jafari, who attended
its unveiling, reportedly spoke of how the new missile will complement Iran’s growing
reliance on drone and helicopter technologies and noted the growing importance of
helicopter and drone operations in both air raids and reconnaissance. While the article
speaks of the missile being mounted on a Cobra helicopter, it most likely refers to the
Toufan, an Iranian knock-off based on the AH-1J SeaCobra.
The manufacture of rockets for air-to-ground use and Iran’s proliferation of drones
to proxies in Lebanon and Syria, as well as the Syrian Army’s use of helicopters,
suggests that the Azarakhsh could soon be deployed against both Israel and Syrian
opposition targets. It might also pose a threat to Turkish forces, especially as Turkey
uses armor in its operation in Afrin, an operation which the Assad regime in Syria
denounced. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The Azarakhsh missile which can be
mounted on the Cobra helicopter was
unveiled.”
Source: “Jadidtarin Moshak-e Zadzareh Irani ba
Nam Azarakhsh Ravanmay’e Shod” (“The newest
anti-armor missile, ‘Azarakhsh,’ was unveiled”),
Tasnim News, 28 February 2018. https://goo.gl/
Jx8fPR
At the ceremony, the Azarakhsh missile which
can be mounted on the Cobra helicopter was
unveiled. This missile weighs 70 kilograms, has a
127 millimeter diameter, has a 10 kilometer range,
and has a six kilometer lock-on feature. The missile
also has a thermal search for air-to-ground mission
and can reach a maximum speed of 550 meters
per second. Another achievement named in this
ceremony was equipping the 17th IRGC Ground
Forces with night vision capability.

IRGC Chief Mohammad Jafari unveils Iran’s new Azarakhsh anti-armor missile.

Source: Tasnim News, https://newsmedia.tasnimnews.com/Tasnim/Uploaded/Image/1396/12/09/1396120915030369113478064.jpg , CC 4.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

23

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Police Chief Demands Death for Sufi Protestors
OE Watch Commentary: On the evening of 25 February 2018, a Sufi protest against
religious repression in Iran and the detention of some of their members in a local police
station turned violent when police moved in and clashed with the Gonabadi (Sufi)
dervishes. During the ensuing fighting, a bus allegedly driven by a member of the Sufi
order and, separately, a car plowed through the assembled police killing three members
of the Law Enforcement Forces and two members of the paramilitary Basij. Some
reports suggested that one of the officers killed had also been stabbed. The violence
injured an additional 30 members of the law enforcement community.
In the excerpted article from Fars News Agency, a hardline government news
outlet, the head of the Law Enforcement Forces for greater Tehran announces his
expectation that the judiciary will expedite the execution of those allegedly responsible
for running over police and Basij with vehicles. The entire episode is revealing on a
number of levels. Firstly, despite the Iranian government’s rhetoric of social justice
and democracy, it shows lack of judicial independence. Secondly, while political
divisions within Iranian society are often depicted as between hardliners and reformers
and religious divisions are portrayed as sectarian—Sunni vs Shi’ite Muslims, for
example—it is also important to recognize the growing influence and power of
Sufism inside Iran (and, for that matter, inside Saudi Arabia where a Sufi underground
exists in the Hijaz). That Sufis not only rallied in the heart of Tehran but also fought
back violently against the Law Enforcement Forces and the Basij shows that anger
percolates not far below the surface of the Islamic Republic. That the video of the bus
running down police went viral in Tehran suggests popular curiosity about dissent and
could spark copy-cat acts of violence.
The arrests of more than 300 Gonabadis may backfire, as could the execution of
the bus and car drivers accused of running over police and Basij, since they could
create more grievance and provide martyrs around which to rally. Based on Rahimi’s
comments in the article, it does not appear that the Iranian government is prepared
to address Gonabadi grievances. His decision to blame external actors fits the
conspiratorial template often used by the Iranian government, but does little to address
the root causes of discord. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The events of 25 February originated
overseas and on counter-revolutionary
[internet] sites.”
Source: “Majazat ‘Amal Shehadat Mamoran
Naja dar Khiaban Pasdaran qabl az payan sal”
(“Punishment before the end of the year for those
who Martyred the Agents of the Law Enforcement
Forces in Pasdaran Street”), Fars News Agency, 28
February 2018. http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.
php?nn=13961209002058
General Hossein Rahimi, in a conversation with
the correspondent from Fars News Agency, said
the punishment for the martyrdom of the Law
Enforcement Forces should be announced before
the Eid. The head of the capital’s police said,
“With the coordination of the Judiciary, and for the
healing of the families of the martyrs of the incident
on Pasdaran Street, the person who killed three
of the officers of the Tehran Police Commander’s
Assistant Unit should be hanged before the Eid.”
It is necessary to mention that General Rahimi
announced at the funeral of the Pasdaran martyrs
that the events of 25 February originated overseas
and on counter-revolutionary [internet] sites,
and said, “For our dear martyrs, we demand
punishment for the driver of the bus and Samand
car.”

The Aftermath of Rioting on Pasdaran Street on the evening of 19-20 February 2018.
Source: Fararu.com, fararu.com/fa/news/349636/‫ریواصت‬-‫نابایخ‬-‫نارادساپ‬-‫دعب‬-‫زا‬-‫یریگرد‬-‫بش‬-‫هتشذگ‬

OE Watch | April 2018

24

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Environmentalists Arrested as Spies
OE Watch Commentary: On 24 January 2018, Iranian authorities arrested IranianCanadian environmentalist Kavous Seyed Emami. On 9 February 2018, Iranian authorities
alerted his wife that he had committed suicide in prison, a charge his family fiercely
denies. The episode, however, placed Iran’s growing environmentalist movement in the
spotlight. The Islamic Republic’s environmental record is poor. Greater Tehran, with its
approximately 14 million people, can rival Beijing and New Delhi in terms of pollution.
Government opacity and the involvement of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
means that ordinary Iranians often have little recourse to hold polluters accountable. Just
as with the Gezi Movement in Turkey, the Iranian government has cracked down quickly
and forcefully on environmental organizing, presumably because environmentalism
has the potential to organize a broad array of citizenry across traditional sectarian and
political divisions.
It is against this backdrop that the excerpted article from the hardline Mehr News
Agency is relevant. Gholamhossein Mohseni-Ejei, the second most powerful judiciary
official in Iran and the ministry’s spokesman, announced that security forces had rounded
up 70 individuals accused of espionage under the cover of environmentalism. Tehran
Public Prosecutor Abbas Ja’fari-Dowlatabadi explained, “These individuals have been
collecting classified information about the country’s strategic areas under the guise of
carrying out scientific and environmental projects.” While Mohseni-Ejei has announced
that no foreigner was among those in the most recent rounds of arrests in the Persian Gulf
littoral Hormozgan province, his quip that foreign influence permeates environmentalism
suggests segues with the judiciary’s espionage conspiracy and reflects Iran’s efforts to taint
all grassroots activism with accusations of foreign control. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

Source: “Fard-e Kharaji dar Pervandeh Jasusa-e
Fa’al Mahit-e Zisti Dastgir Nashodeh Ast” (“No
foreigners have been arrested in case involving
environmentalist spies”), Mehr News Agency, 25
February 2018. https://goo.gl/zSt7Xj
A spokesman for the judiciary said: With regard
to the spy case in the guise of environmental
activity, three people in Hormozgan have
recently been arrested, but no foreigner has
been arrested in the case. According to the
Mehr correspondent, in the 125th [weekly] press
conference, Hojjat al-Islam Gholamhossein
Mohseni-Ejei in answer to the question “Was
any foreigner arrested in the case of the
environmental activists?” said, “Three people
were recently arrested in Hormozgan [province],
but no foreigner was arrested in this case….”
He said, “[Foreign] influence is a serious issue,
and at the head of it are the United States and
Israel, and we must pay attention to it.

“[Foreign] influence is a serious issue, and at the head of it are the United States and Israel.”

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES

OE Watch | April 2018

25

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Israel’s Missile Defense Can Be Overwhelmed
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s growing missile arsenal has
become the focal point of international diplomacy in the wake of the
2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and corollary UN Security
Council Resolution 2231. Lebanese Hezbollah’s acquisition of more
than 120,000 rockets and missiles despite UN Security Council
resolutions demanding the group’s disarmament and a UN monitoring
force in Lebanon, as well as sporadic Iranian and Hezbollah UAV
penetration of Israeli air space, have also increased regional tension.
On 18 February 2018, while speaking at the Munich Security
Conference, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu showed
a portion of an Iranian UAV which he said Israel had downed as
it tried to penetrate Israeli airspace. In the excerpted article from
Javan Online, General Hossein Salami, deputy Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps commander, suggests that while Israel has developed
anti-missile defenses, Iran’s strategy is simply to overwhelm Israel’s
system with the sheer number of rockets.
Salami’s comments hint at Iran’s development of an asymmetric
doctrine similar to the Iranian Navy’s utilization of speed boat
swarming attacks in the Persian Gulf after Operation Praying Mantis
in 1988. Iran appears to be embracing a corollary swarming attack
with mass-produced UAVs and missiles, a tactic it could use to try to
overwhelm the Saudi and Israeli anti-missile defenses or those of U.S.
forces in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“What will they do if hundreds of missiles rain down
on them?”
Source: “Vakanesh Janshin Farmandeh Sepah beh Namayesh
Netanyahu dar Munich” (“Deputy IRGC Commander Responds to
Netanyahu in Munich”), Javan Online, 20 February 2018. http://
www.javanonline.ir/fa/news/896199
“Today, we are witnessing that the US and Israel have turned into
ridiculous artists, by showing the body of a rocket at the White
House and the wing of an aircraft [in Munich] and introducing them
as an Iranian missile and drone. This action means their position
has declined. Faced with the [Islamic] revolution, their situation
has become more complex.” He [Gen. Hossein Salami] continued,
“The Israelis claimed that the UAVs which penetrated the skies of the
occupied territories was Iranian, but whether this allegation is true
or false, we should say this this isn’t the first and won’t be the last
UAV of the resistance front, and the Israeli [F-16] fighter jet was shot
down in response to the downing of the drone….”
“What were the THAAD and Patriot missile systems doing to
counter that missile? Why couldn’t they intercept the missile?” He
added: “If they cannot strike a missile, what will they do if hundreds
of missiles rain down on them?”

Benjamin Netanyahu holds a piece of an alleged Iranian drone, 18 February 2018.

Source: Munich Security Conference, https://www.securityconference.de/mediathek/munich-security-conference-2018/image/benjamin-netanyahu-1/filter/image, Creative Commons Attribution Germany 3.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

26

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
13 Million Users of Domestic Messaging Apps in Iran
OE Watch Commentary: Even before Iran’s December 2017 unrest,
Iranian officials sought to control and constrain the internet. For years,
Iranian officials have debated creating a broad firewall around Iran
and instead, construct a national intranet. The role of social media in
catalyzing the spread of protests, however, has given new urgency to
Iranian efforts to control online activity. The accompanying excerpted
article from Mehr News Agency reports that earlier this year Iran’s
Supreme Cyberspace Council announced government loans and
subsidized bandwidth tariffs for five local apps, including Soroush, Wispi,
Gap, iGap and BisPhone. Abolhasan Firuzabadi, the secretary of the
Supreme Cyberspace Council, now claims that at least 12 million Iranians
use a domestically-produced and operated messenger service, which is
presumably meant to undercut the popularity of Western social media
channels. This shows that the Iranian strategy has gained some traction,
at least in some quarters; however, with 74 million cell phone subscribers
inside Iran (roughly 91 out of 100 Iranians) and with more than 36 million
internet users, even 12 million domestic messaging app users suggests the
majority of Iranians still utilize non-domestic messaging apps. Telegram,
for example, which the Iranian government has struggled to shut down
inside Iran, reportedly has 40 million users in the country. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“There are currently 12 to 13 million users of the
domestic mobile messengers.”
Source: “Takhir Qaveh Qasa’iyeh va Vizarat-e Ershad dar
Ajrayi Mosubeh Hamayat az Peyam Rasanha” (“Delay of the
Judiciary and the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance in the
Implementation of the Bill for Developing Messaging Apps”),
Mehr News Agency, 26 February 2018. https://goo.gl/kHd6wt
[Abdolhasan] Firuzabadi added, “Islamic Republic of Iran
Broadcasting has been cooperating well with the implementation
of this goal, and they have done what they were supposed to do.”
The secretary of the Supreme Cyberspace Council, noting that
the Ministry of Communications had loaned five billion tomans
to domestic messengers, said, “This ministry said there is no
problem to achieve this, and they’re in the final stages of this
field.” Firoozabadi added: “There are currently 12 to 13 million
users of the domestic mobile messengers.”

Arresting Iranian Cyber Criminals
OE Watch Commentary: In the wake of the December
2017-January 2018 unrest, Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
and cyber police have gone on the offensive to counter those utilizing
the Internet to conduct what security forces consider counterrevolutionary activities. In the excerpted article from the semi-official
Islamic Student News Agency (ISNA), Tehran Police Chief Hossein
Rahimi announced that security forces have included those using the
internet to incite in their round-up of “thugs.”
While some of the internet activity may have been political, the
ISNA also reported that the “thugs” had used social media and
Instagram to threaten and perhaps even blackmail other citizens.
If this is accurate, then the range of internet crimes which Iranian
security forces seek to counter has expanded from politics and
pornography to blackmail and extortion as some Iranians post
photographs of others in embarrassing situations. Such incidents,
even if few and far between, will provide Iranian authorities with an
excuse to further their monitoring of all online activity and Iranian
government efforts to create a ‘Halal’ intranet strictly controlled by
the Iranian government. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Police have begun to deal with offenders in
cyberspace.”

Source: “Dastgiri Arazil Faza’i Mojazi” (“Arresting Cyber
Criminals”), Islamic Student News Agency, 2 March 2018. https://
goo.gl/SuPYUF
General Hossein Rahimi, in a conversation with ISNA, with
reference to the plan to deal with the thugs in Tehran that
resulted in the arrest of 241 in different parts of Tehran on
Wednesday, said the police plan to deal with the thugs and
intruders in the neighborhoods with the assistance of the citizens
themselves as well as the observation of my colleagues in
specialized police units in different parts of Tehran. A report on
the final stage of the operation was also released. When asked
whether the “Instagram” thugs were also among those arrested
among the mobs, the police chief of Tehran noted, “Three of the
arrested individuals are thugs who used to bully, trash talk, and
carry out offensive actions in cyberspace. They were identified
and arrested.”
According to the ISNA report, for some time, thugs have created
webpages to threaten people and create a sense of insecurity
for citizens, and police have begun to deal with offenders in
cyberspace.

OE Watch | April 2018

27

AFRICA
Nigeria’s Environmental Devastation Drives Conflict
OE Watch Commentary: While much of the news
coming out of Nigeria about violence and bloodshed is
related to Boko Haram terrorizing the local populace,
the ongoing conflict between the country’s nomadic
herdsmen and indigenous farmers rarely makes the
headlines. As the accompanying article from the South
African news website The Conversation explains,
the herdsmen are mainly Muslims from the Fulani
ethnic group, whereas the farmers are predominantly
Christians and often not Fulani, with the result that
the conflict is fueled by both ethnic and religious
differences. However, frequently overlooked in this
narrative the article describes as “ethnic war” is the
factor that is bringing these two disparate groups into
violent contact with each other, namely environmental
devastation.
A brief geography lesson is necessary in order to
understand the situation. On the north-south axis
Nigeria spans about 1,000 kilometers, with the far
south possessing a tropical rainforest climate, making
it lush with vegetation. The far north is marked by
the fringes of the Sahara and in between the two are
grasslands often turned into farms. Unfortunately, the
Sahara is moving southward at a rate of approximately
600 meters per year, while at the same time Lake
Chad, located in the northeastern section of the
country, is drying up. This combination of increased
desertification and lack of water has pushed the Fulani
pastoralists further south in search of pastures and
water for their herds. The further south they venture,
the more they encounter non-Fulani farmers who are
angered by the Fulani’s animals eating their crops.
There has long been tension between the pastoralists
and farmers, and the Fulani have a history of
strategically annexing territories, but in the past those
problems have largely been confined to the northern
part of the country. Now, because of extensive
environmental degradation there has been large scale
migration of Fulanis into the south, and these are not
just Fulanis from northern Nigeria, but rather from
across a wide swath of West Africa. The results from
the conflict have been devastating, with over two
thousand killed, tens of thousands displaced, and
billions of dollars in lost revenue.

Fulani herders, such as the ones pictured here, have migrated further south into Nigeria because of
environmental degradation in their northern pastures.
Source: Rita Willaert/Flickr, https://goo.gl/b1CuUw, CC BY-NC 2.0

“But environmental explanations are largely ignored in favor
of talk of ethnic or religious conflict. Such talk quickly becomes
highly emotive, preventing a full analysis of all the driving forces
behind the conflict.”
Source: Olalekan Adekola, “Nigeria’s conflict is a result of environmental
devastation across West Africa,” The Conversation (South Africa), 22 February
2018. https://theconversation.com/nigerias-conflict-is-a-result-of-environmentaldevastation-across-west-africa-91694
This is because environmental devastation has necessitated widespread migration
of Fulanis from all over West Africa to the south of Nigeria, which has been unable
to prevent nomads from other countries from coming in along its long borders. The
influx of new people has disrupted the existing dynamics and relationship between
predominantly farming local communities and nomadic herdsmen.
But environmental explanations are largely ignored in favor of talk of ethnic
or religious conflict. Such talk quickly becomes highly emotive, preventing a full
analysis of all the driving forces behind the conflict. The dominance of the “ethnic
war” narrative therefore makes it harder to develop holistic and sustainable
solutions and, in a country that is a mix of cultures and religions, puts national unity
and peace-building at risk.
In 2016, the conflict led to the death of 2,500 people, displaced 62,000 others and
led to loss of US$13.7 billion in revenue. In January 2018 alone, the conflict claimed
the lives of 168 people.

As the article describes, the government response to
this problem has been mostly silence. Some elites and political leaders suspect President Muhammadu Buhari, who is Fulani, of being complicit
in the attacks by herders, but they have not gone so far as to directly accuse him. However, while there is no proof that Buhari has done anything
to fan the flames of the conflict, Nigeria’s hierarchical society gives the word of elites a great deal of weight.
One suggested solution the government did put forth was the creation of cattle “colonies” where land is taken from indigenous farmers and
given to the herders. Farmers from the Yoruba ethnic group have been particularly vocal in their opposition to such a plan, slamming it as
nothing more than an “ethnic land grab.” While such a proposition appears to be a non-starter, the author suggests a difficult but multipronged
approach to reducing the underlying environmental issues that have led to tensions between the herders and farmers: recharging Lake Chad,
emplacing sustainable water management, embarking on large-scale reforestation, engaging neighboring countries, and reaching out to
international donors for assistance. Should such a massive undertaking be successful, the herders would no longer need to descend south as often
or as far, decreasing their interaction with the farmers, and thus in turn decreasing the likelihood of conflict. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)
OE Watch | April 2018
28

AFRICA
Boko Haram Repeats Chibok Kidnapping, Now in Dapchi
OE Watch Commentary: In 2014 Boko Haram infamously
kidnapped 276 schoolgirls in Chibok, Nigeria. Not until October
2016 and May 2017 did the group exchange over 20 and 80 of the
girls, respectively, for a ransom of around three million Euros.
Since 57 girls immediately escaped after the kidnapping, three
escaped in the months afterwards, and several died in the bush,
slightly over 100 girls remain captive. Boko Haram claims the
remaining girls in captivity do not want to return home and has
released videos of them saying they want to stay with Boko Haram,
although such videos were likely coerced.
Less than a year after the May 2017 exchange, according to
the excerpted article in Nigeria’s Vanguard, Boko Haram again
conducted a mass kidnapping of schoolgirls, this time around 110
girls in the town of Dapchi in Yobe State on 18 February. The
attack, according to the article, was not only a human tragedy,
but an example of more “incompetence and carelessness” from
the government. The article describes how, like in the Chibok
kidnapping, the government at first denied a kidnapping took place
and then claimed to have rescued all the girls, only to admit days
later that neither claim was true.
After the kidnapping, a new social media campaign to call for
the release of the Dapchi girls began and was called #DapchiGirls
on Twitter. It also linked up with the #Bringbackourgirls campaign
that has called for the government to win the freedom of the
Chibok girls. The article says the #DapchiGirls campaign will
bring claims of legal, criminal negligence against the Nigerian
government, although it has not explained how it will do so. The
pressure on the government from the #DapchiGirls campaign,
among other sources, apparently was successful in contributing to
pushing the government to negotiate a short-term ceasefire with
Boko Haram whereby the group returned all of the kidnapped
Dapchi girls on 21 March, except five girls who suffocated in a
vehicle during the kidnapping and one Christian girl who refused
to convert to Islam.
The reason for Boko Haram returning almost all of the girls
was that the leadership of the Islamic State-loyal faction of
Boko Haram to which the kidnappers belonged does not believe
in kidnapping Muslim girls as a legitimate form of warfare.
The leadership therefore disapproved of the operation carried
out by the kidnappers in Dapchi, who did so without approval.
While Nigeria saw a best-case scenario unfold after the Dapchi
kidnapping, there is no guarantee that this faction, or the other
more ruthless faction that holds the remaining Chibok girls, will
not continue other attacks and possibly kidnappings of Christians
girls. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Politische Karte Nigerias (Bundesstaat Yobe hervorgehoben).

Source: By Domenico-de-ga (Own Work),zenn https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ANigeria-karte-politisch-yobe.png, CC-BY-SA-3.0.

“The abduction of 110 Secondary school girls of
Government Girls Science and Technical Secondary
School, Dapchi in Yobe State on February 19, 2018 is
the worst form of a deja vu that our movement could
have ever imagined.”
Source: “Bring Back Our Girls’ blames Govt failures for Dapchi kidnap,”
Vanguard, 13 March 2018. https://www.vanguardngr.com/2018/03/bringback-girls-blames-govt-failures-dapchi-kidnap/
The Bring Back Our Girls group accused the Nigerian government
of “incompetence and carelessness” for the seizure of 110 girls by
Boko Haram from their hostel in the restive northeast. “How terribly
embarrassing it is that within four years since the abduction of 276
Chibok girls in April 2014 our country is again in the news for tragic
reasons,” the group said in a statement. “The abduction of 110
Secondary school girls of Government Girls Science and Technical
Secondary School, Dapchi in Yobe State on February 19, 2018 is the
worst form of a deja vu that our movement could have ever imagined
at this time in our nearly four-year-old advocacy.” Blaming the kidnap
on the “incompetence and carelessness of our government,” the group
urged the authorities to do everything possible to free the girls.

OE Watch | April 2018

29

AFRICA
Who are the Anglophone Secessionists in Cameroon?
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article from the website
of the French-Language Journal du Cameroun on 20 February
discusses the main Anglophone secessionist groups in the ongoing
crisis in Cameroon. Cameroon is a country where about 20 percent of
the population of 23 million speaks English as the official language
and most of them are located in the two regions bordering Nigeria.
However, the rest of the country, including the federal government,
speaks French as an official language. Since 2016 a growing number
of Anglophones have protested against, among other issues, the
appointment of Francophones in the education sector in Anglophone
areas.

“The brewing Anglophone crisis [in Cameroon]
has transformed the North West and South West
regions into a vast battleground for various
secessionist faction.”

According to the article there are two currents that characterize
the Anglophone secessionists: the traditional groups, which have
existed since the 1990s, and more recent groups, which have come
together only since 2016. The traditional groups include Southern
Cameroons Defense Forces (Socadef), which is an armed wing of the
Southern Cameroon Youth League. Socadef was formed in 1995 to
seek secession for the Anglophones in the region of Ambazonia. The
article also states that the group has carried out several attacks with
home-made bombs against the Cameroon Defense Forces and has 300
members.
The more recent groups include one called the Vipers whose tactics
involve the burning down of public buildings, including colleges, in
protest of Francophone influence in the education sphere. Other groups,
such as the Tigers of Ambazonia, have assassinated Cameroonian
gendarmeries in the Anglophone regions and circulated leaflets in cities
or on social networks to spread their message.
The article shows that the resistance to Francophone influence in
the Anglophone parts of Cameroon is multi-generational; however, at
the same time, the Anglophone rebels do not appear to be particularly
well-armed or militarily sophisticated. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

Southern Cameroon Map.

Source: Mark Navales, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Southern_cameroon_map.JPG (CC-by-2.0).

Source: “Crise anglophone: plusieurs factions sécessionnistes armées actives sur le terrain (Anglophone crisis: several armed secessionist
factions active in the field),” Journal du Cameroun, 20 February 2018. https://www.journalducameroun.com/crise-anglophone-plusieursfactions-secessionnistes-actives-terrain/
The escalation of violence in the English-speaking areas has brought to light many groups leading the armed struggle. The brewing
Anglophone crisis has transformed the North West and South West regions into a vast battleground for various secessionist factions. Two
currents characterize the different factions fighting in the conflict between secessionists and Cameroonian defense forces. On the one hand,
there are the traditional groups created in the wake of the demands of the 1990s, and the more recent groups which came together in the wake
of the October 2016 crisis.
In the first current, Southern Cameroons Defense Forces (Socadef), an armed wing of Ebenezer Akwanga’s Southern Cameroon Youth
League (Scyl), is a pioneer. This radical secessionist organization was created in March 1995. The second trend of secessionist factions is
made up of groups whose birth dates back to the beginning of the Anglophone crisis in October 2016. Here we find the Vipers. The actions of
the Vipers consist mainly in preventing the resumption of classes in English-speaking regions by setting fire to public buildings.

OE Watch | April 2018

30

AFRICA
Protests Against Foreign Militaries in Niger
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 February the French language website
slateafrique.com reported on protests in Niger that have seen protesters
carrying messages opposing the foreign military presence in Niger, among
other issues. According to the article, a new finance law in the country has
been criticized because it will lead to higher prices for goods and services.
The article, however, does not explain the specific details about the finance
law, but instead focuses on the chants that emerged from the protests
against the finance law.
The article says that the protests quickly saw chants not only against
the finance law, but also against foreign bases in the country. However,
the article does not indicate that the protesters viewed the foreign bases as
an excessively costly expenditure or related to the finance law in any way.
Rather, political opposition parties that joined the protests began raising the
issue of the French, US and German militaries that have bases and conduct
operations in Niger. The protesters called for these foreign armies to “go
away.”
From the article it appears, therefore, that the protests are not about any
maltreatment by the foreign militaries in Niger, but that the issue is being
used as a wedge issue to rally protesters to the side of opposition parties.
The article notes that, in response, a coalition of the ruling parties was
planning counter-demonstrations. While foreign militaries have not been
blamed for any particular incident to warrant protests, their presence in
Niger is a new political issue which deserves continued attention. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Niger: manifestation contre la loi de finances et les
bases militaires étrangères (Niger: protest against the budget
law and foreign military bases),” slateafrique.com, 25 February
2018. http://www.slateafrique.com/827674/niger-manifestationcontre-la-loi-de-finances-et-les-bases-militaires-etrangeres
Several thousand people demonstrated Sunday in Niamey and
the major cities of Niger to demand the abrogation of the 2018
finance law and the departure of foreign forces based in the
country. “Down with the ruthless finance law!”, “Down with
the unjust finance law!”, “Foreign forces down!”, “French,
American and German armies, go away!”, chanted protesters
in Niamey, responding to the call of a coalition of civil society
organizations.
For the first time, the political opposition and three trade
unions (out of the ten in the country), had called their militants
to take part in the demonstrations. One of the main leaders
of the protests described the military bases, in particular of
America and France, as occupation forces that are present in
Niger as part of the fight against the jihadists.
To respond to these waves of protest, the coalition of ruling
parties is planning a counter-demonstration.

“[He] described the military bases, in particular of America and France, as occupation forces that are present
in Niger as part of the fight against the jihadists.”

Af Ner 125 - Fort de Madama.

Source: Thomas Goisque, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Af_Ner_125_-_Fort_de_Madama.jpg, (CC BY-SA 3.0).

OE Watch | April 2018

31

AFRICA
South Sudan’s President Scapegoats US for Failed
Peace Talks
OE Watch Commentary: With the latest South Sudan peace
talks collapsing, the country’s president, Salva Kiir, found a
scapegoat for their failure…the United States arms embargo. The
two weeks of negotiations that took place in Ethiopia between the
Sudanese government and several rebel groups resulted in almost
no agreements on key issues. As the accompanying article from the
newspaper The East African explains, Kiir claims the US decision
to not sell his country weapons emboldened the opposition groups
who are now hoping and waiting for the government to collapse.

“[President Kiir] accused the US of ‘bullying’ and
‘[imposing the arms embargo] to cow South Sudan and
take its resources’.”

Kiir apparently failed to mention that despite the embargo,
arms are still flowing into his country. Last year the UN declared
the trafficking was often coordinated through South Sudan’s
neighboring countries. Nor is the US alone in viewing an arms
embargo as a way to pressure the warring factions to pursue peace,
with Britain, France, and several other countries also viewing
it favorably. Even the UN is presently contemplating an arms
embargo, though an attempt in 2016 by the US to have the world
body adopt one was thwarted and it is possible it will meet the
same fate this time. However, despite the US not being alone in
supporting, or at least considering a stronger arms embargo, Kiir’s
ire is squarely addressed against the US, with his claiming America Salva Kiir, President of South Sudan, claims the US arms embargo caused his peace talks
with rebels to collapse.
is “bullying” South Sudan and wants to “take its resources.”
Source: South African Government, https://goo.gl/5UUrw7, CC BY-ND 2.0.
Kiir also did not mention the strong support the US provided
South Sudan in its bid for independence or the significant aid the
US has provided the country since then. Unfortunately, despite
that aid, as well as assistance from other countries, South Sudan
has become engulfed in an ethnically based civil war. As the
accompanying article details, over one million people have fled the
country, another two million are displaced, and the dead number
in the tens of thousands.
The arms embargo Kiir rails against was emplaced not just
to put pressure on the opposing sides to end the war; it is also
because of the gross human rights violations both sides have
committed. As often happens in ethnic conflicts, cruel and
barbaric acts occur, with Kiir’s government forces, despite
international pressure, not immune to performing some
particularly heinous ones.

Source: Dicta Asiimwe, “South Sudan’s Kiir blames US for peace talks
collapse,” The East African, 23 February 2018. http://www.theeastafrican.
co.ke/news/South-Sudan-Kiir-blames-US-for-peace-talks-collapse/25584316892-ajls0yz/index.html
South Sudanese President Salva Kiir blames the United States for the
collapse of the latest peace talks in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
He accused the US of “bullying” and “taking the action [imposing the
arms embargo] to cow South Sudan and take its resources”.
Juba appears confident that the regional states are likely not to enforce
the arms embargo.
South Sudan plunged into war in December 2013 after a dispute between
President Kiir and his then deputy Riek Machar.

Following the collapse of the peace talks, Kiir has indicated a willingness to resume them, though it is unclear what demands, if any,
either side would change in the next round. As for this latest delay in peace negotiations, the war, now in its fifth year, finds the government
opposition splintering into multiple factions, a development that makes additional talks that much more difficult. Meanwhile, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), at 12,500 personnel, has been unable to quell the ethnic violence, and has suffered losses. Also
with regards to the UN, Kiir may blame the US for some of South Sudan’s woes, but at one point the war and its casualties led UN SecretaryGeneral Antonio Guterres, who rarely criticizes leaders, to call out South Sudan’s political elites as having little interest in their own people.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | April 2018

32

AFRICA
South Sudan: Buying Peace Does Not Work
OE Watch Commentary: On the surface it sounds like a
fairly reasonable way to reduce conflict: provide warring elites
with high-level political positions and/or large sums of money
to prevent them and their followers from fighting. However,
as the accompanying article from African Arguments relates,
this “buying peace” policy, as it is sometimes called, is fraught
with problems, the main one being that it does not treat the
underlying causes of a conflict, leading to any cessation of
hostilities often being only temporary.
The article’s author points to South Sudan as an example
where mediators attempted this strategy of buying peace. In
this case, the deal was between President Silva Kiir and rebel
leader Riek Machar. Machar had been vice-president in July
2011, when South Sudan became independent, and stayed in the
position until 2013 when internal government tensions erupted
into civil war. The 2015 peace agreement returned Machar
to the vice-presidency, but any thoughts of this action buying
long-term peace were relatively short-lived as the following
year Kiir dismissed Machar and fighting resumed. Some view
the attempt to buy peace by having Machar join the government
as a failure. Since 2016 more rebel groups have joined the
opposition, causing the conflict to spread with UN estimates
placing the number killed at tens of thousands, around two
million displaced, and seven million in need of humanitarian
assistance.
Interestingly, despite this disaster, mediators are once again
trying to stop the bloodshed by bringing the warring parties to
the table with appeasements and rewards, or in other words, a
repeat attempt to buy peace. The author points out that this is
not likely to be successful for the same reason previous efforts
to buy peace did not work, specifically a failure to address root
causes of the problem. As an example of this the article points
to a different, although related, conflict in South Sudan between
the Shilluk community and President Kiir. Many Shilluk joined
the South Sudan Democratic Movement to fight Kiir’s fledgling
government over disputed land in the country’s Upper Nile
region. The militia’s leader, Johnson Olony, agreed in 2013
to end hostilities, and in return, he and some of his men were
awarded positions in the military and government. However,
the basic disagreements over land that led to the fighting in the
first place were not addressed. Meanwhile, relationships became
frayed between Olony and other parties in the government, with
the tensions eventually compelling him to return to the rebel
fold where, as a leader once again, he helped rally supporters to
resume the fight over their grievances.

“The strategy of buying peace has not and cannot work.
It is only when the financial resources and benefits of
fighting dry up that we might finally move a step closer
towards building a meaningful and sustainable peace.”

A South Sudanese man in a remote village with what appears to be a well-worn version of
the Heckler & Koch G3 Assault rifle.
Source: Steve Evans/Flickr, https://goo.gl/NVviQD, CC BY-NC 2.0.

Source: Daniel Akech Thiong, “South Sudan: Buying off elites to stop
fighting won’t work. Here’s what might,” African Arguments, 12 March
2018. http://africanarguments.org/2018/03/12/south-sudan-buying-offelites-to-stop-fighting-wont-work-heres-what-might/
In a bid to end this bloodshed, mediators are once again trying to bring
warring parties to the table. They are largely relying on similar tactics
of trying to appease military leaders and offer them rewards to cease
hostilities. Recent experience, however, should have exposed to them the
unsustainability of trying to “buy peace”.
Ultimately, buying peace by offering rewards to warring elites is doomed
to fail. It is anathema to democracy and allows dictatorship. It benefits
only those at the top and, unless every power-broker is satisfied, which is
impossible, it only encourages factions to split to demand what they believe
they are due.
As things stand, there is little prospect of a meaningful peace treaty being
signed. But if different and concerted forms of pressure were exerted on
those benefiting from conflict and obstructing negotiations, the warring
parties’ calculations could finally change. The strategy of buying peace has
not and cannot work. It is only when the financial resources and benefits of
fighting dry up that we might finally move a step closer towards building a
meaningful and sustainable peace.

The accompanying article points out additional problems with
the policy of buying peace. One of these is that in the process of rewarding the elites, accountability and justice for the less powerful is often
ignored. Thus, a history of violence against the masses might simply be dismissed. Yet another problem with trying to buy peace is that there is
a strong chance it only lasts as long as there are resources to pay for it and that when the money runs out, the fighting could resume.
A better approach than a buying-the-peace policy would, to summarize the article, be twofold. The first approach involves shifting the
emphasis away from rewarding the elites and more towards addressing the underlying grassroots grievances driving the conflict. The second
approach is ending the rewards for waging war by finding the funding and then cutting it off through measures such as arms embargoes, asset
freezes, and travel bans. By providing disincentives to conflict as opposed to the failed policy of buying-the-peace incentives not to fight, South
Sudan might finally emerge from the violence that has engulfed it. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
OE Watch | April 2018

33

AFRICA
Local Debate on AMISOM: Should It Stay or Should It Go?
OE Watch Commentary: Is it really time for the African
Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) to begin withdrawing
from the war-torn Horn of Africa nation? As the accompanying
article from the newspaper The East African relates, the UN
and the Western countries that fund AMISOM are saying yes
to the idea of a systematic withdrawal, citing progress made
in rebuilding and training the Somali National Army (SNA),
which now numbers 12,000 soldiers. Opposing the withdrawal
are the governments of Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Ethiopia
and Djibouti, who supply the 22,000 soldiers constituting
AMISOM. The reason given for their recalcitrance in removing
the soldiers is the perception that the SNA is still not ready to
accept full responsibility for defending the country, and that
gains made in securing territory would be at risk if AMISOM
troop numbers and/or funding were reduced. Interestingly two
pieces of information were left out of the article. First, many
of the governments supplying soldiers, as often happens in
foreign-funded peacekeeping operations, find it profitable to
do so. Second, there is no mention as to the possibility that the
desire among these countries to continue in AMISOM may not
be equal. As an example, it is unknown if Uganda, which does
not border Somalia, or Ethiopia, which does and also has a
long and often antagonistic relationship with that country, both
have the same degree of commitment towards continuing the
mission.

“Tough choices as troop contributing countries seek
to increase boots on the ground, but funders push for a
reduction.”

A Ugandan soldier serving with AMISOM on the northern city limit of Mogadishu.
Source: Stuart Price/UN Photo, https://goo.gl/YAxA99, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

Source: Dicta Asiimwe and Julius Barigaba, “Troop contributing countries
disagree with UN, donors on Amisom withdrawal,” The East African, 3
March 2018. http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Amisom-withdrawalregion-differs-with-UN-and-donors-/2558-4327446-3fn59t/index.html

Until recently, the SNA supported keeping AMISOM in
Somalia for an extended period of time; however, that changed
Tough choices as troop contributing countries seek to increase boots on
after the Ugandan army killed three SNA soldiers in a friendly
the ground, but funders push for a reduction…The change of heart by the
fire incident. Blame was traded by both sides. Uganda claimed
Somali authorities on the withdrawal of Amisom gained momentum last
Somali soldiers opened fire on the convoy of their AMISOM
week after the Ugandan army shot dead three SNA soldiers in a friendly
fire incident, prompting a flurry of accusations and counteraccusations
contingent head, Brigadier Paul Lokec, as it was heading to
between Ugandan and the SNA over who started the shooting…Uganda’s
its base and that they returned fire in self-defense. Somalia
Foreign Affairs Minister Sam Kutesa added the mission was also in need of
on the other hand, claimed the convoy tried to forcibly pass
force enablers and multipliers, which are crucial in carrying out effective
a security checkpoint, leading to the exchange of gunfire.
operations.
Whatever the cause, the end result has been anger towards
AMISOM and a change of heart by some Somalia authorities
“Going forward, it is essential therefore that the international community
regarding their intent to having these foreign soldiers on their
look at the bigger picture in Somalia, so that the gains made in recent years
soil for much longer. However, there are those both within and
through enormous efforts and great sacrifice of Amisom and the SNA are not
outside Somalia who question the SNA’s ability to fully carry
in vain,” Mr Kutesa said.
the burden of defending against al-Shabaab, a terrorist group
whose recent large-scale bombings have shown that while it has been hurt by AMISOM and SNA operations, it is far from defeated.
Soon after the AMISOM-SNA shootout, the commanders of each of the contributing nations’ forces stated that the number of soldiers in
AMISOM should not be reduced, a position echoed by their respective ministers of defense and foreign affairs. However, that stand may be
ignored, as last year the UN Security Council (AMISOM is operated by the African Union with UN approval) adopted a resolution to reduce
AMISOM troop levels and transition security responsibilities to the SNA. Thus, the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Smail Chergui, appealed for increased aid to assist with the transition. He noted the recent political gains made by the country as one of
the factors important in helping to fulfill AMISOM’s exit strategy. He also pointed out (as have many other regional analysts) that further
progress on the security front cannot be made without further progress on the political front. Indeed, progress on both fronts has been arduous,
and depending on who is arguing, having AMISOM withdraw will either lead to further stability or a reversal of gains. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | April 2018

34

AFRICA
Is China Practicing “Debt-Trap Diplomacy” in Africa?
OE Watch Commentary: There are some who might
view Chinese investment in African nations as simply
providing assistance for infrastructure development. As the
accompanying article from the Institute for Security Studies
(an organization based in South Africa) explains, the problem
is Africa might be selling its future to China in what has been
described as “debt-trap diplomacy.” One need only look at Sri
Lanka to see what can happen when China offers easy – some
might say addictive – money that comes without the same, or
what might be seen as strict, conditions of Western lenders. Post
civil-war Sri Lanka turned to what it believed was its benevolent
friend, China, to help finance its reconstruction. The money
flowed in, but the country developed economic problems causing
the debt burden to become untenable. In lieu of repayment, Sri
Lanka relinquished majority control over its strategic port of
Hambantota. Outrage ensued across Sri Lanka with accusations
that such debt-trap diplomacy poses a threat to the sovereignty of
developing, but vulnerable nations. Now, many wonder if Africa
is falling into the same trap.

“Given Africa’s huge reliance on China as a source of
funding, there is concern that African states will suffer a
similar fate to Sri Lanka – and unwittingly become pawns
in China’s global strategic agenda.”

In Africa, as happened in Sri Lanka, loans are collateralized
with long-term high value assets, such as ports or mineral
resources. In return for financing and sometimes even building
Concerns are growing that Chinese financed megaprojects in Africa, such as the Mombasathe infrastructure these countries need to exploit their own
Nairobi standard gauge railway pictured here, are causing some African nations to become
natural resources, China frequently requires favorable access
“debt-trapped” to China
Source: Mwangi Kirubi, https://www.flickr.com/photos/mwangee/34181402040/, CC BY-NC 2.0.
to those very same resources. This arrangement, sometimes
described as “tied-aid,” not only benefits Chinese companies,
Source: Ronak Gopaldas, “Lessons from Sri Lanka on China’s debt-trap
but also provides China with economic penetration and strategic diplomacy,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 21 February 2018.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/lessons-from-sri-lanka-on-chinas-debt-trapleverage in the host country.
diplomacy
Perhaps nowhere on the African continent is China’s strategy
Given Africa’s huge reliance on China as a source of funding, there is
so pronounced as in Djibouti. So far, Chinese financing has
concern
that African states will suffer a similar fate to Sri Lanka – and
helped this tiny, coastal, cash-strapped nation with several large
unwittingly become pawns in China’s global strategic agenda.
infrastructure projects, including a new port, two new airports,
and the Djibouti-Ethiopia railroad. This influx of Chinese
With the West in retreat and focusing on internal issues, China is asserting
money and the growing debt Djibouti owes has some in that
a more muscular approach across Africa. As Africa’s main trading partner
African nation concerned, with one deputy from the National
since 2008, China is securing a long-term ‘ foothold’, where it can do
Assembly declaring that China is going to take the port, just as
business and also ensure the security of its citizens and companies.
it did in Sri Lanka. Djibouti, by no coincidence, is also where
Many states would have to resort to payments ‘in kind’ – which effectively
China has established its first military base overseas. This base, amounts to a country handing the asset back to China a la Sri Lanka. This
as the article’s author notes, is the first pearl in China’s “String
has led to Beijing’s role in Africa being criticized by Western governments
of Pearls,” a geopolitical theory describing Chinese ambitions to and some Africans as neo-colonial.
have a secure sea route in the Indian Ocean connecting China to
However while there is a tendency to paint China’s financing as predatory,
the Middle East.
African political elites are also complicit, argues China-Africa expert Dr
Lucy Corkin. Blaming China provides a convenient scapegoat but doesn’t
Although China’s financing is described as predatory, the
absolve governments from brokering shoddy deals that don’t benefit their
article points out how African political leaders are often
people.
complicit in these deals. While not excusing their actions, it
should however be noted that often these countries with their
low credit ratings, narrow revenue bases, and undiversified economies find it difficult to obtain financing through Western sources. Still, it is
those very same economic problems that make it likely a country will default on its loan, allowing China to acquire the resources it had agreed
to as collateral.
Some argue that many African leaders could be savvier in their negotiations with the Chinese, or even possibly use their relationship with
China to encourage Western powers to be more willing to finance riskier infrastructure projects. Meanwhile, there is growing concern that
African nations will suffer a similar fate as Sri Lanka, trapping themselves in a never-ending debt servitude and perhaps losing a piece of their
sovereignty in the process. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
OE Watch | April 2018

35

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil Has a Border Problem
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 March the Brazilian newspaper
O Globo published the following statistic-filled article detailing the
increased amount of contraband seized and criminals apprehended
along Brazil’s long and relatively open border frontier. At first
glance the numbers are dramatic and sobering. However, while
the amount of illicit goods, including drugs and military grade
weapons, crossing the border might be rising, it is difficult
to assess to what degree. The revelation is Brazil’s growing
effort to control its borders in recent years, and hence a better
understanding of what they are seizing and what they might be
missing. Realizing the country is awash in illegal and often very
dangerous contraband, the federal government has rolled out a
number of border security initiatives in the past decade, but the
task is herculean for multiple reasons.
First, the Brazilian armed forces are still haunted by the years of
military dictatorship in Brazil (1964-1985). Significant segments
of the population still recall military rule and fear a resurgent
military as a result. Laws have been enacted and politicians have
been reticent to use the military in what might be considered
standard law enforcement roles, including the government’s
recent decision to have the military take over security in crimeridden Rio de Janeiro. This is understandable but frustrating to
many in the security side of the government who believe there
are currently no other options to maintain security and control
along the country’s vast border—and in its major cities.
The second difficulty is the actual border zone itself. Brazil
has one of the longest and most lightly defended land borders in
the world, in part because a good portion of it is located in the
Amazon. Roads are non-existent. Rivers are highways and are
navigable depending on the season. The face of the Brazilian
state on the Amazon frontier are nearly 40 Special Border
Platoons. Take the case of São Gabriel da Cachoeira in Brazil’s
far northwest, a region typically known as “the Dog’s Head” for
its distinct geographic border resembling a barking dog. It is the
home of the 2nd Jungle Brigade. The entire brigade supports
seven Special Border Platoons strung out from Maturacá near the
Venezuelan border to Bela Vista on the border with Columbia.
The platoons are resupplied by boat and occasionally small plane
when the weather is cooperative. However, the platoon in Cucuí
is cut off from its airstrip and so all supply and support takes
place on the Rio Negro in a six to ten hour boat ride, depending
on the season.
While the federal government can deploy all branches of law
enforcement for any given operation, there are only a handful
of permanently located Federal Police in São Gabriel. While
they conduct their own investigations, they are totally dependent
on the army for logistics and to carry out law enforcement
operations—a task that the army only recently has been granted
within a 90-kilometer deep border zone. Moreover, the Special
Border Platoons were created to secure a variety of government
agencies on the frontier. In reality, only the army has shown up,
and as the article states, 30,000 soldiers have been deployed for
the entire national frontier. Many in Brazil believe that this is not
enough. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“The products with the greatest increase in seizures were
medicines (381.47%), footwear (340.02%), videogames
(174.00%) and non-recorded media (123.48%).”

Major Pontes at 2nd Jungle Brigade HQ discusses an operation to seal the border and
provide humanitarian assistance to the local indigenous population (for Brazil 2).
Source: Author’s own photographs. Permission Granted by Author.

Source: Camporez, Patrik. “Prisões e apreensões batem recorde nas
fronteiras brasileiras (Arrests and illegal goods seized on Brazil’s Border
hits all-time record),” O Globo, 5 March 2018. https://oglobo.globo.com/
rio/prisoes-apreensoes-batem-recorde-nas-fronteiras-brasileiras-22455470
Although there are still vast stretches of unprotected border, the
institutions responsible for its enforcement have undertaken reinforcements
to reduce vulnerability. In the first half of 2017, the Federal Revenue
Office established the General Coordination to Combat Contraband and
Descaminho (Corep), which carried out, by the end of last year, 3,181
surveillance and repression operations, in which it imposed fines of R
$281 millions. The amount was 223.5% higher than in 2016, when the
penalties reached R $86.8 million. The products with the greatest increase
in seizures were medicines (381.47%), footwear (340.02%), videogames
(174.00%) and non-recorded media (123.48%). Altogether, 221 million
packets of smuggled cigarettes were seized, which represented an increase
of 11.16% compared to 2016.

Brazilian soldiers of the 4th Special Border Platoon en route to Maturacá near Venezuela
border (for Brazil).
Source: Author’s own photographs. Permission Granted by Author.

OE Watch | April 2018

36

LATIN AMERICA
Security Issues in Ecuador
OE Watch Commentary: Drug cartel presence, paramilitary
incursions from Colombia, and illegal fishing are just a few of the
security issues Ecuador is currently facing. In late 2017, it was reported
that Mexican drug cartels were operating in Ecuador (as well as in 50
other countries and five continents) as cited in the excerpted article
from Infobae. While Ecuadorean authorities denied the claim, it became
difficult to refute after the Ecuadorean Navy seized 1.3 tons of cocaine
off the countries’ Pacific Coast in December 2017 as discussed in the
excerpted article from El Universo. This same source also discussed that
in recent years authorities seized seven narco-submarines in Ecuadorean
territory, including two semi-submersibles in Isla Puna and five
submersibles in Esmeraldas. Other items seized included towed torpedoes
and buoys with geo-location capabilities for moving drugs. These items
allow drug traffickers to simply cut drugs from underneath a transport
vessel if discovered and with geo-coordinates, they are able to return and
find the shipment at high sea once authorities are gone.
Geographically speaking, Ecuador sits in a vulnerable position between
the world’s two largest cocaine producers, Colombia and Peru. Its location
is also complicated by the fact that it is situated along the Pacific coast,
making its territorial waters a key transit zone for drug traffickers and
other illicit maritime flows to North America and Asia. Analysts also
worry that improvements to the Trans-Amazonian Highway connecting
Peru and Colombia through Ecuador, part of the nation’s notably good
investment in road infrastructure, may exacerbate contraband flows
through the country via overland routes as well.
Apart from drug trafficking, Ecuador is plagued by Colombian
nationals fleeing violence from paramilitary groups such as the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC in Spanish). The
country also serves as a safe haven for paramilitary groups looking to
escape persecution in Colombia as discussed in the excerpted article
from El Comercio. Areas of particular concern for this type of activity
were cited as Sucumbíos, Carachi, and Esmereldas. The article from El
Comercio also notes the formation of new guerilla groups in Ecuador
and, in fact, residents from Sucumbíos have warned the government about
this activity for some time.
Beyond drug trafficking, security in Ecuador is challenged by a range
of other criminal activity, one of which is illegal fishing as discussed
in another excerpted article from El Comercio. Although this problem
is a constant concern, it reached a critical point in August 2017 when
Ecuador’s authorities seized a Chinese fishing vessel in the Galapagos
Marine Reserve with 300 tons of fish and 6,600 hammerhead sharks,
which are considered a protected species. Security in and around the
Galapagos Islands is a priority for Ecuador, but the area is difficult to
protect given it is located 620 miles off the coast, making it an issue for
the country’s Navy and Coast Guard to maintain a constant presence.
Finally, since Ecuador adopted the US dollar as its official currency
in 2000, it has become an attractive center for money laundering as
discussed in the excerpted article from Extra. The country is taking steps
to thwart this activity by creating new laws regarding the transportation
and movement of US dollars and the government created a financial
task force dedicated to mitigating money laundering. In response to the
multiple security challenges mentioned in this commentary, Ecuador
is fighting the issues head on with capable and professional police
and military forces. Nonetheless, continued vigilance is necessary to
keep security concerns in the country to a minimum. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Cuáles son los cuatro cárteles mexicanos que operan
en Ecuador (Which Mexican Drug Cartels are Operating in
Mexico?),” Infobae, 17 December 2017. https://www.infobae.com/
america/america-latina/2017/12/06/cuales-son-los-cuatro-cartelesmexicanos-que-operan-en-ecuador/
Mexican drug cartels are active in at least 51 countries to include
Ecuador according to a Mexican government official. Specifically,
the Sinaloa Cartel, La Familia Michoacana and the Gulf Cartel
currently have the most influence in this country. The country and
its maritime waters are also used as a key transit zone to move
cocaine from Peru and Colombia.
Source: “Ecuador cierra el 2017 decomisando más de 98 toneladas
de droga (Ecuador Ends 2017 Confiscating More Than 98 Tons of
Drugs),” El Universo, 31 December 2017. https://www.eluniverso.
com/noticias/2017/12/31/nota/6545833/ecuador-cierra-2017decomisando-mas-98-toneladas-droga
Pablo Aguirre, Ecuador’s National Anti-Narcotics Director,
reported the seizure of more than 1.3 metric tons of cocaine in
December 2017. He also highlighted that during 2017, authorities
dismantled more than 97 criminal structures associated with drug
trafficking and seized more than 98 metric tons of drugs.
Source: “Ciudadanos extranjeros están detrás de ataques en
Sucumbíos (Foreign Citizens Behind Attacks in Sucumbíos),” El
Comercio, 9 August 2017. http://www.elcomercio.com/actualidad/
extranjeros-criminales-guerrilla-ataques-sucumbios.html
Víctor M. is a 66 year old Ecuadorean national has lived along
the banks of the San Miguel River since 1980. During this time, he
indicated that Colombian paramilitary groups freely crossed from
Colombian into Ecuador without repercussion. He also discussed
during a recent news interview that Ecuadorean guerilla groups
are forming and have been for years as they have watched activity
from Colombia.
Source: “Ecuador presenta protesta a China por pesca ilegal de
especies protegidas (Ecuador Presents Formal Protest to China for
Illegal Fishing Activities),” El Comercio, 17 August 2017.
http://www.elcomercio.com/tendencias/ecuador-protesta-chinaflotapesquera-especiesprotegidas.html
The Chinese Ambassador to Ecuador was called to the
Chancellery where he was presented with a formal protest
regarding Chinese vessels fishing in the countries’ Exclusive
Economic Zone. This protest was made after authorities detained
a Chinese fishing vessel with more than 300 tons of fish including
protected species from the Galapagos Islands.
Source: “Ecuador figura en la lista negra de lavado de dinero
(Ecuador Blacklisted for Money Laundering),” Extra, 2 March,
2017. http://www.extra.ec/actualidad/dinero-listanegra-ecuadorestadosunidos-politica-CJ1128352
Ecuador has made recent strides to crack down on dirty money,
passing a law last year that issues new compliance requirements
regarding the transportation of cash and valuables through the
mail. Also under that law, the UAF, which previously resided
under the purview of the Attorney General’s office, has now been
established as an autonomous body within Ecuador’s Coordinating
Ministry of Economic Policy.
OE Watch | April 2018

37

LATIN AMERICA
Impact of Odebrecht Scandal on Peruvian Economy
OE Watch Commentary: The title of this commentary is
named as such as it exemplifies how Brazilian construction
company Odebrecht has adversely affected the Peruvian
economy following the fallout of the company’s international
construction scandal. Although Brazil is bearing the
largest brunt of its own misconduct, Peru’s economy is also
feeling the effects. This is because construction projects
with contracts worth billions of dollars have been halted in
the wake of the investigation, and in the meantime, Peru
grapples with how to respond to a scandal engulfing the
highest ranks of its political class.
Because of the gravity of this case, experts assert that Peru
could potentially serve as a case study to how corruption
of this nature can affect a developing nation. “The entire
country has come to a halt, leaving Peru’s construction
sector paralyzed” said Hugo Alache, the spokesperson for
the Association of Odebrecht construction, in the excerpted
article from La Republica. In the article, Alache also states
that at least 147 companies went bankrupt due to the scandal.
The excerpted article from El País discusses how the scandal
also affected the Gasoduto del Sur (Southern Gas Pipeline),
a 620-mile long gas pipeline and the largest infrastructure
project ever built in Peru.
Odebrecht admitted to paying $29 million in bribes to
public officials in Peru between 2005 and 2014 in exchange
for $12.5 billion in contracts as discussed in the excerpted
article from El Comercio. However, it has denied that all of
its Peruvian projects were tainted by corruption. Economists
estimate that halted projects and null contracts shaved as
much as 1.5 percentage points off Peru’s GDP last year.
Economists estimate the investigations will cost Peru at
least another half point to a point this year. Thanks in large
part to strong mineral prices, Peru’s economy is still poised
for growth in 2018, but because of the Odebrecht affair,
it is not expected to approach the 5 percent annual GDP
hike that economists say is needed to reduce poverty in the
country. At the same time, because of the Odebrecht-related
investigations, roughly 150,000 jobs have been lost over the
past 12 months and dozens of companies are on the brink of
bankruptcy. The excerpted article from La Región notes how
even Peruvian President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski declared
that the “Odebrecht scandal put a brake on economic
growth.” Since the after effects of this scandal are slowing
coming to light, only time will tell how the Odebrecht affair
will affect Peru’s economy in the long term. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“Hugo Alache Correa, the spokesperson for the Association
of Odebrecht construction materials, reported that at least
147 Peruvian companies have gone bankrupt due to failure
of the Brazilian company to pay for materials purchased to
build multiple construction projects in the country.”
Source: “Odebrecht provocó la quiebra de 147 empresas peruanas (Odebrecht
Causes Finanical Ruin of 147 Companies in Peru),” La Republica, 27 October
2017. http://larepublica.pe/politica/1136486-odebrecht-provoco-la-quiebra-de147-empresas-peruanas
Hugo Alache Correa, the spokesperson for the Association of Odebrecht
construction materials, reported that at least 147 Peruvian companies have
gone bankrupt due to failure of the Brazilian company to pay for materials
purchased to build multiple construction projects in the country. Furthermore,
more than 247 additional construction material providers are in debt because
of the scandal.
Source: “El caso Odebrecht paraliza la construcción del mayor gasoduto
de Perú (Odebrecht Investigations Halts the Construction of the Biggest
Gas Pipeline in Peru),” El País, 02 February, 2017. https://elpais.com/
internacional/2017/02/01/america/1485903956_914476.html
Peru canceled its contract with Odebrecth to build the Gasoducto del Sur.
This pipeline was of particular significance as it represented the countries’
largest ever infrastructure project and was slated to cost seven billion dollars.
Because Odebrecht could not finish the pipeline, the company was forced to
pay Peru a multi-million dollar fine for non-compliance.
Source: “Juez devolvió pedido de extradición contra Toledo a la fiscalía (Judge
Returns Toledo Extradition Request to Fiscalia),” El Comercio, 02 February
2018. https://elcomercio.pe/politica/alejandro-toledo-juez-devolvio-pedidoextradicion-fiscalia-noticia-495022
Odebrecht admitted to paying 29 million dollars in bribes for construction
contracts between 2005 and 2014. During these periods, the following
Presidents were allegedly involved in this corruption scandal: Alejandro
Toledo (2001-2006), Alan García (2006 - 2011) y Ollanta Humala (2011 - 2006).
Source: “El caso Odebrecht afecta la economía peruana (Odebrecht Affair
Affects the Peruvian Economy),” La Región, 14 March 2017. http://
diariolaregion.com/web/el-caso-odebrecht-afecta-la-economia-peruana/
Peruvian President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski declared a few days ago that
“the Odebrecht affair has put a brake on the Peruvian economy”. The after
effects of this scandal could cost Peru anywhere from 0.5 to 1 point in GDP
growth this year. Kuczynski further indicated to open source channels that the
government “is implementing an anti-corruption war on public construction
projects despite the difficulty in implementing something of this nature.”

OE Watch | April 2018

38

LATIN AMERICA
Elections in El Salvador
OE Watch Commentary: Legislative and municipal
Source: Carlos Palomo, “Infografía: Source: “Balance de las Elecciones 2018:
(county level) elections were held in El Salvador on 4
Así quedaría la Asamblea
¿Qué significa la derrota del FMLN?
March. The system of vote counting and confirmation is Legislativa 2018-2021, según
(2018 Electoral Results: What does the
elongated in El Salvador as compared to, say, Colombia
tendencias del TSE (Infograph: This FMLN’s defeat mean?),” El Socialista
or Cuba. As such, the final counts indicated in the first
is how the Legislative Assembly
Centroamericano, 6 March 2018. https://
accompanying reference may be off by a seat or two.
would end up),” elsalvador.com, 5
elsoca.org/index.php/america-central/
In broad ideological terms, however, the overall results
March 2018. http://www.elsalvador. declaraciones-del-psoca/4627-el-salvador
likely to be certified this election cycle appear similar
com/noticias/nacional/457306/
“The electoral defeat puts the exhausted
to those in Colombia. The right did better than the left.
infografia-asi-quedara-la-asambleaFMLN against the ropes in that in its last
This disfavors current President Salvador Sánchez Cerén, legislativa-2018-2021-segunpresidential year it will lose the capacity
tendencias-del-tse/
whose governing party is the leftist Frente Farabundo
to negotiate in the Legislative Assembly.
Martí (National Liberation Front, FMLN). The results
ARENA, with ten more representatives,
ARENA:
37 reps
are also a setback for the region’s Bolivarian alliance, as
has in its favor the rules of the game that
FMLN :
23 reps
President Cerén and the FMLN are supporters of that
will allow them to get the Administration
strategic block. The second accompanying reference is
PCN:		
8 reps
back in 2019…from the Centralamerican
an opinion/analysis/call-to-action from the secretariat
GANA:		
11 reps
Socialist Party we call on all the political
of the relatively obscure Central American Socialist
organizations, labor, campesino, student,
PDC:		
3 reps
Party, PSOCA (see https://elsoca.org/). It points out that
indigenous, popular, etc, to form a new
CD:		
1 rep
the farther left organizations in El Salvador, already
umbrela organization with a view toward
disillusioned with the FMLN, called for blank voting.
Non partisan: 1 rep
making a Revolutionary Pole…”
Indeed, the non-participation rate, according to the
PSOCA, was over 50 percent. Leaders of the PSOCA
are calling for a new, radical umbrella organization outside the FMLN. Notably, the FMLN has been the only openly recognized member of the
Forum of Sao Paulo, the hemisphere’s top leftist consortium and political style guide. We might look to see if a new Salvadoran organization
appears within that grouping. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Elections in Cuba
OE Watch Commentary: Cubans went to the polls on
11 March to elect delegates to the provincial legislatures
and to the National Assembly of Popular Power. The
traditionally high turnout might have been a little lower
than the previous election, but at any rate will have
been around 90 percent of the suffrage, which begins at
age 16. The new National Assembly will then elect the
President of the Council of State, who is also the Chief
of State and Government. Expectations are that current
Vice-president, Miguel Díaz–Canel will be elected as
the new President. Raul Castro, now 86 years old, has
announced his pending retirement and apparently will
not accept the position. He will, however, remain at the
head of the Communist Party (PCC). End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…Cubans meet to exercise
their right to vote…”

Source: “Este domingo Cuba elige
diputados a la Asamblea Nacional
del Poder Popular (This Sunday
Cuba elects deputies to the National
Assembly of Popular Power),”
Panorama,com, 11 March 2018.
http://www.panorama.com.ve/
mundo/Este-domingo-Cuba-eligediputados-a-la-Asamblea-Nacionaldel-Poder-Popular-20180310-0012.
html
“This Sunday more than eight
million Cubans meet to exercise
their right to vote…Those who
may participate in the elections,
in accordance with article 5 of
Electoral Law Number 72, include
‘all Cubans man and woman
including members of the armed
institutions, who will have reached
16 years of age…’”

Source: “¡Un Ejemplo para El Mundo!
Dictadura cubana destacó “la pureza
y transparencia” de las elecciones (An
Example for the World! Cuban dictatorship
exhibits ‘the purity and transparency of the
elections),” DolarToday, 12 March 2018.
https://dolartoday.com/un-ejemplo-parael-mundo-dictadura-cubana-destaco-lapureza-y-transparencia-de-las-elecciones/
https://elcooperante.com/cubanos-eligenal-parlamento-como-primer-paso-parasustituir-a-raul-castro-en-la-presidencia/
“For his part, the First Vice-president
of the Councils of State and of Ministers,
Miguel Díaz – Canel highlighted that ‘the
act of voting, in this occasion, entails a
lofty concept of duty and a commitment
to the revolution and to socialism, it is a
recognition of the purity and transparency
of the Cuban process, very different than
that of other nations.”

OE Watch | April 2018

39

LATIN AMERICA
Elections in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: Legislative elections were held in
Colombia on 10 March and as the accompanying excerpted articles
show, the right did better than the left. The legislative elections
precede the presidential elections and constitute a final, definitive
survey of national opinion regarding the array of political parties. It
is considered definitive in the sense that the numbers of seats in the
Senate and Congress are set. Because the incoming president will
have to form a legislative coalition to get anything passed, voters
now have an idea of which presidential candidates have a real hope
of forming such a coalition. Many individual voters will still vote
their first preferences; however, some will select a candidate who
they consider close enough to their way of thinking but who can
actually effect the necessary alliances. Iván Duque, who will be the
rightist coalition’s candidate in the first presidential round, earned
more votes (43 percent of the total) in the parliamentary elections
than did the whole leftist coalition. Marta Lucía Ramirez, who
came in second to Duque on the right, herself won a million and a
half votes. Those two will form a single ticket for the presidential
contest. Given the recent results, a President Duque would appear
to have the easiest path to creating a workable legislative block. Of
course, things can change between now and the first round on 27
May, but at this point it seems likely that the Duque/Ramirez ticket
will win over fifty percent of the vote in the first round, ending the
race early (there will be a second round only if no candidate wins
an absolute majority).
This prognostic seems also to be what the left sees, given that
in his speech after the results came in, leftist leader Gustavo Petro
asserted that the numbers were there to take things to the second
round, which seems to mean he wishes the numbers were there.
Right now they are not. The FARC, for the first time running
candidates as a legal political party, got less than one percent of the
vote, not enough to earn a legislative seat. This reflects a continued
aversion in Colombia for the brand. (Note, however, that because
of the FARC-government power sharing agreement, the FARC
still gets five seats in the house and five in the Senate, as many as
a minor party that earned ten times as many votes). Nevertheless,
candidate Gustavo Petro, who for practical purposes may be as
leftist as any of the official FARC candidates, won 30 percent
of the vote. Candidate Iván Duque sounded far more confident
afterwards, however, appealing in his speech to those dissatisfied
with the FARC-government agreement by deriding the impunity
extended to FARC leaders and the clientelism of which the current
president has been accused. What does all this mean for the future
of Colombia’s internal political warfare? It is too early to make
a confident guess, but a less-than-confident guess sees a coming
Duque-led administration making few additional concessions to
the Bolivarians. That would mean, for instance, that the ELN will
not likely get a power-sharing deal like the FARC did, and neither
Cuba nor Venezuela will see much diplomatic support coming out
of Bogotá. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the right doubled the left…”

Ivan Duque, May 2017.

Source: Centro Democratico, https://www.flickr.com/photos/152378065@N04/34004503594, CC 2.0.

Source: “Así quedó el Congreso: conozca a los senadores más votados
del país (This is how Congress ended up: know which were the most
voted-for senators in the country),” El Tiempo, 12 March 2018. http://
www.eltiempo.com/elecciones-colombia-2018/congreso/el-centrodemocratico-es-el-mas-votado-para-el-senado-2018-192752
“The abstention rate fell with respect to 2014. In the Senate it went
from 56% to 53%. There were 2,901,939 more votes. In the House it
went from 56% to 52.4%. An additional 3,040,996 persons voted. …In
an unprecedented day of voting, the right doubled the left.”…
Great Consultation through Colombia
[right coalition]

Social Inclusion for Peace
[left coalition]

Iván Duque--4,038,101

Gustavo Petro--2,849,331

Marta Lucia Ramirez--1,537,790

Carlos Caicedo--514,978

Alejandro Ordoñez--384,721
Source: Jorge Galindo, “La mayor encuesta de Colombia (The most
important Colombian poll),” El País, 11 March 2018. https://elpais.
com/internacional/2018/03/11/colombia/1520729654_650810.html
“…the [congressional] elections are an inflexión point that fixes
expectations that exist about each party, about each regional leader, but
also about each [presidential] candidate, the the extent that they can
give a turn to the results. …In no small measure this happens becasue
the legislative elections serve as the definitive poll.”
Source: Editors, “Los mensajes de Duque y Petro tras ganar las
consultas (The messages of Duque and Petro on winning the
consultations),” El Tiempo, 12 March 2018. http://www.eltiempo.com/
elecciones-colombia-2018/presidenciales/declaraciones-de-ivan-duquey-gustavo-petro-tras-ganar-en-consultas-192748
Duque:“…the presidential candidate [Duque] made it clear that among
his principle propositions was avoiding ‘that to our country come the
temptations of popular authoritarianism that ruined Venezuela.’…
He added that the moment had arrived to ‘turn the page on impunity,
clientelism and tax strangulation…”
Petro: “The numbers are there to move on to the second round.”

OE Watch | April 2018

40

LATIN AMERICA
Cristina Fernández’s Legal Jeopardy
OE Watch Commentary: Former Argentinean President Cristina Fernández
de Kirchner is facing what appear to be multiple uphill battles in the Argentinean
justice system. The most serious, as noted in the first accompanying reference,
is a charge of having conspired to cover up the culpability of Iranians implicated
in the 1994 terrorist car bombing of a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires.
The cover-up was allegedly organized within the scope of an agreement with the
Iranian government. The second accompanying reference is of a separate charge of
government corruption. It mentions a third investigation on yet another corruption
accusation. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Justice entered a case against ex-president Cristina
Fernández for presumed illegal concealment...”

Remains of the AMIA after the AMIA bombing in Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Atentado_AMIA.jpg, Fair Use.

“…Justice…resolved today that opposition senator and ex-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner
(2007-2015) be tried…”
Source: “Tres años después: Cristina Fernández irá a juicio por presunto
encubrimiento de terroristas (Three years later: Cristina Fernández will face justice
for presumed cover-up of terrorists),” El Cooperante, 5 March 2018. https://
elcooperante.com/tres-anos-despues-cristina-fernandez-ira-a-juicio-por-presuntoencubrimiento-de-terroristas/
“The Justice [Department] resolved today that opposition senator and ex-president
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner (2007-2015) be tried for the crimes of fraud and
illicit association…According to the accusation, the ex-chief executive and the rest of
the accused participated in an association…purposed to commit crimes in order to
illegally and deliberately take funds that had been assigned to public transportation
works…”

Source: DPA, “Elevan a juicio oral causa contra
Cristina Fernández (Hearing for cause brought
against Cristina Fernández),” La Jornada, 2
March 2018. http://www.jornada.unam.mx/
ultimas/2018/03/02/elevan-a-juicio-oral-causacontra-cristina-fernandez-1756.html
“The Justice [Department] entered a case against
ex-president Cristina Fernández for presumed
illegal concealment, by way of an agreement with
Iran, of those implicated in the attack against the
Jewish Community Center AMIA of Buenos Aires…”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | April 2018

41

LATIN AMERICA
Colombian Forces Fight the ELN
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
references are recent among numerous reports
showing that the Colombian Army has been taking
offensive initiative against the People’s Liberation
Army (ELN) in the last few months. The action
reported in the first reference took place in North
Santander, a department bordering on Venezuela
and which is home to a great deal of hydrocarbon
infrastructure, including hundreds of miles of
vulnerable pipeline. The ELN has long experience at
hydrocarbon predation. Shutting down the loci of their
processing operations will set the ELN back a bit, but
unless they are chased to sanctuary and neutralized,
they are likely to continue. According to the second
accompanying source, government forces apparently
caught up with one of the ELN units in Antioquia,
in northeastern Colombia, at the base of a large
sanctuary area known as the Paramillo. The report
suggests that the pre-stated goal of the operation was
to wipe the ELN unit out, and that seems to have been
the result. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…seven illegal complexes were located and destroyed…”
Source: Radio Santafé, “El Ejército desmanteló siete cambuches de robo de gasolina del
Eln (The Army dismantles seven ELN gasoline theft structures),” Radio Santafé, Bogotá,
8 March 2018. http://www.radiosantafe.com/2018/03/08/ejercito-desmantelo-sietecomplejos-ilegales-del-eln-para-robar-y-procesar-hidrocarburos-en-norte-de-santander/
“In joint operations of the Second Division [Colombian Army], the Air Assault
Division with its Counter-Narcotics Trafficking Brigade, the National Police, seven
illegal complexes were located and destroyed, [these complexes] being used for the
extraction and processing of hydrocarbons in North Santander Department.”
Source: Colprensa, “10 guerrilleros muertos por bombardeo al Eln (10 guerrillas dead
from bombing the ELN),” Vanguardia.com, 7 March 2018. http://www.vanguardia.
com/colombia/426615-10-guerrilleros-muertos-por-bombardeo-al-eln
“Operation Red Lighting, that is advancing against the ELN, [effected] by the Armed
Forces in conjunction with the National Police and the Colombian Air Force, left 10
persons dead and three captured, as well as seizing war materiel…This is considered
to be the complete column of the ELN in Lower Cauca [lower Cacuca River area in
northern Antioquia Departments] that has caused displacements in Cáceres y Tarazá
[counties] and the attacks against electric towers in the interconnection toward
Córdoba.”

Cracks in Bolivarian Military Morale
OE Watch Commentary: In March 2017, counterintelligence personnel
arrested a number of officers in the Bolivarian National Army (Venezuela).
According to the first accompanying source, those officers were convicted
this month of treason and sent to prison. The second accompanying
reference is exemplary of many reports of a new set of arrests just made
this March. The men arrested this time were also mostly lieutenant
colonels, the apparent leader being a highly accomplished commander.
Given that Hugo Chávez’ political career was launched by a coup attempt
that got him arrested when he was a lieutenant colonel, it is no wonder
Nicolas Maduro would have a heightened concern, especially about young
commanders in charge of considerable weaponry. It would be valuable
to remember, nevertheless, who is who. Chávez left prison to later run
as a candidate in actual elections. Presidential elections are coming in
Venezuela, perhaps this May. Few people, if anyone, thinks they are going
to be open or fair. They will more than likely reaffirm choices made by
party leadership in the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (United
Socialist Party of Venezuela, PSUV) and the Partido Comunista de Cuba
(Cuban Communist Party, PCC). Those nuclei might decide that it is time
to retire and replace Maduro, and it may be that the military rumblings will
have had an influence on such a decision.
In any case, our analyses of the possibilities of a military coup in
Venezuela cannot reasonably be drawn without consideration of other
milestones noted in this month’s OE Watch, in particular the elections in
Cuba. Elections there reaffirmed party control and commitment to the
revolution, but still presented a change in public personalities at the top.
As such, it could give color to the notion of peaceful systematic change
of leadership in Venezuela as well. Considering how much power the
Bolivarian National Army already has within the Venezuelan government
and society, it seems unlikely that we will see an actual military coup, even
while the elections might herald more public leadership by uniformed men.
Still, many in Venezuela see things are getting worse and more curious all
the time. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…the accused …were detained last March…”
Source: “Tribunal dictó privativa de libertad a nueve militares
del Ejército por ‘traición a la patria’ (Tribunal sentenced nine
military officers to prison for ‘treason’),” Aporrea, 10 March
2018. https://www.aporrea.org/ddhh/n322073.html
“The tribunal charged them with the crime of treason,
instigating rebellion and actions unbecoming of an officer. The
accused are six lieutenant colonels, two sergeants and a first
lieutenant, who were detained last March.”
Source: Javier Mayorca, “Crímenes sin Castigo: Descontento
en el Ejército (Crimes without punishment: Discontent in
the Army),” Rurrun.es, 8 March 2018. http://runrun.es/
opinion/341149/crimenes-sin-castigo-descontento-en-el-ejercito.
html; “¡EL RÍO SUENA! Un nuevo movimiento nace en el
corazón del ejército (The River is Noisy [from a common
saying that when the river makes noise, it carries stones] A new
movement is born in the heart of the army),” DolarToday, 10
March 2018. https://dolartoday.com/el-rio-suena-un-nuevomovimiento-nace-en-el-corazon-del-ejercito/
“A new movement that supposedly intended to remove Maduro
from power was detected in the country’s principal military
force. Officers that had been in command of units with a high
degree of firepower are now carried to the tribunals….At the
time this note is being written, the presentation of Marín [Igbert
José Marín Chaparro, accused as mutiny leader] and other
officials [apparently 19 in all] to the military control tribunals in
Caracas…This is the second anti-President dissident movement
detected in the ranks in only a year.”
OE Watch | April 2018

42

LATIN AMERICA
Stabilizing Venezuela: Strategic Objective for Bolivarians
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 March, on the
fifth anniversary of the death of Hugo Chavez,
Latin American leaders were scheduled to meet
in Caracas, Venezuela to set the objectives for the
continuation of the Bolivarian Alliance for the
Peoples of Our America (ALBA). Hugo Chavez
and Fidel Castro originally founded the group in
2004 as a regional union to resist perceived United
States imperialism via the Monroe Doctrine and to
encourage other nations to adopt Bolivarian styles
of leftist authoritarian government.
As noted in the first excerpted article from
Granma Online, the official newspaper of the
Cuban Communist Party, Bolivarians fear that “the
American continent faces an important challenge
amid Washington’s hostility and aggressiveness.”
After the US government revealed that it would
prefer that Peru encourage Venezuelan officials
not to attend the 15th annual Summit of the
Americas, Bolivarians argued that “destroying the
Bolivarian Revolution and overthrowing Maduro
is an imperialist priority.” With the US developing
assistance programs for Latin American states, like
Peru, to reduce their dependence on Venezuelan
oil, some Latin American states are indecisive on
whether to side with the US or the Bolivarians.
Considering this new political and economic
divide, the Bolivarians in Cuba and Venezuela
fear that the US is “in favor of a military coup in
Venezuela.”
The second excerpted article from Granma
Online describes how Cuban president, Rául
Castro called upon the leaders at the Summit on
5 March, saying leaders “have a strategic and
urgent task [to defend] the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.” According to the excerpt, President
Castro blames US actions to “destabilize the
region” for the current instability in Venezuela.
The article suggests that the Bolivarians view
instability as a strategic threat to Latin American
stability, but also to the image of Bolivarian
economic systems. In other words, Venezuelan
economic collapse could indicate to other Latin
American states that the Bolivarian model (stateowned industry and authoritarian government)
could be unsustainable, but this remains to be
seen. With the two original ALBA founders now
deceased, the future of the Bolivarian movement
will likely continue to resist US policy initiatives
in Latin America, but its survival will depend
on stabilizing Venezuela. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kelsay)

“We proclaim the unwavering support for the civic-military union
led by President Nicolás Maduro.”

Raul Castro and Nicolas Maduro, November 2016.

Source: https://www.voanoticias.com/a/depredadores-prensa-rsf-maduro-castro-zetas/3576110.html, Public Domain.

Source: “After the Eagle’s Flight, Will the Condor Return? (Tras vuelo del águila ¿el
regreso del Cóndor?),” Granma Online, 15 February 2018. http://www.granma.cu/
mundo/2018-02-14/tras-vuelo-del-aguila-el-regreso-del-condor-14-02-2018-23-02-10
The American continent, which has been declared a peace zone, faces an important
challenge amid Washington’s hostility and aggressiveness... Sierra said that
“Interestingly, the OAS secretary general remained in complicit silence regarding the
statements made just a few days ago by US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson in which he
supported a military coup in Venezuela and in which he also defended the validity of the
Monroe Doctrine…” Destroying the Bolivarian Revolution and overthrowing Maduro
is an imperialist priority, when seeking pretexts to raise popularity rates in the White
House.
Source: “Raúl: la defensa de Venezuela es una tarea estratégica del Alba (Rául: the
defense of Venezuela is a strategic task of the ALBA),” Granma Online, 5 March, 2018.
http://www.granma.cu/mundo/2018-03-05/raul-la-defensa-de-venezuela-es-una-tareaestrategica-del-alba-05-03-2018-16-03-21
The president of the Councils of State and Ministers, Army General Raul Castro Ruz,
said Monday that the Alba has as a “strategic and urgent task” the defense of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Cuban leader intervened in the XV Summit of the integration mechanism that
coincides with the fifth anniversary of the physical departure of Commander Hugo
Chávez, founder with Fidel of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our AmericaPeoples Trade Treaty (ALBA) -TCP).
Raúl referred to the military threat, the hostility and the aggression of imperialism
against Venezuela, as well as a neoliberal attack to reverse the social gains achieved
since the triumph of Chávez at the end of the last century.
He added that at the present time interventionist policies against the sovereignty of
the nations of the region are being carried out, especially against the progressive
governments, and attempts are being made to dismantle the integration processes forged
in the last decades.
These actions, he said, “destabilize the region and pose dangers to regional peace and
security.”

OE Watch | April 2018

43

LATIN AMERICA
Continuing Violence in Mexico Fuels Armored Car Business
OE Watch Commentary: In the earliest years of Mexico’s raging
drug war, relocation to less violent regions of the country resulted in
mass internal migration or movement abroad. Today, families are still
relocating because of violence, armed robbery and kidnapping threats,
but a trend of purchasing armored vehicles for personal safety, which
first appeared two years ago, is now exploding in popularity. When
this trend was first reported in 2015, buyers were predominantly drug
traffickers, affluent families and politicians. However, Ballistics Group
CEO Fernando Echeverri indicates in the excerpted article from El País
that this is no longer the case and that today’s market is more diversified
given that independent professionals and entrepreneurs in all sectors are
looking for protection from violence. Echeverri further indicated that
cars produced by his company are indeed effective, as the work done
by his company has thwarted attempted murders and kidnappings on
multiple occasions, though actual statistics are not reported. In terms
of demand, the highest overall sales of armored vehicles are reported
in Monterrey (Mexico’s industrial epicenter) and the Federal District,
where common street cars can be retrofitted into certifiable armored
vehicles for $25,000-$55,000.
Apart from news articles simply reporting that the sale of armored
vehicles are on the rise, the excerpted article from Motorpasion provides
statistics to support this idea. For example, the sale of bulletproof
vehicles in Mexico rose 10 percent between 2015 and 2016, with a
growing demand from the private sector. Demand also is based on the
type of protection one may need as indicated in the excerpted article
from La Jornada. Mauricio Garibaldi Sanchez of Blindajes Alemanes,
a private sector armored vehicle company, indicated that vehicles are
generally built to protect against three different weapon types, including
.44 Magnum revolvers, AK-47s, and AR-15s. However, this does not
mean that vehicles are not available to protect against higher caliber
weapons.
Garibaldi Sanchez further indicated that consumer demand in Mexico
City is for armor that can withstand .44 caliber bullets as these are the
weapons most commonly used in car robberies. In closing, Garibaldi
Sanchez commented that in 2017, 23 percent of his sales came from
new customers. He clarified this comment by stating that before, these
customers were not concerned with purchasing armored vehicles and
tied this necessity to insecurity. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“As reported by Motorpasion, the sale of
bulletproof vehicles in Mexico rose 10% between
2015 and 2016, with a growing demand from the
private sector. Sales grew by another 9% in 2017.”
Source: “El negocio de detener las balas crece en México (The
Business of Stopping Bullets Grows in Mexico),” El País, 18
February 2016. https://elpais.com/internacional/2016/02/18/
actualidad/1455818852_628648.html
[According to Ballistics Group CEO Fernando Echeverri],
“75% of our sales last year were to private individuals. Wealthy
businessmen and moneyed families are being joined by mediumsized businesses and employees that spend all day in the street and
are scared of their windows being smashed.”
Source: “La venta de autos blindado en México crece de manera
exponencial (Sale of Armored Vehicles in Mexico Grows
Exponentially),” Motorpasion, 19 November 2017. https://www.
motorpasion.com.mx/industria/la-venta-de-autos-blindado-enmexico-crece-de-manera-exponencial
As reported by Motorpasion, the sale of bulletproof vehicles in
Mexico rose 10% between 2015 and 2016, with a growing demand
from the private sector. Sales grew by another 9% in 2017.
Source: “Aumento de la delincuencia y la violencia impulsan
mercado del blindaje en México (Increases in Violence and
Crime Fuel Armored Vehicle Industry in Mexico),” La Jornada,
12 December 2017. https://www.jornada.unam.mx/2017/12/17/
mundo/019n1eco
Mauricio Garibaldi Sanchez, head of Blindajes Alemanes
in Queretaro, Mexico stated that his firm produces armored
vehicles capable of providing three different levels of protection:
one capable of protecting occupants from a weapon such as the
Magnum 44 revolver, a second which is able to withstand attack
from an AK-47 rifle, and a third capable of stopping rounds fired
by AR-15 automatic rifles.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377

OE Watch | April 2018

44

LATIN AMERICA
Bombs Detonated on Ferry and Tourist Vessel in Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: An explosion on a tourist
ferry in Playa del Carmen in February 2018 and the
discovery of a bomb on a tourist vessel in early March
2018 have some authorities in Mexico claiming that
these may not be coincidental accidents, but instead,
terrorist attacks of some type as discussed in the
excerpted article from El Universal. However, the
article also notes that not everyone drew the same
conclusion, particularly Alberto Elias Beltran, the
Deputy Attorney General for International Affairs in
Mexico. Expounding on this statement, Elias Beltran
indicated that it is not in the interest of criminal
organizations (drug cartels) to conduct terrorist
attacks of any kind as these types of actions would
certainly lead to increased levels of security and
increased scrutiny by authorities.
On 21 February 2018, five explosive devices were
detonated on a ferry known as the Caribe 3 (owned by
Barcos Caribe) while docked at Playa del Carmen, a
popular tourist destination in Mexico. The excerpted
article from Milenio provides details regarding these
devices, but indicated they were not professional
grade. A total of 24 people were injured as a result
of the explosions. On 1 March 2018 two separate
explosive devices were discovered on another vessel
owned by Barcos Caribe after it was searched at the
Port of Cozumel. Representatives from the company
reported that the explosive devices found had been
in place for 10 months, but that they represented no
harm to travelers.
Foreign governments are taking these incidents
very seriously and the US State Department issued
a travel warning on 7 March for ferry travel to Playa
del Carmen. The excerpted article from Noticaribe
shows that Mexico is taking these incidents seriously
and authorities are actively looking to discard and/
or corroborate information regarding these incidents.
They are also looking to identify, arrest, and bring to
justice the probable perpetrators of these acts. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“According to Alberto Elias Beltran, whoever caused the
explosion did not intend to injure individuals on the boat
because the devices themselves had very limited capacity.”
Source: “Explosion en ferry fue intencional: PGR (Explosion on Ferry was
Intentional: PGR),” El Universal, 10 March 2018. http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/
nacion/seguridad/bomba-casera-explosion-en-ferry-fue-intencional
The Attorney General’s Office (PGR) assured that the explosion in February on a
ferry boat owned by Barcos Caribe Company, the family of the former governor of
Quintana Roo, Roberto Borge, was the act of a terrorist or organized crime group.
However, Alberto Elias Beltran, the Deputy Attorney General for International
Affairs, argued that it was not a terrorist attack because no claim was made by any
organization nor do conditions exist to motivate an incident of this type.
Source: “Explosion y bombas en barcos caribes…Que se sabe del caso (Explosions
and Bombs on Caribbean Ships in Mexico and What is Known about the Cases),”
Milenio, 03 March 2018. http://www.milenio.com/estados/explosion-barcos-caribebomba-playa-carmen-cozumel-alerta-embajada-noticias_0_1135086681.html
According to Alberto Elias Beltran, whoever caused the explosion did not intend
to injure individuals on the boat because the devices themselves had very limited
capacity. In total, five explosive charges were used to target the vessel docked at
Playa del Carmen. Among the material collected at the scene by Expert Services
personnel, items recovered included pieces of cardboard in cylindrical form,
fragments of copper wire with yellow insulating coating and two aluminum sheets
that were part of the boat structure.
Source: “Alerta en Cozumel: presuntas bombas en embarcación de Barcos Caribe;
la Semar ya investiga (Alert in Cozumel: Alleged Bombs Found on Barcos Caribe;
Semar Investigates Incident),” Noticaribe, 01 March 2018. http://noticaribe.com.
mx/2018/03/01/preliminar-alerta-cozumel-reportan-dos-presuntas-bombas-enembarcacion-de-barcos-caribe-fondeado-frente-a-la-isla-la-semar-ya-investiga/
Alberto Elias Beltran reported that extensive investigations are being conducted
by the PGR, the National Security Commission (CNS) and the Secretariat of the
Navy (Semar). He further reiterated that to date, the Attorney General’s Office has
interviewed witnesses, reviewed videos from security cameras, and carried out work
such as inspection of the scene with experts in chemistry, criminalistics, photography,
fire, and explosives. Finally, the general commissioner of the Federal Police,
Manelich Castilla, announced that 900 military personnel from seven divisions, as
well as 195 canine units, were deployed in Cancun to reinforce surveillance to the
highway network and in the three airports that the state has, which are in Cozumel,
Cancun, and Chetumal.

OE Watch | April 2018

45

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Focus on the Development of “High-Quality
Weapons and Equipment” for the Navy
OE Watch Commentary: China Shipbuilding Industry
Corporation (CSIC) is aiming to build the country’s first
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier by 2025, according to the
recent accompanying excerpted article by the South China
Morning Post. Currently, China already possesses two
conventional powered carriers and is nearing completion
of a third. Developing a nuclear powered aircraft carrier,
as the article points out, will allow the Chinese navy to
“go on long missions on the high seas.” It will also “be key
to firing up an advanced electromagnetic aircraft launch
system, in contrast to the ski-jump launches now in use.”
Other possible advantages not mentioned in the article
include: greater flexibility without the hassle of refueling,
energy independence, more storage capacity for weapons
and aircraft fuel, and an environmentally clean source of
(nuclear) energy. Other notable projects being undertaken
by CSIC, according to the article, include a “new type
of nuclear submarine (China already has several nuclear
submarines in its fleet), submarine artificial intelligence
combat systems, and a “comprehensive electronic
information system” for maritime battles.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“[China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation] must… provide
high-quality weapons and equipment for the navy’s strategic
transformation towards a blue-water force in 2025…”
Source: Liu Zhen, “China Aims for Nuclear-Powered Aircraft Carrier by 2025,”
South China Morning Post, 1 March 2018. http://www.scmp.com/news/china/
diplomacy-defence/article/2135151/china-aims-nuclear-powered-aircraftcarrier-2025
CSIC (China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation) also said it was working on a
new type of nuclear submarine, submarine artificial intelligence combat systems
and a “comprehensive electronic information system” for maritime battles.
The South China Morning Post reported earlier that China was installing AI
systems on its nuclear submarines as part of computer upgrades to aid decisionmaking.
“We must … provide high-quality weapons and equipment for the navy’s
strategic transformation towards a blue-water force in 2025,” CSIC said.
Nevertheless, China will need to go down the nuclear power route if its aircraft
carriers are to be able to go on long missions on the high seas. Nuclear power
will also be key to firing up an advanced electromagnetic aircraft launch system,
in contrast to the ski-jump launches now in use.

China’s first domestically built aircraft carrier, the Type 001A, in Dalian, China.

Source: GGOO1213, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3A%E5%81%9C%E6%B3%8A%E4%BA%8E%E5%A4%A7%E8%BF%9E%E6%B8%AF%E7%9A%84001A.jpg, Public Domain (CC0 1.0).

OE Watch | April 2018

46

ASIA-PACIFIC
Fact or Psychological Warfare? China’s Development
of the World’s Strongest Individual Firepower System
OE Watch Commentary: Foreign press reports are claiming that
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has been equipping some of its
ground forces with the QTS-11 infantry integrated combat system,
which is designed to “adapt to future informatized warfare.”
Echoing the claims from a CCTV program, reports are calling the
gear the “strongest individual firepower in the world.”
According to the excerpted articles from Asia Times and Global
Times, China developed the QTS-11 system in response to a
need to “catch up in the race to arm soldiers” and took a decade
of dedicated effort to accomplish it. The gear consists of a 5.8
millimeter-caliber rifle, integrated with a 20 millimeter grenade
launcher, capable of destroying antipersonnel targets within a radius
of 200 meters. The system is fully digitalized and can include
other wearable gear such as thermal imagers, laser rangefinders,
wearable computer and positioning, communication and situational
awareness helmets. The whole intent is to improve combat strength
by arming individual soldiers with a complete unit rather than as a
segment of a larger force in urban warfare and dismounted infantry
actions.
The QTS-11 system is described as a possible game-changer.
According to Asia Times, a military hospital in China’s East Theater
Command claims to be developing “an Ironman-like, weightbearing suit mocked as a ‘wearable skeleton’ to carry heavier gear”
as the PLA seeks to increase the number of “gadgets and devices
on each of its infantrymen.” The article also notes how the gear has
reportedly been “deployed to about 50,000 infantrymen and other
troops for special duties, air assault, and paratrooper brigades of 13
field armies.”
The article from the Global Times points out that the United
States was the first to develop an integrated combat system,
but “they dropped the research of Objective Individual Combat
Weaponry system due to weight problems.” The article also reports
how the QTS-11 system has also been used for training by a branch
of PLA Special Operations Forces, known as Sky Wolf Commandos
in China’s Western Theater command, which has reportedly caught
India’s attention.
The article from The Economic Times questions China’s motives
in announcing the deployment of the system. According to the
article, China’s Western Theater Command is responsible for
security along the 3,488 kilometer Line of Actual Control (LAC)
with India. Media reports announcing the deployment of the
QTS-11 system along the border of India are perceived as possible
psychological warfare being used by the PLA because the news
followed within a few days of Chinese reports announcing it was
upgrading its air defenses along the LAC. The article cites another
example of Chinese psychological warfare being used against India
during last year’s 73-day Doklam standoff. The article states that
during the standoff, the “Chinese military carried out a media
blitzkrieg,” which highlighted the deployment of new battle tanks as
well as massive military exercises on the Tibetan plateau. Whether
China’s announcements are solid fact or psychological warfare,
it is a potential development worth tracking. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “PLA Infantrymen Now Have Powerful Rifles, but Still Lag
US,” Asia Times, 22 January 2018. http://www.atimes.com/article/plainfantrymen-now-powerful-rifles-still-lag-us
The big gun, part of the PLA’s QTS-11 system, is the result of a decade
of painstaking efforts to catch up in the race to arm soldiers… Together
with other wearable gear such as thermal imagers, laser rangefinders,
wearable computer and positioning, communication and situational
awareness helmets, the whole QTS-11 kit costs a grand total of 1 million
yuan a pop. It has already been deployed to about 50,000 infantrymen
and other troops for special duties, air assault and paratroopers
brigades of 13 field armies, Hong Kong-based Ming Pao newspaper
reports.
…the QTS-11 system could be a game changer, and it has also been
reported that a military hospital of the East Theater Command is now
developing an Ironman-like, weight-bearing suit mocked as a “wearable
skeleton” to carry heavier gear as Beijing aims to put more gadgets and
devices on each of its infantrymen.
Source: Liu Caiyu, “PLA Arms Ground Force Unit with Integrated
Warfare System,” Global Times, 22 February 2018. http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/1090258.shtml
A branch of the People’s Liberation Army Ground Force has been
equipped with an integrated individual soldier combat system to “adapt
to future informatized warfare,” which has been hailed as the strongest
individual firepower in the world, media reported on Thursday.
The Sky Wolf Commandos, a branch of PLA Special Operations Forces
from the Western Theater Command, have been equipped with the QTS11 system in their training, Weihutang, a column affiliated with China
Central Television (CCTV), reported on Thursday.
The system,…is capable of destroying antipersonnel targets. Each
soldier equipped with the system is armed with a thermal imager and
optoelectronic and positioning systems, Science and Technology Daily
reported.
Source: “PLA Equips Ground Unit along Indian Border with US ArmyStyle Combat Gear: Report,” The Economic Times, 23 February 2018.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/pla-equips-groundunit-along-indian-border-with-us-army-style-combat-gear-report/
articleshow/63042343.cms
The announcement by the official media of the deployment of new
system along the border with India followed a report few days ago of
the upgrading the air defences along the LAC was seen by military
observers here as a psychological warfare being resorted to by the PLA.
The Global Times earlier quoted an expert as saying the upgradation
of the air defence with deployment of fighter jets like J-10 and J-11
is aimed at confronting any threat from India in the light of India
acquiring new fighter aircraft, an apparent reference to Rafale aircraft
The Chinese military carried out a media blitzkrieg during the height
of last year’s 73-day Dokalam standoff highlighting deployment of new
battle tank as well as massive military exercises on the Tibetan plateau.

OE Watch | April 2018

47

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: Fact or Psychological Warfare? China’s
Development of the World’s Strongest Individual
Firepower System
“...the QTS-11 system could be a game changer, and it has also been reported that a military hospital

of the East Theater Command is now developing an Ironman-like, weight-bearing suit mocked as a
‘wearable skeleton’ to carry heavier gear as Beijing aims to put more gadgets and devices on each of its
infantrymen.”

Soldiers of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army 1st Amphibious Mechanized Infantry Division.

Source: By Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Flickr: 110712-N-TT977-077), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/72/Soldiers_of_the_Chinese_People%27s_Liberation_Army_-_2011.jpg, CC BY 2.0.

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | April 2018

48

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Commits to Building Global Satellite
Communication Network by 2023
OE Watch Commentary: China has announced
that it will begin construction of a low-earth orbit
(LEO) communication satellite constellation with the
goal of building a global communication network.
The constellation, dubbed Hongyan (鸿雁) or Wild
Geese, will eventually provide global cell phone
coverage, even in remote areas. The system will
also include automatic identification systems (AIS),
allowing more precise monitoring of ships and
aircraft and improving safety. China Aerospace
Science and Technology Corporation (CASC;中国航
天科技集团) plans to complete the system by 2023.
CASC affiliates have also partnered with international
clients such as Thailand’s Kasetsart University to help
develop the technology. China’s pursuit of a lowercost, network of LEO satellites follows its success in
building geostationary communications for a number
of countries, including Pakistan, Nigeria, Venezuela,
and Bolivia.

“By 2020 we want to build a network of six linked satellites to
prove the system works.”
- Zhang Hongtai,
Director of the China Academy of Space Technology

The accompanying transcribed excerpt from
CCTV, a Chinese government broadcaster, included
an interview with Zhang Hongtai, Director of the
China Academy of Space Technology, the research
arm of CASC. Hongtai argued that the satellite
system has a number of advantages over current
ground-based internet connections. In particular,
they are able to more effectively reach remote areas
and do not require as much physical infrastructure,
including base stations in remote areas. This is even
more important in the context of creating redundant
networks that work in parallel with existing internet
connections. Currently, 99 percent of internet traffic
is transmitted over fiber optic cables, which can be
disrupted by natural disasters (especially earthquakes,
which have been known to damage cables on the
ocean floor) or in times of conflict.
However, CASC’s system will be joining an
already-crowded field; many similar systems
already exist or are planned. The Iridium satellite
constellation, for example, has been active since
the late 1990s. Planned systems include SpaceX’s
12,000-satellite constellation, slated for completion
in the mid-2020s. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wood)
Long March 5 Y2 is Moved to the Launch Site.

Source: Huang Zhu Shui Sheng (篁竹水声),
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3A%E9%95%BF%E5%BE%81%E4%BA%94%E5%8F%B7%E9%81%A5%E4%BA%8C%E7%81%AB%E7%AE%AD%E8%BD%AC%E5%9C%BA.
jpg, CC BY 4.0

Source: “鸿雁星座系统今年发射首颗星 未来手机上网信号无死角 (Hongyan Satellite System Will Launch First Satellite This
Year - In the Future Cellphones Will Not Lose Internet Signal),” CCTV, 10 March 2018. http://m.news.cctv.com/2018/03/10/
ARTIX4psuzAaIt3USfXBQdMQ180310.shtml
Zhang Hongtai, Director of the China Academy of Space Technology: “By 2020 we want to build a network of six linked satellites to prove
the system works, and then by 2023 increase the system to 54 satellites to have global data coverage. After the system reaches 270 satellites,
we will have global broadband capability, with applications in six fields including voice telecommunication.
OE Watch | April 2018

49

ASIA-PACIFIC
Xi Jinping Promotes Civil-Military Integration,
Technological Innovation
OE Watch Commentary: China recently held its
annual National People’s Congress (NPC) in Beijing
over two weeks in March. This year Xi Jinping took on
special significance due to important changes to China’s
governmental structure. An important theme promoted
by senior leaders, including Chinese Communist Party
General Secretary Xi Jinping, has been “Civil-Military
Integration (军民融合).” As noted in the accompanying
excerpted article from Xinhua, Xi spoke to military
delegates at the NPC in March and made a case for
continuing military reforms and improving China’s ability
to innovate in military technology fields. To do so, Xi
argued, China’s defense industries and the monopolies they
represent must reform, promote the exchange of ideas and
receive greater input from the civilian sector.
China’s Communist Party (CCP), and by extension the
People’s Liberation Army, have military and political
traditions that emphasize strong connections between the
civil and military domains. China’s Defense White Papers,
its biennial announcement of official military policy,
frequently highlight civil-military integration. The 2008
Defense White Paper for example, stated that “China makes
it a point to take into consideration the needs of economic
and social development and insists on having military and
civilian purposes compatible with and beneficial to each
other, so as to achieve more social benefits in the use of
national defense resources in peacetime.”
Xi’s speech in March, following his work report at the
19th Party Congress in October 2017, mirrors the pattern
of remarks he made, first at the 18th Party Congress in
2012 (where he was appointed General Secretary of the
CCP) and then at the NPC that March. As noted in the
accompanying excerpted speech from March 2013, Xi
called on the Chinese government and civilian industry “to
achieve in-depth integration of the use of infrastructure
and other key facilities based on demands and led by the
government.”
Chinese civil-military cooperation is multi-level and
spans a wide range of industries, research programs, and
infrastructures. Chinese military aircraft practice deploying
to, and operating from, designated dual-use airports.
Infrastructure projects, particularly in China’s less welldeveloped west, are built with military considerations and
long distance deployments are practiced using all available
roads and rail to move troops from one side of the country
to another. Civilian advances in quantum technology are
being used to create encrypted communications for the
military. As Xi put it in speech this year, “Civil-Military
Integration is beneficial to strengthening China’s hidden
war potential and national defense strength.” Given the
recent modification to China’s constitution that will allow
Xi to extend his tenure beyond 2023, the pattern of military
reforms and promotion of civil-military integration can
be expected to continue to accelerate. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

“We must pay close attention to the direction of
development of military science and technology and
weaponry in the world, highlight the coordinated innovation
of military-civilian science and technology in key areas.”
- Xi Jinping
Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping prior to a meeting in Beijing China, Sept. 19, 2012.
Source: DoD photo by Erin A. Kirk-Cuomo, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AXi_Jinping_Sept._19%2C_2012.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: “习近平：扎扎实实推进军民融合深度发展 为实现中国梦强军
梦提供强大动力和战略支撑 (Xi Jinping: Resolutely Promote the Deep
Development of Military-Civil Integration to Provide Strong Momentum
and Strategic Support for Realizing the China Dream and the Strong
Military Dream),” Xinhua, 12 March 2018. http://www.xinhuanet.com/
politics/2018lh/2018-03/12/c_1122526642.htm
Xi Jinping: “We must pay close attention to the direction of development
of military science and technology and weaponry in the world, highlight the
coordinated innovation of military-civilian science and technology in key
areas… We must strengthen the sharing of ideas, break monopolies, improve the
efficient allocation of resources for technological innovation, uncover hidden
capacity for innovation in society, and promote lively competition in national
defense science and technological innovation.”
Source: Xi Jinping, “Build People’s Armed Forces That Follow the Party’s
Commands, Are Able to Win Battles and Have Fine Conduct” (2013) The
Governance of China, (Beijing: Foreign Language Press 2014), p. 243.
“We should coordinate the development of our economy and defense
capabilities, and combine efforts to make the country prosperous and the
military strong. We should further the great integration of military and
civilian development, and work to achieve in-depth integration of the use
of infrastructure and other key facilities based on demands and led by the
government.”
OE Watch | April 2018

50

ASIA-PACIFIC
Reopened Chinese-Built Railways Link Coastal
Angola with the Interior of Africa
OE Watch Commentary: A newly reopened railway is now transporting goods from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) across Angola to the port of Lobito. The 1,344 km
Benguela railway, built by the China Railway Construction Corporation (CRCC), China’s largest
rail company, cost $1.8 billion. The accompanying excerpted article from The People’s Daily
Online provides some details on this project. The project began in 2007 and saw its first trial
run in 2015. According to CRCC statistics, the project employed roughly 100,000 local workers.
The fastest rail in Angola’s history, the project will quickly move passengers and cargo across
the breadth of Angola and the railway is likely to be a major boon to the Angolan and DRC
economies. UN trade data indicates that over 80 percent of DRC exports consist of minerals and
metals and because of the railway, DRC copper and manganese now have a more efficient route
to the Atlantic. Angola, while far wealthier than its neighbor to the east, is even more reliant on
mineral wealth, with over 90 percent of its exports coming from oil.
China and Angola enjoy a close trade relationship, and in 2016, Angola for the first time beat
out Russia to become China’s top source of oil imports. CRCC is heavily invested in Angola, and
in addition to the railway has built an airport in Angola’s Cabinda Province, an exclave separated
from Angola proper by part of the DRC.

Source: “中企承建铁路助力安哥拉重
启铁路国际贸易 (Chinese Enterprises
Contracted to Help Reopen Railways,
Resume International Trade),” People’s
Daily Online, 8 March 2018. http://world.
people.com.cn/n1/2018/0308/c100229856853.html
The Benguela Railway is an important
route for DRC and Zambian copper,
manganese, and other mineral resources,
but due to the Angolan Civil War
transportation totally prevented, forcing
exports to Europe to be transported
through South Africa or Tanzania, resulting
in a sharp increase in costs.

Chinese firms are making major inroads in Africa through construction projects. While the details of many deals are murky and reports of
spying devices planted in a new, Chinese-built African Union building have raised concerns, many infrastructure projects appear to have real
traction with local governments. In east Africa, for example, a railway corridor linking the port city of Djibouti with Ethiopia’s capital Addis
Ababa and Nairobi, Kenya is opening up whole new avenues of trade. There are plans to link the Benguela Railway with other projects, such as
the trans-Tanzania-Zambian TAZARA Railway, linking both coasts of the African continent. China’s efforts to link these underdeveloped, but
geographically important axes of trade will likely change patterns of trade in Africa. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The Benguela Railway is an important route for DRC and Zambian copper, manganese, and other
mineral resources.”

Benguela Railway.
Source: Map by Peter Wood .

OE Watch | April 2018

51

ASIA-PACIFIC
Beyond Bitcoin: Could China Embrace Blockchain for
Defense and Security Applications?
by Wilson VornDick
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 2, dated 13 February 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/beyond-bitcoin-china-embrace-blockchain-defense-security-applications/

OE Watch Commentary: Since January 2016, bitcoin has skyrocketed from less than $1,000 and nearly peaking at $20,000 in December—a
2,100 percent increase. Despite its volatility, euphoria over bitcoin along with other cryptocurrencies has spread across the globe and nowhere
has this been more evident than China. However, despite official concern about cryptocurrency, the technology that underpins bitcoin, known as
distributed ledger technology or blockchain, is being evaluated for application by other Chinese industries and sectors. Specifically, it has piqued
the interest of a small group of cyber security experts and media in China that view blockchain as holding great promise for application across
China’s broad national security interests and apparatus.
Even though China has quickly become a global leader in cryptocurrencies, fear of the currency’s potential use in illicit purchases on the dark
web, money laundering, and offshoring of badly needed currency have left Chinese authorities unnerved. As a result, the government began
cracking down in the last quarter of 2017. In September, a notice was issued to shutter cryptocurrency exchanges, restrict any new ICOs, and ban
the trading of digital cryptocurrency under the pretext of reducing financial risks.
Meanwhile, the rest of the world is charging ahead with new and innovative ways to leverage the blockchain. Indeed, many of these uses are
interchangeable with defense and security priorities. One groundbreaking proposal in National Defense Science and Technology (NDST) in 2016
and a concentrated release of associated articles on June 2, 2017 asserts that China should consider blockchain in military and security operations.
While these articles are in no way an official indication of China’s current or future use of blockchain, the articles do offer a glimpse of the novel
ways in which this technology could be leveraged. Moreover, it would seem that the technology would align with the civil-military application
goals tied to the broad “informatization” campaign enshrined in China’s 2015 Military Strategy and 13th Five-Year Plan for Informatization (20162020) among others.
Of the three researchers that contributed to the NDST (2016) article, each of whom holds a PhD and is focused on cyber security, one in
particular stands out: Zhu Qichao. Dr. Zhu Qichao is not only the director of the Center for National Security and Strategic Studies at the
National University of Defense Technology in Beijing, but also a colonel in the PLA and a thought leader in China’s artificial intelligence efforts.
In the article, three main areas of military and security employment were outlined: intelligence operations, weapons life cycle and personnel
management, and military logistics. This foundational approach may very well frame future Chinese security-related blockchain endeavors and
perceptions.
For intelligence operations, the ability to discretely “pay intelligence professionals and informants” is critical. Blockchain allows participants
to apply for one or more accounts, regardless of “national and geographical restrictions,” with no direct correlation between different accounts.
Touting the weapons life cycle and personnel management advantages, blockchain would allow Chinese military and security-related commercial
and industrial partners as well as leadership to maintain secure information transfers and communications to include sensitive studies, combat
readiness statuses, and production timelines.
Finally, as military logistics becomes more “smart” or “intelligent”, blockchain can improve the entire logistics enterprise by making it more
robust, dynamic, and resilient by creating small, interconnected networks. As a result, this new enterprise is less risky and more survivable since
it avoids a “centralized management strategy” that is over-reliant on a few critical information centers or other key geographical sites. The NDST’s
recommendation was reprised a year later in a slimmed down, summation in Liberation Army Daily by Zhang Min. This article gained significant
traction as it was widely circulated and republished in a variety of Chinese media outlets to include Xinhua (Xinhua, China Military Online, China
News; June 2, 2017).
Despite these benefits, blockchain is not a panacea for China’s security challenges. First, the issue of confidentiality for the large amount of
classified military information and where those “densities” of information would be stored on the blockchain needs to be addressed. Second,
constructing these various blockchain would require a substantial amount of resources (power, programmers, processing power, etc.) and
dedicated nodes. Third, because blockchain architecture is decentralized, its communications would bypass a centralized server, thereby
raising regulatory and control issues. Finally, the authors allude to the fact that the “liberalism” at the heart of blockchain architecture may be
irreconcilable with the degree of control with which Party and military leadership would likely seek to exercise, even though it is not specifically
stated in such terms.
Blockchain has yet to prove its military and security bona fides in China. However, as the technology becomes more mainstream, regulated,
and slowly sheds its illicit reputation, it is very likely that its use will proliferate across the public and private sectors in China. Even if China
continues its crackdown on cryptocurrencies in the future, the technology behind it has been recognized as having intrinsic value and utility for
Chinese defense issues. End OE Watch Commentary (VornDick)

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2018

52

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: Beyond Bitcoin: Could China Embrace
Blockchain for Defense and Security Applications?
“With stronger policy support, China will work to establish uniform military and civilian standards for
infrastructure, key technological areas and major industries, explore the ways and means for training
military personnel in civilian educational institutions, developing weaponry and equipment by national
defense industries, and outsourcing logistics support to civilian support systems.”
Source: “Full text: China’s Military Strategy,” Xinhua, 26 May 2015. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2015-05/26/content_20820628_5.htm
…China’s armed forces will deepen logistics reform in relevant policies, institutions and support forces, and optimize strategic logistics
deployment. They will innovate the modes of support, develop new support means, augment war reserves, integrate logistics information systems,
improve rules and standards, and meticulously organize supply and support, so as to build a logistics system that can provide support for fighting
and winning modern wars, serve the modernization of the armed forces, and transform towards informationization…
…With stronger policy support, China will work to establish uniform military and civilian standards for infrastructure, key technological areas
and major industries, explore the ways and means for training military personnel in civilian educational institutions, developing weaponry and
equipment by national defense industries, and outsourcing logistics support to civilian support systems…China will devote more efforts to science
and technology in national defense mobilization, be more readily prepared for the requisition of information resources, and build specialized
support forces…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | April 2018

53

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Seeks Extradition of Detained Uyghurs in Malaysia
OE Watch Commentary: The Chinese government has requested the
extradition of 11 Uyghur detainees in Malaysia in accordance with a strengthened
extradition agreement signed in 2016 between the two governments. The detainees
were captured during an illegal border crossing from Thailand into Malaysia.
Chinese sources allege that the detainees are linked to terrorist activities, while
Malaysian authorities and officials have agreed to investigate the matter.
As the first source from the pro-Chinese Global Times points out, following
the detention of the 11 ethnic Uyghur Chinese nationals in Malaysia, the Chinese
government formally requested the extradition of the detainees to China for
“possible links to terror activities.” Zhu Yongbio, assistant director of the Institute
of Central Asia Studies at Lanzhou University, quoted in the source, expressed
confidence that the detainees would receive a “fair trial” upon their return to China
and that “Western countries should not apply a double standard to China in its
dealings with suspected terrorists” and added “that China is making a contribution
to international anti-terrorism efforts by strengthening domestic anti-terrorism.”
China has faced increased scrutiny internationally for attempting to utilize the
extradition process to renationalize foreign Uyghur scholars, migrants, and asylum
seekers, with 612 “red notices” issued last year alone. Red notices are akin to an
international arrest warrant and are among one of eight types of notices circulated
through Interpol. Controversy surrounds the legitimacy of the claims that those
sought for renationalization are linked to criminal or terrorist activity.
The Malaysian government responded to the request, as the second excerpt from
the semi-independent news source, The Star, indicates, with Malaysian Deputy
Prime Minister Zahid promising an investigation, consideration, and cooperation
with the Chinese request. This is not the first request of late; as recently as
early 2017, the Malaysian government returned 29 other Uyghurs under similar
circumstances. End OE Watch Commentary (Shanks)

Deputy Malaysian Prime Minister Ahmad Zahid Hamidi.
Source: Prachatai, https://goo.gl/Zx8pWH, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

“China’s request to extradite from Malaysia 11 Uyghurs detainees, who illegally crossed the border and
are being investigated for possible links to terror activities.”
Source: “China wants Uyghurs from Malaysia: Report,” Global Times, 11
February 2018. http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1089256.shtml
…“China’s request to extradite from Malaysia 11 Uyghurs detainees,
who illegally crossed the border and are being investigated for possible
links to terror activities... Malaysia approved a document to strengthen
law enforcement cooperation with China in April 2016, in which the
two sides agreed to offer wide assistance to each other on criminal
procedures…”
…”It is legitimate for China to request the extradition of the Uyghurs,
who are Chinese nationals. Once extradited to China, the Uyghurs would
be given a fair trial in accordance with China’s laws,” Zhu Yongbiao,
assistant director of the Institute of Central Asia Studies at Lanzhou
University, told the Global Times….”Western countries should not apply a
double standard to China in its dealings with suspected terrorists as they
would ask suspected terrorists involved with IS to be extradited,” Zhu
said, adding that China is making a contribution to international antiterrorism efforts by strengthening domestic anti-terrorism.

Source: Shah, M. F. and Kili, M. A. “Zahid: China has requested
extradition of detained Uighurs,” The Star (Online), 10 February
2018. https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2018/02/10/
zahid-uighur-extradiction-request/
…Deputy Prime Minister Datuk Seri Dr Ahmad Zahid Hamidi
said Malaysia would honor the Mutual Legal Assistance (MLA)
thorough Interpol and the extradition agreement it signed with
China…”Prior to this, we have extradited Malaysians from
China who were involved in falsifying credit cards and other
criminal activities. As such we will consider Beijing’s request,”
he said….
…Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Malaysia’s Deputy Prime Minister,
told local media last year that biometric information provided
by Chinese authorities had enabled the arrests of 29 Uighur
militants since 2011, all of whom were deported to China. That
includes six Uighurs sent back to China in 2012, despite their
pending refugee status determinations….

OE Watch | April 2018

54

ASIA-PACIFIC
Vietnam’s Military Modernization
OE Watch Commentary: On 8 February the Vietnamese-language website soha.
vn published an article hailing the country’s military modernization. The article
emphasizes the practical application of the military modernization for the country’s
defense needs, including procuring 17 multi-purpose transport helicopters and new
battle tanks. In addition, the article emphasizes self-reliance, noting that Vietnam
has produced its own new weapons technologies. The article also mentions that
procurement has been proportionate to the country’s national resources. It appears that
the article is keen to also emphasize that the country is not overspending or spending
wastefully on new weapons, equipment and technology alongside reports of ongoing
research on new weapons.
The article also notes that Vietnamese soldiers underwent a number of simulations
to prepare for real battles in harsh environments. The purpose of such simulations
was not only to test new weapons and train in their use, but also to increase the speed
and strength of combat units. The article does not refer to any specific conflicts for
which Vietnam is preparing nor does it discuss any of the weapons that Vietnam
has purchased from other countries, such as India. The purpose of the article, whose
information came from a television program about military affairs, is to portray the
military’s modernization as something about which Vietnamese citizens can be proud
and also something that is being done responsibly in line with the country’s national
interests. It is notable that the article praises the Communist Party for its leadership in
this regard. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Việt Nam hiện đại hóa quân đội phù hợp
với nguồn lực đất nước (Vietnam’s modernization
of the military is proportional to the country’s
resources),” soha.vn, 8 February 2018. http://soha.
vn/viet-nam-hien-dai-hoa-quan-doi-phu-hop-voinguon-luc-dat-nuoc-20180208001804426.htm
To build up a regular, elite military in which
troops advance directly towards modernity is
a great policy of the Party and the State. While
reinforcing national defense and security in
accordance with the requirements of the new
defense situation, Vietnam’s military modernization
is proportional with its national resources. The
army has concentrated on investing to equip and
self-produce suitable weapons. The Ministry of
Defense has also closely managed the procurement
and manufacturing of new weapons.
The modernization of the army is accompanied by
the need to promote the spirit of self-reliance. This
has been done effectively by the military in the past
several years.

“The modernization of the army is accompanied by the need to promote the spirit of self-reliance.”

Quân đội diễu hành đại lễ.

Source: Trananh1980, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AQu%C3%A2n_%C4%91%E1%BB%99i_di%E1%BB%85u_h%C3%A0nh_%C4%91%E1%BA%A1i_l%E1%BB%85.jpg, (CC-by-2.0).

OE Watch | April 2018

55

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Concern in Kazakhstan over Returning Foreign
Fighters from Syria
OE Watch Commentary: A Russian-language article on 6 March
from the Kazakhstan-focused Russian-language news website Tengri
News presented new statistics on the number of foreign fighters from
Kazakhstan who have returned to the country from Syria. According to
the new statistics, 125 Kazakhs have returned from Syria and 57 of them
have been convicted on terrorism charges. The deputy chairman of the
National Security Committee of Kazakhstan was quoted in the article as
saying that since the defeat of international terrorist organizations in Syria,
presumably referring to the al-Qaeda-loyal groups and the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria (ISIS), there has been an exodus of fighters to other regions,
including Central Asia.
One of the concerns expressed by the deputy chairman is that most of
the returnees still adhered to their radical views. Kazakhstan is therefore
developing rehabilitation programs for the returnees who have not been
convicted. Without these programs, the article notes that the returnees may
otherwise contribute to the broader radicalization of Kazakh society. The
deputy chairman believes that Kazakhstan needs to improve its national
programming to counter terrorism and religious extremism. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“International terrorist organizations were
defeated in Syria and Iraq and as a result there
have been outflows of militants and their families
to other regions.”
Source: “57 вернувшихся из Сирии казахстанцев осуждены –
КНБ (57 Kazakhstani returnees from Syria sentenced – KNB),”
Tengri News, 6 March 2018. https://tengrinews.kz/kazakhstan_
news/57-vernuvshihsya-iz-sirii-kazahstantsev-osujdenyiknb-339290/
125 citizens returned from Kazakhstan to Syria, 57 of whom
were convicted. This was reported by the deputy chairman
of the National Security Committee of Kazakhstan Nurgali
Bilisbekov. “As you know, international terrorist organizations
were defeated in Syria and Iraq and as a result there have
been outflows of militants and their families to other regions.”
According to him, the returnees mostly continue to adhere to
radical views. These and other factors emphasize the need to
further improve the national program for countering terrorism
and religious extremism,” he added.

Manjali mosque atyrau.

Source: By Redtryfan77 (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Manjali_mosque_atyrau.JPG, (CC-by-2.0).

OE Watch | April 2018

56

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Uzbekistan Reopens Border Checkpoints with Tajikistan
OE Watch Commentary: The President of Uzbekistan,
Shavkat Mirziyoyev, has made improving relations
with neighboring states a priority since taking office
in December 2016. The accompanying excerpts from
Uzbek and Tajik sources report on the government of
Uzbekistan’s recent decision to reopen several checkpoints
on the Uzbek-Tajik border after years of remaining closed
under former President Islam Karimov. This could be
the most significant of Mirziyoyev’s efforts to improve
relations in the region, as Uzbekistan’s relationship with
Tajikistan under Karimov stood as the worst compared to
relationships with other regional governments.
The article from Anhor, a Russian language news
website in Uzbekistan, reports on the recent decision
and that “a new checkpoint will be set up in the
Samarkand Oblast, located in the village of Jartepa, Urgut
District.” The article also notes that there were regular
disagreements between the Tajik and Uzbek governments
on the demarcation of the border, though it does not
mention that the two sides stated they would work on
resolving undemarcated sections of the border in the near
future.
The article from Asia-Plus, a Russian-language news
website in Tajikistan, lists all of the border checkpoints
that are now open, including the “railway crossing
‘Amuzang,’ connecting the Surkhandarya Oblast of
Uzbekistan with the Tajik rail station ‘Khoshadi’ in the
Khatlon Oblast.” The article from Avesta, a Russianlanguage news website, also reports on the reopening
of the rail line and how “in November 2011 Uzbekistan
suspended all rail traffic” and in 2012, the government
reportedly “removed some of the rail line.” The
suspension of traffic on this rail line stood as one of a
number of measures Karimov took against Tajikistan
over the years as the relationship between the two sides
remained strained, but none of the articles mention the
minefields along sections of the Uzbek-Tajik border.
The government of Uzbekistan placed land mines on
sections of the Uzbek-Tajik border in the early 2000s
in response to incursions carried out by the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan in 1999 and 2000. The Uzbek
government removed some of the mines in the years since
then, but it is unknown what sections of the Uzbek-Tajik
border remain mined or how Mirziyoyev might deal with
it. In any case, Mirziyoyev’s decision to reopen a number
of checkpoints on the Uzbek-Tajik border is significant
and it will be worth watching how Uzbek-Tajik relations
develop. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Over the past eight years only two border checkpoints
operated between the two countries – Tursunzade-Sariosiyo
and Fotekhobod-Oybek.”
Source: “Узбекистан обустраивает старые и открывает новые КПП
(Uzbekistan is equipping old and opening new border checkpoints),” Anhor, 24
February 2018. https://anhor.uz/news/uzbekistan-obustraivaet-starie-i-otkrivaetnovie-kpp
The government of Uzbekistan reached a decision on the resumption of activities
of some border checkpoints on the Uzbek-Tajik border…Another important
announcement is that a new checkpoint will be set up in the Samarkand
Oblast, located in the village of Jartepa, Urgut District…a number of different
disagreements regularly took place between Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, including
the demarcation of the border. However, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, after coming to
power, engaged in a “reset” of relations with neighboring states, in particular
Tajikistan…
Source: Yuldashev, Avaz. “На таджикско-узбекской границе сегодня начнут
функционировать десять ранее закрытых КПП (Nine previously closed border
checkpoints have started operating today on the Tajik-Uzbek border),” Asia-Plus,
1 March 2018. http://news.tj/ru/news/tajikistan/politics/20180301/na-tadzhikskouzbekskoi-granitse-segodnya-nachnut-funktsionirovat-desyat-ranee-zakritih-kpp
…Today (these border checkpoints) began to operate:
-

“Jartepa,” connecting (Tajik) Penjikent and Uzbek (Samarkand)

“Kushkent” and “Uchturgan,” connecting (Tajik) Ganchi and Zafarabad
and (Uzbek) Jizzak
“Khavastabad” and “Bekabad,” connecting the Tajik District of Spitamen
with the (Uzbek) Syrdarya and Tashkent Oblasts
“Pap,” connecting the Asht District of the Sughd Oblast with the Namangan
Oblast of Uzbekistan
-

“Ravat,” connecting the city of Kanibadam with the Fergana Oblast

“Gulbahor,” connecting the Shakhritus District, Khatlon Oblast with the
Surkhandarya Oblast
The railway crossing “Amuzang,” connecting the Surkhandarya Oblast of
Uzbekistan with the Tajik rail station “Khoshadi” in the Khatlon Oblast
…Over the past eight years only two border checkpoints operated between the two
countries – Tursunzade-Sariosiyo and Fotekhobod-Oybek. Two other checkpoints
closed under the (former) President Islam Karimov resumed operations at the
beginning of the year, “Andarkhon-Patar” and “Kushtigermon”…
Source: “Первый поезд из таджикского Хатлона проследует через узбекский
Амузанг 7 марта (The first train from Tajikstan’s Khatlon will travel through
Uzbekistan’s Amuzang on 7 March),” Avesta, 1 March 2018.
http://avesta.tj/2018/03/01/pervyj-poezd-iz-tadzhikskogo-hatlona-prosleduetcherez-uzbekskij-amuzang-7-marta/
The first passenger train on the “Kulyab-Moscow” route is expected to travel
through the railway checkpoint “Khoshadi” (Amazung) on 7 March. Remember
that in November 2011 Uzbekistan suspended all rail traffic on the GalabaAmuzang line (connecting to Khatlon Oblast, Tajikistan). In the spring of 2012
Uzbekistan removed some of the rail line…

OE Watch | April 2018

57

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Azerbaijan and Georgia Increase Bilateral
Security Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: Georgia’s security cooperation with
Azerbaijan has been increasing over the past few years through a
trilateral relationship that includes Turkey, but as the accompanying
excerpted article reports, it appears that bilateral military ties between
Georgia and Azerbaijan are increasing as well. The article comes
from Haqqin, a Russian-language news source in Azerbaijan with
ties to the government, and it reports on a recent meeting between the
Azerbaijani and Georgian defense ministers.
Outside of any agreements made at the meeting, a statement by
Defense Minister of Azerbaijan, Colonel-General Zakir Hasanov,
where he “expressed gratitude to the Georgian people for the support
of Azerbaijan in international organizations and recognition of its
territorial integrity, and stressed, that Azerbaijan also recognizes
and supports the territorial integrity of Georgia,” shows how the
partnership continues to take shape. The government of Azerbaijan’s
support of the territorial integrity of Georgia is worth noting, but
the Georgian government’s support for Azerbaijan in recognizing
its territorial integrity is more important, particularly as it relates to
Armenia. Armenia and Azerbaijan remain locked in a conflict over
the territory of Nagorny-Karabakh.
The Georgian government has maintained a fairly good relationship
with the Armenian government over the years, but statements of
support for Azerbaijan’s territorial integrity and increased security
cooperation with Azerbaijan’s armed forces could have a significant
impact on Georgian-Armenian relations. There are several areas that
the article mentions as prospects for military cooperation between
Georgia and Azerbaijan and it will be important to watch how
these develop in the next few years and the impact it could have on
Georgian-Armenian relations and security in the Caucasus region.
End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The (Azerbaijani) Minister again expressed
gratitude to the Georgian people for the support
of Azerbaijan in international organizations and
recognition of its territorial integrity, and stressed,
that Azerbaijan also recognizes and supports the
territorial integrity of Georgia.”
Source: “Азербайджан и Грузия договорились о военном
сотрудничестве (Azerbaijan and Georgia reached an agreement on
military cooperation),” Haqqin, 9 March 2018. https://haqqin.az/
news/124327
The Defense Minister of Azerbaijan, Colonel-General Zakir Hasanov,
met with the delegation led by the Defense Minister of Georgia,
Levan Izoria…Hasanov emphasized that the Azerbaijani-Georgian
strategic partnership is at a high level…military cooperation of the
two countries is carried out by providing regional economic projects
as well as in the format of the Azerbaijan-Turkey-Georgia military
structure…
The (Azerbaijani) Minister again expressed gratitude to the Georgian
people for the support of Azerbaijan in international organizations
and recognition of its territorial integrity, and stressed, that
Azerbaijan also recognizes and supports the territorial integrity of
Georgia…
…The two sides also exchanged views on the prospects for
cooperation in military, military-technical, military-education,
military-medical spheres, joint military exercises, and (other) issues of
mutual interest.
At the conclusion of the meeting, a plan of bilateral cooperation
for 2018 was signed by the ministries of defense of Azerbaijan and
Georgia.

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | April 2018

58

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Pakistan’s Training Mission to Saudi Arabia
OE Watch Commentary: When the head of the
Pakistani Army, General Qamar Bajwa, announced on 15
February that 1000 soldiers will deploy to Saudi Arabia
as part of a training mission, it caused a controversy in
Pakistan’s parliament and generated a number of questions
from the media. The accompanying excerpted articles
from Pakistan report on the recent decision to deploy
additional forces to Saudi Arabia and provide insight into
the impact of the deployment.
The article from Dawn, a widely-read English-language
news source in Pakistan, reports on the announcement
and how Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi “greenlighted the deployment” without the knowledge of
Pakistan’s parliament. The article brings up how one of
the government’s main concerns with the deployment is
that Pakistan “not become party to any war in the Middle
East or any Arab state.” It is noted that the deployment will
consist of 1000 soldiers “on a training mission” in addition
to the 1600 soldiers “already stationed in Saudi Arabia.”
The article also mentions how “military cooperation
between Pakistan and KSA dates back nearly five
decades,” but the Pakistani government has not discussed
any specifics of the new training mission, which led to
concerns that the soldiers could get involved in Saudi
Arabia’s operations in Yemen. The size of the deployment,
which adds a significant number of soldiers to the overall
Pakistani contingent in Saudi Arabia, also contributed to
speculation about the mission.
The article from The Express Tribune, an Englishlanguage newspaper in Pakistan, discusses the deployment
and provides insight into concerns of Pakistanis. The
article notes how the deployment “comes at a time when
Saudi forces are undertaking a military campaign to quell
the Houthi rebels in Yemen” and that “Riyadh has been
pushing Islamabad to commit troops for its campaign in
Yemen for quite some time now.” The author questions
why the government of Pakistan decided to rethink its
decision to deploy forces after a few years of deliberations
and notes how Saudi Arabia “was one of the few countries
which came to Pakistan’s rescue during times of crisis.”
Outside of any pressure the Pakistani government felt
to support Saudi Arabia, the author also brings up how
the government consulted with the governments of Iran
and Qatar before moving forward. Lastly, the author’s
statement that “Pakistan is walking a tightrope and any
misstep can have grave consequences” sums up the
situation that some in Pakistan now believe the deployment
has created. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Dastagir said a total of 1,000 Pakistani
troops are being sent to the Kingdom on a
training mission. He said 1,600 Pakistani
soldiers are already stationed in Saudi
Arabia.”

Source: Guramani, Nadir. “Govt refuses to divulge ‘operational details’ of
Pakistani troops’ deployment to Saudi Arabia,” Dawn, 19 February 2018. https://
www.dawn.com/news/1390403
Senate Chairman Raza Rabbani on Monday threatened Defence Minister
Dastagir with ‘contempt of parliament’ proceedings after the minister outright
refused to provide details of the ‘unilateral decision’ to send Pakistani troops to
Saudi Arabia for deployment…”Why don’t we proceed against you and the prime
minister over contempt of parliament?” Rabbani asked Dastagir after the minister
revealed that it was Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi who green-lighted the
deployment…”The parliament found out [about the deployment] through a press
release,” Rabbani said…
But the defence minister argued that despite the decision, Pakistan remains
“neutral” — in line with a unanimous resolution passed by a joint sitting of
parliament in 2015 stating that Pakistan will not become party to any war in the
Middle East or any Arab state.
Disclosing the size of the deployment for the first time since the decision was
announced, Dastagir said a total of 1,000 Pakistani troops are being sent to the
Kingdom on a training mission. He said 1,600 Pakistani soldiers are already
stationed in Saudi Arabia…
Military cooperation between Pakistan and KSA dates back nearly five decades,
the minister recalled, adding that Pakistani troops’ training of Saudi forces is
governed by the ‘1982 bilateral Pak-Saudi Protocol on the Deputation of Pakistan
Armed Forces Personnel and Military Training’…”The assistance being rendered
to Saudi Arabia is a continuation of the ongoing support and is within the confines
of joint parliamentary resolution of April 2015 [that called for neutrality].”
Source: Yousaf, Kamran. “Pakistani boots on foreign soil,” The Express Tribune,
19 February 2018. https://tribune.com.pk/story/1638546/6-pakistani-bootsforeign-soil/
…Given the sensitivities attached to the move, the military’s media wing in its
terse statement clarified a few crucial points.
Firstly, troops are being sent as part of the longstanding bilateral security
cooperation between Pakistan and Saudi Arabia…troops who are already
stationed in the Kingdom and fresh contingent would not be deployed outside
Saudi Arabia. The deployment is only meant for ‘training and advise mission,’ says
the army…
But the fresh deployment has raised eyebrows because it comes at a time when
Saudi forces are undertaking a military campaign to quell the Houthi rebels in
Yemen, reportedly backed by Iran. Riyadh has been pushing Islamabad to commit
troops for its campaign in Yemen for quite some time now. In 2015, the government
took the Saudi request to parliament, which passed a unanimous resolution
outlining guidelines for Pakistan’s engagement with Saudi Arabia. Parliament
while supporting Saudi Arabia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, set certain
red lines. And those include staying away from the conflict in Yemen…
So, in this backdrop what has really prompted Pakistan to rethink that policy?...
Islamabad has longstanding strategic and defence ties with Riyadh. The oil-rich
Kingdom was one of the few countries which came to Pakistan’s rescue during
times of crisis. After Pakistan conducted nuclear explosions in May 1998, Saudi
Arabia bailed out Pakistan to avoid its economic meltdown because of the West’s
crippling economic sanctions…
…The good news though is that Pakistan has taken Iran on board before making
the latest move. Qatar is another country that must be concerned and closely
watching the Pakistani decision. But before the formal announcement, the army
chief paid a secret visit to Doha to assure the Qatari leadership that Pakistan’s
troops would not become part of any military adventure outside Saudi Arabia. All
this demonstrates that Pakistan is walking a tightrope and any misstep can have
grave consequences.
OE Watch | April 2018

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
A Russian Approach to Interagency Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: A good example of
Russia’s military-scientific approach to problem solving
was on display in the December 2017 edition of Russia’s
military theory journal, Military Thought. On the
subject of identifying key problems with collective
information-sharing tasks between Russian government
entities, Y.G. Anisimov, V.G. Anisimov, and E.V.
Solohov lay out an extensive argument for interagency
cooperation that is significantly based on mathematical
modeling and quantitative analysis. For Russian
professional readers, this would be an entirely normal
article and an understandable approach to the argument.
The fact that the authors are all general officers and two
have doctoral degrees is also par for the course. The
article does not highlight specific current event-based
issues, rather, it is an appeal for a general acceptance of
a scientific-based approach to conducting information
sharing among “federal executive bodies” on security
and defense issues.

“Effective security measures can only be applied by
simultaneous, coordinated deployment of all the country’s
available capabilities and resources. They synergetic effect of
these deployments is synonymous with accomplishing the Russian
Federation’s security and defense mission.”
Source: Е.Г.Анисимов, В.Г. Анисимов, и И.В.Солохов, Проблемы Научнометодическово обеспечния межведомственного информацонного
взаимодействия, Военная Мыцл, Но.12, Декабр 2017, стр. 45-51. (Y.G.
Anisimov, V.G.Anisimov, and E.V. Solohov, “The Issue of Providing for Scientific
Methodological Interagency Information Cooperation,” Military Thought, No.12,
December 2017, pp.45-51.)
…The stated interaction objective is to maximize the synergy effect by applying
capabilities and resources from various agencies. Thus, the most effective form of
interaction is symbiosis. If this is not to be achieved for whatever reason, then the
acceptable ways of interaction maybe commensalism or neutralism…

The purpose of this commentary is not a review of
the math involved, rather just to highlight an example
this discussion framework. From a standpoint of
research and development, the authors explain that
developing predictive methods and making decisions
based on mathematically predictive outputs would find
an immediate and agree-able audience among Russian
federal bodies. They also indicate that this approach
would provide enhanced feasibility with a choice of
and use of multiple predictive models and the ability to
coordinate decision-making from local to global levels.
The models presented in the article show “possible
synergy effects of two [generic] interacting agencies”
and the application of generic “capabilities and
resources.” The authors’ statement, “Experience tells us
that these types of interactions are not always effective,”
surely evokes a knowing nod from anyone working with
large bureaucracies.
With the advent of Russia’s National Defense
Management Center and its emphasis on consolidation
of defense and security information, new bureaucratic
procedures and even a bureaucratic culture would be
expected to emerge. A scientific approach, inherent
in Russian military science education and practice,
is a natural Russian response. Serious discussions by
leading strategic researchers and policy-makers are
likely to proceed from this approach. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wilhelm, Vainer)
A Russian Approach to Interagency Cooperation.

Source: Анисимов В.Г., Горбатов М.Ю., Сауренко Т.Н. Модел динамики показателй економичецкого развития взаимодействую государств, Вестник Российцкой
Таможенной Академии, 2013. Но. 2, С. 33-44. (V.G.Anisimov, М.U. Gorbatov, and T.N. Saiurenko, “Model of dynamic demonstration of economic development in
cooperative government,” Journal of Russian Customs Academy, 2013, No. 2, pp. 33-44.)
Printed in:
Е.Г.Анисимов, В.Г. Анисимов, и И.В.Солохов, Проблемы Научно-методическово обеспечния межведомственного информацонного взаимодействия, Военная
Мыцл, Но.12, Декабр 2017, стр. 4. (Y.G. Anisimov, V.G.Anisimov, and E.V. Solohov, “The Issue of Providing for Scientific Methodological Interagency Information
Cooperation,” Military Thought, No.12, December 2017, p 47.)

OE Watch | April 2018

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
New Russian Officer Code of Conduct
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past several years, the
Russian Ministry of Defense (MoD) has implemented policies
to improve operational security. Many of these new restrictions
stem from advances in digital technology, particularly those
associated with social media. Ever since Russia’s intervention
in Ukraine, there have been numerous incidents where Russian
military personnel have posted information on social media
sites which flatly contradicted the official Kremlin version of
events. The brief excerpt from the pro-Kremlin news source,
Izvestiya Online, describes a new code of conduct for officers
and general officers on the General Staff, which not only covers
proper officer behavior, but places considerable emphasis upon
information and operational security.
The article begins by pointing out that the new code of
conduct “describes all aspects of a commander’s performance,
from his external appearance and manner of talking to
the organization of subunit operations,” suggesting that
today’s General Staff officers should model themselves
Soldiers without insignia guard buildings in the Crimean capital, Simferopol, March 2, 2014.
Source: Elizabeth Arrott (VOA), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VOA-Crimea-unmarked-soldiers.jpg, Public Domain.
after their tsarist and Soviet predecessors. As a leader, the
code advises the officer “to be patient and well disposed
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov, Nikolay Surkov, and Aleksey Ramm, “Табу на
toward his subordinates,” and that he/she “must not transfer
соцсети включили в кодекс (Social Network Taboos Incorporated into a
the responsibility for making the final decision onto a
Code),” Izvestiya Online, 28 February 2018. https://iz.ru/714220/aleksandrsubordinate’s shoulders.” The “officer must always maintain
kruglov-nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm/tabu-na-sotcseti-vkliuchili-v-kodeks
a smart external appearance and look like a leader in any
The Defense Ministry has drawn up a code of conduct for officers and
situation,” avoiding the use of “street jargon or undesirable
general officers on the General Staff, the High Command, and the military
language.” Moreover, today’s officer should keep his workplace
district commands. The document describes all aspects of a commander’s
well organized, and he is “insistently encouraged to place
performance, from his external appearance and manner of talking to the
portraits of the Russian Federation President and the Defense
organization of subunit operations and setting of tasks for subordinates.
Minister in his office.”
A special section is devoted to information technologies and the need to
observe secrecy in using them. Mobile telephones are to be monitored
A major portion of the code focuses upon computer and
particularly, and social networks are declared “taboo.” The experts say that
digital security. Today’s officer must be computer literate,
in both the tsarist and the Soviet armies a General Staff officer was a model
ensuring that he maintains a strict line between personal and
of professionalism and good manners….
military digital systems. The code warns about the dangers
of cellphone use, pointing out that a cellphone is “the ideal
In the section about work organization the authors have tried to answer
instrument for spying on its owner and obtaining confidential
the question: What personal qualities must a leader demonstrate first and
information and statistical data for analysis.” According to the
foremost? The officer is advised to be patient and well disposed toward his
subordinates -- with the emphasis on the fact that they are under the leader’s
new code “social networks are categorically banned,” and are
protection. The chief must not transfer the responsibility for making the final
regarded as “taboo for you and your subordinates.”
decision onto a subordinate’s shoulders….
The timing for the release of this new officer code of conduct
…It is written into the code that an officer must always maintain a smart
is curious. There’s no question, that over the past several
external
appearance and look like a leader in any situation…. Particular
years, the Russian Ministry of Defense has become much
attention is paid to standards of speech. An officer may not use street jargon
more alarmed with information and operational security, and
or undesirable language, lest he become the object of mockery and lose
that concern is reflected in the new code. However, ever since
authority in the eyes of those around him….
the annexation of Crimea in March 2014, the popular meme
…A competent leader must be able to use a PC and office equipment.
for those in the military has been the “polite Russian soldier,”
There are many hidden rocks in these waters, however. The use of personal
where the brave Russian defender unselfishly protects the
motherland. This new code of conduct suggests that this meme computers, external hard disks, or other information storage devices for
work needs to be prohibited…. The rules for using mobile phones are
may no longer be accurate. End OE Watch Commentary
stipulated separately. The cellphone is called “the ideal instrument for
(Finch)
spying on its owner and obtaining confidential information and statistical
The cellphone is called ‘the ideal
data for analysis.” …Social networks are categorically banned. According to
the code they are “taboo for you and your subordinates.”

“

instrument for spying on its owner and
obtaining confidential information and
statistical data for analysis.’”

The officer’s workplace is not ignored. He is insistently encouraged to place
portraits of the Russian Federation President and the Defense Minister in his
office. …
OE Watch | April 2018

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Operational Reserve Will Enhance Active
Component Readiness
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article from Izvestiya discusses the Russian Ministry of Defense’s latest attempt to implement
an operational reserve system. This iteration of the reserve system is notable for several reasons. The first is that there is no mention of
“territorial defense units,” a concept where reservists man units that provide rear area security throughout the strategic depth. Although not
mentioned, it is likely that Russia’s newly formed National Guard, Rosgvardiya, will assume these units, as it is primarily concerned with
internal defense. Perhaps of most interest is the description of how Russian reservists will complement the active force. In the Russian personnel
system, positions that are vacant are termed “current under manning” (TNK, from the Russian текущий некомплект, “ТНК”), while positions
that are filled with personnel that are not available (due to medical issues, leave, in training, etc.) are termed “temporary under manning” (VNK,
from the Russian временный некомплект, “ВНК”). The Russian Ministry of Defense will not only use reservists to staff designated reserve
units (similar to the US System), but reservists will also fill TNK and VNK shortages in active duty units (something that is not done in the US
system) to boost active duty readiness. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“There are those concepts – current under manning (TNK) [текущий некомплект (ТНК)] and
temporary under manning (VNK) [временный некомплект (ВНК)].”
- Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin
Source: Bogdan Stepovoy, Aleksey Ramm, and Yevgeniy Andreyev, “В резерв по контракту (In the Reserve, on Contract),” Izvestiya, 13
February 2018. https://iz.ru/706732/bogdan-stepovoi-aleksei-ramm-evgenii-andreev/v-rezerv-po-kontraktu
The Russian Army has begun the full-scale formation of a mobilization reserve. Reserve soldiers and officers, who have concluded a
contract with the Ministry of Defense, must attend special classes every month and undergo military training annually. In exchange, the state
guarantees them monthly payments and a series of compensations. In the event of the declaration of a call to service, reservists will bring
existing units up to strength, and they will also be used to form new units. Military experts think that the reform will strengthen the country’s
defense capability…
The military commissariats are responsible for the formation of the reserve. Not all of them have yet begun the corresponding work.
However, by way of illustration, the recruitment of volunteers is already occurring in Rostov Oblast – a reserve servicemen can conclude
a contract for service in the reserve at the Novoshakhtinsk City Military Commissariat…”To do this, you need to appear at the military
commissariat, while having your passport and military identification card on your person,” a Novoshakhtinsk Military Commissariat
spokesman told Izvestiya. “A reserve serviceman must train for 2-3 days per month and undergo annual training with a duration of from
20-30 days”…They can call up that man for service at any moment: during the declaration of a special or threatening period, in the event of
major exercises, emergency situations, or simply a critical shortage of military specialists in the units.
“The issue on the creation of an organizational mobilization reserve was raised a long time ago,” Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy told
Izvestiya. “The new system will permit the training and maintenance of highly-skilled cadres at combat readiness and guarantee the rapid
deployment of personnel to the theaters of military operations, where new formations need to be deployed, but the local mobilization reserve
is inadequate”…In particular, in his words, the new cadre recruitment system will increase the combat capability of the Far East. There is
equipment in the units of this region but a cadre shortage exists.
Salary and Money for Billeting
The reserve soldiers and officers who are arriving in the reserve sign a contract for three, five, or more years. During the conclusion of a
new agreement, a Russian receives a lump sum payment: for a three-year period – in the amount of the salary, and for five or more years –
one and a half times more.
A reservist’s pay will be composed of the position salary, the pay for rank, and the regional coefficient. For example, a platoon leader in the
rank of a senior lieutenant in central Russia totals R27,500 [≈$481 based upon March 2018 exchange rate]. A squad leader in the rank of a
sergeant in Kemerovo Oblast (regional premium – 30 percent) – R25,300 [≈$443 based upon March 2018 exchange rate]. Indeed, this money
is paid in the full amount only during training. The reservists will be paid 12 percent of the pay in the remaining period, 11 months per year.
A senior lieutenant form central Russia will receive R3,300 [≈$58 based upon March 2018 exchange rate] per month and a sergeant from
Kemerovo Oblast – R3,036 [≈$53 based upon March 2018 exchange rate] …

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2018

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Operational Reserve Will Enhance
Active Component Readiness
How This Works
They will attach the reservist to a specific military unit or to a Mobilization Deployment Support Center (TsOMP) [Центр Обеспечения
Мобилизационного Развертывания (ЦОМР)], where he will undergo training…
“There are those concepts – current under manning (TNK) [текущий некомплект (ТНК)] and temporary under manning (VNK)
[временный некомплект (ВНК)],” Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin told Izvestiya. “For instance, a serviceman has transferred to a
different duty location, and his vacant position has not yet been filled, this is temporary under manning. If a man has become ill and already
will be unable to accomplish his duties – this is current under manning. TNK and VNK seriously impact a military unit’s combat capability.
By way of illustration, there can be a shortage of one company commander and several riflemen-machine-gunners and driver-mechanics.
Their absence has a serious impact on the battalion’s capability to accomplish the combat mission. There are also positions, which are
introduced only in the event of war. For example, assistant machine-gunner or mortar loader. They are not needed in peacetime but they
become critically important in an engagement”…
The mobilization reservists, who have concluded a contract with a military unit, will fill TNK and VNK positions. The replenishment of losses
in wartime will become their other mission.
New Centers for Reservists
They will both store equipment and train reservists at the Mobilization Deployment Support Centers (TsOMPs)…If necessary, they
will transform the centers into “ full-fledged” military units and formations. They will build a new state-of-the-art infrastructure for
the Mobilization Deployment Support Centers. In 2016, the Ministry of Defense concluded a contract for the design of the new Military
Equipment Storage and Repair Base on Sakhalin. The design illustrates what the Mobilization Deployment Support Center could look like.
They plan to build a military garrison in the Village of Dachnoye. A parking lot with an area of 700,000 square meters and a barracks for
the accommodation of 521 soldiers and sergeants, headquarters and training buildings, depots for equipment and missile-artillery weapons,
and a heated storage facility for 1,200 vehicle parking spaces will appear there. They will equip the equipment storage and repair areas.
That infrastructure will permit the accommodation of a battalion of reservists at the base in the event of training assemblies and to conduct
exercises and routine maintenance of the equipment using their own manpower…

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues

OE Watch | April 2018

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Drel Gliding Gravity Bomb with Independently
Targetable Submunitions
OE Watch Commentary: The Standardized Gliding Cluster Bomb (PBK) with Self-Aiming Antitank Submunition-Combined (SPBE-K), or
Drel PBK-500U, will be Russia’s first guided bomb with self-targeting submunitions. The Drel is reportedly 310 cm long, has a 45 cm diameter,
weighs 540 kg, and has 15 self-targeting submunitions that are designed to destroy armored vehicles, radar reconnaissance system radars,
command-and-control facilities, and particularly SAM systems. The air dropped PBK-500U can glide up to 30 km from its target, well outside
the range of many short-range air defense systems. The accompanying excerpted article from Gazeta.ru discusses the features of the PBK-500U,
and specifically mentions the cost savings of using the PBK-500U versus using an expensive cruise missile.
The accompanying excerpted article from Svobodnaya Pressa also mentions the bomb’s features and points out that the PBK-500U will by no
means replace conventional gravity bombs, as they are far cheaper. Of particular interest in the article is the mention of how Russians describe
the tactical, operational, and strategic depths. Based upon this information, and descriptions seen in other sources, the approximate depth values
are: tactical depth (0-120 km), operational-tactical depth (120 km-500 km), operational depth (500-1,500 km), operational-strategic depth (1,5005,500 km), and strategic depth (5,500+ km). The PBK-500U is considered to be an operational-tactical level weapon system, likely used on
operational-tactical fighters such as the Su-24M and Su-34. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Why do we need air-delivered weapons such as the Drel?... it is all a matter of price. A gliding munition
with guidance based on data of the global positioning system is tens or even thousands of times less
expensive than an air-to-surface guided missile. It ensures high accuracy of engagement (3-5 meters) with
a long flight range. But the most important thing is that the price of this air-delivered weapon permits
using it en masse.”
Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “Новое оружие России: «Дрелью» по танкам (New Russian Weapon: Drel Against Tanks),” Gazeta.ru, 20
February 2018. https://www.gazeta.ru/army/2018/02/20/11656981.shtml
During a scientific-technical conference held at facilities of Basalt Scientific Production Association (NPO), Vladimir Lepin, general director
of the Tekhmash Concern, announced that Drel, the newest aerial bomb that became known for the first time during the Army-2016 forum, will
enter the inventory in 2018.
“State tests of the new basic model of a 500-kilogram gliding cluster bomb armed with self-aiming submunitions began in 2016. The state
tests are being conducted in accordance with the program of the client (Russian Defense Ministry), and after their successful conclusion in
2018 it is planned to make this article operational,” Lepin stated.
It is reported that the standardized gliding cluster bomb, PBK-500U SPBE-K (Drel) has the capability of all-weather, around-the-clock use.
It is presumed that the munition will be released without the platform aircraft entering the kill zone of SAM systems and complexes. The
PBK-500U SPBE-K gliding cluster bomb is designed to engage the probable enemy’s armored vehicles, radar reconnaissance system radars,
command-and-control facilities, and SAM complexes and systems.
After separation from the platform aircraft, Drel can fly up to 30 kilometers and deliver up to the 15 self-aiming submunitions to the target
area, which will be guided to specific targets using the GLONASS global positioning system.
The newest PBK-500U SPBE-K aerial bomb weighs around 540 kilograms and the munition is three meters long. It is presumed that
Drel will be released from high altitudes and from the stratosphere (in particular, the principal altitude for combat employment of the new
munition is given as 14 kilometers). It is reported that the cluster bomb itself and the self-aiming submunitions have a small radar crosssection, which will reduce substantially the possibility of Drel being hit by enemy air defense missile-gun complexes and small-caliber air
defense artillery.
It is presumed that the Drel aerial bomb will enter the arsenal of all Russian aircraft. It will be possible to accommodate this air-delivered
weapon in their internal bomb bays and on their underwing pylons…”The meaning of developing such munitions that glide and are guided
based on data of the global positioning system is as follows,” Andrey Frolov, editor-in-chief of the Arms Export journal, explained to Gazeta.
Ru. “It would appear that we have air-to-surface guided missiles with a substantially greater flight range and warhead yield.
“Why do we need air-delivered weapons such as the Drel?” According to the expert, it is all a matter of price. A gliding munition with
guidance based on data of the global positioning system is tens or even thousands of times less expensive than an air-to-surface guided
missile. It ensures high accuracy of engagement (3-5 meters) with a long flight range. But the most important thing is that the price of this
air-delivered weapon permits using it en masse. In fact it is rather stupid to try to hit a jeep costing $15,000 and mounting a heavy-caliber
machinegun with a guided missile costing $500,000. This is absurd. And no economy will withstand the employment of missiles at that price
en masse. But Frolov emphasizes that a gliding munition with GPS guidance is the ideal munition for low and even high intensity conflicts.
Therefore the Drel is an extremely promising gliding cluster bomb.And the expert believes its acceptance into the inventory will sharply
increase Russian Army combat capabilities.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2018

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Drel Gliding Gravity Bomb with
Independently Targetable Submunitions
Source: Sergey Aksenov and Viktor Murakhovskiy, “ВКС России никак не возьмут в руки «Дрель» (There Is No Way The Russian
Federation Aerospace Forces Will Get Their Hands on The Drel),” Svobodnaya Pressa, 8 January 2018. https://svpressa.ru/war21/
article/190045/
The Russian military will receive the newest PBK-500U Drel precision aerial bomb in the inventory in 2018. Tekhmash Concern General
Director Vladimir Lepin told Interfax about this in an interview…In 2016, RF Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov promised to equip
our operational-tactical aviation aircraft with Drel soon. According to him, the munition is designed to engage enemy armored vehicles,
fortifications, field ammunition dumps, industrial facilities, and lines of communication…
In the opinion of Anatoliy Tsyganok, head of the Center for Military Forecasting of the Institute for Political and Military Analysis, state-ofthe-art munitions of this nature will become the primary weapon for all the world’s high-tech armies in 10-15 years. We are ahead for now,
although not everything is going smoothly. “PBK-500U Drel is an antitank system. It is designed to engage particular armored vehicles,”
military expert and MilitaryRussia website editor Dmitriy Kornev explained. “This is a rather recent decision for Russia, because up to now
we have not had a single series-produced device with self-aiming submunitions in the inventory. There are of course simple cluster munitions
on tactical missiles, including Iskander.”
[Svobodnaya Pressa] But in fact there is an international convention prohibiting cluster munitions?
[Kornev] Most likely the new aerial bomb is not among those prohibited by this convention, since the ban extends only to antipersonnel
cluster munitions (submunitions weighing up to 20 kilograms -- Auth.). Not only do we have, but the West also has more powerful cluster
bombs.
[Svobodnaya Pressa] On what kind of delivery vehicles can the new aerial bombs be mounted?
[Kornev] First of all, there is the Su-24M. Secondly, the Su-34 is an aircraft that will operate in the operational depth of the enemy defense.
The Tu-22M also can employ the new bomb theoretically, but it hardly will. This is a little way from their specialization.
[Svobodnaya Pressa] How should we assess the fact that the Drel bomb can glide up to 30 kilometers? Is this a revolution or nothing
special? Will the platform aircraft really remain unattainable for enemy air defense?
[Kornev] If we are talking about engaging tank formations, their own air defense has a kill radius of less than 30 kilometers against
offensive air weapons. In the Russian troops these are the Osa and Tor complexes. That is, bombing is possible without entering the
immediate air defense zone of a tank formation. It is understandable that if we are talking about permanent positions of armored systems
prepared in advance and covered from the air, then of course there will be more serious air defense systems there. But in any case, the kill
probability against the platform aircraft declines as the munition’s range capability increases.
And it simply is great to employ such a munition with respect to an enemy who is on the march, because there is a much lesser radius of
action for mobile air defense complexes in troop columns. The only thing is that it will be necessary to ensure the coordination of bombers as
part of a reconnaissance-strike complex. This is when reconnaissance reports target coordinates in real time and incoming aviation executes
a maneuver and employs munitions against a target for which there has been prestrike reconnaissance. As a matter of fact, the majority of
modern operations should be carried out specifically in that way…
In the opinion of Colonel (Reserve) Viktor Murakhovskiy, editor-in-chief of the Journal Arsenal Otechestva [Homeland Arsenal], acceptance
of the new aerial bomb into the inventory will not affect the strategic balance of forces in the world in any way.
[Murakhovskiy] You have to understand that in the case of a new aerial bomb we are talking about the operational-tactical and not the
strategic level. These are entirely different concepts. It is like comparing apples to oranges. For example, range is the main characteristic
of a strategic weapon. The Chief of General Staff recently publicly designated the range of operational-tactical arms as up to 500 kilometers.
The next level is up to 1,500 kilometers. But strategic weapons have a reach from 5,500 kilometers and more. And their warhead can be both
nuclear and conventional, as for cruise missiles.
[Svobodnaya Pressa] That is, it is a question of a simple improvement of operational-tactical munitions and no more than that?
[Murakhovskiy] Just so. There are two directions here. The first is an improvement in the delivery vehicle. In this case aircraft are
equipped with a computer subsystem that supports employment of conventional unguided munitions with an accuracy similar to that of a
precision munition. There are such systems on the Su-24M, Tu-22M3, Su-33, Su-35, and so on.
And the second direction is creation of the precision-guided munitions themselves, but you have to understand that this is expensive. A
conventional 500-kilogram aerial bomb costs less than 300,000 rubles (≈ $5211 based upon the March 2018 exchange rate.) but a smart bomb
of that caliber with a laser homing head costs around 8,500,000 rubles. (≈ $147,635 based upon the March 2018 exchange rate.) Therefore
you have to have both of them in the arsenal and employ them depending on the specific mission and the enemy force.

OE Watch | April 2018

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Kinzhal Air Launched Missile is a Modified
Iskander SRBM
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses features of Russia’s newly announced Kinzhal airto-surface missile. The Kinzhal is intended to be fired from a MiG-31, as the aircraft reportedly functions as a first stage booster for the missile.
The MiG-31 also launches Russian anti-satellite missiles. Russia has saved substantial costs and research and development time by basing the
Kinzhal on the existing Iskander SRBM surface-to-surface missile, instead of developing a new missile from scratch. The adoption of existing
technologies, and repurposing (if feasible), is standard practice in the Russian Armed Forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: Aleksey Ramm, “Кинжальный удар «Искандера» (The Iskander’s Kinzhal Strike),” Izvestiya, 2 March 2018. https://iz.ru/715127/
aleksei-ramm/kinzhalnyi-udar-iskandera
The Russian Armed Forces have received the Kinzhal aviation missile system, Vladimir Putin stated in a message to the Federal Assembly.
The “heart” of the new system is a hypersonic missile capable of performing complex maneuvers. It strikes targets with high precision
within a radius of more than 2,000 kilometers. On 1 December last year, the latest aviation missile systems commenced trial combat duty in
the Southern Military District. According to experts, video during the President’s speech showed the aviation version of the ground-based
Iskander operational-tactical missile system. It is modified for high-altitude supersonic launch. Meanwhile, the Kinzhal is categorized as
defensive weaponry.
“The video clearly shows a modified Iskander system series 9M723 aeroballistic missile suspended under the fuselage of a MiG-31,” Dmitriy
Kornev, editor-in-chief of the Internet project Military Russia, noted. “The missile cone is streamlined with several tapers. It can also be
observed that the engine compartment has a characteristic barrel shape. In contrast to the ground-based version of the Iskander, the Kinzhal
missile has a remodeled tail section and smaller vanes. Also, in the tail of the missile there is a special cap. Apparently, it protects the engine
nozzle when flying at supersonic speed. The cap separates after the missile launch from onboard the MiG-31.”…
“Accelerated to supersonic speed, the MiG-31 acts as a ‘first stage’ which increases by several times the flight range and speed of the 9M723.
After launch, due to the increase in altitude and dive, the missile gains hypersonic speed as well as the necessary energy for maneuvering,”
Dmitriy Kornev noted. “Although the 9M723 is considered to be aeroballistic, its trajectory in the terminal phase is quite complex. Due to the
energy obtained, the rocket can perform complex maneuvers.”
According to the expert, this product has special units to overcome antimissile defenses — decoy targets and jamming generators. The 9M723
can be equipped with optical or radar homing heads. The first detects the target, combining what the camera sees with a picture stored in its
memory. It is best suited for striking stationary objects. The second looks for targets in reflected radar signals. It serves to destroy mobile
targets, in particular ships.
“The 9M723 is a fully developed and tested system. It has a homing head, a system to overcome antimissile defenses, and maneuvering
capability,” military historian Dmitriy Boltenkov noted. “It would take at least 7-10 years to create an aviation missile with similar
capabilities from scratch. A further two-three years would have been spent on testing. In the case of the Kinzhal, the developers and military
managed with just eight years. It is also quite understandable why the MiG-31 was chosen as the carrier. The Mig-31 has a high load capacity
and powerful engines. It is the only one capable of accelerating to supersonic speed and also launching the five-ton 9M723 missile.

“The video clearly shows a modified
Iskander system series 9M723 aeroballistic
missile suspended under the fuselage of a
MiG-31.”

MiG-31.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/790th-Fighter-Regiment/i-wSTNGqR/A, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Stock up on Baking Soda Before the Acid Fog Descends
OE Watch Commentary: Two of Russia’s most polluted
centers are in the Arctic. One is in the city of Norilsk, east
of the Yenisei River, and the other is Monchegorsk on the
Kola Peninsula, 145 kilometers south of Murmansk. Both are
major producers of nickel, cobalt and copper. Heavy metals
and sulfides pollute the air, forests and waterways at both
locations. Wages are high and their products are an important
part of the Russian economy. Additionally, the Russians have
long maintained a military airbase at Monchegorsk. The
government has made progress in cleaning up the environs,
but anytime authorities advise wiping down one’s floors with
baking soda, it makes the ecological cleanup look at bit tardy.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The authorities in Monchegorsk, in the
northwestern Arctic Russian region of
Murmansk, have warned residents to stay
at home after the town was engulfed in a
dense fog of hydrogen sulfide, the Novaya
Gazeta newspaper reported on its website
on 9 March.”

Source: “Arctic Russian Town in Lockdown Over ‘Toxic’ Fog,” Caversham,
BBC Monitoring, 9 March 2018.
The newspaper said the local administration had not officially said where
the toxic fumes where coming from, but it recalled that sulfates are being
processed in Monchegorsk by the Severonickel Kola Mining-Metallurgical
Company, which is part of Nornickel - Russia’s leading metals and mining
enterprise. According to Novaya Gazeta, the town has been covered in
hydrogen sulfide since 5 March.
The paper quoted the mayor’s office as “saying diplomatically” that the
maximum permissible concentration of the substance in the air had been
exceeded “more than a factor of two”. Nornickel has also announced that it
is stopping production “until weather conditions improve”. The fog is so thick
that it is causing traffic accidents, according to the newspaper.
This is not the first time that Monchegorsk has been covered in a yellow
mist... The incidents have always been associated with emissions from the
Nornickel plant during windless weather…
Murmansk Governor Marina Kovtun has tweeted that the authorities are
dealing with the situation. But Novaya Gazeta quoted residents as saying
they are angry that the regional administration is not doing enough. The
Russian Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights Protection
and Human Wellbeing (Rospotrebnadzor) said on its website on 8 March that
the maximum permissible concentration of hydrogen sulfide has not been
exceeded in Morchegorsk. However, it advised residents to wipe their floors
with baking soda, tightly close doors and windows, refrain from going outside
and drink plenty of liquids.

Monchegorsk - railway and factories.

Source: By kallerna (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/62/Monchegorsk_-_railway_and_factories.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

67

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Arctic Oil Vital to Russian Economy
OE Watch Commentary: Arctic oil and
gas extraction is paying off for Gazprom
and Gazprom’s majority stock holder, the
Russian government, as the accompanying
excerpted article from The Independent
Barents Sea Observer reports. The
Gazprom CEO, Alexey Miller, reported the
good news directly to President Putin. In a
time of Western economic sanctions, this
can only be good news from the Russian
perspective. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

“As Gazprom, celebrates its 25-year anniversary, it can also record a
historical high in natural gas exports. In a meeting with President Putin
last week, company CEO Aleksey Miller confirmed that exports in 2017
amounted to 194.4 billion cubic meters, the company’s biggest annual
volume ever. According to Miller, the 2017 result is 90 percent higher
than the result in 1993, the year when Gazprom was privatised. The
biggest part of the export growth - as much as 30 percent – was during
the last three years.”

Source: “Gazprom’s Export from Arctic Goes Record High,” The Independent Barents Sea Observer, February 2018. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-and-energy/2018/02/gazproms-exports-arctic-goes-record-high
Russian natural gas now accounts for as much as 34.7% of the European market, its biggest share ever. And volumes are likely to continue
to grow... With new export pipelines North Stream-2 and the TurkStream, more natural gas can be sold to European consumers. The Arctic
constitutes an increasingly important priority for Gazprom. In 2017, the company’s flagship project in the region, the Bovanenkovo field in the
Yamal Peninsula, produced as much as 82.8 billion cubic meters of gas. And more is to come. By year 2020, the company intends to produce an
annual of 115 billion cubic meters from the field.
According to Aleksey Miller, the … Yamal Center is becoming its most important priority…. Huge additional reserves have been added to its
resource portfolio. Further, the regional Tambey fields hold an estimated 7.7 trillion cubic meters…
Gazprom previously estimated its potential natural gas exports from Yamal to up to 360 billion cubic meters. In 2017, the company’s total
production amounted to 471 billion cubic meters. Gazprom was originally established in 1989. It originated from the Soviet Ministry of Gas
Industry, and became the Soviet Union’s first state run corporate enterprise. On 17 February 1993, Gazprom became a joint stock company. It is
majority owned by the Russian government.

Gazprom Headquarters in Moscow (2010).

Source: By Ghirla (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/ab/Gazprom.JPG, [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], via Wikimedia Commons.

OE Watch | April 2018

68

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The New Chinese Silk Road May Run Through the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The extension of the Finnish railroad
system into Norway to the town and port of Kirkenes, as the
accompanying excerpted article from China’s Xinhua reports, would
provide a trade route for Chinese goods to the Baltic Sea and into
Central and Eastern Europe. This would allow the Chinese to use
the Northeast Passage running north of the Russian coast and save
40 percent of the current travel distance and 20 percent of energy
costs. It would also bypass the major ports of Marseilles, Antwerp,
Rotterdam and Hamburg and create a new trade hub in the Baltic
Sea and, ultimately, it would promote China’s major interest and
influence in the Arctic region. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

“Envisioning a new port on the Barents Sea coast
and a railway that goes all the way southward to
the Baltic Sea, Norway’s Arctic town of Kirkenes
sets its sight on a major European hub on a
Polar Silk Road with a link to China. Finland
and Norway announced on … 9 March their
plans to explore building an Arctic railway
between Finland’s northern city of Rovaniemi
and Norway’s ice-free port of Kirkenes. This
agreement came after Norway announced plans
to develop a new harbor and terminal areas near
Kirkenes, a town in the Sor-Varanger municipality
in Norway’s northeastern county of Finnmark.”

Source: Liang Youchang and Zhang Shuhui , “Norway’s Arctic town
envisions Gateway on the Polar Silk Road with link To China,”
Xinhua, 10 March 2018. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/201803/10/c_137029993.htm
Rune Rafaelsen, mayor of the Sor-Varanger municipality, told Xinhua
that “This project with a railway connected to the Belt and Road
Initiative through the Northern Sea Route and the Arctic strategy of
China fits very well into all the plan for the huge ‘Barents Harbor’.
Regarding future logistic transport in the Arctic, you are dependent on
having a good railroad that could reach Europe fast and Kirkenes is the
first (Western) port when you come from China.”
According to a study by the Finnish and Norwegian governments, the
520-km railway between Rovaniemi and Kirkenes would cost about 2.9
billion euros (3.6 billion U.S. dollars) and open in 2030. It will form
part of the proposed Arctic Corridor, which envisions that cargo from
Asia would be offloaded in Kirkenes and sent southward by railway
to Finland, the Baltic states and the rest of Europe. Local planners in
Kirkenes have been lobbying for the Norwegian town of Barents, 15
kilometers west of the border with Russia, as the perfect site for a major
hub linking the Arctic shipping route and the Arctic Corridor.
“The vision for the Arctic Railway is to be able to offer an
environment-friendly and faster transport alternative for goods between
Northeast Asia and Northern Europe via Finland by utilization of
the Northern Sea Route and development of Kirkenes as a hub port,”
according to a Norwegian report published in January. The report
titled ‘An Arctic Railway Vision’ was the result of work between the
development company Sor-Varanger Utvikling, the Kirkenes Business
Park and the Finnmark County Council. The voyage could be reduced
by 40 percent using the Northern Sea Route, also known as the
Northeast Passage, when compared to the current route through the
Suez Canal between Northern Europe and Northeast Asia…. It would
result in a 20 percent reduction in fuel consumption….

Kirkenes Harbour, 2010.

Source: By Mathis Heibert, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/52/Kirkenes_Harbour.jpg, CC BY 2.0.

OE Watch | April 2018

69

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Interview with Russian Navy Commander Admiral Korolev
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s recent military
developments have included significant efforts to
improve the Russian Navy, so far with mixed results.
In February 2018 a journalist from Russia’s major
military newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star),
interviewed the Commander-in-Chief of the Russian
Navy, Admiral Vladimir Korolev, who provided a
glowing report on the navy’s status and plans for the
year ahead.

Source: Andrey Gavrilenko, “Военно-морской флот – на стремнине развития (The
Navy Is on the Swift Current of Development),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 15 February
2018. http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/item/36166-voenno-morskoj-flot-nastremnine-razvitiya

In the interview, Admiral Korolev pointed out
how the Russian Navy gained “practical experience”
in Syria, firing 100 cruise missiles on ISIS forces
and destroying “more than 1,250 targets of illegal
armed force elements” from operations in the
Mediterranean. The Admiral also mentioned the
Gulf of Aden and the African Horn as areas of
recent naval success, where Russia worked to
decrease terrorism and increase safety. He went
on to comment on Russian advances in the Arctic,
securing the region for the country’s economic
development.

[Korolev] You mentioned our naval confidence correctly. The Navy began 2018
with significant achievements behind it in all directions and components which feed
this confidence, and I would even say this conviction. Our Navy gained inestimable
practical experience of combat operations against terrorist groupings on Syrian
Arab Republic territory, having brought down 100 cruise missiles on the head of the
IGIL, and having carried out more than 400 combat sorties with the destruction of
more than 1,250 targets of illegal armed force elements during the carrier group’s
operations in the Mediterranean. Today this is a Navy which succeeded in operating
effectively to lower the threat of maritime piracy in the vicinity of the Gulf of Aden
and African Horn and which continues to be present in these areas regularly for
guaranteed safety of world shipping. Well, and of course this is a Navy that is
successfully developing the Arctic and which has been and remains a guarantor of
security of Russia’s maritime economic activity in the ocean….

When asked about the strong history of the
Russian Navy and its relevance to present
operations, Admiral Korolev, who has served in
his current position for two years, discussed the
annual navy leadership operations conference.
This year’s conference will include, in part, a
scientific-historical conference to celebrate the 60th
anniversary of Russia’s nuclear submarine fleet.
Rather than focusing on current operations, “(at)
the operational conference…we also will remember
the centennial of the day the RKKA [Workers’ and
Peasants’ Red Army] and the RKKF [Workers’ and
Peasants’ Red Navy] were established” by the Soviet
government.
The Admiral paints a radiant picture of the
Russian Navy’s continued development. As he
explains, the increased financial and innovative
focus recently placed on the navy are proved by the
fact that “in just the last five years the figure for
time spent underway in Navy combined formations
doubled and the average time of missions performed
by crews of submarines and ships at sea grew almost
by a third. In short, the condition of the Navy always
is checked fundamentally by its actions at sea.”
Admiral Korolev cites the last five to six years as a
time of immense naval improvement, including in
naval aviation, submarine development, equipping
96 percent of coastal defense troops with cutting
edge missiles, personnel training, rescue equipment,
and other developments. Coincidentally, these years
of development were overseen by Russian President
Vladimir Putin and Krasnaya Zvezda published the
interview a month before the 18 March election,
which Putin won by a considerable margin. End OE
Watch Commentary (Johnson)

[KZ] Comrade Commander-in-Chief, the Navy has entered a new training year,
which for the navy men will be another stage of development and improvement of
combat proficiency. What kind of “deck” is beneath your subordinates’ feet now and
on what does the traditional confidence of sailors in the successful performance of all
missions assigned to them rest today?

[KZ] It is common knowledge that navy men are capable of performing missions of
any difficulty, relying among other things on their own unique historical traditions.
What kind of pages of the combat annals will be of help for sailors in 2018?
[Korolev] The Navy leadership operations conference held annually in the N.G.
Kuznetsov Naval Academy is in part devoted to these pages… A scientific-historical
conference devoted to the 60th anniversary of Russia’s nuclear submarine fleet, which
we will celebrate this year, will be held as part of this conference. At the operational
conference we also will remember the centennial of the day the RKKA [Workers’ and
Peasants’ Red Army] and RKKF [Workers’ and Peasants’ Red Navy] were established.
[KZ] How is the Navy’s oceangoing status confirmed today?
[Korolev] I would say there no longer is a need to confirm the oceangoing status of
the Russian Navy. Even stubborn skeptics realize and know that the zone of operations
of our Navy’s forces has not been enclosed for a long time just by the boundaries of
inland seas…. The last five-year plan in which the foundation for Navy development in
all directions was laid down speaks best and most graphically of all about the results
of this work. In just the last five years, 64 combatant ships and craft, including 3
strategic missile submarine cruisers, 7 multirole submarines, 14 surface combatants,
and 39 small combatants were built for the Navy….
…It was thanks to the attentive attitude toward Navy problems on the part of the
Supreme Commander, defense minister, and the not indifferent heads of Russian
Federation components and cities that we are worthily overcoming all difficulties
in short time periods. There are many proofs. I will cite one of the most indicative
ones. In just the last five years the figure for time spent underway in Navy combined
formations doubled and the average time of missions performed by crews of
submarines and ships at sea grew almost by a third. In short, the condition of the
Navy always is checked fundamentally by its actions at sea….
[KZ] The Navy includes coastal defense troops. How do things stand with
reequipping the Navy’s coastal component?
[Korolev] In the last few years the reequipping of the Navy coastal defense troops
with Bal and Bastion missile complexes allowed us to take the level of outfitting with
state-of-the-art equipment to 96 percent….

OE Watch | April 2018

70

