community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #12
December 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA

INDO-PACIFIC

6

28

3

8
11
13
14
16
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Russia Adopts 57mm Caliber as Standard for Future
Armored Vehicles
Crimean Army Corps Conducts Amphibious Landing and
Defense Exercise
Russia Conducts Brigade/Division Force-On-Force Exercises
Caspian Sea Flotilla Conducts Amphibious Landing
Exercise
Young Army for All Schools
Russian Railroad Troop Developments
Northern Fleet Army Corps Command and Control Element
Cold Weather Tor-M2DT Air Defense System Training for
Arctic Duty
Spinning International Intrigues
Russian – Ukrainian Regional Conflict Seemingly Pervades
Spiritual Plane
Negative Military Reporting
CSTO Peacekeeping in Ukraine?
Changes for the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Armenian’s Fighter Acquisition Complete?
Estonian Analysis of Russian Threat
Closer Russian-Cuban Relations

27

30
31
33
34
36
37
38
39
40

From “Informationized” to “Intelligent”: Chinese Military
Aviation Prepares for the Future
Gaining a Better Understanding of Future Intelligent
Warfare through a Chinese Lens
Local Companies Provide Logistics Support During PLA
Joint Exercise
An Instant PLA: Just Add 3D Printing
New “Fast Food” to Replace Rations and Field Kitchen
Meals in the PLA
Japan and India Relations: A Counterweight to China?
The Impact of Pakistan-Russia Security Cooperation on
India
Indonesia Seeks to Strengthen its Global Standing by
Increasing Military Diplomacy
Malaysia Arrests Group of Foreign Salafi-Jihadis
The Philippines Military Commemorates Marawi Battle
Counterterrorism Vulnerabilities in Western Australia

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
41
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
53
54

Russia Cultivates Libyan Ties
Moving Forward on Turkish Acquisition of Russian S-400s
Equipping the IRGC with New Ballistic Missiles
Turkey to Mass Produce Altay Tank
Iranian Border Guard Post Overrun, Guards Abducted
Iranian Law Enforcement Forces Receive 12 UAVs
Syria’s MERV: Uptick in Anti-Kurdish Sentiment among
Arabs
PKK’s Influence on Turkish-Iraqi Relations
Rising Tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean over Natural
Gas
Egyptian Views on Arab Security
Turkey and Kuwait Sign Military Cooperation Agreement

AFRICA
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
63
64
65

Mysterious Militants Threaten Burkina Faso amid Security Crisis
Fear of Islamist Terrorism Taking Root in South Africa
Chad to Combat Boko Haram Closer to Nigerian Border
Boko Haram Execution of Midwife Demoralizes Nigeria
African Standby Force: Still Not Ready for Primetime?
Amidst Concerns, AMISOM Prepares to Withdraw from Somalia
NGOs Tell Story of Southern Mali, One Post at a Time
Tiny Lesotho’s Large Military Budget
China’s Racism Problem in Africa
Ethiopia Arrests 63 Senior Military and Intelligence Officials

LATIN AMERICA
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

Cubazuela Intelligence
Venezuela Imports Chinese ZTE Social Control System
ELN and FARC Dissidents Actively Recruiting Venezuelan
Nationals
More News on the ELN
Internal Divisions within the FARC and the Reaction of
Remaining and Dissident FARC Members
The Flow of Cuban Doctors
Panama: A Bridge in Latin America for China’s “Belt and Road”?
Bolivian Government Steps Up Fight to Thwart Entry of Illegal
Contraband

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 12

December | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Matti Dimmick
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Greg Sarafian
Matthew Stein

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Wilson VornDick

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gunduz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Alma Keshavarz
Catalina Wedman
		

ON THE COVER:
Foreground: A 366th Training Squadron electrical systems
apprentice course student at Sheppard Air Force Base, Texas, puts
on a virtual reality headset Jan. 26, 2018, at Sheppard AFB.
Image Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Airman 1st Class Pedro Tenorio, https://www.dvidshub.net/image/4126117/
airmen-gauge-fear-heights-virtual-simulation , Public Domain.

Background: Visualization of DTI data, depicting a detail of an axial
slice of a human brain.

Image Source: Thomas Schultz [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html), CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) or CC BY-SA 2.5 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)], https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DTI-axial-ellipsoids.jpg.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Russia Adopts 57mm Caliber as Standard for Future
Armored Vehicles
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation has a long history of using 57mm caliber weapons. The Soviet manufactured ZSU-57-2
self-propelled anti-aircraft gun (SPAAG) was considered to be quite a success during the Vietnam War, the Arab-Israeli wars, and the Iran-Iraq
War. Although the ZSU-57-2 lacked a radar system, making the targeting of jet aircraft extremely difficult, the system was excellent at engaging
slower moving targets. The ZSU-57-2 and other SPAAGs that use smaller caliber shells, such as the ZSU-23-4 Shilka, the 2K22 Tunguska,
and the Pantsir-S1, have an important secondary mission to use their rapid-fire guns to fire on ground targets when required. As discussed in
the accompanying excerpted article from Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, Russia is currently developing its next generation of SPAAG
technology, the 2S38 Derivatsiya-PVO SPAAG, which will reportedly be a 57mm gun system mounted on a BMP-3 chassis intended to primarily
target helicopters and ground attack aircraft. The 57mm shell is considered to be ideal for destroying low-flying and (relatively) slow targets such
as tactical UAVs, MLRS projectiles, cruise missiles, precision-guided munitions, and certain ground targets.
The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses a recent Russian decision to make the 57mm autocannon a standard armament
on future Russian infantry fighting vehicles (BMPs) and armored personnel carriers (BTRs). The Russian Federation has long made modularity
a cornerstone of its military modernization. For instance, the Armata, Kurganets, Atom, BTR-82, BMD-4M chassis are all manufactured to
accept BMP-3 turret specifications, so chassis and turrets of different manufacturers may be mixed and matched. Since these new turrets are
all unmanned, some Russian theorists have posited that there will be no functional difference between infantry fighting vehicles and armored
personnel carriers in the future. The Russian Federation could possibly adopt the AU-220M Baikal 57mm automated turret that reportedly can
fire 120 shells per minute. As explained in the article, the Russians view larger caliber munitions, such as the 57mm, as essential for establishing
dominance on the battlefield. Of particular note, there will likely be several different types of (interchangeable) shells produced for these systems
to suit their particular missions. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“A light armored vehicle with a 57 millimeter gun will obtain an advantage over other armored vehicles
of that same class.”

BRM-3K armored reconnaissance vehicle with 57mm AU-220M Baikal turret system.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog,CC 4.0. (https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy), https://photos.smugmug.com/Military/ARMY-2016-Static-part1/i-fqqrsPr/0/5ecce52a/X2/Army2016-215-X2.jpg.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

3

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Adopts 57mm Caliber as Standard
for Future Armored Vehicles
Source: Irina Dronina, “Огненная «Деривация»: Российская армия получит новую зенитную самоходку (Fire ‘Derivation’: The Russian
Army to Get New Self-Propelled Antiaircraft System,)” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 13 September 2018. http://nvo.ng.ru/nvo/201809-13/5_1013_arms.html
One of the armament and military equipment novelties presented at the recent Army-2018 forum was the 2S38 Derivatsiya-PVO self-propelled
antiaircraft gun (SPAAG)…the unmanned combat module, in other words, the turret, in which there is no room set aside for crew members,
but rather the 57-mm gun and 7.62-mm machine gun are controlled remotely from the hull where the three-man crew is resides…Stipulated for
use…is the BMP-3 armored tracked chassis…The complex also includes a transporter-loader, a repair vehicle, and an ammunition set.
The ammunition set of the new antiaircraft artillery complex includes 148 rounds, while the developer provided for their automatic supply to
the gun. The combat module’s design allows for circular horizontal aiming with the ability to adjust the vertical angle of the barrel from -5 to
+75 degrees. The gun’s rate of fire is 120 rounds per minute…
In addition to standard ammunition, for the gun they can use fundamentally new rounds – multifunctional with remote detonator and guided
artillery. The use of a programmable detonator is the main novelty here; prior to firing, the munition receives data from the fire control system,
and the detonator will detonate the round at the assigned moment and the assigned distance from the gun.
The new self-propelled antiaircraft artillery piece will have an electro-optical control system with laser rangefinders and it can destroy air
targets at distances of up to six kilometers and altitudes of up to 4.5 kilometers.
The Derivatsiya-PVO can be called a universal complex capable of operating under conditions of fire and radioelectronic countermeasures, as
well as at any time of day and in any weather. It can be used when shooting at ground targets, including armor, as well as at enemy live forces.
At the same time, the most effective ammunition is individually selected for each specific target.

2S38 Derivatsiya-PVO Self-Propelled Antiaircraft Gun.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog,CC 4.0. (https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy), https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2018-Static-part-3/i-hhBP2KZ/A.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

4

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Adopts 57mm Caliber as Standard
for Future Armored Vehicles
Source: “Убойные миллиметры: БМП и БТР вооружат мощными пушками-пулеметами (Destructive Millimeters: They Will Arm BMPs
and BTRs with Powerful Autocannons),” Izvestiya, 8 November 2018. https://iz.ru/795299/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/uboinye-millimetrybmp-i-btr-vooruzhat-moshchnymi-pushkami-pulemetami
The Ministry of Defense has approved the new armored vehicle development concept. The new maximum caliber – 57 millimeters – has been
selected for all light armored vehicles (BMPs [infantry fighting vehicles], BTRs [armored personnel carriers], and armored motor vehicles).
Those guns are strong based upon their versatility. They are capable of not only destroying tanks, but also of shooting down unmanned aerial
vehicles. One can compare their rate of fire with a machinegun. For the time being, only Russia has been able to bring that weapon up to series
production. A light armored vehicle with a 57 millimeter gun will obtain an advantage over other armored vehicles of that same class.
A Ministry of Defense spokesman told Izvestiya that the new armored vehicle development concept was approved this year. Before making the
decision, experimental-design work was conducted, which confirmed the feasibility of arming those vehicles with 57mm guns. Right now, as a
rule, they install 30mm or 100mm guns-launchers on BMPs and BTRs. The local wars and armed conflicts of recent years have shown that the
existing weapons are not always effective while combating high-speed or armored targets.
The more powerful 57mm gun will permit a Russian light armored vehicle to not only easily deal with BMPs and BTRs but also enter into a
skirmish with any existing probable enemy tanks, if necessary. It will be able to use it to damage sights, thermal-imaging devices, and other
external equipment or to attack the side of such a well-defended tank as an Abrams.
Not hostile tanks, BTRs, or BMPs, but lightly-armored jeeps or unmanned aerial vehicles are increasingly becoming the main target on the
battlefield for armored transport vehicle crews. Those targets need to be destroyed at maximum range, having used a minimal amount of
ammunition. It is impossible to permit light infantry, which is traveling in “21st century machinegun carts”, to be the first to employ antitank
guided missiles or drones – to transmit reconnaissance information to their command post…
The new guns will increase the Ground Troops’ firepower, Military Expert Sergey Suvorov thinks. “He who more rapidly accomplishes his
fire mission, will win in a contemporary war”, he told Izvestiya. “The 57mm seriously improves that indicator through its greater accuracy,
lethality, and high armor-piercing capability than the existing 30mm guns”. This should ensure the superiority of domestic equipment over the
latest BMPs and BTRs of the armies of the world’s leading countries for years. So, for example, the German Puma heavy BMP, which arrived
in the Bundeswehr inventory in 2015, has just a 30mm gun in its weaponry.

ZSU-57-2 Soviet self propelled anti-aircraft gun.

Source: User:VargaA, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ZSU-57-2_Hun_2010_02.jpg , CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons.

OE Watch | December 2018

5

EURASIA
Crimean Army Corps Conducts Amphibious Landing
and Defense Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian 126th Coastal Defense Brigade and the 810th Naval Infantry Brigade are part of the 22nd Army
Corps, which is the ground forces command of the Black Sea Fleet. As the accompanying excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda reports,
these units recently conducted a force-on-force exercise in the Opuk training area in the southeast of the Crimean Peninsula.
The exercise was a “ramps-on-beach” exercise where the naval infantry’s tanks, artillery and personnel carriers stayed dry. The “over-the
horizon” amphibious capability is lacking until the naval infantry receive more of the BMP-3F infantry fighting vehicles, which are especially
designed for operations at sea. They have improved seaworthiness and buoyancy and can fire accurately at Beaufort Sea force 2 and function up
to force 3. Reportedly, they can endure sustained amphibious operations for up to seven hours.
Of particular interest was the Russian use of tanks in the reconnaissance-strike system. The reconnaissance-strike system is a Russian
tactical innovation to combine reconnaissance, command and control and artillery together in order to identify and destroy targets accurately
in near-real time. Soviet/Russian tanks have long had a “support by indirect fire” role and the inclusion of accurate high-angle tank fire in the
reconnaissance-strike system has been used in Syria. It has now spread to the training grounds of the Crimea and unmanned aerial vehicles
provided much of the targeting data. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“In order to conduct aerial reconnaissance and generate targeting data, subunits used UAVs, including
Takhions and Orlans. During the seaborne landing, Eleron UAVs flew from one of the large landing
ships.”

BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicle.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Demonstration-p1/i-3SKF64Q, CC 4.0.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

6

EURASIA
Continued: Crimean Army Corps Conducts
Amphibious Landing and Defense Exercise
Source: Pavel Zavolokin, “В бой идут «чёрные береты» (“Black Berets” go into battle),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 17 October 2018. http://redstar.
ru/plechom-k-plechu-drug-protiv-druga/
The 12-day exercise was divided into four main phases with two to six events in each of them. One of the most dynamic and intensive events
involved landing naval infantry subunits from large amphibious landing ships on an unfortified coastline.
In order to secure a beachhead before the large amphibious landing ships approached the shore, “black berets” of the naval infantry, with
the support of attack helicopters, conducted a tactical air assault from Mi-8AMTSh helicopters and also landed attack and engineer-sapper
groups from high-speed motor boats. Fighting successfully to secure a beachhead and clearing passages through minefields, the lead naval
infantry subunits ensured that the ships were able to approach the shoreline and disembark the brigade’s main forces from the landing ships’
twin decks directly onto dry land.
Building on their success, the naval infantry cleared the beachhead with a rapid attack and moved inland from the coast. Driving the
notional enemy back from his forward positions, the advancing naval infantry destroyed enemy reserves and established a defensive
line and begin digging in. During the live-fire phase, individual small arms, BTR-82A ordnance, grenade-launcher teams, and 2S9 selfpropelled howitzer Nona-S crews engaged targets. Lieutenant-Colonel Roman Verikzhinkov, deputy chief of the Black Sea Fleet Army Corps
Operations Section, stated that this is a force-on-force exercise. While the naval infantry is seeking to capture a section of coastline following
successful sea and air landings, the coastal defense brigade soldiers are defending that coast against an enemy invasion.
The successful side will be the one that employs tactics that the “adversary” least expects, makes rational use of available forces and
resources, and responds correctly and promptly to unexpected exercise events. The Black Sea Fleet Army Corps headquarters assesses its
subunit commanders’ decisions daily, while a modeling group is using mathematical calculations to assess the effectiveness of the opposing
sides’ actions.
The exercise included experiences from modern-day combat in Syria. Extensive use was made of [artillery] reconnaissance-fire systems,
tank reconnaissance-fire systems, mobile electronic warfare groups, fortifications incorporating ancient “Syrian ramparts,” and vertical
envelopment and outflanking notional enemy’s forces. In order to create a situation that was as close as possible to actual conditions and
effectively fulfill prescribed missions, subunits from a separate reconnaissance brigade and a CBR reconnaissance regiment, command and
control and communications battalions, and artillery regiment subunits were mobilized for the exercise.
Lieutenant-Colonel Verikzhinkov stated “At least six [artillery] reconnaissance-fire complexes, including two tank reconnaissance fire
complexes have been in operation. The use of the latter is more than justified -- they are armored systems with good firepower that are
hard to destroy. Further, this makes it possible to rehearse effectively those issues relating to tank fire over large distances from concealed
positions.”
In order to conduct aerial reconnaissance and generate targeting data, subunits used UAVs, including Takhions and Orlans. During the
seaborne landing, Eleron UAVs flew from one of the large landing ships. The drones relayed reconnaissance information, even when the
command points were packed up and moving with the subunits. While the Coastal Defense brigade’s subunits were on the move their drones
remained in the air, collecting information in automatic mode...
The drones were confronted by electronic warfare subunits, which were attempting to disrupt or intercept C&C channels on the Takhions
hovering over the training ground. The electronic warfare experts had to operate with precision in order to avoid “wrecking” valuable
equipment on the ground. Meanwhile they were striving to suppress the notional enemy’s communications channels as completely as possible.
As the experience of operations in Syria suggests, a suppressed enemy communications network provides a tangible contribution to the
success of an entire operation.
Communications personnel at Opuk also came under attack -- this time from saboteurs. As the actions of the sabotage and reconnaissance
groups demonstrated, communications equipment sites are vulnerable, threatening subunits with the loss of several communications channels
at once. New mobile command and control and communications devices, enabling a commander to control a subunit on the move without
using command-staff vehicles or deploying communications sites, are currently being trialed in subunits. Such systems make it possible to
safeguard data-transmission channels at the tactical level, and in the very near future it is expected that this system will be further developed
at a higher level of command and control.
The force-on-force exercise resulted in the fulfillment of tasks to repulse actions by an “enemy” who had landed on the coast and to defend
the coastline. Which of the brigades will prove victorious in the end will be shown by an upcoming detailed analysis of operations during
each stages of the maneuvers. As yet it can only be said that all the planned tasks for the training event were achieved and the subunit
commanders and personnel acquired essential training in conducting modern combat.

OE Watch | December 2018

7

EURASIA
Russia Conducts Brigade/Division Force-On-Force
Exercises
OE Watch Commentary: Although there was much ballyhoo over Russia’s Vostok-2018
maneuvers in September, little has been mentioned in the Russian mass media about large-scale
force-on-force exercises that were reportedly conducted in the Southern Military District in
October. According to the accompanying press releases from the Russian Ministry of Defense,
a number of units participated, including elements from the 8th, 49th, and 58th Combined Arms
Armies, the 22nd Army Corps, the Caspian Flotilla, the Black Sea Fleet, the 4th Air Force and
Air Defense Army, military units directly subordinate to the Southern Military District, and
certain spetsnaz units.
Although in terms of numbers of personnel and scope of operations the Vostok-2018
maneuvers were far larger, the October exercise featured large-scale force-on-force maneuvers.
Apparently, the exercise is the first of its kind in recent memory involving divisions or brigades
conducting exercises against one other. As Colonel-General Aleksandr Dvornikov, the
Commander of the Southern Military District states: “For the first time in exercises of this level,
the opposed forces principle was implemented, in which troops in two operational directions
conducted combat operations against each other.…Prior to the command staff exercise the
troops of the military district conducted just company and battalion tactical exercises.” The
implication of the October exercise is that the Russians believe that large-scale warfare is now
more a possibility than previously thought and that such warfare will not be conducted by
Commander of the Southern Military Colonel-General
Dvornikov Alexander Vladimirovich
large numbers of independent battalion tactical groups, but instead by brigades and divisions/
Source: Mil.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aleksandr_Dvornikov_(2016).jpg.
regiments. Interestingly, the Russians have chosen to pit units against one another, instead of
creating an opposing force (OPFOR) to replicate enemy capabilities. Apparently, the use of a notional OPFOR was either deemed not feasible or
unnecessary for this event. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Military parade on the maneuvers “Vostok-2018” (Tsugol training ground, Trans-Baikal Territory).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=60539@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

8

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Conducts Brigade/Division
Force-On-Force Exercises
Source: “AЧетыре дивизионных и бригадных тактических
учения пройдут в рамках КШУ сгруппировками войск ЮВО
(Four Divisional and Brigade Tactical Exercises to Take Place as
Part of Command-Staff Exercise with Groups of Southern Military
District Troops),” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 18
September 2018. https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.
htm?id=12195952@egNews
It is planned to conduct four divisional and brigade tactical exercises
this fall as part of a major command-staff exercise with groups of
troops from the Southern Military District. Colonel General Aleksandr
Dvornikov, commander of the Southern Military District troops, talked
about the concluding events in the summer training period.
“In the first 10 days of October naval infantry formations from the
22nd Army Corps of the Black Sea Fleet will conduct tactical exercises
in Crimea at the Opuk combined-arms range,” Col. Gen. A. Dvornikov
said.
“From 10 through 21 October the 150th Motorized Rifle Division and
the 20th Motorized Rifle Brigade of the Southern Military District’s 8th
Combined-Arms Army will take part in two-sided tactical exercises at
the Prudboy combined-arms range in Volgograd Oblast, and twosided exercises by the 42nd Motorized Rifle Division and the 136th
Motorized Rifle Brigade of the Southern Military District’s 58th
Combined-Arms Army are planned at four ranges in North Ossetia
and Dagestan,” the commander added on the topic of the bilateral
exercises…
A fourth set of tactical exercises will be one-sided and will involve
military units from the Southern Military District Russian military
base in Armenia at the Alagyaz and Kamkhud mountain ranges.

Source: “Соединения армии Южного военного округа (ЮВО),
дислоцированные в Волгоградской и Ростовской областях
принимают участие в двухстороннем командно-штабном учении
(КШУ) на полигоне Прудбой под Волгоградом (Exercise with
Southern Military District Formations Begins in the Volgograd
Oblast),” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 1 October
2018. https://tvzvezda.ru/news/forces/content/201810011602-mil-ruj6tgf.html
Formations [Соединения] of an army of the Southern Military
District based in the Volgograd and Rostovs oblasts are
participating in an opposed forces command-staff exercise
[командно-штабном учении] at the Prudboy training range near
Volgograd.
Over the course of five days the commanders and the staffs of
the formations will practice a set of tasks to improve practical
skills in the uninterrupted command and control of operations of
subordinate forces during a notional battle and in the organization
and support of interactions between subunits while repelling
notional enemy attacks…
The exercise of formations of the 8th Combined Arms Army of the
Southern Military District will follow a single scenario as the final
exercise of record [итогового учения] of the troops of the Southern
Military District. It has begun simultaneously in seven regions of
southern Russia under the leadership of Colonel-General Aleksandr
Dvornikov, the commander of troops of the district.
…Up to 7,000 servicemen will participate in various stages of the
gaming of tactical episodes and more than 2,500 pieces of military
equipment will be involved, including approximately 20 aircraft and
more than 60 helicopters.

“For the first time in exercises of this level, the opposed forces principle was implemented, in which
troops in two operational directions conducted combat operations against each other.…Prior to the
command staff exercise the troops of the military district conducted just company and battalion tactical
exercises.”
Military parade on the maneuvers “Vostok-2018” (Tsugol training ground, Trans-Baikal Territory).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=60539@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2018

(continued)
9

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Conducts Brigade/Division
Force-On-Force Exercises
Source: “Командующий войсками ЮВО объявил о завершении масштабного КШУ (Commander of Troops of Southern Military District
Announces Completion of Large-Scale Command-Staff Exercise),” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 8 October 2018. https://
function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12198892@egNews
Colonel-General Aleksandr Dvornikov, Commander of Troops of the Southern Military District, has announced the completion of a
command-staff exercise involving troop groupings in the Caspian and Vladikavkaz Operational Directions.
For the first time in exercises of this level the opposed forces principle [принцип двусторонности] was implemented, in which troop
groupings in two operational directions [двух операционных направлениях] conducted combat operations against each other. A leadership
staff, in which a referee unit of more than 200 officers operated, was established to monitor and analyze the decisions of the commanders of
the major commands and below. On-site evaluations were provided of the actions of all participants of the activity, including the execution by
subunits of dozens of combat orders.
The leadership of the exercise paid special attention to evaluating the abilities of the commanders of all levels to make unconventional
decisions in the combat training environment and to operate using the combat experience of modern armed conflicts…
During the tactical operations events, modern methods of combating cruise missiles as members of ship and aviation groups were used with
support provided by shore signals intelligence assets and air defense assets. The destruction of enemy strike UAVs, the repelling of attacks
by sabotage and reconnaissance groups, fire support as components of reconnaissance-strike and reconnaissance-fire loops, and other
scenarios were practiced. Ships of the Caspian Flotilla performed live firings with the Kalibr missile system.
Summarizing the exercise, Colonel-General Aleksandr Dvornikov, Southern Military District Commander of Troops, noted that this method
of conducting exercises both at the operational level, as well as at the command level, was advanced.
Prior to the command staff exercise the troops of the military district conducted just company and battalion tactical exercises. All of these
were of the opposed forces type. During the exercises new methods were tested and modern principles of managing subunits in combat were
used.
“The armies of the district are facing very large, formation-level tactical exercises, in which the opposed forces techniques that have been
developed must continue,” Colonel-General Aleksandr Dvornikov indicated.

Performing engineering tasks in preparation for the Vostok-2018 maneuvers.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=60538@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2018

10

EURASIA
Caspian Sea Flotilla Conducts Amphibious Landing
Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Caspian Sea Flotilla has two naval infantry battalionsthe 414th in Kaspiysk, Dagestan and the 727th in Astrakhan, Astrakhan Oblast. This year, it was
the 727th’s turn to conduct an exercise. The Caspian Sea Flotilla’s amphibious landing ships carry
3-4 vehicles, or up to 100 personnel each. There are no large landing ships in the flotilla, but their
smaller landing ships are all comparatively new, since they have been built since the collapse of
the Soviet Union. The naval infantry is mounted on BTR-82As, which are reliable, modernized,
up-engined wheeled armored personnel carriers with an amphibious capability. The accompanying
excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda (dated 17 October) states that the sea state was at least
Beaufort Scale 2, which made the going choppy. Beaufort Scale 2 is a light breeze of 4-7 mph,
which produces 1-2 foot waves. Apparently, the BTR-82A is amphibious, but not aggressively
amphibious. The landing ships have the option of running the craft on shore and having the vehicles
drive off onto dry land or approaching the shore line and letting the vehicles drive off into the water
and swim to shore. Running the craft on shore lengthens the time that a vessel could come under
fire in an opposed landing, so having the vehicles drive off into the water and swim is preferred
when opposed. The BTR-80 series of vehicles were designed for river crossings, not open sea.
The naval infantry has long been lobbying for another infantry carrier which is larger and more
seaworthy. A new Bumerang-chassis BTR could fill that need.

“Prior to loading, each BTR82 [armored personnel carrier]
underwent a dunking, where
the fighting vehicle enters the
water and floats while its hull
is checked for water-tightness.
Only after passing this test for
dryness and unsinkability will
the APC ascend onto the craft’s
ramp.”

This landing did not include extended sustainment training. In previous Caspian Sea exercises, they have run pipelines from offshore tankers
onto the beachhead and pumped over 400 tons of fuel (see: “Russian Pipeline Troops: Sustaining the Fight Across the Land and From the Sea”,
OE Watch, October 2018). The Caspian Sea naval infantry contingent is being expanded from two battalions into the 177th Naval Infantry
Regiment, as the other excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda notes. Whether it will be a two-battalion or three-battalion regiment remains to
be seen; however, it is a significant expansion of capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Shamil Khayrullin, “Атака с моря на гребне волны (Attack from the Sea on the Crest of a Wave),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 17 October
2018. http://redstar.ru/ataka-s-morya-na-grebne-volny/
Vehicle loading … was conducted at dusk under blackout conditions from the shore of a bay that was sheltered from the wind and the waves.
Prior to loading, each BTR-82 [armored personnel carrier] underwent a dunking, where the fighting vehicle enters the water and floats while
its hull is checked for water-tightness. Only after passing this test for dryness and unsinkability will the APC ascend onto the craft’s ramp….
The amphibious landing ship detachment landing craft with all personnel and equipment aboard sheltered in the bay for the night. The next
morning, the amphibious landing craft division commander received the radio message that the missile ship Dagestan had inflicted a missile
strike with a Kalibr precision missile on the “enemy” command post and communications on the Caspian coast…. The command for the
amphibious landing ship detachment to sail followed.
The fact that the sea was choppy -- at least Beaufort Force two -- became clear when the landing craft left the bay. However, the choppy sea
did not affect the landing force personnel’s upbeat fighting spirit…. The landing ship detachment operated stealthily to mislead the “enemy”
as to its intentions. They conducted a simulated landing at a different part of the coast. At that place, Serna-class amphibious landing craft,
under the cover of a dense smoke screen laid by a Spetsnaz vessel, simulated an approach toward the coast.
The real landing of the wheeled vehicles was conducted further to the south, on a three-kilometer stretch where Spetsnaz divers had cleared
the landing approach of “mines” and “explosive devices”. A hydrographic service detachment set up alignment markers and a sapper
subunit landed and cleared passages through the minefield. In addition, to provide fire support for the landing, the forward air controllers
called in attack helicopters and Su-25 attack aircraft.
The landing of the battalion’s main forces consisted of several tactical groups, each of which functioned independently within its own zone,
thereby confusing the “enemy” (its role was played by a Black Sea Fleet naval infantry company) as to the landing force’s main strike zone.
This frustrated the defensive force’s ability to execute effective fires and a counter attack rapidly.
Finally, the amphibious landing craft ramps were lowered, the first fighting vehicles drove into the water where steep Caspian waves
snatched them up and propelled them to the shore . . . .
On 8 October, in Kaspiysk, the Southern Military District command summed up the results of the large-scale command and staff exercise
in the Caspian area. Particular attention focused on assessing the ability of commanders at all levels to make nonstandard decisions in a
combat-training situation and to act so as to apply the combat experience of modern armed conflicts. The Caspian Flotilla’s operations fully
meet these requirements.... The command and staff exercise’s command personnel demonstrated high-quality operational and tactical skills
and in general, coped with the missions set for the period of the command and staff exercise. However, during their execution, the flotilla
headquarters had not avoided certain errors. For example, a planning-error occurred while assessing the sea’s turbulence at the time of the
landing, and this violated safety standards when the personnel were moving to shore in wheeled vehicles.
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

11

EURASIA
Continued: Caspian Sea Flotilla Conducts Amphibious
Landing Exercise
Source: Leonid Khayremdinov, “В Каспийске будет современная военно-морская база (Kaspiysk will have a modern naval base),”
Krasnaya Zvezda, 17 August 2018. http://redstar.ru/v-kaspijske-budet-sovremennaya-voenno-morskaya-baza/
General of the Army Sergey Shoygu, Russian Federation Minister of Defense, inspected the construction of a new base for the Caspian
Flotilla in Dagestan. Last year, the supreme commander made a strategic decision on the relocation of the Caspian Flotilla Headquarters
from Astrakhan’ to a more southern region – Dagestan. There are two factors behind this decision – geophysical and strategic. Astrakhan’,
situated in the Volga delta, is hydrologically less suitable for ships than Kaspiysk, which is located on the open sea. And the distance from
there to the main operational areas is significantly less– the Caspian future naval base is practically on the equator of the planet’s largest
enclosed lake.
[In August] in Kazakhstan’s Aktau, which, incidentally, is situated practically opposite Russia’s Kaspiysk, the leaders of the Caspian states
(Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Tajikistan) signed the Convention on the Legal Status of the Caspian Sea. It bars the deployment
in the region of any military contingents and bases from third countries. The Russian Navy’s Caspian Flotilla is the guarantor of the
observance of this important part of the document. General of the Army Sergey Shoygu inspected the major construction in Kaspiysk... It
includes building anchorages and berths for the ships; erection of piers and servicing centers; dredging; and shore infrastructure....
The housing and barracks are almost finished, a cultural and leisure center is being erected, a military hospital has begun operation.
Moorages and hydraulic structures, a training area and warehouses are under construction in the adjacent city of Makhachkala to
accommodate the ships, patrol boats, and support vessels.
Minister Shoygu stated “Surveying for the development of the Kaspiyskya Bight is being performed and facilities in the port of Makhachkala
are currently being built as part of the improvement of the system of basing of the flotilla. Major renovation of the buildings and structures
for accommodating the 177th Naval Infantry Regiment, which is being organized this year, is being completed. Training facilities for the
detachment which combats underwater-saboteurs are being provided with amenities. A modern naval base with engineering, navigationhydrographic, and logistic support is being built in Kaspiysk.”

Amphibious assault supports deployment of CSS base on sea shore, Caspian Flotilla (09/2017).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=60386@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2018

12

EURASIA
Young Army for All Schools
OE Watch Commentary: During the Soviet period,
the young communist league (Komsomol), served as the
chief conduit for training school-age children in party
principles. Although the communist teachings have been
largely discredited, as the first accompanying excerpt from
the official Russian news source TASS points out, this past
month, Komsomol celebrated its 100th anniversary with
a concert at the Kremlin Palace. As the article explains,
prior to the collapse of the USSR, “Komsomol was one
of the most popular organizations in the history of the
international youth movement, which was an important
component of the Soviet political system and a starting
point in choosing a profession and a path of creative
realization for about 200 million young people.”
Over the past several years, Kremlin officials have
been searching for a new ideology to both replace the
Komsomol ideology and to inspire and guide Russian
youth while attending school. The second excerpt, also
from TASS, suggests that this new ideology for Russian
young people will be built upon the Yunarmiya (Young
Army) movement, which emphasizes patriotism and
military defense. The article quotes Deputy Defense
Minister Andrei Kartapolov (head of the Main Military
Political Directorate of the Armed Forces), who claims
that “the Yunarmiya movement in 2019 should appear
in all schools of the country.” According to Kartapolov,
what began as a relatively small patriotic organization
for youth in April 2016, now “exceeds 270 thousand
adolescents.” Kartapolov asserts that “the formation
of the Yunarmiya movement, which is by far the most
widespread military-patriotic movement in the country,
has been completed.” (For additional background on this
topic, see: “Russia’s New ‘Young Army’ Movement,” OE
Watch, July 2016). The article goes on to quote the Chief
of the Yunarmiya movement, who announced that in 2019,
the organization will also branch out into “the enterprises
of the Russian defense industry.” While not exactly
specified, the objective of this new Yunarmiya project will
provide vocational training for those students interested
in working “with enterprises of the Russian militaryindustrial complex.”
While many today in Russia still retain a nostalgia
for the ideals of Komsomol, the ideological void which
developed after the collapse of the USSR has slowly, but
surely, filled with renewed calls for patriotism and national
defense. As the modern Russian state becomes ever
more militarized, it is not surprising that the Yunarmiya
movement has now become widespread within the
country’s school system. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“Next year, the Yunarmiya movement
should be represented in all schools of the
country.”

“‘Yunarmiya’ attacks on all fronts.”

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://mil.ru/youtharmy/news/more.htm?id=12093043@egNews&_print=true, CC 4.0.

Source: “Столетие ленинского комсомола отметили концертом в
Кремлевском дворце (Centenary of Leninist Komsomol was celebrated with
a concert in the Kremlin Palace),” TASS, 27 October 2018. https://tass.ru/
kultura/5728526
The centenary of the founding of the All-Union Leninist Communist Youth
Union (VLKSM-Komsomol) was celebrated with a concert at the State Kremlin
Palace….
…The Komsomol is one of the most popular organizations in the history of the
international youth movement, which was an important component of the Soviet
political system and a starting point in choosing a profession and a path of
creative realization for about 200 million young people.
Source: “Минобороны: отряды “Юнармии” появятся во всех школах страны
в 2019 году (Defense Ministry: detachments of “Yunarmiya” to appear in all
schools in 2019),” TASS, 2 November 2018. https://tass.ru/obschestvo/5752050
The Yunarmiya movement in 2019 should appear in all schools of the country,
said Russia’s Deputy Defense Minister, head of the Main Military Political
Directorate of the Armed Forces, Andrei Kartapolov.
“Next year, the Yunarmiya movement should be represented in all schools of
the country. For this to happen, multi-year events should be held at the highest
level with maximum coverage of young people, including with the participation
of youth military-patriotic associations and clubs in the community” Kartapolov
said at the meeting of the headquarters of Yunarmiya. He also noted that in the
two years since the foundation of the movement, enrollment has now exceeded
270 thousand adolescents.
“The formation of the Yunarmiya movement, which is by far the most
widespread military-patriotic movement in the country, has been completed.
Regional headquarters are gaining experience,” added Kartapolov.
In turn, the chief of the headquarters of the military-patriotic movement
Roman Romanenko, noted that the Yunarmiya centers in 2019 will appear at
the enterprises of the Russian defense industry.” In 2019, we are launching a
new project Yunarmiya in the profession. The project is being implemented in
partnership with enterprises of the Russian military-industrial complex. The
goal is to create multi-agency centers on the basis of defense enterprises,” said
Romanenko….
…The All-Russian Children and Youth Military-Patriotic Social Movement
“Yunarmiya” was created on the initiative of the Ministry of Defense in 2016.
Members of the movement are Russians aged 8 to 18 years. The headquarters of
the organization work in all Russian regions.
OE Watch | December 2018

13

EURASIA
Russian Railroad Troop Developments
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s Railroad Troops is a uniformed branch of the MaterialTechnical Support Troops with approximately 28,500 personnel. Although their structure and
command relationships have often been changed, their general core purpose has not, which
is providing technical support, rebuilding, and securing railways (including mine clearance);
constructing new railways for military and (occasionally) civilian use; and managing a few
armored trains in Russia’s Southern Military District. The Railroad Troops are organized into 4
corps (aligned to each military district) and 10 separate brigades (with each brigade having 2-5
battalions). The Russian Federation has a highly developed network of 17 railway lines, with a
total length of more than 86,000 kilometers of track. These tracks are primarily managed and
serviced by the state-owned Russian Railways Company (RZhD), but can be serviced by the
Railroad Troops if necessary. After the annexation of Crimea, the Russian Railroad Troops
reportedly laid 177km of the 214km Zhuravka-Millerovo rail line that was built to bypass
Ukraine. In addition to domestic duties, there has been mention in the Russian mass media of
deployment of Russian Railroad Troops to Syria in order to rebuild the rail infrastructure.
The accompanying excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda features an interview with
Lieutenant General Oleg Kosenkov, Chief of Railway Troops. General Kosenkov discusses how
the Railroad Troops have not only supported military operations, but have also been key in
supporting natural disaster relief efforts. In line with this theme, the accompanying excerpted
article from Izvestiya discusses Russian plans to equip the Railroad Troops with more modern
equipment to better support these efforts. Although the accompanying excerpted article from
Lieutenant General Oleg Kosenkov,
Chief of Railroad Troops.
Vedomosti does not mention the Railroad Troops, the transfer of the Arctic BovanenkovoSource: Mil.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Oleg_Kosenkov.jpg.
Sabetta rail line to federal control will likely mean that the Railroad Troops (which are
accustomed to working in austere conditions) will be deployed to support this effort, thereby lowering construction costs. In sum, the Railroad
Troops are not only seen as a military necessity, but also as an important tool during a humanitarian crisis and (sometimes) an economic enabler.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Competition for the best specialist and the calculation of railway troops in the Eastern Military District (2016).
Source: Mil.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Competition2016-02.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

(continued)
14

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Railroad Troop Developments
“The latest models of special equipment – all terrain vehicles, swamp buggies, amphibious vehicles, selfpropelled pontoons, and others – are arriving in the railroad formations right now.”
Source: Aleksandr Tikhonov, “Переброска войск будет обеспечена (Troop
Deployments Will Be Assured),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 24 October 2018. http://
redstar.ru/perebroska-vojsk-budet-obespechena
[Kosenkov] …our core purpose is technical support and reconstruction
of railways. In the event of railway infrastructure being destroyed, for
example the 4-km major rail bridge (and rail bridges are classed as minor,
intermediate, and major) across the Yenisey river outside Krasnoyarsk, the
most important thing is to rebuild it as quickly as possible so that traffic can
resume. The extent of the damage will inform the decision on whether to
rebuild the bridge along the old center line or make a near or more distant
detour…
Rail transport remains the main method of moving supplies and personnel
in our country. Military transport aviation cannot carry the same amount
of men and materiel as rail can in the same compressed period of time. It
can handle rapid-reaction missions but on the whole, our troop movements
are by rail…So the mission assigned to us was to restore the rail bridge.
Every structure for which we provide technical support has two or three
preprepared rebuilding sites…
[Tikhonov] Oleg Ivanovich, with what kind of outcomes are the Railway
Troops ending the 2018 training year?
[Kosenkov] Regarding what we call practical training work, the troops
completed it by 1 September. Except for a task that was set in February by the
Russian Federation Defense Minister, Army General Sergey Kuzhugetovich
Shoygu, to build a road bridge across the Yenisey outside the town of Kyzyl
to shorten the traveling distance and time for subunits of the 55th Separate
Motorized Rifle Brigade when moving to a training ground. There was no
proper bridge there beforehand -- only a ferry crossing. We were given
until 29 September to build the bridge. That objective was achieved and the
bridge’s opening ceremony and entry into operation took place 12 October.
In 2018 the Railway Troops repaired 60 km of approach tracks not at 47
Defense Ministry sites. These were various types of repair -- raising track, or
reinforcing it…

Source: Roman Kretsul and Aleksey Ramm, “Военные
железнодорожники получили приоритет: Функционал
железнодорожных войск будет существенно расширен
(Military Railroad Personnel Have Received the Priority:
The Railroad Troops’ Functionality Will Be Significantly
Enhanced),” Izvestiya, 14 September 2018. https://
iz.ru/783651/roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm/voennyezheleznodorozhniki-poluchili-prioritet
The Railroad Troops will be reinforced. The Ministry of
Defense has made that decision. The realization of the
concept of their expansion began this year, including the
emphasis will be made on their participation in rescue work
during emergency situations. New equipment is already
arriving in the troops. During the course of the reforms of
the end of the last decade, the status and role of the Railroad
Troops were appreciably reduced…However, as a result, the
Defense Department came to the conclusion on the need for
these formations, which not only ensure the deployment of
troops, but are also involved in the construction and repair
of railroad tracks. The fact that the railroad troops proved
themselves after the events of 2014 in Ukraine played a
leading role in this…
The Railroad Troops’ functionality and technical
capabilities will be significantly enhanced, a Ministry of
Defense spokesman reported to Izvestiya. Not only the
support of transport movements, but also rescue work during
emergency situations and the elimination of catastrophes
will be part of their missions. The latest models of special
equipment – all terrain vehicles, swamp buggies, amphibious
vehicles, self-propelled pontoons, and others – are arriving
in the railroad formations right now. The troops should
undergo complete reequipping by 2020…

Source: Olga Adamchuk and Artur Toporkov, “«Газпром» и РЖД вместе могут построить самую северную железную дорогу России
(Gazprom and Russian Railways Together May Construct Russia’s Most Northerly Railroad),” Vedomosti, 29 October 2018. https://www.
vedomosti.ru/business/articles/2018/10/29/784911-zheleznuyu-dorogu
A year ago President Vladimir Putin said that enterprises operating in the Arctic were already producing 10 percent of Russia’s GDP. This
may be why the government is thinking of relaunching one of the biggest transportation projects – Russia’s most northerly railroad to the
port of Sabetta. In order to construct this railroad (Bovanenkovo-Sabetta), it will be transferred to the federal level: The federal budget will
safeguard the investors, an official and three participants in the negotiations said…
The railroad is needed to ensure the delivery of freight to places of extraction – according to the YaNAO Government’s data, investment
in opening up Yamal and the neighboring Gydan Peninsula will come to R7 trillion by 2035 – and also to move freight from the Northern
Latitudinal Railroad, along which some 20 oil and gas fields are located, to the Northern Sea Route.
The railroad will cost R113-115 billion, someone else familiar with the talks’ progress confirmed. Two talks participants promised that the
new planning decisions will produce a saving: It will be a single-track railroad, without an embankment for a second track. The throughput
capacity will be 8-10 million tons a year, the Governor’s spokesman said. Gazprom’s participation in the concession is logical: The company
has already constructed the Obskaya-Bovanenkovo-Karskaya section employing technologies for permafrost…

OE Watch | December 2018

15

EURASIA
Northern Fleet Army Corps Command and Control Element
OE Watch Commentary: Russian Army Corps
are smaller than US Corps and are usually part of
a combined command as part of a naval fleet. The
Northern Fleet is Russia’s largest and most powerful
fleet with responsibilities for defending the Arctic
and maintaining Russia’s primary strategic nuclear
submarine strike capability. The 14th Army Corps is
part of the Northern Fleet and controls a ground forces
coastal defense motorized rifle brigade, an Arctic
motorized rifle brigade and a naval infantry brigade.
This accompanying article, excerpted from a larger
article on Russian Arctic ground forces, addresses
the composition and training of the corps’ command
and control battalion. It is designed to deploy support
elements to multiple Arctic deployments simultaneously
and maintain constant communication with corps
and fleet headquarters. The battalion must be able
to communicate with naval, ground, air, air defense
and coast guard elements. Considering the size of the
Northern Fleet’s area of operations, the difficulties of
communications in the Arctic and the need to mesh
with the different services, this battalion has a lot on its
plate. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Northern Fleet Army Corps recruits departing to the military ranges in the Murmansk Region.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12127838@egNews, CC 4.0.

“The Northern Fleet’s Army Corps has its own Separate Command and Control Battalion.

It is the
responsibility of the battalion…to deploy the command and control posts … of the corps’ ground forces, to give
them technical and rear support, to organize communications, to carry out reconnaissance, and to control
artillery fire.”

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

16

EURASIA
Continued: Northern Fleet Army Corps Command and
Control Element
Source: Anna Korolkova, “Мощная группировка сил (Powerful grouping of forces),” Na Strazhe Zapolyarya, 28 September 2018.
The zone of responsibility is vast. However, the forces are commensurate: This large formation incorporates the [200th] Separate
Pechengskaya Order of Kutuzov Motorized Rifle Brigade, the [80th] Arctic Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade, and the specially formed
Separate Command and Control Battalion. The Separate Kirkenes Red-Banner [61st] Naval Infantry Brigade and the Northern Fleet’s
Tactical Group based on the New Siberian Islands Archipelago are operationally subordinated to the corps….
The Northern Fleet’s Army Corps has its own Separate Command and Control Battalion. It is the responsibility of the battalion…to deploy
the command and control posts … of the corps’ ground forces, to give them technical and rear support, to organize communications, to carry
out reconnaissance, and to control artillery fire.
The subunit is commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Sergey Krivchenko. According to him, in the 18 months since the battalion was created, it
has become a unified collective that is capable of fulfilling its missions exactly and on time.
Within its structure there are two communications companies, two separate communications platoons, a guard platoon, and a support
platoon. The personnel of the latter two are responsible for feeding and quartering servicemen and guarding the Army Corps Staff and
officials. The guard platoon under the command of Sergeant Igor Zubarev, acting platoon commander, was deemed one of the best in the
battalion based on the results of the winter training period.
When conducting drills, training sessions, and exercises of various formats and levels, the communications subunits’ duties include
deploying the command post, which exercises continuous leadership of the force groupings and observes the battlefield, and also the Army
Corps’ communications hub. The mobile communications hubs must be highly mobile and capable of being quickly deployed, taken down,
and moved and must ensure communications not only on the spot but also on the move.
Captain Vladimir Boyko, commander of a communications company, said that the communications hub consists of several vehicles equipped
with communications systems for various purposes. All of this mobile equipment has to be delivered to the designated area, deployed,
camouflaged, tuned and must then maintain steady communications around the clock.
When it was being formed, the Command and Control Battalion was provided with the latest models of equipment that meets the
requirements of protection, quality, reliability, stability, and secrecy of communications.
To resolve its most important tasks, the Northern Fleet Army Corps Separate Command and Control Battalion must operate its equipment to
a high standard and improve the existing communications and command and control systems. So it is no wonder that the subunit has a tough
selection process for its new personnel…. All the battalion’s servicemen undergo training either in their own subunit or in communications
training centers.
The standard of vocational-official training of leadership personnel, officers and subunit commanders, is constantly being raised, as is the
improvement of their practical preparedness, skills, abilities, and professional qualities. The most important thing is practical experience,
which is gained during field exercises.
The battalion commander, Lt. Col. Sergey Krivchenko, stated that “Throughout the training year we conduct tactical special exercises, we
hold a final control drill each month, and toward the end of the summer training period the battalion conducts a field exercise with control
drills and a communications exercise under the direction of the fleet’s communications chief. At the end of the year there is a final check for
the entire training year.”
Maj. Gen. Dmitriy Krayev, Commander of the Northern Fleet Army Corps, said that, as part of the 2018 training plan, during the winter
training period the subunit’s subordinates conducted 87 company and battalion tactical exercises (with and without live firing) including
exercises on the islands of the Novaya Zemlya and New Siberian Islands Archipelagos in cooperation with the Kola Flotilla … and the
Northern Fleet’s Air Force and Air Defense Army. In all, more than 1,050 training events involving small arms and crew-served weapons
firing and approximately 820 motor movements took place in the corps.
Forces of the Northern Fleet Army Corps were also involved in the Vostok-2018 Operational-Strategic Command and Staff Exercise. On the
eve of the large-scale maneuvers, a combined tactical exercise of forces of the Northern Fleet’s Arctic Group took place with Airborne Troops
in Tiksi Bay. Subunits moved to the exercise both by air, by military transport aircraft of the 45th Air Force and Air Defense Army and the
Russian Aerospace Forces, and by sea – by a detachment of warships of the Kola Flotilla….

OE Watch | December 2018

17

EURASIA
Cold Weather Tor-M2DT Air Defense System Training
for Arctic Duty
OE Watch Commentary: A surface-to-air missile battalion that
has been enjoying the balmy weather in Yeysk, near the Crimea, will
spend its Christmas much closer to the North Pole. The battalion is
being refitted and trained in the new Arctic variant of the Tor-M2 (SA15 Gauntlet) as the accompanying excerpted article reports. The TorM2DT is a short-to-medium range system that carries 16 missiles and
can engage out to 12 kilometers with an altitude engagement that can
range from 10 meters to 10 kilometers. It can reportedly engage four
targets simultaneously while on the move. Its radar is effective out to
25 kilometers. It is designed to defeat cruise missiles, guided bombs,
high-performance aircraft, helicopters, guided missiles and unmanned
aerial vehicles. There are normally 12 launchers in a Tor battalion. Its
articulated carrier has proven reliable in the Arctic. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“The surface-to-air missile system’s vehicles
have a unique all-terrain capability -- they can
cross ditches and open water, and can maintain
their performance in more than -50° Centigrade
[-58° Fahrenheit].”

Source: “Northern Fleet Combined-Arms Formation To Receive
First Battalion of Arctic Tor-M2DT Surface-To-Air Missile Systems
in November,” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 25
October 2018.
Lieutenant General Aleksandr Leonov, chief of the Russian
Federation Armed Forces Air Defense Troops, announced this
during a conversation with journalists. Under the state defense
order, the manufacturer will transfer the systems to the Northern
Fleet Combined-Arms Formation on the territory of the Air Defense
Troops’ 726th Training Center in the city of Yeysk [Ейск] in the
Kuban’. Once the systems have been transferred to a surface-to-air
missile battalion’s combat crews, the servicemen will have to undergo
retraining, perform combat teamwork training, and carry out an
operational readiness exercise [boveyye stykovochnyye strelby].
The Tor-M2DT is an Arctic variant of the Tor-M2 system transported
on the DT-30M articulated tracked transporter. The surface-toair missile system’s vehicles have a unique all-terrain capability
-- they can cross ditches and open water, and can maintain their
performance in more than -50° Centigrade [-58° Fahrenheit]. They
are able to engage targets just a few seconds after detecting them.
Surface-to-air missile systems from the Tor-M2 family are currently
the most effective means of combating all types of airborne targets,
including low-signature unmanned aerial vehicles and precision
weapon warheads

9K331MDT Tor-M2DT air defence system on DT-30PM transporter chassis.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Blog, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Victory-Day-Rehearsal-in-Moscow-3May2017/i-fXgTk98, CC 4.0. (https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Copyright-policy).

OE Watch | December 2018

18

EURASIA
Spinning International Intrigues
OE Watch Commentary: When Syrian air defense
forces inadvertently shot down a Russian IL-20
reconnaissance aircraft in mid-September, killing all
15 officers aboard, most of the major Russian-language
media attributed the disaster to either what President
Putin claimed was the result of a chain of tragic accidental
circumstances or the connivance of Israeli pilots, who
allegedly avoided the Syrian air defense by maneuvering
close to the IL-20. Instead of allowing anti-Israeli
propaganda to saturate the Russian information space,
the Kremlin-sponsored media responded with extensive
coverage regarding the deployment of the more advanced
S-300 system to strengthen Syrian air defense, though this
propaganda continued through other outlets.

Source:
‫ضيفا الحلقة الخبير العسكري رضا أحمد شريقي؛ واملحلل السياسي الروسي أندريه أونتيكوف‬
Nizar Bush, “Seminar Guest: military expert Rida Ahmad Shurayqi and Russian
political analyst Andrey Ontikov,” Sputnik, 4 October 2018. https://goo.gl/r8ETZf
Moscow’s patience with Israeli unruliness, attacks on Syrian territories, and
targeting of the positions of the Syrian Army that Russia supports in fighting
global terrorism has run out. The downing of the Russian Il-20 aircraft off the
Syrian coast -- caused by Israeli aggression on Syrian territories in an area
not far from the Russian Humaymim Air Base -- prompted Russian decisiveness
to respond to Israel and every other country thinking about attacking Syrian
territory. Thus, President Vladimir Putin made the decision to provide the Syrian
Army with the S-300 system that will protect Syrian airspace from missile attacks
or airstrikes….
…Syrian military expert Rida Ahmad Shurayqi said: “It must be pointed out
that the Israeli entity is not only the enemy of Syria and the Arab nation -- it
constitutes the advanced base for the Western camp, in general, and the United
States, in particular. The Israeli Air Force is the arm of this imperialist Western
camp that constantly targets our region. The downing of the Russian Il-20
aircraft is undoubtedly a conspiracy, prompting President Putin to insist on an
investigation because everything that happened was led by the United States.
What Israel is doing is not only aimed at Syria but also against the Russian
friends in Syria, in particular, and the axis confronting the United States, in
general…

Over the past 10-15 years, by creating numerous
foreign-language media outlets, the Kremlin has pursued
an effective strategy to ensure that its voice is heard
within the global information space. These multi-lingual,
Kremlin-sponsored media stations like the notable RT and
Sputnik not only permit the Russian leadership to reach
an international audience, but also allow them to tailor
their message for a specific audience. The accompanying
excerpt from an interview in the Russian-funded Sputnik
Arabic news agency, which discussed the IL-20 disaster, illustrates how the Kremlin can spin a story to its own advantage.

The article begins by making clear that “the downing of the Russian Il-20 aircraft off the Syrian coast [was] caused by Israeli aggression on
Syrian territories.” The article goes on to explain the motive behind the “Israeli aggression,” by asserting that “the Israeli state is not only the
enemy of Syria and the Arab nation -- it constitutes the advanced base for the Western camp, in general, and the United States, in particular.
The Israeli Air Force is the arm of this imperialist Western camp that constantly targets our region. The downing of the Russian Il-20 aircraft
is undoubtedly a conspiracy, prompting President Putin to insist on an investigation because everything that happened was led by the United
States.”
While the Kremlin would never allow the above paragraph to be published on its official website, it does promote this type of incendiary
rhetoric on the international media outlets it controls. Global journalistic enterprises, like Sputnik-Arabic, not only allow the Russian leadership
to avoid blame for a disaster like the IL-20 destruction, but show how the Kremlin works to spin even the most negative story into positive PR to
support their geopolitical objectives. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…The downing of the Russian Il-20 aircraft is undoubtedly a conspiracy, prompting President Putin to
insist on an investigation because everything that happened was led by the United States…”

Russian Air Force Ilyushin Il-20 (2012).

Source: Kirill Naumenko [CC BY-SA 3.0 GFDL 1.2, CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) ], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Russian_Air_Force_Ilyushin_Il-20_Naumenko-1.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

19

EURASIA
Russian – Ukrainian Regional Conflict Seemingly
Pervades Spiritual Plane
OE Watch Commentary: Within the framework of
the ongoing regional conflict with Russia, the Ukrainian
government recently achieved a long sought-after goal
regarding the Ukrainian Orthodox Church: Ecumenical
Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople (“first among equals”
in the Eastern Orthodox faith) took the first step in formally
granting autocephaly (independence) to the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church, which had operated under the jurisdiction
of the Russian Orthodox Church since 1686.
The Ukrainian Orthodox Church has been divided within
three distinct groups since the end of the Cold War, the
largest of which remained under the jurisdiction of the
Moscow Patriarchate (the Russian Orthodox Church). In
some regions within the far west of Ukraine, the Uniate or
“Greek Catholic” Church, not the Orthodox Church, still
predominates; however, the overriding majority of Ukrainians
belong to the Orthodox Church. The Ecumenical Patriarchate,
in conjunction with the announcement of the granting of
autocephaly, also openly declared its wishes that the parties
involved do not resort to physical or any other retaliatory acts
in the aftermath of its announcement. The Russian Orthodox
Church then formally severed ties with the Ecumenical
Patriarchate of Constantinople, causing what could be the
largest schism in the church since 1054.
The Russia Orthodox Church maintains close ties with the
Russian government. President Putin regularly showcases the
connectivity between the spiritual and the secular in modern
Russia and the Russian Ministry of Defense has announced
plans to build what will be the world’s third tallest Orthodox
Cathedral in Moscow, dedicated to the armed forces. This
follows the announcement almost 10 years ago, by thenPresident Medvedev, of the introduction of the military
position of chaplain within the Russian armed forces.

“Meanwhile, the Russian Orthodox Church announced
the complete cessation of Eucharistic communion with the
Patriarchate of Constantinople.”

Petro Poroshenko and Patriarch Bartholomew sign an agreement “On cooperation and
interaction between Ukraine and the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.”
Source: Адміністрація Президента України [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Порошенко_і_п._Варфоломій.jpg.

Source: “Сербская православная церковь не признала решение
Константинополя по Украине (The Serbian Orthodox Church did not
recognize the decision by Constantinople on Ukraine),” Komsomolskaya
Pravda, 12 November 2018. https://kp.ua/politics/622498-serbskaiapravoslavnaia-tserkov-ne-pryznala-reshenye-konstantynopolia-po-ukrayne
The Serbian Orthodox Church did not recognize Constantinople’s decision on
Ukraine.
… the (Serbian Orthodox Bishops’) Council regrets that the Patriarchate
of Constantinople made a canonically unfounded decision to rehabilitate
and recognize the two leaders of the Ukrainian splinter groups (the leaders
of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate and the Ukrainian
Autocephalous Orthodox Church)

As the Ukrainian government continues to consolidate
this recent spiritual step forward – President Poroshenko and
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew signed an agreement
on cooperation and coordination in Istanbul (formerly
This was preceded by a synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate (of
Constantinople) on 4 November – other national Orthodox
churches have voiced opinions on the granting of autocephaly Constantinople), which took place on 11 October… the synod supported
the provision of autocephaly for the Ukrainian church…Meanwhile, the
to Ukraine. The Serbian Orthodox Church (having its
Russian Orthodox Church announced the complete cessation of Eucharistic
own issues with the Macedonian Orthodox Church, which
communion with the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
unilaterally announced its independence from the Serbian
Church in 1967) openly opposed Constantinople’s decision
to grant Ukraine autocephaly in mid-October. According to the accompanying excerpted article, the Serbian Orthodox Church also noted its
disagreement with the Ecumenical Patriarchate’s decision to rehabilitate the religious leaders of the two Ukrainian Orthodox groups not under
the Moscow Patriarchate’s jurisdiction. This is important to note as the Serbian government continues to increase its security cooperation with
Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Sarafian)

OE Watch | December 2018

20

EURASIA
Negative Military Reporting
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past several years, the Kremlin and the Russian
Ministry of Defense have become more restrictive regarding the publication of
negative military information. Not only has material dealing with soldier casualties
been classified, but there is a growing general tendency to avoid reporting any adverse
material. Journalists are wary of being charged with revealing “state secrets,” while
military personnel have been prohibited from using social media. There are still a
handful of independent Russian sources who are willing to cover both the positive and
negative in their military reporting. The excerpted recent blog entry describing the
hazards of Russians volunteering to fight in Ukraine, from the relatively well-known
military blogger, Denys Mokrushin (see: https://twower.livejournal.com/), serves as an
apt example.
Mokrushin’s entry describes how a patriotic Russian military pensioner, decided to
volunteer “to defend the Donbass in 2016,” only to discover that “the Russian military
registration and enlistment office suspended the payment of his military pension on the
grounds that he had entered military service in another state.” After publishing this story
on his blog, Mokrushin was accused of either posting false information and/or “selling
out to the Ukrainians for 30 pieces of silver.” To prove the story was true, Mokrushin
asked the pensioner-volunteer to create a short video to describe his plight (see: https://
youtu.be/tKGuOzumDtI). In the video, the pensioner displays his passport and the letter
he received from the Volgograd Military District informing him that his retirement
benefits had been canceled. He ends by appealing to his audience for help in restoring
these benefits.
Map of the war in Donbass (2014).

After the video was posted, some readers commented that the Russian bureaucracy was Source: User:Marktaff, ZomBear [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via
Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_the_war_in_Donbass.svg.
more powerful than the appeals to patriotism which had initially encouraged volunteers
like this pensioner to defend Russian interests in the Donbas. Others suggested that this pensioner had indeed broken the law by serving as a
mercenary in a foreign state and that he did not deserve a military pension. A few readers apologized to Mokrushin for questioning his integrity,
while others insisted he was still serving Ukrainian interests by publishing such negative material.
Four-plus years ago, Russia began its not-so surreptitious military involvement in southeastern Ukraine. At the time, using its extensive media
resources, the Kremlin appealed to Russians to help defend their ethnic brothers in the Donbas region. Now that this conflict has turned into
an ugly stalemate, this same Kremlin-sponsored media appears reluctant to help those who responded to their call to arms. If nothing else, it
appears that besides becoming mired in the Donbas region, this conflict continues to have a chilling effect upon Russian military reporting. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“A few days ago, I wrote that one Russian military pensioner, who after leaving to defend the Donbass
in 2016, the Russian military registration and enlistment office suspended the payment of his military
pension on the grounds that he had entered military service in another state…. ”

Source: Denys Mokrushin, “Про фейк, который не фейк (Regarding the fake, which is not fake),” Twower, Live Journal blog post, 29
October 2018. https://twower.livejournal.com/2314120.html
A few days ago, I wrote that one Russian military pensioner, who after leaving to defend the Donbass in 2016, the Russian military
registration and enlistment office suspended the payment of his military pension on the grounds that he had entered military service in
another state….
Some commentators have doubted the authenticity of this information. Someone wrote sympathetically to me that I bought into a primitive
fake of Ukrainian propaganda. Someone actually accused me that I intentionally spread this fake, having sold out for 30 pieces of silver. Like,
“they paid you scoundrel, so you sold your soul to Ukraine.” Then I asked this serviceman of the DPR [Donetsk Peoples Republic] to record
a video where he will confirm that this is all true and will show the letter from the military enlistment office…. Since the man was on duty, he
was only able to record a video today.
Reader Comments:
Imperia mir
In short, so. I am a “sympathetic commentator” and I offer you my sincere apologies. Still, the feeling of something incomprehensible in this
story does not leave, but really, only a bureaucrat could make such a mess in a person’s heart. Disgusting.
sh00zz
…alas, there is the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. Article 359. Mercenary part three: Participation of a mercenary in an armed
conflict or military actions is punishable by imprisonment for a term of three to seven years with restriction of freedom for up to one year…
OE Watch | December 2018

21

EURASIA
CSTO Peacekeeping in Ukraine?
OE Watch Commentary: Some Russian commentators
have referred to the conflict in southeastern Ukraine as
a “suitcase without any handles,” suggesting that the
Kremlin has helped to create a situation which will not
be easily moved. The current Kremlin strategy appears to
be in a holding pattern, perhaps hoping that there will be
a more pliable government in Kiev after the presidential
elections scheduled for March 2019. In the interim,
as the accompanying excerpt from the centrist daily
Nezavisimaya Gazeta points out, Kremlin authorities are
beginning to lay the groundwork for a possible Russianled peacekeeping operation into the Donbas region
under the auspices of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO).
The article begins by describing that one of the
training objectives for “the Enduring Brotherhood 2018
maneuvers” (which took place 30 October-2 November),
included “the rehearsal of tasks on the territory of a state
that is not a member of collective defense.” Although
CSTO members have conducted joint training exercises
for the past decade, they have never been deployed to
handle a crisis within a member state (Armenia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Tajikistan). Despite
this lack of genuine peacekeeping experience, the article
states that CSTO forces might be deployed to handle
“the instability resulting from sanctions and from the
economic crisis in the former USSR countries [which]
may lead to a change of their political regimes.” Given
that the Kremlin just recently enacted sanctions against
the government in Kiev, it is clear which “former USSR
country” the article is referring to. Indeed, the article
specifically states that “the southeast of Ukraine” lies
within “the CSTO’s zone of responsibility.”
To buttress the argument that the CSTO must be
prepared for a Ukraine peacekeeping contingency, the
article asserts that “Ukraine and the NATO countries
now want to deploy peacekeeping forces in the conflict
area in the Donets Basin.” While such an assertion might
be surprising to officials in Brussels, it reflects Kremlin
concerns that Western participation in a future Donbas
peacekeeping mission would likely limit the Kremlin’s
ability to move the Donbas “suitcase” into Russian
territory. The article concludes with comments from a
Russian military expert who suggests that Russia will
be able “to effectively defend its geopolitical interests in
the countries of the former USSR through mechanisms
linked to the collective defense system.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“…in the context of attempts by the West to isolate Russia, it
[Russia] is finding opportunities, as previously, to effectively
defend its geopolitical interests in the countries of the former
USSR through mechanisms linked to the collective defense
system…”
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Войска ОДКБ нацелились на Кавказ и Донбасс
(The CSTO Troops Have Targeted the Caucasus and the Donbas),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 30 October 2018. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2018-10-30/2_7343_odkb.
html
The scenario of the Enduring Brotherhood-2018 maneuvers suggests the
rehearsal of tasks on the territory of a state that is not a member of collective
defense.
On Tuesday [30 October], the Enduring Brotherhood-2018 (NB-2018)
peacekeeping maneuvers of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
began in the Urals. The collective defense system’s member-countries have
been regularly conducting such exercises for almost 10 years. Although the
CSTO peacekeeping forces have not been used in a real situation for the entire
post-Soviet period. True, if one evaluates the Enduring Brotherhood-2018
scenario, they are already prepared for “an operation by the CSTO Collective
Peacekeeping Forces (CPF) in the Central Asian region, under a UN Security
Council resolution, on a CSTO non-member-state’s territory.”
…Such representative participation by the security structures of the Russian
Federation’s allied countries suggests that, first, the CSTO leadership attaches
special importance to integrated performance of missions for ensuring the
internal security not only of the states that belong to the collective security
system, but also of the post-Soviet space overall. And, second, it is possible that
the instability resulting from sanctions and from the economic crisis in the former
USSR countries may lead to a change of their political regimes. For Russia
and its allies, such a scenario is unacceptable. And, evidently, for this reason a
police factor is present during the rehearsal of the Enduring Brotherhood-2018
maneuvers.
The CSTO press release reports that, in the course of fulfilling the Enduring
Brotherhood-2018 assignments, the troops, “in cooperation with militia (police)
personnel, will rehearse CSTO CPF subunits’ operations in executing tasks
for countering mass disturbances.” Such tasks -- according to the scenario
of maneuvers -- will be rehearsed in a state that is “not a CSTO member.”
Currently, except for Afghanistan, there are no countries in the region in which
there can be mass riots and where reconciliation operations are required.
However, within the CSTO’s zone of responsibility, there are many such zones in
the post-Soviet space -- they are the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, the southeast of
Ukraine, and Transnistria.
The expert community believes that such CSTO CPF missions may be performed
not only on Central Asian region territory, but also in any location within the
post-Soviet space. As is known, Ukraine and the NATO countries now want to
deploy peacekeeping forces in the conflict area in the Donets Basin….
…Military expert Lieutenant General Yuriy Netkachev commented to NG that
“in the context of attempts by the West to isolate Russia, it [Russia] is finding
opportunities, as previously, to effectively defend its geopolitical interests in the
countries of the former USSR through mechanisms linked to the collective defense
system and to bilateral military contacts with the Commonwealth of Independent
States countries.”

OE Watch | December 2018

22

EURASIA
Changes for the Collective Security Treaty Organization
OE Watch Commentary: The Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) has
undergone several significant changes since its creation. Notable changes include the
creation of a collective operation reaction force (consisting of contributions of battalions
from member states and Russian aircraft posted in Kyrgyzstan) and revising the
organization’s articles to better respond to a conflict involving a member state and allow
for the deployment of a peacekeeping force through a UN mandate. The accompanying
excerpted article looks at the results of the recent CSTO summit held 8 November in
Astana, Kazakhstan and it notes a couple of changes as well as issues that have yet to be
resolved.
The article from Fergana, a Russian-language news website based in Moscow with
reporters in Central Asia, includes a statement from the leaders of CSTO members
claiming that they “have agreed to equip the collective forces with modern types of
weapons and military equipment.” CSTO members already have the benefit of purchasing
weapons and equipment from the Russian defense at lower prices usually reserved for
the Russian armed forces, but no other details about equipping the collective force appear
in the article. The article goes on to note the establishment of the CSTO Crisis Response
Center, which will work “to identify potential threats to security.” The center had been a
couple of years in the making and represents some of the organization’s efforts to improve
intelligence sharing on threats. This comes alongside the announcement that before the
summit, “members agree to create a unified list of terrorist organizations.”
While the article includes the changes within the CSTO, it also mentions that member
states “did not agree on a plan for the creation of a unified air defense and missile defense
system” and could not reach an agreement for the next secretary general. The resolution
to create a unified air defense system could happen in the next year or so, but the issue of
the secretary general has been more contentious. Armenian General Yuri Khachaturov
was officially removed as the secretary general in early November as he faces charges in
his home country for his involvement in a civil unrest incident in 2008. The appointment
of the next secretary general is causing a dispute between CSTO members, particularly
Armenia and Belarus. The CSTO members agreed to resolve the appointment of the next
secretary general at another summit in early December and it could be a good indicator of
the organization’s future direction. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: “Лидеры стран ОДКБ договорились
оснастить коллективные силы современным
оружием (Leaders of the CTSO countries
have agreed to equip the collective forces with
modern weapons),” Fergana, 9 November 2018.
https://www.fergananews.com/news/33923
The leaders of the countries of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) have
agreed to equip the collective forces with
modern types of weapons and military
equipment…In the declaration, the full text of
which has been posted on the website of the
Kremlin, states that it will raise the effectiveness
of joint measures for operations and training.
The President of Kazakhstan noted the section
on military cooperation. According to him,
member states completed the reform of the CSTO
headquarters and are now finishing preparations
for the full time operation of the CSTO Crisis
Response Center, which is designated to identify
potential threats to security…
At the same time, member states of the
organization did not agree on a plan for the
creation of a unified air defense and missile
defense system…It was also not agreed on who
will become the new secretary general of the
organization…
…Earlier, on October 30, at the meeting of the
(CSTO) parliamentary assembly in Moscow,
the members agree to create a unified list of
terrorist organizations…

“At the same time, member states of the organization did not agree on a plan for the creation of a unified
air defense and missile defense system.”

CSTO Collective Security Council meeting in narrow format (November 2018).
Source: Russian Presidency, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/59068/photos/56421, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | December 2018

23

EURASIA
Armenian’s Fighter Acquisition Complete?
OE Watch Commentary: Armenia’s Minister of Defense David Tonoyan
has noted several areas of reform that are needed for the country’s armed
forces since assuming his position earlier this year. He has previously
stated that there was a priority on the acquisition of a new multirole fighter
and as the accompanying excerpted articles report, it continues to be
discussed. The articles, from the government news agency Armenpress,
report from an interview with Tonoyan on a military loan from Russia for
$100 million and the possibility of acquiring the Swedish JAS 39 Gripen
(manufactured by Saab). Tonoyan spoke of “details on the supplies that are
being negotiated right now” as part of the loan, as well as another loan that
“does not have to be taken out with Russia.” The Armenian government,
even prior to Tonoyan’s tenure as defense minister, stated that it would
look for alternative partners instead of acquiring weapons and equipment
largely from Russia. It has been reported that the Armenian government
received a proposal on the Swedish JAS 39, but as Tonoyan stated: “There
has been no decision on the Gripen. There are other proposals from
other partners.” The acquisition of the Russian Su-30 has previously
come up in discussions, but Tonoyan mentioned nothing about it in this
interview. There has been no indication that the $100 million military
loan from Russia is tied to the acquisition of new fighters, but the Russian
government has worked to maintain close security cooperation with
the Armenian government over the years. Tonoyan has not stated when
the government will announce its final decision on acquiring multirole
fighters, but it appears that a deal is moving closer to being finalized. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“There are other proposals from other
partners.”
Source: “Подписан Военный кредитный договор с РФ в
размере 100 миллионов долларов (The military loan agreement
with the Russian Federation in the amount of $100 million
has been signed),” Armenpress, 12 November 2018. https://
armenpress.am/rus/news/954230.html
…“We have not completed negotiations for supplies. The
agreement is signed. There are some details on the supplies that
are being negotiated right now,” (Tonoyan) said…the Ministry of
Defense is exploring the possibilities of a new military loan. He
noted the loan does not have to be taken out with Russia.
Source: “В МО Армении нет решения о приобретении
шведских истребителей Gripen: Давид Тоноян (There is no
decision in the Defense Ministry of Armenia on the acquisition
of the Swedish fighter Gripen: David Tonoyan),” Armenpress, 12
November 2018. https://armenpress.am/rus/news/954191.html
No decision on the acquisition of Swedish fighters was made…
(said) Defense Minister of Armenia David Tonoyan, commenting
on the acquisition of the Swedish JAS-39 fighter…“There has
been no decision on the Gripen. There are other proposals from
other partners…”

Saab JAS-39 Gripen (Czech Air Force).

Source: © Milan Nykodym, Czech Republic [CC BY-SA 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saab_JAS-39_Gripen_(Czech_Air_Force)_(6417854291).jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

24

EURASIA
Estonian Analysis of Russian Threat
OE Watch Commentary: Before the instances of Russian military
involvement in Georgia or Ukraine, Estonia fell victim to a Russiansponsored cyber-attack in April 2007. This attack not only exploited
existing tensions between ethnic Russians and Estonians by spreading
false information about the status of a Soviet-era statue, but also damaged
Estonia’s digital infrastructure. The response from Estonia and NATO
was to establish the Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of Excellence in
Tallinn. As described in the accompanying excerpt from the Estonian
news source ERR.ee, this response was discussed in a recent interview
with the outgoing Commander of the Defense Forces in Estonia, General
Riho Terras, who commented that “Estonia has never been as safe as it is
today.”
According to General Terras, while NATO and the West remain
peaceful, “Russia considers itself to be in war.” He goes on to describe
Kremlin behavior as resembling “a bigheaded bully in a park in the
dark who is not really equal with his opponent and who, for that reason,
wants to frighten [his opponent].” General Terras asserts that instead of
confronting NATO directly, which is impossible for Russia as it does not
have the same strength, Putin resorts to “some action below the fog line
which can certainly not be called war yet.”
General Terras states that the Western response to these threats from
Russia is “to ensure that Putin also believes in NATO.” Following the
aggressive actions Russia has taken in recent years, Terras is increasingly
confident that Estonia is safe from a military attack from Russia because
Putin “believes in [NATO] today much more than he believed in it five
years ago.” End OE Watch Commentary (Dimmick)

“[Sildam] What do you think, does Russian
President Vladimir Putin believes in NATO?
[Terras] I think that he believes in it today much
more than he believed in it five years ago.”

Source: Thomas Sildam, “Kindral Terras: nüüd usub Putin
NATO-sse rohkem kui viie aasta eest (General Terras: Putin now
believes in NATO more than five years ago),” ERR.ee, 23 October
2018. https://www.err.ee/871523/kindral-terras-nuud-usub-putinnato-sse-rohkem-kui-viie-aasta-eest
[Sildam] Is Estonia a frontline state?
[Terras] No, definitely not. Estonia has never been as safe as it is
today, throughout all those harsh storms of the world.
[Sildam] In response to a question whether Russia intends to
attack Estonia, you have said: “I do not know that. But I believe
in NATO. And our main task is to ensure that Putin also believes
in NATO.” What do you think, does Russian President Vladimir
Putin believes in NATO?
[Terras] I think that he believes in it today much more than he
believed in it five years ago.
[Sildam] As the commander of the defense forces you have said
that “you cannot steamroll our state within a few hours.” How
long will it take?
[Terras] The last time, the fight lasted for 50 years but we
regained our independence.
[Sildam] How likely do you think it is that Estonia will come
under a military attack?
[Terras] The probability exists but I cannot calculate the
percentage. The most important thing is to do everything to
minimize this probability.
[Sildam] You once compared Putin’s Russia with a bigheaded
bully in a park in the dark who is not really equal with his
opponent and who, for that reason, wants to frighten [his
opponent], resort to cheap shots. Why the park in the dark?
Russia is acting openly and in broad daylight.
[Terras] That depends. At the time of the annexation of the
Crimea and the attack against Eastern Ukraine, (Russia) tried to
employ methods of the dark park, while denying all its activities.
It has continued on the cyber front, in Syria, etc.
[Sildam] Yet, their muddy footprints are all over the place.
[Terras] They are. Just like muddy footprints in the dark park
become visible when the daylight comes.
[Sildam] Is NATO, and broadly speaking the democratic world,
in war?

Russian population of Estonia by county, 1 January 2010.

Source: Abarmot [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Russians_in_Estonia_2010.png.

[Terras] It is sad that Russia considers itself to be in war. The
democratic world has perhaps not yet realized this. There is some
action below fog line which can certainly not be called war yet.
So – no, we are not in war.

OE Watch | December 2018

25

EURASIA
Closer Russian-Cuban Relations
OE Watch Commentary: A key tenet of current
Russian foreign policy could be summed up as “the
enemy of my enemy is my friend.” The Kremlin continues
to strengthen ties with those countries which share an
antagonism toward the US, for instance, Cuba. The
accompanying excerpts, the first of which comes from the
pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya, describe the highlights of a
recent Kremlin visit by the leader of Cuba, Miguel DiazCanel.

Source: Aleksandr Vedrussov, “Старый друг (Old Friend),” Izvestiya, November
2018. https://iz.ru/808771/aleksandr-vedrussov/staryi-drug

The first excerpt begins by referring to “the strategic,
allied nature of relations between [Russia and Cuba] …
and the concurrence of positions on practically all relevant
issues on the international agenda.” It describes their
“mutually beneficial infrastructure projects and militarytechnical cooperation,” asserting that the “bilateral
ties are literally permeated by the enduring historical
bonds of friendship, mutual sympathy, respect, and
solidarity.” The article focuses upon Russian initiatives
to restore its economic ties to Cuba via “joint production
of pharmaceuticals,” while “Russian energy companies
are working effectively on the island” to “help support
Havana’s energy independence and self-sufficiency
in the face of the US embargo.” The article concludes
by suggesting that Cuba may play a role in an era of
“heightened re-militarization of international relations,”
pointing out that “active preparation is underway for the
deployment of a ground station of the Russian GLONASS
[Global Navigation Satellite System]” in the country.

From mutually beneficial infrastructure projects and military-technical
cooperation to such noncommercial gestures of goodwill as, for example, Russian
assistance in restoring the golden surface of the dome of the Havana Capitol
Building ahead of the 500th anniversary of the Cuban capital, our countries’
bilateral ties are literally permeated by the enduring historical bonds of
friendship, mutual sympathy, respect, and solidarity….

The second excerpt, from the Kremlin-supported
Sputnik, announces that Russia plans “on giving Cuba a
loan worth 38 million euros ($43.25 million)” to purchase
Russian military equipment. The final excerpt, from the
official Russian news agency Interfax, quotes State Duma
Defense Committee head Vladimir Shamanov, who
suggests that “in response to the United States’ withdrawal
from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF
Treaty), …a Russian military presence in Cuba could be
an option.” During the Cold War, the USSR regarded Cuba
as a close ally and used the island nation as a valuable
pawn in its geostrategic struggle with the US. Recent
events suggest that today’s Kremlin leadership maybe
looking at adopting a similar Cuban strategy. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“It is too early to talk about Russia’s
possible decisions in response to the
United States’ withdrawal from the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty (INF Treaty), but a Russian
military presence in Cuba could be an
option….”

The first official visit outside of Latin America by Miguel Diaz-Canel,
Chairman of the Council of State and Council of Ministers of Cuba, was not only
symbolically significant but also pragmatically productive for both Havana and
Moscow. Talks between the Russian and Cuban leadership not only took place in
a friendly and businesslike atmosphere, but they confirmed the strategic, allied
nature of relations between the countries and the concurrence of our positions on
practically all relevant issues on the international agenda….

…That is precisely why Russia is trying to participate in Cuba’s socioeconomic
development projects into 2030 and beyond as actively as possible. Joint
production of pharmaceuticals unmatched anywhere in the world has already
been established, and Russian energy companies are working effectively on the
island. Among other things, they help support Havana’s energy independence and
self-sufficiency in the face of the US embargo….
Today, the strategic balance between great powers has again been upset.
And once again, it is through no fault or initiative of our own. The announced
withdrawal of Washington from the INF Treaty and the threat of the lapse of
START-III will mean reevaluating fundamental agreements in the military
sphere and a heightened re-militarization of international relations. Russia is
absolutely opposed to the dismantling of the existing global security architecture
but has already had to take into account its potential consequences in practice.
Currently, active preparation is underway for the deployment of a ground station
of the Russian GLONASS [Global Navigation Satellite System] in Cuba.
Source: “Russia May Lend $43Mln to Cuba Under Defense Cooperation
Program,” Sputnik, 2 November 2018. https://sputniknews.com/
military/201811021069466230-russia-cuba-defense-cooperation/
Russia intends to sign an agreement in mid-November on giving Cuba a loan
worth 38 million euros ($43.25 million) as part of the two countries’ defense
cooperation agenda, Russian Deputy Finance Minister Sergey Storchak told
reporters…
Source: “Шаманов: Ответом на выход США из ДРСМД может быть военное
присутствие России на Кубе (Shamanov: Russian military presence in Cuba
may be possible response to U.S. quitting INF Treaty),” Interfax, 30 October
2018. http://www.interfax-russia.ru/print.asp?id=979038&type=view
It is too early to talk about Russia’s possible decisions in response to the United
States’ withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF
Treaty), but a Russian military presence in Cuba could be an option, State Duma
Defense Committee head Vladimir Shamanov told Interfax.
“We need at the minimum the Cuban government’s consent to build up our
military presence in Cuba. After all, this issue is more political than military,
and perhaps it’s too early today to talk about some specific measures in response
to the U.S.’ possible withdrawal from the INF Treaty. An active phase of the
assessment of the consequences is currently under way, and the assessment will
be followed by proposals,” Shamanov said on Tuesday.
“I would not rule out that the matter could be addressed at the upcoming
meeting with the Cuban leader in Moscow,” he said….

OE Watch | December 2018

26

INDO-PACIFIC
From “Informationized” to “Intelligent”: Chinese
Military Aviation Prepares for the Future
OE Watch Commentary: The Zhuhai Airshow,
China’s massive biennial aviation exhibition, is
frequently used to show off both technological progress
and hint at future directions. In an interview with
Wang Mingliang, a professor at the PLA Air Force
Command College in Beijing and frequent media
commentator on Chinese military affairs, noted in the
accompanying excerpted article that the focus of this
airshow was unmanned systems. According to Wang,
intelligent warfare [智能化战争] is an emerging global
evolution of informationized warfare [信息化战争] that
was characterized by precision guided weapons. Wang
believes the new form of warfare will be decentralized,
fast moving and stealthy, but ultimately defined by selfarranging networked components.
A key characteristic will be maneuverability,
including hypersonic capability. Currently hypersonics
encompass a wide range of ballistic and maneuvering
systems capable of reaching speeds over Mach 5. These
connected systems will range dramatically in size,
and likely require delivery vehicles, such as transport
aircraft, or stealthy fighter aircraft, such as the J-20.
An example of the type of aircraft that will dominate
this new type of warfare was on display at the
airshow. Appearing for the first time, the CH-7 is a
stealthy Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle (UCAV).
Produced by China Aerospace Science and Technology
Corporation, one of China’s primary aerospace
companies, the CH-7 is slated be test flown next year
and begin mass production by 2022. Overall, Wang
believes that the airshow is a solid indication of the
progress China’s aviation industry has made and its
focus on preparing for the next generation of warfare.
End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Intelligent decision-making systems
are the core (of this new type of
warfare), consisting of large, medium,
small, and micro systems, manned and
unmanned, stealth and non-stealth
weapons, forming a group from a
dispersed deployment, concentrated
numbers and capabilities to carry out
operations.”

Wing Loong II front view, Dubai Air Show 2017.

Source: Mztourist [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wing_Loong_II_fron_view.jpg.

Source: “军事专家王明亮：从中国航展看未来智能化战争 (Military Expert Wang
Mingliang: Seeing the Future of Intelligent Warfare at the China Aviation Expo),”
Xinhua, 11 November 2018. http://www.81.cn/jwgz/2018-11/11/content_9341000.
htm
According to Wang Mingliang, based on qualities emerging from theoretical
research, concept development, technology testing and weapons development in
some countries, intelligent warfare [智能化战争] can be defined as a form of war
having intelligent decision-making systems at the core, reliant upon with a new
information networks, carried out with traditional weapons, high-energy weapons,
and new energy weapons.
“High-energy weapons refer to ‘hypersonics,’ that is, weapons that fly higher,
faster, and farther.” New energy weapons refer to new concept weapons, namely
laser weapons, kinetic weapons, etc., that are fundamentally different from physical
and chemical [propellant, i.e., firearms] weapons, in their mechanism and operation.
These features will totally change the rules of warfare.
Wang Mingliang further said that the operational mode of intelligent warfare will
be distributed operations. “Intelligent decision-making systems are the core (of this
new type of warfare), consisting of large, medium, small, and micro systems, manned
and unmanned, stealth and non-stealth weapons, forming a group from a dispersed
deployment, concentrated numbers and capabilities to carry out operations.”
The basic components of this kind of combat are large, medium, small and micro
unmanned weapons and their platforms. “At this year’s air show, various types of
drones and unmanned combat vehicles were revealed all at once. Although there is
no special aerial platform on display, many combat aircraft embodied by the [J-20
fighter] can be used as platforms for unmanned weapons in the future.”
The operational unit of distributed operations will be small combat systems. “You
can call it a group.” Wang Mingliang said that they could detect and evaluate, and
they can make decisions, assign tasks, and implement strikes. Separated from each
other but connected by networks, these groups can achieve concentrations of force.”

OE Watch | December 2018

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Gaining a Better Understanding of Future
Intelligent Warfare through a Chinese Lens
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past decades, the world
has undergone an evolution of disruptive technologies that have
transitioned from mechanized warfare to informatized warfare.
The next evolution is expected to bring in artificial intelligence
technologies and China is determined to lead the way. The
accompanying excerpted article not only “paints a portrait” of what
intelligent warfare is shaping up to look like in the future, but it
also explains the importance of innovation in new combat methods,
formats, and concepts.
According to the article, published in Xinhua, there are three
developmental phases in which science and technology go through
before transforming the science of warfare. The first phase is “initial
entry.” The second is “ongoing support.” The final phase is “eventual
dominance.” By looking at current developments in artificial
technology development and the degree to which they are applied in
military matters, the author estimates that the technology is currently
“in the initial entry phase and is rapidly moving towards the ongoing
support phase of development.”
The author believes that, while information systems assist humans
in combat, intelligent systems will eventually replace humans in
combat. Mobile internet, big data, cloud computing, machine learning,
and biomimetic technologies are examples of “intelligent systems,”
and are expected to one day have disruptive impacts on warfare.
Combat power will shift from being human driven to one driven by
intelligent systems. Methods that drive command and control will
shift from one that is currently assisted by information systems, to
one in which artificial intelligence technology will allow command
and control systems to become autonomous. Finally, humans who
have long been on the front line of the battlefield will be replaced by
autonomous systems and therefore, this new confrontation between
unmanned systems will disrupt people’s traditional understanding of
battlefield combat methods.
The author points out that through systematic research, four
“classical types of intelligent combat” will be possible. First,
“swarming” will increase effectiveness through quantity. Second,
“Trojan horse-type combat” will enable more covert maneuvers or
prepositioning of systems. Third, the “autonomous-type combat”
will be unmanned combat systems requiring autonomous sensing,
judgement and decision-making capabilities and will make up for
human shortfalls (i.e.: slower reactions). Finally, “disability-type
combat” in which unmanned platforms will target, paralyze, and
destroy key components of enemy combat system-of-systems.
In the concluding paragraph, the article eloquently stresses the
importance innovation has to the development of new systems,
technology, ideas and concepts. The author stresses the importance
of not only embracing the new technologies but also the concepts and
methods/formats in which they will be used. Without doing so, ideas
will become outdated and are likely to “restrain the arrival of radical
change.” History has taught the importance of a willingness to change
tactics to fit the scene and related technologies. In short, the author is
urging China to be aggressive in and willing to make breakthroughs
in technology and to embrace “new combat forms, and initiate a new
combat era.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Lu Zhisheng, “为未来智能化战争画个像 (Painting a
Portrait of Future Intelligent Warfare),” Xinhua, 18 October 2018.
http://www.xinhuanet.com/mil/2018-10/18/c_129974033.htm
Warfare will soon enter a stage of autonomous confrontation
between unmanned systems where reconnaissance and strike
decisions will occur in seconds, and the characteristics of an
“unmanned, shapeless, and silent” battlefield will become
increasingly visible day by day. Science and technology (S&T)
generally transforms warfare by going through three necessary
developmental phases, namely initial entry, ongoing support, and
eventual dominance. Looking at current AI technology developments
and their degree of application in military matters, especially in
actual practice in the Syria war, AI technology is currently in the
initial entry phase and is rapidly moving towards the ongoing support
phase of development.
If information systems assist humans in combat, then intelligent
systems replace humans in combat. Intelligent systems are
represented by technology groups, such as mobile internet, Big Data,
cloud computing, machine learning, and biomimetic technologies will
have fundamental, long-term, and disruptive impacts on warfare.
…The direct integration of humans and weapons is gradually
transitioning to the relative separation of humans from weapons.
Following the historical path of war, advanced technologies tend
to catalyze the birth of new weapons and promote changes in how
humans and weapons are integrated…
…In the future, with the sufficient development of AI technology,
intelligent command and control systems will possess relatively
powerful autonomous control and autonomous command capabilities
and be capable of autonomously capturing information, assessing
circumstances, making decisions, and handling situations relatively
independently. This will create a new state of affairs; as the
assistance of humans by information systems transitions to the
partial replacement of humans by intelligent systems, traditional
understandings of human command and control methods will become
somewhat disrupted…
…In a future where unmanned systems are widely applied on
battlefields, those in direct confrontation on the front lines are likely
to be a series of unmanned systems and will not involve the human
casualties normally seen in traditional battlefields…
…In the future, expensive weapon systems might be divisible into
large numbers of small, cheap, and dispersed unmanned platforms
that conduct highly efficient strikes against combat targets by way of
swarm saturation attacks that transform quantitative advantages into
qualitative advantages.
Every revolution within the history of human warfare has to varying
degrees broken the multi-leveled “shackles” worn by combat
personnel. However, while “shackles” with identifiable form are often
easily broken, those “ formless shackles” brought about by outdated
ideas are far more likely to restrain the arrival of radical change. On
the precipice of the arrival of unmanned combat, we must be bolder
in innovation, be braver in making breakthroughs, actively seek
change, enthusiastically acknowledge new combat forms, and initiate
a new combat era.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Gaining a Better Understanding of
Future Intelligent Warfare through a Chinese Lens
“Warfare will soon enter a stage of autonomous confrontation between unmanned systems where
reconnaissance and strike decisions will occur in seconds, and the characteristics of an ‘unmanned,
shapeless, and silent’ battlefield will become increasingly visible day by day.”

AVIC Cloud Shadow at Dubai Air Show 2017.

Source: Mztourist [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AVIC_Cloud_Shadow_side_view.jpg.

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | December 2018

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Local Companies Provide Logistics Support
During PLA Joint Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: China appears to be improving
its use of civilian assets in joint exercises. An October 2018
exercise meant to test the PLA’s interoperability and ability to
maintain air superiority highlights the positive impact civilian
transport and technical personnel can have on operations. Two
examples of civilian support during the exercise mentioned
in the accompanying excerpted article particularly deserve
attention.
When a naval commander required an emergency support
unit to be deployed to support PLA Naval Aviation operations
on an island, a transportation unit was able to call on local
civilian transportation companies’ flatbed trucks as well as
passenger and roll-on/roll-off ships to get the equipment and
personnel where they needed to go. A second area where
civilian resources played an important role during the exercise
was “recovery” after a simulated air attack against an airbase.
Responding to “various degrees of damage” to several fighter
aircraft, a group of air force technicians, bolstered by eight
civilian technicians from a local factory, were able to replace
damaged components and get the aircraft back in the air after
an hour.

JH-7A of the PLANAF seen at Yantai Laishan International Airport.

Source: Czip001 [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Jh-7a_naval_yt.png.

“At the assembly site, you could see that an airbase

engineering technical service group coordinating quickly
The exercise also made use of modular “containerized”
barracks and support buildings that were built and transported
assembling the container-style living quarters produced
to deployment areas by local companies. The article mentioned
that use of civilian contractors and materials made it easier
by local companies.
to conceal the units’ deployment. In many ways, this exercise
represents the “nuts-and-bolts” of what China’s Military-Civil Fusion strategy is all about—putting the procedures in place to allow full
utilization of all available resources in a crisis. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

”

Source: “军民融合在 ‘战时’ 的威力有多大 (The Power of Military Civil Fusion During ‘Wartime’),” China Youth Daily, 16 November
2018. http://kj.81.cn/content/2018-11/16/content_9347122.htm
In late October, the PLA held a joint PLA Air Force and PLA Navy offense/defense combat exercise involving multiple branches and units in
southern China. During the exercise, the “red” and “blue” forces competed fiercely for air supremacy. The air defense operations were in
full swing, and the rear logistics support group codenamed “cavalry” [驰援, lit. gallop to the rescue] began operations.
In a break with past exercises, the 13 rear support elements [分队] of the Southern Theater Air Force Support Department were assigned six
local [civilian] support forces for the first time, and were co-organized with the Navy and the Joint Logistics Support Force to for integrated
and realistic field exercises.
“In order to ensure that none of the equipment or vehicles are left behind, we have established 16 core repair stations along the way with
local auto repair manufacturers, ensuring that every 100 kilometers there are professional maintenance technicians and rapid-repair vehicles
for all types of vehicles!” The Theater Command Air Force Ground Equipment Division leader explained that in recent years, the Logistics
Support Department organizations have established communication and coordination with all of the various battlefield support resources
such as local transportation facilities, airport terminals, oil storage facilities, warehouses, and maintenance and repair facilities. The
emergency response mechanism can quickly resolve the question of what is available for logistics support.
After the emergency detachment completes the maneuver by means of motorized marching and railway transportation, it deploys in the
deployment area, opens a command organization, and builds a field camping area. Before the departure of each detachment, all the field
battle boxes and camping gears were uniformly distributed according to the standards of field support and operation, and the field selfprotection was implemented throughout the entire process.
At the assembly site, you could see that an airbase engineering technical service group coordinating quickly assembling the container-style
living quarters produced by local companies. Group leader Yang Fuli [杨夫礼] said that the container-style barracks are not only fast and
convenient, but also easy to conceal. This is the first time they have explored the military-civilian field bivouac model in realistic conditions.
The leaders of the Southern Theater Air Force Support Department also explained that after local mobilization forces have fully deployed
within the required time limit, all of them will be assigned to the emergency support unit for on-the-spot training, and cooperate with each
other to carry out specialization and refinement, while providing support for the PLA forces.
OE Watch | December 2018

30

INDO-PACIFIC
An Instant PLA: Just Add 3D Printing
by Wilson VornDick
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 17, dated 20 November 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/an-instant-pla-just-add-3d-printing/

OE Watch Commentary: In the PRC, the promise of 3D printing has stretched the boundaries of possible future applications. The PRC is
pushing ahead with innovative ways of employing 3D printing across all sectors of its economy, from prosthetics to titanium-based aerospace
parts, to a sustainably-built bus stop shelter outside Shanghai. The PRC is also pioneering concepts and applications for 3D printing of materiel,
weaponry, and munitions for use by the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). As Wang Feiyue, a director at both the National Defense University of
Technology and the Chinese Academy of Sciences states, quoting an old Chinese proverb, one must “cross the river by feeling the stones” (摸着
石头过河)
3D printing falls under the broad umbrella of advanced manufacturing technology which is divided between “subtractive” and “additive”
manufacturing. Subtractive manufacturing is the process in which an item is created by the removal of material through methods such as
drilling or lathing. Conversely, additive manufacturing (AM) is the process of adding material to create an item. Pioneered in the 1980s but still
considered a new form of AM, 3D printing is the ability to fabricate objects by constructing them over a period of minutes, hours, or days using
a “printer” capable of laying down one very precisely defined layer of a material after another, eventually forming the completed object.
It is important to note that the field of 3D printing, as part of AM, remains dynamic as new concepts, technical definitions, standards,
techniques, and follow-up technologies evolve. As such, PRC sources sometimes refer to 3D printing and AM as one in the same, while other
sources make minor distinctions between the two based on the type of material created or process employed.
Even though Western standards identify upwards of ten 3D printing methods, the PRC sources reviewed in 2015 list only six 3D printing
methods. The six processes include: Fused Deposition Modeling (熔融沉积成型), Selected Laser Sintering (选择性激光烧结), Selective
Laser Melting (选择性激光熔融), Stereolithography Appearance (立体光刻), Electron Beam Melting (电子束熔化), and Laminated Object
Manufacturing (分层实体制造).
AM aligns with China’s national strategic objective to become a science and technology superpower (科技强国) through initiatives at all levels
of government. Because 3D printing relies heavily on advances in both software and hardware, 3D printing falls squarely in broader efforts
within China to promote “informatization” (信息化). Furthermore, advances in 3D printing can be used to boost not only civilian industries, but
also military ones as well, making it a good fit for the PRC’s program of “military-civil fusion” or “civil-military integration” (军民融合). Two
especially noteworthy programs in the context of 3D printing and civil military fusion are “Made in China 2025” and the PRC’s 13th Five-YearPlan.
Linking his support to these state-directed efforts and the “Thousand Talents Program” (千人计划), Wang Feiyue champions the integration
of fields such as big data (大数据) and 3D printing with Chinese intelligence and military capabilities. In Wang’s view, 3D printing offers three
advantages: flexibility, production of both simple and complex items, and production capability for a large inventory and a variety of items.
Advancing his assessment beyond 3D printing, Wang augurs a broader swath of the future digital landscape in which advances in cyberspace
synch with advances 3D printing. He concludes that existing military systems “must improve and transform” as a result. If that can be achieved,
it will aid in the goals toward national rejuvenation and fulfillment of the “Chinese Dream” (中国梦). However, he ominously warns that if
China does not properly align and balance between the civilian and military systems, such as 3D printing, then it could spell disaster on par with
the Soviet Union’s collapse.
Chinese sources appeared to be mixed on the potential of AM for China, viewing it as both a threat and opportunity. Some viewed 3D printing
as a threat because it challenges traditional manufacturing techniques and interests within the PRC. Meanwhile, others expressed fear and
anxiety that if China does not become a major player in 3D printing, it could lose critical ground in leveraging this new technology. At the same
time, some found that 3D printing is pregnant with possibilities for China to “regain market share in advanced manufacturing” and “leapfrog”
global competitors in this developing field. In a follow-up analysis on the aviation and aerospace industries, it was found that China has already
achieved significant savings in production time, cost, and material on account of AM. 3D printed parts have been used in the COMAC C919
passenger jet and various military aircraft such as the Y-20 transport and J-15, J-16, J-20, and J-31 jet fighters.
Jin Dayuan from the No. 36 Research Institute of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation (CETC) contends that 3D printing
will not replace traditional form of manufacturing, rather it will complement. Specifically citing American advances in 3D printing, which is
common throughout Chinese sources, Jin holds up American efforts to 3D print parts for the F-35 fighter and SpaceX’s Dragon 2 space capsule
as examples. Jin also sees additional opportunities in space-based manufacturing (太空制造), thereby reducing loads for launch and greater
mission flexibility; production of “mini-unmanned aerial vehicles (微型无人) and parts (无人机暂用零件);” military electronics such as a
2013 production of a satellite antenna by Shenzhen Weihang Magnetoelectric Co., Ltd.; and the production of parts for regular and emergency
repairs and general maintenance. In line with Jin’s last point, the repair of damaged military materiel is echoed by writers in Tactical Missile
Technology, a PRC military journal. Referencing American Naval proposals, the same analysts assert 3D printers could be deployed on ships and
act as “factories” for materiel, such as drones, which will save space and inventory overhead. Around the same time as that publication, the PLANavy unveiled that it had used 3D printers onboard its naval vessels.
3D printing has an important role to play in the PRC’s strategic objective of becoming a science and technology superpower, with significant
implications for both civilian industries and for PLA capabilities. Although analysts within the PRC are divided between those who perceive 3D
printing to be a threat to traditional manufacturing industries, and those who consider it an indispensable part of the PRC’s superior military
capabilities, collaboration between the PRC central government and PLA science and technology commissions has nevertheless resulted in the
(continued)
increasing incorporation of 3D printing technology in military manufacturing. End OE Watch Commentary (VornDick)
OE Watch | December 2018
31

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: An Instant PLA: Just Add 3D Printing
by Wilson VornDick
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 17, dated 20 November 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/an-instant-pla-just-add-3d-printing/

“Through use of the on-board 3D printer, though, sailors were able to create the replacement part in mere
hours, getting the Harbin up and running and back to maneuvers.”
Source: Sarah Anderson Goehrke, “China’s PLA Navy Deploys 3D Printers Onboard Warships to Replace Small Parts,” 3DPrint.com, 8
January 2015. https://3dprint.com/35981/china-pla-navy-3d-printing/
…We do know that China has been developing 3D printers since 2001, particularly for use in their military. The technology is utilized largely for
prototyping, molding, repair of small parts, and weapons systems throughout the various branches of the country’s military…
Additionally, the J-15 carrier-based fighter jet used 3D printing to create new small parts to repair training flight damages…Today, we also learn
that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Navy is utilizing 3D printers on their warships. The deployed 3D printers will be used to replace crucial
small parts, and one destroyer has already taken advantage of the technology.
Last week, a wheel gear on the Harbin broke. The New Year’s Eve incident occurred in the Gulf of Aden, where the Harbin has been involved
in counterpiracy maneuvers alongside the US Navy since mid-2013. The Harbin is a Type 052D destroyer; having the engine down in the far-off
Arabian Sea, thousands of miles from parts suppliers in the ship’s home country, was a problem that required a fast solution…Through use of
the on-board 3D printer, though, sailors were able to create the replacement part in mere hours, getting the Harbin up and running and back to
maneuvers.
US Army PACBOT lightened by 6 pounds by using 3-D printed parts (shown
in color). 3-D printing capability in the field means that Soldiers won’t always
have to wait for spare parts to arrive from original manufacturers, increasing
Soldiers’ readiness and flexibility.
Source: U.S. Army photo by Erin Usawicz, https://www.army.mil/article/191316/3_d_printing_in_the_field_gives_soldiers_more_
flexibility, Public Domain.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | December 2018

32

INDO-PACIFIC
New “Fast Food” to Replace Rations and
Field Kitchen Meals in the PLA
OE Watch Commentary: The PLA is attempting to speed up, systematize and improve
the quality of their food service for soldiers. As the PLA increases the regularity and degree
of realism with which it trains, the way logistics support units feed the PLA is also having
to adapt. The accompanying excerpted article outlines the steps that the Chinese military is
taking to improve the speed with which food can be prepared while improving quality. The
effort involved all Chinese services, the Central Military Commission’s Joint Staff, Political
Work, Logistics Support, and Equipment Development Departments as well as five other
organizations under the training administration department. A key consideration mentioned
in the article is that every operational unit is expected to go out on exercises for at least seven
contiguous days every year. Such demands make traditional ways of feeding soldiers in the
field impractical. This is involving a cultural shift from traditional Chinese expectation that
“four dishes and a soup” will be served at every meal to prepackaged, or less time-intensive
dishes. This appears to be part of a broader discussion the PLA is having internally about the
quality of its rations and food services, perhaps sparked by recent reports that soldiers were
bringing their own food to field exercises.
Mirroring a broader effort to make better use of local companies to support PLA
operations, units are being encouraged to work with catering companies to reduce cost,
improve quality and strengthen military-civil fusion. Other avenues to streamline the
logistics “tail” for military catering units are being explored. In June 2018, for example,
an air force unit under the Central Theater Command experimented with delivering field
equipment and food via UAV to a logistics support company. The article ends by mentioning
that the updated guidelines for food service will be incorporated into the Outline of Military
Training Evaluation (OMTE; 军事训练大纲). The PLA hopes to improve conditions at its
bases and in the field, while reducing its logistics footprint and allowing more effective
deployments and training. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “全军野战饮食快餐化保障
体系加快推进 (Accelerate Adoption of
“Fast Food” Field Ration Support System
Throughout the Whole Military),” PLA
Daily Journalist Department, 9 November
2018. http://army.81.cn/content/2018-11/09/
content_9339704.htm
Field food catering is an important part of
combat power generation. In recent years,
the Logistics Support Department of the
Central Military Commission has resolutely
implemented the spirit of CMC Chairman
Xi Jinping’s series of important instructions
regarding the battlefield rations and food
services, and the systemic obstacles to the
field catering training and the “ four dishes
and one soup” [according to Chinese culinary
tradition most meals include four dishes
(hot and cold) and soup]. The question of
structural contradictions between soldiers’
traditional diet and new policy that are not
supported by the standard of protection have
fully promoted the overall transformation of
the field food security.
When creating the “Fast Food” Field
Ration Support System model, the approach
must change depending on the operational
conditions, support environments and force
compositions to offer appropriate levels of
service. Catering support will be contingent
upon the unit mission requirements, at the
individual, tactical and campaign levels.
Units will set requirements, and with the
government providing a platform, and
enterprises supporting through research,
officers and soldiers will test idea of field
rations, field catering equipment and
equipment research, direct use of local highquality scientific research force to carry out
technical research, but also direct choice of
local mature products and technology. Aiming
at the forefront of international and domestic
science and technology, actively develop
and apply new materials, technology, new
technologies, the introduction of a number
of high-energy, light weight, small volume of
field food and integrated, intelligent, fast field
catering equipment.

Chinese army flag.

Source: Created by PhiLiP / using CorelDRAW X3 [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:People%27s_Liberation_Army_Flag_of_the_
People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.

“When creating the ‘Fast Food’ Field Ration Support System model, the approach must change
depending on the operational conditions, support environments and force compositions to offer
appropriate levels of service.”
OE Watch | December 2018

33

INDO-PACIFIC
Japan and India Relations: A Counterweight to China?
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese expansion into the
South China Sea and Indian Ocean are reportedly prompting
stronger military, economic, and trade ties between India and
Japan. The accompanying four excerpted articles, published
in Nikkei Asian Review, Jansatta, Gujarat Samachar,
and Japan Times respectively, offer some insight into the
situation.
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe have met with each other a dozen times
since they have been in office. Three of the articles discuss
the Asia-Africa Growth Corridor (AAGC), a growth strategy
plan introduced jointly in 2016. In the $40 billion plan,
according to the Gujarat Samachar article, Japan wishes to
invest $30 billion and India $10 billion. Some observers see
AAGC as a competitor to China’s Belt and Road Initiatives,
which is a huge concern for India. It is worth noting that
China is currently Africa’s biggest economic partner.
According to the Nikkei Asian Review article, in recent
years, the Indo-Japanese defense relationship has expanded
quickly. For example, both countries have conducted threeway naval exercises with the United States in both the Indian
Ocean and the Pacific. Both sides are also cooperating
in the exchange of intelligence information, according to
the Jansatta article. They have also agreed to work on the
research and development of unmanned ground vehicles and
robotics.
India and Japan have also begun formal negotiations over
an acquisition and cross-servicing agreement, which would
allow the Japan Self Defense Force and the Indian military
to use each other’s bases for logistical support. However,
with Japan possibly allowing India to access its base in
Djibouti and Japan gaining access to India’s Andaman
naval base, the Nikkei Asian Review article cautions that,
while such logistics arrangements would be geared toward
peacekeeping missions, “it may prompt a reaction from
China – especially from elements who see such moves as
attempts to encircle the country.”

“After the Doklam dispute, continuous cooperation from
Japan has become extremely important for India.”
Source: Kiran Sharma, “Modi-Abe Summit to Pave Way for Closer Security
Cooperation,” Nikkei Asian Review, 26 October 2018. https://asia.nikkei.com/
Politics/International-Relations/Modi-Abe-summit-to-pave-way-for-closersecurity-cooperation
The two governments have already agreed to work on research and
development of unmanned ground vehicles and robotics, and plan to continue
discussions. Modi and Abe are likely to talk about a bilateral Acquisition and
Cross-Servicing Agreement, a military logistics pact that would allow access to
each other’s bases.
The Indo-Japanese defense relationship has expanded quickly in recent years.
The countries conduct three-way naval exercises with the U.S. in the Indian
Ocean and the Pacific.
Signing an ACSA would pave the wave for their defense forces to share not
only bases but also fuel, food, water and other supplies. Shamshad Ahmad
Khan, a visiting associate fellow at the Institute of Chinese Studies, said the
governments reached an understanding on signing such a pact when Japanese
Defense Minister Itsunori Onodera visited India in August.
Khan said it is “likely that Japan will allow India access to its base in Djibouti
and India in turn will allow access to Japan to its Andaman naval base.” But
he warned that, although the logistics arrangement would be geared toward
peacekeeping missions, it may prompt a reaction from China -- especially from
elements who see such moves as attempts to encircle the country.
Source: “साझेदारी का सफर (Partnership Journey),” Jansatta, 30 October 2018.
https://www.jansatta.com/editorial/jansatta-editorial-journey-to-partnershipabout-indo-japan-annual-summit/804868/
After the Doklam dispute, continuous cooperation from Japan has become
extremely important for India. Shinzo Abe has returned from China visit
only last week. That’s why this meeting between the leaders of India and
Japan would also be helpful in understanding the stance of China. If the two
countries talk to China together, it can be a more effective step. Then, if the
two undertake strategic cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, they can
pose a challenge to China. Apart from this, with cooperation in the exchange
of intelligence information, the security arrangement in this region will
become more concrete. Japan has always been cooperating with India in the
technology sector. It has been investing in several projects in the industrial
sector.

All four articles clearly point to India’s strengthening
relationship with Japan as a perceived strategy to counter
China’s growing power. However, according to the Japan
Times article, Tokyo officially denies that Japan is trying to
keep China’s growing economic and military power in check through such strategy. Shinzo Abe seems to be walking a fine line. According to
the last article, Abe, who recently returned from Beijing, where he “succeeded in significantly improving Japan’s ties with Beijing by meeting…
(Chinese President) Xi Jinping,” continues to “pursue his apparent favored policy of strengthening Japan’s ties with India as a counterweight to
China’s growing power in the region.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

34

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Japan and India Relations: A Counterweight
to China?
Source: “ભારત અને જાપાનના સંબંધો નવી ઊંચાઇ તરફ અગ્રેસર (India and Japan’s Relationship
Leading to New Heights),” Gujarat Samachar, 30 October 2018. https://www.
gujaratsamachar.com/news/news-focus/news-focus-30-october-2018
After the Modi government came to power in 2014, there has been a significant
improvement in the relations between India and Japan… Japan has been at the forefront
in participating in the Make in India campaign launched by Prime Minister Modi. The
Mumbai-Ahmadabad bullet train project worth $15 billion is an important step under this
campaign. However, even now, the project is facing a lot of challenges. Japan is ready
to help eliminate the lack of capability in India which is a part of the economic strategy
between the two countries. India and Japan together are working toward development
of Asia-Africa Growth Corridor. On the other hand, the strategies of both countries are
the same for the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue created for security of India-Pacific
region. The two countries will also work for the development of infrastructural facilities
in Bangladesh, Nepal, and Sri Lanka and in the energy sector. In reality, it is happening
for the first time in the history of independent India that a country is ready to cooperate
with India to save its reputation among its neighboring countries and South Asia, i.e.
countries in the Indian Ocean region.
As such, friendly relations have existed between India and Japan since 1958 but the
chain of events taking place in the Asia-Pacific region for the past few years has made
these two countries natural partners. China is the greatest factor in bringing the two
countries on the same platform. In reality, China, increasingly becoming a bully in the
Asia zone, is dangerous for the two countries. China is increasing its movements in the
South China Sea that is equivalent to danger for other Asian countries including Japan
and Indonesia. So, the way China is increasing its intrusion in the Indian Ocean is also
akin to a warning for India.

Source: Reiji Yoshida, “Modi and Abe Agree
to Boost Ties as Tokyo Pledges Huge New Yen
Loans for India,” Japan Times, 29 October 2018.
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2018/10/29/
national/politics-diplomacy/modi-abe-agreeboost-ties-tokyo-pledges-huge-new-yen-loansindia/#.W-x9EvZFzZs
The concept is often seen as part of Japan’s
effort to keep in check China’s growing economic
and military power in the region, although Tokyo
officially denies this.
Abe, who returned from Beijing on Saturday,
has recently succeeded in significantly improving
Japan’s ties with Beijing by meeting his Chinese
counterpart Xi Jinping there.
Still, Abe has continued to pursue his apparent
favored policy of strengthening Japan’s ties with
India as a counterweight to China’s growing
power in the region.

Prime minister Modi with Prime minister Abe of Japan (2014).

Source: Prime Minister’s Office [GODL-India (https://data.gov.in/sites/default/files/Gazette_Notification_OGDL.pdf)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Narendra_Modi_and_Shinzo_Abe,_2014.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

35

INDO-PACIFIC
The Impact of Pakistan-Russia Security
Cooperation on India
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past few years
the Russian government has increased its level of
security cooperation with the government of Pakistan
after lifting an embargo on selling weapons to it in
2014. While this caused some immediate issues with
the Indian government, a major purchaser of Russian
weapons and equipment, the impact it has had on
Indian-Russian security cooperation is still playing out.
The accompanying excerpted articles report on a couple
of recent developments in Russia’s security cooperation
with both South Asian states and they provide some
measure of how this continues to take shape.
The article from The News International reports on
the third iteration of the joint Russia-Pakistan exercise
“Friendship,” which took place in northern Pakistan.
The article notes how “70 troopers from Russia’s
southern military district will participate in the drills”
and that it comes only a couple of months after the two
Russian and Pakistani servicemen train to eliminate a mock base during Friendship 2018.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=61487@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.
governments established the “Russia-Pakistan Joint
Military Consultative Committee” and reached an agreement “allowing officers from the country’s armed forces to train in Russia.” It is worth
remembering that a few years ago, Russian officials stated that they planned to hold the joint exercise only once, not as a series.
The article from The Economic Times reports on a recent deal the Indian government made to purchase two frigates for “$950 million.” The
article on the agreement also notes how “two frigates of the Project 11356 class will be bought directly from Russia and a contract to build
two more at an Indian yard is likely to be signed at a later stage” and that the frigates “are expected to be delivered by 2022.” As the Indian
government watched Russian security cooperation with Pakistan increase, there were statements from Indian officials and predictions from
regional analysts that this would push India to look for alternative sources of weapons and equipment. While the Indian government has been
reducing some of the amount of money spent on procurement of Russian weapons and equipment over the past several years, the articles
show that Russian security cooperation with Pakistan has been relatively small in scale and it has not, for the time being, caused the Indian
government to completely end procurement from Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“This is 3rd exercise as part of Pak-Russia bilateral training cooperation.”
Source: “Russian troops in Pakistan for joint militray training,” The
News International, 22 October 2018.https://www.thenews.com.pk/
latest/384062-russian-troops-in-pakistan-for-joint-militray-training
A Russian Army Contingent has arrived in Pakistan to participate in
Pak-Russia Joint Training Excercise ‘Druzhba-III’, DG ISPR Maj Gen Asif
Ghafoor said in a statement Monday.
“This is 3rd exercise as part of Pak-Russia bilateral training cooperation.
The 1st Exercise was held in Pakistan during 2016, while 2nd in Russia
during 2017, he further explained…
According to Vadim Astafyev, head of the press service of the Russian
Southern Military District, the joint drills – Friendship 2018 – will be held
at the training range in Pabbi town in Nowshera district. More than 70
troopers from Russia’s southern military district will participate in the
drills…
In August, Pakistan and Russia reached a historic agreement allowing
officers from the country’s armed forces to train in Russia. The deal was
concluded at the end of the inaugural meeting of Russia-Pakistan Joint
Military Consultative Committee in Rawalpindi…The talks between the two
countries were headed by Defence Secretary Zamirul Hassan Shah and
visiting Russian Deputy Defence Minister Col Gen Alexander Fomin.

Source: Pubby, Manu. “India inks $950 million deal for Russian
frigates,” The Economic Times, 29 October 2018. https://
economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/india-inks-950million-deal-for-russian-frigates/articleshow/66408319.cms
Russia has inked a $950 -million deal to supply two new
warships to India that will be equipped with Brahmos missiles to
add to the firepower of the Navy. The two frigates of the Project
11356 class will be bought directly from Russia and a contract to
build two more at an Indian yard is likely to be signed at a later
stage.
Sources told ET that while final clearances for the long-pending
project came before the summit earlier this month between
President Vladimir Putin and Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
the deal was signed last week after price negotiations.
…The deal — under a ‘2+2’ scheme where technology will be
transferred to an Indian shipyard to construct two of the frigates
from scratch — has been in the works since 2015. The two
ships to be brought from Russia are expected to be delivered by
2022…

OE Watch | December 2018

36

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia Seeks to Strengthen its Global Standing
by Increasing Military Diplomacy
OE Watch Commentary: Hadi Tjahjanto, the
Commander of Indonesia’s National Armed Forces
(TNI), seems to have a new agenda in mind for the
country’s military. According to the accompanying
article excerpt, published in ANTARA, he is now
looking to increase the country’s military diplomacy
in order to “strengthen Indonesia’s position in the
international world.” Hadi, who was appointed to
the highest ranking position in TNI in April 2017, is
pushing for increased military diplomacy because
the “development of a threat spectrum” is becoming
more complex. Bilateral and multilateral cooperation
between countries is more suited to confront these
threats “since no single country can face the threat
by itself.” The article points out that by participating
in bilateral and multilateral UN operations, such as
peacekeeping, TNI will strengthen its position in the
international arena and gain invaluable operational
experience, therefore strengthening its capabilities.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Syaiful Hakim, “TNI tingkatkan diplomasi militer dukung diplomasi
luar negeri (TNI Increases Military Diplomacy to Support foreign Diplomacy),”
ANTARA Online, 5 November 2018. https://jateng.antaranews.com/nasional/
berita/765135/tni-tingkatkan-diplomasi-militer-dukung-diplomasi-luar-negeri?utm_
source=antaranews&utm_medium=nasional&utm_campaign=antaranews
The Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI) Commander Air Chief Marshall Hadi
Tjahjanto says that at the moment TNI is increasing its military diplomacy in order
to support foreign diplomacy and strengthen Indonesia’s position in the international
arena. “A strong military diplomacy is needed in order to support foreign policy and
strengthen Indonesia’s position in the international world,” said the TNI commander
in a message when presiding over a welcome ceremony for the TNI Maritime Task
Force (MTF), Garuda Contingent (Konga) XXVIII-J UNIFIL, at the Military SeaCross Command Dock in Tanjung Priok, North Utara, on Monday.
In addition, the development of a threat spectrum is also getting more complex. This
demands bilateral and multilateral cooperation since no single country can face the
threat by itself.
“This duty as TNI diplomats not only gives the country a good name, but also
provides individual experience. What the soldiers have carried out and the insights
they have gained from the assignment field have to be used to improve the units’
professionalism and ensure the success of the next mission,” he said.

“…the development of a threat spectrum is
also getting more complex. This demands
bilateral and multilateral cooperation since no
single country can face the threat by itself.”
Indonesian soldiers participate in a mass casualty training scenario as part of exercise Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training (CARAT) (2013).

Source: MC1 Joshua T. Rodriguez [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Indonesian_sailors_participate_in_a_mass_casualty_training_scenario_as_part_of_exercise_Cooperation_Afloat_Readiness_and_Training_(CARAT)_Indonesia_2013_in_Jakarta,_
Indonesia,_May_24,_2013_130524-N-NX489-076.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

37

INDO-PACIFIC
Malaysia Arrests Group of Foreign Salafi-Jihadis
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 October the Malaysian-language website
Berita Harian published the accompanying excerpted article about the arrest
of eight men in three parts of Malaysia: Perlis, Kuala Lumpur, and Johor.
According to the article, they all had studied at an Islamic center in Perlis,
which is the smallest and northernmost province of Malaysia and borders
Thailand. There were also transnational elements to this group. They had
desired to set up an Islamic center, which would have been based on the
model of a madrassa in Yemen, which is led by Salafi-Jihadi extremist
ideologues.
At least one of the arrested individuals had a relative who was connected
to the madrassa in Yemen and had undergone firearms training. Of the eight
individuals arrested, five were from a European country and one was from a
country in the Americas (Malaysian officials did not specify the countries in
the article). The Malaysian authorities also noted they could not have carried
out these arrests if not for cooperation with foreign intelligence agencies.
The Malaysia intelligence officials interviewed for the article stated that
the ideology of the group was opposed to democracy or any mixing of the
sexes or secular teaching at any private or public institution. The group
also declared that anyone who did not hold their beliefs was an apostate.
According to the Inspector-General of Police, this was not the first time the
foreign Salafi-Jihadi ideology has been spread in Malaysia to recruit and
operationalize new members: the same ideology had been a catalyst for the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), al-Qaeda, Jemaah Islamiyah, and Abu
Sayyaf attacks in Southeast Asia. As a result, Malaysia was unwilling to take
any chances with this group and arrested them before they could carry out
any attacks in furtherance of their ideology. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“This is not the first time foreign Salafi Jihadi
elements have used Malaysia as a base to spread the
ideology of Salafi Jihadi and recruit new members.”

Source: “8 individu terbabit kumpulan ekstremis ditahan (8
individuals involved in extremist groups were arrested),”
Berita Harian, 6 October 2018. https://www.bharian.com.my/
berita/kes/2018/10/482442/8-individu-terbabit-kumpulanekstremis-ditahan
A total of eight men, including seven foreign nationals, were
involved in an extremist group’s activities in the country.
Inspector-General of Police, Tan Sri Mohamad Fuzi Harun,
said all suspects had a relationship with an Islamic study
center in Perlis either as a student, a former instructor or a
former student. “The arrest was made following intelligence
information obtained by the police in connection with the
efforts of a terrorist group that adhered to the ideology of
Salafi Jihadi in Yemen to set up an Islamic learning center in
Southeast Asia to spread the ideology.”
The result of intelligence information obtained from foreign
intelligence agencies revealed that the six suspects had links
with the Daesh terrorist group or other extremist groups in
their home countries. The preliminary findings on detained
suspects revealed that they rejected the democratic system and
had adopted extreme ideals such as men and women being
banned from wearing pants. They also claim that secular
studies in public and private institutions of higher learning
are illegal.
Mohamad Fuzi said the arrest by the Counter Terrorism,
Special Branch, PDRM Division was to curb the spread of
ideology of Salafi Jihadi which was the catalyst for violent
acts of groups such as Islamic 4 State, Al-Qaeda, Jemaah
Islamiah, Abu Sayyaf Group, others. “This is not the first
time foreign Salafi Jihadi elements have used Malaysia as a
base to spread the ideology of Salafi Jihadi and recruit new
members,” he said.

Perodua Kembara Polis.

Source: Perodua Kembara Polis, CC 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Perodua_Kembara_Polis.JPG
.

OE Watch | December 2018

38

INDO-PACIFIC
The Philippines Military Commemorates Marawi Battle
OE Watch Commentary: Just over one year ago, the Armed Forces of the
Philippines (AFP) won a decisive months-long battle against Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria (ISIS)-loyal militants in Marawi. One year later, on 18 October,
the accompanying excerpted article from The Philippine Star discussed
the country’s commemoration of that battle. Quoting government officials,
the article notes that millions of dollars are being devoted to the rebuilding
of Marawi. However, at the same time, the article seemed to question the
government’s commitment to the city, highlighting that President Rodrigo
Duterte skipped the commemoration and his spokesmen would not state where
he was that day.
The AFP Chief General spoke at the event, declaring that the country stood
united to defeat the evils of terrorism and that the military killed the leaders of
the ISIS-loyal Marawi rebels. Nevertheless, the article also emphasized the high
price exacted in the battle for Marawi. Over one year later, the article described
how the city still bore the scars from aerial bombardments and fighting on
the ground. Moreover, despite the military victory, Marawi remains under
martial law, which means the population still feels the effects of the battle. It is
unknown when martial law will end.
The article also seemed to indicate a disconnect between the AFP’s rhetoric
and the reality on the ground. While the AFP promises to remain vigilant to
prevent terrorists from infiltrating Marawi again and asserts an attitude of
bravado, the article remained focused on the displaced of Marawi. For them, the
victory against the ISIS-loyal militants has not brought back their livelihoods.
The article reminds the reader that hundreds of thousands of the city’s residents
are still displaced and they cannot return to their homes. The government
claims it has the right to restrict movement into the city because it has not
concluded bomb-clearing operations. Therefore, for many civilians, their battles
are still ongoing. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Despite the government’s promise of massive
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the devastated city,
hundreds of displaced families are still staying at various
evacuation camps.”

Source: “Liberation of Marawi City remembered,” The
Philippine Star, 18 October 2018. https://www.philstar.
com/headlines/2018/10/18/1861019/liberation-marawi-cityremembered
A year after its liberation from Islamic State (IS)-linked
militants, Marawi City is inching its way to total recovery
and freedom from terrorism and violence, with P20 billion
earmarked to help its citizens rebuild their homes and
livelihood. Presidential spokesman Salvador Panelo said
from Davao City, “As we celebrate the triumphs of our
government troops against the Daesh-inspired Maute
rebels, we pay tribute to those who have fallen in the fierce
battles during the siege of Marawi and gave the ultimate
sacrifice to make our nation safer and more secure,” he
said. He was mum on the whereabouts of President Duterte,
who skipped the anniversary rites attended by Armed
Forces of the Philippines (AFP) chief Gen. Carlito Galvez
and other ranking officials. He also lauded the military’s
action that led to the death of suspected terror leaders
Omar Maute and Isnilon Hapilon.
Scars of months-long fighting were still visible in most
parts of the country’s only Islamic city. The government’s
military action – including aerial bombing and massive
infantry attack – had thwarted the establishment of an
Islamic caliphate in the area and staved off the possibility of
violence spreading to other parts of the country, Duterte’s
spokesman said.
But despite the government’s promise of massive
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the devastated city,
hundreds of displaced families are still staying at various
evacuation camps. The military said it has to restrict the
movement of civilians in the city as troopers have yet to
complete their bomb clearing operations, especially at
ground zero.

Local officials of Lanao del Sur province visits the Ground Zero (also known as the Main Battle Area) in Marawi for the first time since the end of the Battle of Marawi (2017).
Source: Marawi Ground Zero, public domain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marawi_Ground_Zero.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

39

INDO-PACIFIC
Counterterrorism Vulnerabilities in Western Australia
OE Watch Commentary: Australia has suffered relatively few
terrorist attacks in recent years, as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS)-connected attacks in the country have mostly been inspired by
ISIS, not directed. They have also tended to be small-scale and often
failed attempts by novices. Nevertheless, according to the accompanying
excerpted article from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
authorities in Western Australia have not done enough to ensure the
public’s safety from potential terrorist attacks.
The lack of preparedness of the authorities was detailed in a new report
by a parliamentary committee called The Community Development
and Justice Standing Committee. One problem discussed in the report
is that security guards working at various events often do not receive
any training to prepare for terrorist attacks. However, they are often
inevitably the first responders to attacks. In addition, police often do
not provide security advice to organizations before they hold events in
crowded places. While security at larger events, such as soccer matches,
tend to be adequate, the report noted that smaller ad hoc events were more
susceptible to terrorism because they are soft targets.
Another issue is that unlicensed contractors can often gain access
to sensitive locations. The report found one unlicensed contractor, for
example, was working in a police station in Perth. In response to the
report, the Premier of Western Australia, Mark McGowan, stated that
Western Australia is vast and police could not be everywhere at once. He
also expressed confidence that the leadership of the police would do all
it could to prepare for all eventualities. While the report exposed some
gaps in counterterrorism in Western Australia, the overall reaction to
the report in Australia appeared to be positive and it is believed that it
could lead to improved preparedness for terrorist attacks. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“The report found both local government and the

security industry were neither adequately resourced to
deal with terrorist threats nor adequately trained.”

Source: “WA Police not doing enough to protect public from
terrorism, report finds,” Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
18 October 2018. https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-1018/wa-police-not-doing-enough-to-protect-public-fromterrorism/10393560
Authorities are not doing enough to protect West Australians
from terrorist attacks, and a lack of coordination among agencies
and inadequate resources are not helping, a parliamentary
committee has found. The Community Development and Justice
Standing Committee’s initial report into the state’s preparedness
for a terrorist incident found police were reluctant to provide
counter-terrorism security advice for private organisations
holding events in crowded places.
While the management of major venues such as Perth Arena
and Perth Stadium were willing to strengthen their venues and
fulfill their duty of care, the report found their efforts were being
undermined by the attitude of police. Although the community
and national bodies like the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation (ASIO) are saying that the Western Australian
Police need to be more proactive and provide more advice to
owners and operators of crowded places, the Western Australian
Police are seemingly reluctant to engage in that space.
The report found both local government and the security industry
were neither adequately resourced to deal with terrorist threats
nor adequately trained. While security and major public events
was generally adequate, smaller or ad hoc events and those held
in regional areas were more susceptible to terrorism. In one case
uncovered by the committee, an unlicensed security contractor
was found to be undertaking work inside the armoury of a Perth
police station.
Premier Mark McGowan said police and the State Government
did all they could to protect Western Australians from the threat of
terrorism.

Perth Stadium in December 2017.

Source: Samuel Wiki [CC0], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Perth_Stadium,_December_2017_01.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia Cultivates Libyan Ties
OE Watch Commentary: Since the overthrow of
Muammar Gaddafi in 2011, and in particular over the past few
years, Russia has gained influence in Libya by cultivating ties
with key players involved in the ongoing struggle for power.
According to the accompanying Arabic-language media
excerpts, the Kremlin has become an essential ally to Khalifa
Haftar, the leader of the Libyan National Army (LNA) based
in the country’s eastern half; it has also maintained warm
relations with Haftar’s rivals in the Tripoli-based Government
of National Accord (GNA); and most recently, it has reached
out to Gaddafi loyalists.
Khalifa Haftar commands Libya’s strongest single fighting
force and favors a military solution to the Libyan conflict.
According to the first two accompanying articles, from the
Qatari daily al-Araby al-Jadid, this now puts him at odds with
his main regional backers (Egypt and the UAE), who over
the past several months have sought a political solution by
reaching out to Haftar’s rivals, including “officers and soldiers
from Misrata and in the ‘Bunyan al Marsous’ forces.” Their
goal is to establish “a military council that includes officers
representing all political factions, including those loyal to the
previous regime.” Haftar, according to these reports, “does not
want to share power in the military institution” and disagrees
with the proposed contours of a negotiated settlement. If
his relations with Egypt and the UAE were to deteriorate,
Haftar would be forced to rely on Russia, “which deals with
him according to its own interests and has not directly stated
support for him.”
A key area where Russia and Haftar are closely aligned
involves weapons transfers: Libya remains under an
international arms embargo which both want lifted. According
to the editor of a Russian military magazine, “[Russia] may
circumvent the embargo by providing Haftar with weapons in
accordance with contracts signed in the Gaddafi era, that is
before the embargo was put in place.” Rumors that they have
covertly begun doing so abound. Haftar’s relationship with
the Russian military was punctuated by a surprise visit to
Moscow shortly before the Palermo Conference on Libya in
early November 2018, where he was shown meeting with top
Russian military leaders.
Egypt’s overtures to anti-Haftar militias and political leaders
in western Libya are in line with Russia’s overall approach to
the conflict. As noted in the third article, also from al-Araby
al-Jadid, “Official Russian policy toward Libya is based on
the principle of being on the same field with all key players,
in order to achieve a strategic objective.” On the heels of the
Palermo conference, the Kremlin’s key operative in Libya,
Lev Dengov, announced that Moscow is courting Muammar
Gaddafi’s son, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi. Although Saif al-Islam
is currently barred from participating in politics, Dengov
believes that he could appoint a representative and should be
involved in the process, since he has “political weight and
Sergei Shoigu meeting with Khalifa Haftar, Commander of the Libyan National Army (2017).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12137732@egNews, CC 4.0.
importance in the country” and would represent “a specific
group of people that support all that is related to Gaddafi and his family.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)
(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia Cultivates Libyan Ties
“…Official Russian policy toward Libya is based on the principle of being on the same field with all key
players…”
Source:
‫تفاصيل مقرتح مرصي جديد لتوحيد مؤسسة الجيش يف ليبيا‬
Osama Ali. “Details on New Egyptian Proposal to Unify Libyan Army,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 14 October 2018. https://goo.gl/kKJE2a
According to the anonymous source, the new proposal rests on creating a military council that includes officers representing all political
factions, including those loyal to the previous regime. Haftar would be the council president without having absolute power, as the proposal
calls for the military decisions to be taken by consensus… Last March, Egyptian sources in the presidential commission on Libyan affairs
disclosed details on an Egyptian-Emirati proposal to unify political and military leadership in Libya… Mohhi al-Din Zakariya, a Libyan
security specialist, said that “Egypt is growing closer to all parties in the country. The Cairo meetings allow it to become closer not just to the
Sarraj government but also to officers and soldiers from Misrata and in the ‘Bunyan al Marsous’ forces.
Source: ‫حفرت منزعج من تراجع دعم حلفائه ويل ّوح بتهديد األمن املرصي‬
Osama Ali. “Haftar Bothered by Declining
Support from Allies, Hints at Threatening
Egyptian Security,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 10
November 2018. https://goo.gl/veP4Uk

Source:
‫هل تع ّزز روسيا وجودها العسكري يف ليبيا؟‬
Rami al-Qaliouni. “Is Russia Strengthening
its Military Presence in Libya?” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 12 October 2018. https://goo.gl/
HGzUfa

… Haftar “began realizing that his regional
and global allies do not want to eliminate
him nor do they want to support his wishes
to resolve the Libyan issue militarily. Haftar
does not want to share power in the military
institution, and his backers do not appear
to support this position” … “Haftar’s only
remaining supporter is Moscow, which deals
with him according to its own interests and has
not directly stated support for him. He knows
well that his former allies, such as the UAE,
are no longer excited about him and prefer
silence toward recent political events. Cairo
wants to keep Haftar to protect its security
interests along the border, but it does not see
opposing the Government of National Accord
(GNA) as being in its interests but rather seeks
to negotiate with it and to convince Haftar to
agree to become part of a military institution
under his leadership but under the control of the
GNA. Haftar has recently begun seeking a way
out, including by opening communication with
the African Union through a message conveyed
by a military delegation last week, asking its
president for support. He then resorted to
Russia, in order to ease the brunt of the results
of the upcoming Palermo Conference on his
situation.”

Over the past two years, Russia has sought
to establish intensive communications
with Libya’s various factions, seeking to
regain the massive contracts it lost with the
fall of Muammar Gaddafi in 2011. This is
shown by the repeated visits made by both
Haftar and the head of the government of
national accord (GNA) Fayez al-Sarraj to
Moscow, which seeks to mediate between
the two. [Political Science Professor
Gregory] Lukyanov explained that “Official
Russian policy toward Libya is based on
the principle of being on the same field
with all key players, in order to achieve a
strategic objective and reinstate political
and economic channels to an acceptable
level, in a way that benefits both parties
on the medium and long term” … Despite
Haftar’s desire to obtain weapons from
Russia, Moscow until now does not wish
to violate the global embargo on weapons
exports to Libya, at least openly. Andrey
Frolov, the editor in chief of the magazine
“Weapons Exports,” believes that Russia
“may circumvent the embargo by providing
Haftar with weapons in accordance with
contracts signed in the Gaddafi era, that is
before the embargo was put in place.”

Source:‫  تواصل رويس مع نجل القذايف يثري ردود فعل ليبية متباينة‬
Jamal Jawhar. “Russian Communications
with Gaddafi’s Son Elicits Diverse Reactions
in Libya,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 15 November
2018. https://goo.gl/CucPDS
The head of the Russian contact group for
resolving the Libyan crisis, Lev Dengov,
disclosed the existence of communications
between his country and Saif al-Islam
Gaddafi. He characterized Gaddafi as
“having political weight and importance
in the country, therefore he will be among
the parties participating in the Libyan
political process.” Dengov added, speaking
to Russia’s Sputnik news agency the day
before yesterday, “Saif al-Islam is extremely
positive, and we may say he will be one of
the parties to a political settlement for a
simple reason, namely there is a specific
group of people that support all that is
related to Gaddafi and his family.” He
added that “Saif al-Islam is very optimistic.
He has a team that supports him. We
should not forget, though, that there are
sanctions against him and even if they are
lifted, I don’t think his participation will
be legitimate, since the elections will take
place under UN auspices… I believe that in
any case Saif al-Islam will need to name a
candidate to represent him and the interests
of the tribes, including the Qadhadhfa.
Russia will never support someone whom the
Libyan people do not support.”

OE Watch | December 2018

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Moving Forward on Turkish Acquisition of Russian S-400s
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey signed a $2.5 billion agreement with Russia in December 2017 to purchase the S-400 anti-aircraft missile
system and remains committed to it, despite the concerns of its NATO allies. The accompanying passages, one from the Turkish state owned
Anadolu Ajansı and the other from English-language daily Hurriyet Daily News, provide information regarding why Turkey is moving ahead
with the purchase, the steps it is taking to incorporate this system into its defense capabilities and the possible implication on Turkey as a NATO
member.
The first passage from Anadolu Ajansı, quotes Turkish Minister of Defense Hulusi Akar stating, the S-400 purchase “was not a matter of
choice for us, but necessity.” Turkey plans to complete the installation of the S-400 by October 2019 and is in the process of selecting the
personnel to send to Russia for training at the beginning of 2019. Akar did not reveal any details regarding where the air-defense system will be
deployed. Additionally, Akar claimed that this system will not interfere with NATO and that the concerns of their allies were irrelevant.
The second article from Hurriyet Daily News notes that while Turkey strengthens NATO militarily, Russia has made efforts to exploit the
problems Turkey has had with its allies. The article quotes the former secretary general Rasmussen saying, “Russia is posing a threat to NATO,
not just militarily, but also in terms of hybrid warfare and disinformation campaigns.” Regardless, it appears that the Turkish government is
moving forward with the purchase of the S-400. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“No doubt Russia will exploit signs of a split in our alliance and will make offers you cannot refuse.”
Source: Merve Yıldızalp.“‘S-400’lerin kurulum
çalışmalarına Ekim 2019’da başlanacak’ (The installation
of S-400s will begin in October 2019),” Anadolu Ajansı,
25 October 2018. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/bilimteknoloji/s-400lerin-kurulum-calismalarina-ekim-2019dabaslanacak/1292537

Source: Barçın Yinanç.“Turkey will marginalize itself in NATO with the
S-400s purchase,” hurriyetdailynews.com, 25 October 2018. http://www.
hurriyetdailynews.com/opinion/barcin-yinanc/turkey-will-marginalize-itselfin-nato-with-the-s-400s-purchase-138243

Minister of Defense Hulusi Akar said “the installation
of the S-400 missile defense system will begin in October
2019.”…

Yet, despite being in the same alliance, Turkey has experienced severe
strains with some NATO countries, especially with the United States. Russia
has not missed the opportunity to exploit these rifts to widen the gap among
alliance members.

Akar highlighted that the S-400 is a matter of defense and
pointed out that there are serious aerial and missile threats
against Turkey and the Turkish population.
“Currently, we are in process of selecting personnel.
The selected personnel will be sent for training in Russia
starting in the beginning of 2019,” Akar said. “They will get
the necessary training there and then they will come back
for duty…”
Akar noted that the location where the system will be
placed is still in progress. [Turkish] Air Forces Command
is working to assess the aerial and missile threats. The
decision of where the [S-400] systems will be placed is
going to be made according to the assessment results.
…Saying that the anti-aircraft missile system will be used
independently from NATO systems, Akar said: “We find
U.S. and NATO concerns irrelevant. We never allow any
interference in U.S. or NATO systems. This was not a matter
of choice for us, but necessity …”
Akar said that Turkey wants to also be a producer, not
just a buyer, of these systems, stressing that it will continue
working on projects that incorporate Turkish collaboration
in production.

Turkey is… [a]NATO member enjoying good relations and intensive
cooperation on both bilateral and regional issues with Moscow…

Looking from that perspective, Turkey stands as a member that strengthens
NATO militarily, but weakens it politically.
Following the panel, I approached Rasmussen to ask him about his views on
Turkey…“Russia poses a threat to NATO, not just militarily, but also in terms
of hybrid warfare and disinformation campaigns,” he said.
Then he went on to say, “Obviously, we have some internal challenges like
Turkey…”
“…we are of course concerned about Turkey’s purchase of Russian military
equipment that is not compatible with NATO equipment. The risk is of course
that gradually Turkey will marginalize itself security wise within NATO. It
will marginalize itself not by NATO’s decision but by its own decision,” said
Rasmussen.
He said he agreed that Turkey was fulfilling its military commitments to
NATO, however, the government decision to purchase S-400s is not just
posing a political challenge but a strategic challenge, according to the former
secretary general.
“No doubt Russia will exploit signs of a split in our alliance and will make
offers you cannot refuse,” he said.
“My conclusion is we should keep Turkey as a full-fledged member and
we should step up our dialogue with the government in Ankara,” said
Rasmussen.

OE Watch | December 2018

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Equipping the IRGC with New Ballistic Missiles
OE Watch Commentary: Since the Iranian navy’s defeat in Operation
Praying Mantis in 1988, it has shied away from direct confrontation
between its large ships and the US navy and instead embraced
asymmetric swarming tactics with small speed boats. According to
the accompanying excerpted report from the Tasnim News Agency, an
outlet affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), the
IRGC has now developed anti-ship ballistic missiles with a range of 435
miles. While Iranian military and political leaders often exaggerate their
capability, the Islamic Republic has invested significantly in its domestic
military industries and has rolled out a number of other missiles, drones,
and military platforms.

“We can target ships 435 miles away.”

The commander of the IRGC Aerospace Force, General Amir Ali
Hajizadeh, mentions in the article that Iran has “good capabilities and
equipment in the fields of air defense more advanced than China, Russia,
France, and England.” While it has been noted that Iran has become
Iran testing its new anti-ship missile.
Source: Tasnim News, goo.gl/ZoD8ju, CC 4.0.
a significant producer of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), there are
questions about its air defense capabilities. The likelihood that Iranian engineers have reverse-engineered equipment purchased from abroad
has been noted, making Iranian missiles in the Persian Gulf a growing threat.
Within Iranian rhetoric, up to and including that of Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, a constant theme is that Iran as a littoral state has more of
a right to operate in the Persian Gulf than outside powers like the United States. Often, Khamenei refers to “the iron fist under a velvet glove”
to argue that US diplomacy is insincere so long as the its navy remains in the Persian Gulf and transits the Strait of Hormuz, which contradicts
the sanctity of international waters. That Iran is building up its anti-ship capabilities, if real, suggests that a doctrinal shift is underway in Iran.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Tajhiz Sepah beh Mushak-e Balistik daryaye ba barad 700 kilometer (Equipping the IRGC with a surface-to-sea ballistic missiles
with a 435 mile range),” Tasnim News Agency, 16 October 2018. www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1397/07/24/1854036
According to the defense correspondent of the Tasnim News Agency, at the sixth meeting of political officers of the Armed Forces based in
both Tehran and Alburz provinces and held by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)’s Aerospace Force, Gen. Amir Ali Hajizadeh,
commander of this Force, during the ceremony described the capabilities and achievements, both offensive and defensive, of the IRGC’s
Aerospace Force.
In this ceremony, he described the capabilities and achievements of the offensive and the defense of the aerospace force of the IRGC.
According to a Sobh-e Sadegh report, at the beginning of the meeting, Gen. Amir Ali Hajizadeh pointed out the three basic pillars to the
administration of the country: The Supreme Leader, people, and officials….
He stressed, “The world is witnessing that Iran ranks first in the region and seventh or eighth in the world and is ahead of the [North]
Koreans in the missile field. We are also in the top 15 countries in the world in terms of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) production more
advanced than China and Russia, and we have good capabilities and equipment in the fields of air defense more advanced than China, Russia,
France, and England.
General Amir Ali Hajizadeh pointed out that in 2007, the Supreme Leader ordered the commander at the time [and said], “I do not know if
a ballistic missile from land will hit a ship or not, and if you can do this, it is great work.” We followed from that, and we have empowered
our children and today we have succeeded. The coastal missiles are ballistic rather than cruise, and this is itself sophisticated technology. We
have produced [these] and can target ships 700 kilometers [435 miles] away.”

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a marketplace of ideas about the future of our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and community of action that continually explores the
future through collaborative partnerships and
continuous dialogue with academia and industry.
OE Watch | December 2018

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Mass Produce Altay Tank
OE Watch Commentary: On 9 November 2018 the Presidency
of Defense Industries of Turkey (SSB in its Turkish acronym)
signed a deal with Turkish defense contractor BMC to mass
produce 250 Altay main battle tanks. The Altay tank is believed to
be an improved version of South Korea’s K2 Black Panther tank.
The accompanying passage from the state-owned Anadolu Ajansı
provides information about the agreement for the production of
Altay tanks.
According to the passage, in the initial phase, 250 Altay tanks
will be manufactured and the Turkish Land Forces Command will
receive the delivery of the first tank within 18 months. The Turkish
and Qatari joint venture BMC will manufacture the tank, with
additional involvement of Turkish firms Roketsan, Aselsan, MKE
and Havelsan. BMC’s CEO Ethem Sancak, during the signing
ceremony, stated that SSB and the Turkish armed forces requested
to manufacture the Altay tanks 100 percent locally. However,
despite this request, the Turkish defense industry is still unable
to produce a Turkish-made engine. The president of SSB Ismail
Demir, stated that the engine will be foreign at this stage while
locally made engines are being developed. German MTU engines
will probably be used as the prototypes were produced using this
engine.
The first 40 tanks are projected to be relatively basic in design
and will carry the Akkor active protection system and some
additional armor. The other 210 tanks will have a more advanced
armor system and the capability to launch laser-guided projectiles
from their 120-mm main gun. They will also have electronic
command and control systems. Designing an unmanned Altay tank
was also in the contract. Turkey’s long-awaited Altay tank’s mass
production will certainly play a significant role in local armored
vehicle production and will be an important contribution to the
Turkish defense industry. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“The contract for the mass production of (Turkish)
Altay tank was signed in a ceremony at the state
Defense Industries Presidency (SSB).”
Source: Necati Keleş, “Altay tankının seri üretim sözleşmesi imzalandı
(Contract signed for the mass production of Altay tank),” Anadolu
Ajansı, 9 November 2018. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/gunun-basliklari/
altay-tankinin-seri-uretim-sozlesmesi-imzalandi/1306982
The contract for the mass production of Altay tank was signed in a
ceremony at the state Defense Industries Presidency (SSB)…
…The state Defense Industries President [Ismail] Demir, ... armored
vehicle maker BMC’s Chairman Ethem Sancak, Chairman of Aselsan
Haluk Görgün, and General Manager of Roketsan Selçuk Yasar were
present at the signing ceremony for the Altay [tank] mass production
contract.
The project includes mass production of 250 Altay main battle tanks.
The contract includes life-cycle logistical support and the establishment
and operation of the Tank Systems Technology Center. The first Altay
tank is projected to be delivered to Land Forces Command in 18 months.
As part of the contract one unmanned Altay tank will also be designed,
developed, and manufactured. Altay tanks have a 120-mm gun,
electronic command and control systems, and armor…
Demir in a speech during the ceremony said the Altay tank is a mile
stone in the development of the Turkish defense industry.
Demir said foreign engines will be used in the first Altay tanks and in
the future locally [made] engines will be used…
Regarding the engine of the tank, Demir said Turkey’s main aim was to
maximize the local production rate in such defense projects.
“We need to overcome obstacles that obstruct Turkey’s ability to
move independently. We are, of course, not closing the doors to foreign
partners. Our doors remain open to any firms which want to cooperate
with us…”

OEWATCH
community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #11
November 2018

Foreign news & PersPectives oF the oPerational environment

1RL257E Krasukha-4
Electronic Warfare System
EURASIA
3
5
6
8
9
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
21
22
23

Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan Electronic Warfare
Battalions
Russian MoD Considers a “Pocket” Iskander
The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile Defense System Is
Coming!
More Muscle for the Northern Fleet
Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
Why Russians Fight in Syria
Increased Economic Strains for Russian Military Personnel
Military Benefits of the Caspian Sea Convention for Russia’s
Power Projection Capabilities
The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border
Gauging Armenian and Azerbaijani Military Exercises
Moscow Pushes Own Approaches to Cyber Security on Rest
of CSTO
Russian De-dollarization: Economic Counter-Attack?
Polish Perspective on Russian Disinformation Campaigns
Social Media Restrictions for Russian Security
NATO Arctic Exercise Draws Russian Response
French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route
Russian Coast Guard Expanding in the Arctic
India and the Arctic?
Bulgarian Fighter Aircraft Acquisition

INDO-PACIFIC

AFRICA

49 Yemen’s Civil War Fails to Discourage Horn of Africa Refugees
Made-in-China 2025
50 Cameroon Prison Break Signals Rising Anglophone Insurgency
A Look at the PLA’s Youth Aviation Programs
Recruit Training Extended for New PLA Recruits to Increase 51 South Sudan’s Civil War Death Toll Reaches 400,000
52 Nigeria’s Chukwu on Cross-Border, Counter-Boko Haram
Readiness
Operations
The Growing Face of China’s Civil-Military Integration
53 Environmental Crimes Reportedly Leading Funding Source for
Initiative
Terrorists
Poor Training and Insufficient Personnel Hamper Chinese
54 Military Intervention for Ebola Outbreak in DRC
Maritime Militia Development
30 Chinese-Nepalese Anti-Terror Training Causing Concern in 55 With Tight Budgets, South Africa’s Military Strains to Meet
Mandates
India
56 Partisanship Alleged in Promotion of Malian Generals
31 India Upgrades Its MiG-29s
57 Will Corruption in South Sudan Torpedo Peace Plan?
32 Singapore Unites Southeast Asia to Counter Terrorism
33 Is It Too Late for the Maldives to Lift Itself Out From Under
China’s Hold?
LATIN AMERICA
34 Vietnam Begins Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan
58 A Bolsonaro Brazil and the FSP
59 Mexican President-Elect Plans to Extend Federal Security
Presence
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
60 Worse to Come in Venezuela
35 Iranian Government Details Ahvaz Terrorist Incident
60 Overton Window Shift on Venezuela
36 Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use
37 Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Confirms Use of Armed 61 Chinese Medical Aid to Venezuela
62 ELN and FARC Seek Sanctuary
Drones in Syria
63 Colombia May Return to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields
38 Iran to Build New Missile System?
64 Protests Disturb Peace Commonly Associated with Costa Rica
39 Turkey Tests Anti-torpedo Torpedo
65 Student Marches as a Form of Struggle
40 Turkish Naval Special Forces
41 The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the Middle East
43 Russia and China Help Egypt’s Space Industry Move
Forward
44 Supreme Leader’s Advisor: United States Common Enemy
of Iran and China
45 Turkish and Iranian Cooperation to Fight Terrorism
46 Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s Drilling Plan
48 The “Soft War” on Hezbollah
24
26
27
28
29

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | December 2018

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Border Guard Post Overrun, Guards Abducted
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic of Iran has long faced low-level
insurgency and insecurity in its Sistan and Baluchestan Province, which includes the
entirety of Iran’s border with Pakistan and several dozen miles of its frontier with
Afghanistan. The region is both sparsely populated and dominated by extremely rough
and inhospitable terrain. The local tension with the central government in Tehran is
motivated not only by ethnicity—the Baluch are distinct from Persians, inhabit both
sides of the Iran-Pakistan border, and have long harbored a nationalist movement—but
they are also overwhelming Sunni and complain about sectarian discrimination from
Iran’s Shi’ite leadership. The accompanying excerpted article from the Tasnim News
Agency highlights a 15 October 2018 incident in which insurgents overran the Mirjaveh
border post, the main border crossing between Iran and Pakistan, and kidnapped
several paramilitary Basijis and border police manning the crossing. The article
suggests that there was collusion within the Iranian base, which enabled the seizure
of the 12 Iranian servicemen. Jaish ul-Adl (Army of Justice), a Pakistan-based Salafi
group, claimed responsibility. On 31 October, Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad
Javad Zarif traveled to Pakistan to urge resolution of the incident, which increasingly
represents a thorn in relations between Iran and Pakistan.

Source: “Rabudeh Shodan Ta’dadi az Basijian-e
Bumi va Merzbanan dar Noqteh-e Sifr Marz (The
Abduction of a Number of Indigenous Basijis and
Border Guards from the Zero Point of the Border),”
Tasnim News Agency, 16 October 2018. https://www.
tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1397/07/24/1854143
According to a report by the defense correspondent
of the Tasnim News Agency, citing a report from
Sepah [Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corp] News:
Last night [15 October], a number of indigenous
Basijis and border forces who were at the Mirjaveh
border post. They were kidnapped by the betrayal
and collusion of agents or intruders of the counterrevolutionary groups. This announcement continued
that the base had good fortifications, and reminded:
The agents of terrorist groups are guided and
supported by foreign [intelligence] services, and by
deception and infiltrating agents, this incident took
place at the zero marker of the border and in front of
a Pakistani border guard station.

Of interest in the article is the fact that Iran had deployed “indigenous” Basijis to
staff the post, an indication that Iranian authorities seek to utilize ideological loyalists
among local ethnicities to be the face of its security. That the same article shares
the assessment that infiltrated agents helped conduct the operation from the inside,
however, could suggest discord within the security forces about such a strategy and might signal a forthcoming decision to revert to staffing of
years past, in which Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps units not native to Baluchistan were the first line of local security and defense. Lastly,
the excerpted “reminder” that the terrorists had external support fulfills a common rhetorical theme blaming all local insecurity on the United
States, Saudi Arabia, or both. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The agents of terrorist groups are guided and supported by foreign [intelligence] services.”

The Iran-Pakistan Border.

Source: Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Iran_-_Pakistan_border_-_panoramio.jpg, franek2, Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0

OE Watch | December 2018

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Law Enforcement Forces Receive 12 UAVs
OE Watch Commentary: Within the
Iranian context, the Law Enforcement
Forces (LEF) are more than simply a
police force, but rather often serve parallel
domestic functions to the paramilitary
Basij. In the accompanying excerpted
article from the Mehr News Agency,
Defense Minister Amir Hatami announced
that the Ministry of Defense would increase
the armaments and technologies available
to the LEF for use in border control,
surveillance, and combating smugglers. He
specifically announced the transfer of 12
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), both the
Mohajer and Sadeq models, to the LEF.
Alongside the Ababil, the Mohajer was
the earliest indigenous Iranian UAV line.
Iran developed the first prototype in 1985,
and it was first used later that year. While
Iranian forces used it mostly to take photos
of Iraqi strongholds, it was also Iran’s first
weaponized UAV. When the Mohajer-4
was unveiled in September 2014, Iran’s
Deputy Defense Minister claimed that it
could shoot down helicopters, fighter jets,
and cruise missiles. The Mohajir-4, now
built by the Qods Aviation Industries,
reportedly has a 10 horsepower engine, a
6,500 foot flight ceiling, and a maximum
speed of 75 miles per hour. It has become
a mainstay of the regular army’s ground
forces. The Iranian government first
unveiled the Sadeq in 2014 and claims the
Sadeq can fly above the speed of sound and
at a flight ceiling of 25,000 feet.
That the Iranian military more broadly,
and the LEF specifically, are flying drones
and utilizing them to conduct surveillance
and security during the Arba’in religious
festivities, when large numbers of Iranian
pilgrims travel to Iraq, suggests their
capabilities are to a large extent real and
that they are becoming a normal tool in the
Iranian security forces’ toolbox. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The Ministry of Defense will stand firm with the Law Enforcement
Forces.”

Iran’s Mohajer-6 drone on display.

Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://newsmedia.tasnimnews.com/Tasnim/Uploaded/Image/1396/11/16/1396111614450867913235454.jpg.

Source: “Anva-e Pehpad, Balgerd, va Tajhizat-e Entizami Shari beh NAJA Tahvil Dadeh Ast
(Types of UAVs, Helicopters, and urban security equipment delivered to the LEF),” Mehr News
Agency, 8 October 2018. https://www.mehrnews.com/news/4424588
According to a report from the public relations bureau of the Ministry of Defense, Gen. Amir
Hatami [said]… The Ministry of Defense has always been prepared to engage seriously with the
Law Enforcement Forces to equip the organization with the best defense and law enforcement
products, and by divine power and through the wisdom and guidance of the Supreme Leader,
and with the government’s support for the dedicated and revolutionary experts and scientists
of the Ministry of Defense and also the support of the armed forces and their reliance on
indigenous knowledge, and despite all sanctions, they were able to tap the capabilities of
knowledge-based companies, and optimize and deliver usable defense products to the Law
Enforcement Forces based on the needs of this organization, and today we are witnessing
the delivery of a small part of these products to the Law Enforcement Forces. Amir Hatami,
referring to the fact that the Ministry of Defense will always stand alongside the Revolutionary
Guards and the Law Enforcement Forces in establishing and developing national security,
said, “Today… the Ministry of Defense will stand firm with the Law Enforcement Forces in the
stability of national security.”
Amir Hatami added, “Thank God Almighty, at this ceremony and in the presence of my
dear brother General Ashtari from the Iran Aviation Industries Organization of the Ministry
of Defense, delivered 12 Mohajer and Sadeq UAVs, six helicopters, and new advanced
communications equipment for special forces, that were manufactured by two organizations of
the defense and electronic industries, and the beloved forces are provided such equipment so
they can participate in promoting security and confronting dangerous phenomena that threaten
the law and social security of the country.

OE Watch | December 2018

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syria’s MERV: Uptick in Anti-Kurdish Sentiment
among Arabs
OE Watch Commentary: Recent news items from
local media indicate that Arab residents of Syria’s
Middle Euphrates River Valley (MERV) are growing
increasingly dissatisfied with life under the USbacked Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). The SDF is
dominated by Kurds but includes Arab units that help
maintain a modicum of local support. One of these Arab
units, the “Deir Ezzor Military Council,” took heavy
casualties in the October 2018 push to expel ISIS from its
final Syrian holdout near the border with Iraq. As noted
in the first accompanying excerpt from al-Modon, the
council’s leader blamed SDF leadership for the losses
and resigned; fighters under his command went home,
“accusing Kurdish SDF leaders of sending them into a
bloodbath.”
In early November, a prominent tribal leader from
Raqqa named Bashir al-Huwaidi was assassinated by
unknown gunmen. He had just left a meeting with SDFallied local political leaders. ISIS took credit for the
assassination, and the SDF was quick to concur that an
ISIS cell was to blame. Local Arabic-language media
sources, however, were unpersuaded and instead
blamed the SDF. Leaders of several local tribes issued
statements condemning the SDF, and according to the
second accompanying passage, from al-Araby al-Jadid:
“Tensions are at their highest, and the incident will not
pass easily. A new stage has begun in the dealings with
[the SDF], which behaves as an occupier with residents of
the province.”
Recent local media stories also accuse Kurdish SDF
leaders of amassing power and wealth through the illicit
drug trade. Although Syria is considered a narcotics
transit country, the production, consumption and export
of pharmaceutical psychostimulants and cannabis/
hashish have increased markedly during the current
conflict. In several areas under SDF control, including
the border towns of Tel Abyad and Kobani, cannabis
cultivation has become widespread. According to the
third accompanying passage, “The growing of hashish
(cannabis) is fully monopolized by militias of the
Kurdish defense units (PYD).”
The Syrian government is not oblivious to the
opportunities presented by Arab-Kurdish friction in the
MERV. Back in March, as noted in the accompanying
passage from Arabi21, it exploited widespread indigence
and simmering anti-Kurdish sentiment in the area to
recruit local Arabs into a loyalist militia. Since then,
the economic fortunes of the Arab tribes have hardly
improved, while anti-Kurdish sentiment is on the rise.
Barring alternatives, the article muses, Arab tribal
leaders may eventually fall back on the government for
recourse. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫استقاالت جامعية من مجلس ديرالزور العسكري‬
“Mass Resignations from the Deir Ezzor Military Council,” al-Modon, 31 October
2018. https://goo.gl/zSWRvn
Following the advances made by ISIS to stop the “Defeating Terrorism” battle
launched by the SDF in Hajin, rural Deir Ezzor, problems between SDF’s Kurdish
and Arab components were aggravated, according to al-Modon correspondent
Nawras al-Arfi. The Arab component, represented by the Deir Ezzor Military
Council, lost nearly 100 fighters in the recent battle and was not able to recover
the bodies of tens of them, which ISIS burned and tortured. Tens of the Council’s
fighters were captured and tens others injured, amidst a situation of neglect and
absence of needed medical services. This was preceded by a marginalizing of Arab
leaders, giving Kurdish leaders the final word… As a result of the marginalization,
the head of the Deir Ezzor Military Council, Ahmed Abou Khoula resigned from his
position two weeks ago. The resignation was kept under wraps, in an attempt by the
SDF to contain the situation until the end of the battle, which has gone differently
than the SDF had hoped. On Tuesday news of the resignation was circulated, at the
same time as many Council members put down their weapons, accusing Kurdish
SDF leaders of sending them into a bloodbath…
Source:
‫ وتوتر متصاعد يف الرقة‬...‫تعطّل حملة قسد رشق الفرات‬
Amin al-Asi. “SDF Campaign East of the Euphrates Halts… As Tensions Grow in
Raqqa,” al-Araby al-Jadid. 4 November 2018. https://goo.gl/RKvNr2
Raqqa Province is experiencing major tensions after the assassination of a wellknown tribal leader. Leaders in the Kurdish Units [SDF] controlling the province
are being blamed for being behind this unprecedented attack… Despite the fact
that ISIS took credit for the assassination of sheikh Bashir al-Huwaidi via its Amaq
agency, local sources say that two leaders in the Kurdish forces are behind the
attack, adding that the victim was opposed to Kurdish military presence in the
Arab-majority area. The “Euphrates Post” network published a video recording
of the moment the people expelled the head of the Raqqa Civilian Council, Layla
Mustafa, members of the council from the SDF, and a SDF military leader
named Luqman al-Saha, from sheikh al-Huwaidi’s memorial service in the alMashlab neighborhood of Raqqa… The assassination is expected to have major
repercussions. According to a local source, “Tensions are at their highest, and the
incident will not pass easily. A new stage has begun in the dealings with this force,
which behaves as an occupier with residents of the province.”
Source:
‫ الجميع يتعاطى‬:‫الحشيش يف الرقة‬
Khalil Asaf. “Hashish in Raqqa: Everyone is Using it!” al-Modon, 13 October 2018.
https://goo.gl/sDi7KJ
Selling, smoking and growing hashish and taking and selling Captagon pills have
become widespread phenomena among the youth of Raqqa, whose city has gone
from ISIS control to SDF control following a bloody and destructive battle… A
former FSA fighter in Raqqa told al-Modon: “The growing of hashish (cannabis) is
fully monopolized by militias of the Kurdish defense units (PYD). Most of it is grown
in Ain al-Arab (Kobani) and Tal Abyad. The plants are hidden by planting them in
the middle of corn fields. I saw Captagon pills for the first time in preparation for
the Raqqa battle. The Arab units in the SDF received an allotment, since they were
fighting at the front. I believe the Americans knew this”… In today’s Raqqa, which
has been exhausted by war and whose residents suffer from sickness due to polluted
water mixed with city water, an adolescent may work selling water drawn from the
river or gathering metal scraps from destroyed buildings, then spend the rest of the
day smoking hashish, which holds the future of the region.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Syria’s MERV: Uptick in Anti-Kurdish Sentiment
among Arabs
“… Tensions are at their highest, and the incident will not pass easily… ”
Source:
‫ ما أهدافه وماذا عن “قسد”؟‬..‫النظام يشكل مليشيا رشق الرقة‬
Mustafa Mohammed. “The Regime Forms a Militia East of the Euphrates… What are its Goals and What About the SDF?” Arabi21, 6 March
2018. https://goo.gl/nDkrVj
A news source in eastern Raqqa disclosed that the Syrian regime is determined to form new militias in the area under the name of “Sanadid
al-Jazeera Shield”… The “Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently” website said: “The new militia will be part of the Syrian regime’s 5th
Legion, financed by Iran, and based in the village of Zur Shamar in rural eastern Raqqa. The source explained that the regime tasked Walid
al-Shamari with leading this militia, which will work to “recruit people using money, taking advantage of the region’s extreme poverty.”
In this regard, the deputy head of the opposition Raqqa Provincial Council, Mohammed Hijazi… [said] that the regime will exploit the
marginalization of Arabs in Raqqa due to the SDF’s discriminatory policies, particularly toward tribal members. Hijazi said that the regime
will benefit from the overwhelming anger of Raqqa’s people during the Kurdish militia’s occupation of their city, eventually leading them to
fight without declaring war on the SDF or the United States. He believes the regime has a high chance of success in Raqqa, due to the fact that
most residents oppose the SDF and its policies in Raqqa…

Fighters of the People’s Protection Units of the Syrian Democratic Forces on the bank of the Euphrates east of the city of Raqqa in northern Syria.
Source: Voice of America [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:YPG-SDF_fighters_near_the_Euphrates_east_of_Raqqa.png.

Reconnaissance-in-Force Russian Style
By Lester W. Grau

“Integrated fires, rapid detect-destroy systems and the controlled, merciless
onslaught of smaller robot tanks and assault vehicles may rip through robust
defenses to determine the true nature of the defense and prepare the main attack
to totally dismantle it. To the Russian way of thinking, the reconnaissance-inforce remains a viable method of tactical intelligence. Learning how to employ it
optimally is the current challenge.”
This paper was originally published in Armor journal’s Winter-Spring 2018 edition.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/230764
OE Watch | December 2018

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
PKK’s Influence on Turkish-Iraqi Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey and Iraq have historically
had challenging issues to tackle. As the new government forms
in Baghdad, the Turkish government seeks to insert its influence
and build stronger relations with it. However, the presence of the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in Northern Iraq continues to
impact Turkish-Iraqi relations as Turkey’s main objective in Iraq
is to fight the PKK with the support of the Iraqi government. The
accompanying excerpted article from the pro-government think tank
Seta Foundation, argues that the most pressing issue in Turkish-Iraqi
relations is the PKK’s presence in Iraq.
According to the author, while there are other policy issues on the
table, the most pressing issue in Turkey’s policy towards Iraq is the
presence of terrorist organizations, especially the PKK in Iraq. The
author further argues that the Iraqi central government’s inability
to control the areas bordering Turkey has led the PKK to form a
strong presence, especially in northern Iraq. The PKK’s presence
in Iraq affects Turkey’s relations with the Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) as well, since Turkey blames the KRG for
not cracking down on the PKK. Turkey expects the Iraqi central
government to take measures to increase its border security to curb
the PKK’s cross-boundary movement. It has also tried to enhance its
economic relations with an additional border gate to increase trade
between both countries. While Turkish Foreign Minister Çavuşoğlu
highlighted the cooperation between the two countries, he also made
clear that Turkey will continue its cross-boundary operations into
Iraq against the PKK despite Baghdad’s concerns over violating its
sovereignty. The Minister continued by saying that Turkey will fight
terrorism regardless of its location and expects the support of the new
government in Baghdad. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: Kemal İnat, “Türkiye-Irak İlişkilerinde Terör Sorunu
(Terrorism Problem in Turkish-Iraq Relations),” Setav.org, 13 October
2018. https://www.setav.org/turkiye-irak-iliskilerinde-teror-sorunu/
The main objective of Turkey’s Iraq policy is to completely eradicate
the existence of the PKK terror organization which continue to exist
with the direct or indirect support of global and regional actors
despite being labeled as a terrorist organization.
We can talk about three intertwined main issues as Turkey forms
its Iraq policy. These can be categorized as clearing terrorist
organizations from Iraq which pose a danger to Turkey’s security,
protecting Iraq’s territorial integrity, and developing Turkish-Iraqi
economic relations for mutual benefits.
The most important of these [issues] is to clear terrorist organizations
out of Iraq. It is known that for decades Iraqi central government has
had challenges exerting its authority over the areas bordering Turkey.
As a result, the power vacuum in these areas has been filled by the
terrorist organizations that stage attacks on and endanger the security
of Turkey…
The power vacuum not only provided the opportunity for the legal
Kurdish parties KDP [Kurdistan Democratic Party] and the PYD
[Patriotic Union of Kurdistan] to establish an autonomous region,
but also it allowed the PKK to increase its presence in Northern Iraq
and move the headquarters of its terrorist attacks from Syria to Iraq…
These [Kurdish] parties have refused to step up to end the existence of
the PKK in the region.
[Turkish] Foreign Minister [Mevlüt] Çavuşoğlu gave a clear message
during his visit to Iraq… to summarize: The system you are trying
to establish in Iraq should not have a place for the PKK, otherwise
Turkey will work to destabilize your system.

“The main objective of Turkey’s Iraq policy is to completely eradicate the existence of the PKK terror
organization.”

Kurdish PKK Guerillas (2016).

Source: Kurdishstruggle [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PKK_female_figher%CC%A002.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Rising Tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean
over Natural Gas
OE Watch Commentary: The maritime disputes in the Eastern Mediterranean over hydrocarbon reserves remain combustible as littoral states
declared overlapping exclusive economic zones. The political situation in Cyprus adds another layer of complexity and poses a greater challenge
to the giant energy companies getting contracts from the littoral states. The excerpted passage from Al-Monitor, a news website with analysts
from the Middle East, provides insights into the situation, which is becoming militarized as the tension between Turkey, Greece and the Republic
of Cyprus in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea increases.
The author states that Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan calling certain foreign oil companies “bandits of the sea” on 4 November is an
indication of rising tensions. The companies that President Erdogan referred to are French energy giant Total SA and Eni SpA of Italy, among
others. These companies have secured permits from the Republic of Cyprus to conduct natural gas explorations. On 18 October, Turkey deployed
its survey drilling ship Barbaros to start oil and gas exploration in the north of Cyprus’s self-claimed drilling areas licensed to Turkish Petroleum
(TPAO). Before Erdogan’s statement on 24 October, the Turkish Minister of Defense stated that “[we] will never tolerate new harassment. We
have [taken] all kinds of measures. I want everyone to know that we will not tolerate a fait accompli of any sort on this subject.” Also, Turkish
drilling ship Fatih, escorted by a navy assault boat and a submarine, began survey drilling 60 miles off the coast of the Turkish city of Antalya.
Turkish Energy Minister Fatih Donmez signaled the possibility of another drilling ship being deployed to the Eastern Mediterranean to accelerate
exploration. While Turkey deployed its drilling ships, the Republic of Cyprus and Greece formed the Middle East Gas Forum with Egypt to
coordinate natural gas exploitation policies and counter balance Turkish ambitions.
This exploration traffic has escalated tensions in the Mediterranean, especially between the Republic of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey. It has also
further complicated the Cyprus issue, which is already one of the most intractable conflicts in the region. According to Turkey “a Greek frigate
tried to block a Turkish vessel” on 18 October, but Turkish warships prevented it from doing so. The rivalry over hydrocarbon reserves in the
Eastern Mediterranean between Greece and Turkey has also spilled over to the Aegean Sea. Turkish Minister of Defense Akar threatened to take
military action if Greece extends its territorial waters in the Aegean in response to former Greek Foreign Minister Nikos Kaotzias’ announcement
of expanding its territorial waters from 6 to 12 nautical miles. The author concludes the article on a cautionary note stating, “the commanders
from Turkey, Greece and Cyprus must keep their cool when confronted with the risk of military engagement.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

“The feud has been brewing for years and now is threatening to boil over, especially as some governments
in the area have declared their own overlapping exclusive economic zones.”

Cyprus map from CIA World Factbook (2003).

Source: United States Central Intelligence Agency [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cy-map.png.

(continued)
OE Watch | December 2018

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Rising Tensions in the Eastern
Mediterranean over Natural Gas
Source: Metin Gurcan, “Militarization of Mediterranean rises with exploration disputes,” al-monitor.com, 8 November 2018.
https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/11/turkey-egypt-cyprus-mediterranean-tension-escalates.html
Tensions are rising quickly in the Eastern Mediterranean over sharing hydrocarbon reserves in the area.
The latest developments signal increasing volatility. On Nov. 4, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan called certain foreign oil companies
“bandits of the sea” and warned them against conducting exploration activities near Cyprus. Turkey controls the northern third of the divided
island…
The feud has been brewing for years and now is threatening to boil over, especially as some governments in the area have declared their own
overlapping exclusive economic zones (EEZs).
On Oct. 17, Turkey issued an advisory to ships in the area that it would be conducting seismic surveys in the Eastern Mediterranean
beginning the next day and running through Feb. 1.
Indeed, on Oct. 18, military tension over control of economic interests there grew as the Turkish seismic survey drilling ship Barbaros started
searching for oil and gas. The ship was exploring areas Ankara has licensed to Turkish Petroleum (TPAO) just north of Cyprus’ self-claimed
drilling areas.
That same day, according to Ankara, a Greek frigate tried to block the Turkish vessel, but was prevented from doing so by its Turkish navy
escort.
“We will never tolerate new harassment. We have [taken] all kinds of measures. I want everyone to know that we will not tolerate a fait
accompli of any sort on this subject,” Turkish Minister of Defense Hulusi Akar said Oct. 24. He also threatened military action if Greece acts
on plans to extend its territorial waters in the Aegean. Turkish government spokesman Omer Celik conveyed a similar message Oct. 31, one
day after the Turkish drilling ship Fatih… began drilling at the Alanya-1 borehole, 100 kilometers (60 miles) off Antalya. The ship will be
survey drilling for 150 days until early April under the protection of a navy assault boat and a submarine.
…Turkish Energy Minister Fatih Donmez noted that other shallow drilling work with the Fatih vessel is planned northwest of Cyprus in
November, adding that Turkey is about to buy a second drilling ship to ramp up exploration.
Meanwhile, Egyptian, Greek and Greek Cypriot leaders met Oct. 10 to discuss EEZs in the area of the Eastern Mediterranean near the
Greek island of Crete. The leaders also reaffirmed their commitment to explore gas reserves off the coast of Cyprus.
…If the rivalry over sharing hydrocarbon reserves continues, it could spill over to territorial waters and sovereignty issues, which would
only escalate tensions.
The Eastern Mediterranean has become an international problem. Turkish media reported Oct. 28 that Turkish F-16s challenged British war
planes that were conducting reconnaissance close to the Barbaros ship. Cypus has issued exploration permits to French energy giant Total
SA, (and) Italy’s Eni SpA...
…Turkey doesn’t accept agreements that Cyprus has made with Egypt, Lebanon and Israel to delineate the EEZs, as Ankara says they would
infringe on its rights.
Some experts feel Turkey should have declared EEZs… However, there is a growing opinion in Ankara that Turkey should declare an EEZ in
2019 and defend its sovereign rights in the Eastern Mediterranean more robustly.
In conclusion, the remainder of 2018 could be interesting, considering the pace of unfolding events and escalating militarization.
The grim fact everyone should bear in mind is: We are at the threshold of an era when commanders from Turkey, Greece and Cyprus must
keep their cool when confronted with the risk of military engagement…

OE Watch | December 2018

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egyptian Views on Arab Security
OE Watch Commentary: Military delegations
from countries belonging to the Middle East Strategic
Alliance (MESA), often referred to as a future “Arab
NATO,” gathered for their first exercise in midNovember 2018. Hosted by Egypt in its new and
expansive Mohammed Naguib military base, the
exercises involved forces from the United Arab
Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain and Jordan,
along with host Egypt. Lebanese and Moroccan forces
were present as observers.
The common thread between MESA members
is their Arab identity, reflected in the name of the
exercises: “Shield of the Arabs 1.” The exercises
prompted supportive media outlets to emphasize the
interconnectedness of Egyptian national security and
that of other Arab countries, particularly those in
the Gulf. For instance, the accompanying excerpted
opinion piece from the UAE’s al-Bayan repeatedly
stresses the shared destiny of Egypt and the broader
Arab community (Ummah). The author references
unnamed “enemies of the Ummah and of religion”
who are constantly seeking to undermine Egypt and
by extension the entire Ummah, since “[Egypt’s]
security cannot be separated from the security of the
Arab nation.”
In early November, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah
Sisi alluded to the interconnectedness of Egyptian and
Arab security. Speaking at the closing ceremonies of an
international youth festival in Egypt, he affirmed that
his country’s military would intervene directly if the
security of its Arab Gulf allies were to come under
threat. Although Sisi has used similar language in the
past, his actions on key Arab security issues, including
Yemen and Syria, have often diverged from those of
his Gulf allies, as noted in the second accompanying
article from Egypt’s Madamasr.
According to the accompanying passage from Egypt’s
semi-official al-Ahram, the fundamental threat to joint
Egypt-Arab security comes not from Iran but from
“transnational terrorism that has been sown in the
region by Western powers since 2011.” The deliberate
Western plan “to take us back to the age of ignorance”
is ultimately aimed at redrawing the region’s borders,
in a “clear and forthright plan from the West to benefit
the interests of Israel, to avoid Arab countries once
again being strong enough to confront them.” MESA,
the author believes, is a unified Arab response to
these challenges. In a similar vein, the accompanying
passage from the Egyptian daily al-Youm al-Sabaa
sees the “Shield of the Arabs 1” exercises as “sending
various messages to the US regarding the capacity of
Arabs to ally with one another without US sponsorship.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Egypt cannot ignore its national responsibility, and its
security cannot be separated from the security of the Arab
nation.”
Source:
‫أمن مرص والخليج العريب مسؤولية واحدة‬
Jalal Araf. “The Security of Egypt and the Arab Gulf is a Shared Responsibility,”
al-Bayan, 11 November 2018. https://www.albayan.ae/opinions/
articles/2018-11-11-1.3405694
Egypt understands well that it may be constantly targeted by its enemies and those
of the Arab community. Egypt understands well that its rise bothers many, and that
its progress, which pleases all Arabs, does not please the evil powers waiting in
ambush for it and the Arab nation… Arabs only want a stable Egypt, which means
a stable Arab nation… any harming of Arab national security will face a severe
response and any attack on Arab lands will pay a heavy price… The truth is that
Egypt will remain targeted by the enemies of the Ummah and of religion, but at the
same time they will confirm that it remains the heart of its Arab Ummah… Egypt
cannot ignore its national responsibility, and its security cannot be separated from
the security of the Arab nation.
Source:
‫فعل؟‬
ً ‫تحليل إخباري هل مرص تتحرك لحامية أمن الخليج‬
Amr Said. “News Analysis: Will Egypt Actually Deploy to Protect Gulf Security?”
Mada Masr, 7 November 2018. https://goo.gl/58bmpZ
Talk about Gulf security is not new, and Sisi has mentioned it more than once,
beginning with his presidential campaign in 2014, when he said Egypt would
“arrive immediately” if Arab countries needed it… Egypt’s policy toward the Gulf
and its security, though, have been the opposite of what Sisi stated and state media
repeats. In most crises, the state’s foreign policy has been very independent, even in
crises between Egypt and Saudi Arabia. This is not only the case with Saudi Arabia,
which is the most important political actor in the Gulf, but also includes conflicts
and disagreement with the UAE and Bahrain by extension.
Source:
‫ واألمن القومى العرىب ال يتجزأ‬..‫ املناورة تحقق الردع‬..‫ عودة للقوة املوحدة‬. 1 ‫درع العرب‬
Jamil Afifi. “‘Shield of the Arabs-1’… A Return to Unified Power, Exercise Achieves
Deterrence, and Arab National Security Undivided,” al-Ahram, 15 November 2018.
https://goo.gl/2Kykiv
… there are also places aflame from transnational terrorism that has been sown
in the region by Western powers since 2011. This has turned some countries into
fields of conflict, such as Libya which has become fertile ground for the spread of
terrorism, and Syria, where terrorists of more than 82 nationalities fight on the
field. Major powers are also fighting for influence here, and this naturally affects the
balance of power in the Middle East and particularly the Arab world, which have
become targets for the great powers. There is a clear plan to strike the national
armies in the region in order to facilitate the region’s destruction and redivision… In
light of the many crises experienced by the region’s countries and Western attempts
to take us back to the age of ignorance by planting those who spread ignorance
among the Arabs, all of this is taking place with a clear and forthright plan from
the West to benefit the interests of Israel, to avoid Arab countries once again being
strong enough to confront them…
Source:
‫ هدف واحد لوطن واحد نحو مصري مشرتك‬..‫  درع العرب‬
Mohammed Haboush. “Shield of the Arabs… Single Goal, Single Nation Toward
Shared Destiny,” al-Youm al-Sabaa, 9 November 2018. https://goo.gl/NSjTaA
… throughout the military exercises an Arab vision will be reflected, one which
sends various messages to the US regarding the capacity of Arabs to ally with one
another without US endorsement. Arab countries have security interests in common,
and these can provide a foundation to achieve their interests, whether this be in
confronting the dangers of Iran or of terrorism.
OE Watch | December 2018

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey and Kuwait Sign Military Cooperation Agreement
OE Watch Commentary: Gulf nations have
sometimes relied on the United States for security;
however, this could be changing as they form
new alliances. Turkish and Kuwaiti top military
officials signed a military cooperation agreement
after holding a Military Cooperation Committee
meeting on 9-10 October 2018. Both countries
agreed to share their military experiences and to
coordinate military activities beginning in 2019.
The accompanying excerpted article from AlMonitor, a news website with analysts from the
Middle East, provides insight into why Kuwait
has sought the alliance and what Turkey intends to
gain from it.
According to the article, behind this agreement
to enhance military cooperation with Turkey is
Kuwait’s concern about Saudi Arabia’s intentions,
especially after Mohammed bin Salman (MBS)
becoming the heir apparent. The tensions between
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait have escalated due to
problems over restarting production in common
oilfields of Khafji and Wafra. The crown prince
MBS was in Kuwait on 30 September 2018 for
talks, but the meeting was cut short and failed
to resolve the issue. As the author states, Kuwait
is “truly afraid of a Saudi invasion because of a
hegemony crisis in the oil fields” and “(a) military
accord with Turkey now raises the question of
whether Kuwait, like Qatar, is looking for military
protection.” The agreement could lead to the
deployment of Turkish troops to Kuwait and the
establishment of a Turkish military base.
There have been a couple of questions in the
region about how Turkey benefits from this
alliance. First, Turkey seeks to expand the market
for its defense industry products. A total of 23
Turkish companies attended the 2017 Kuwaiti
Defense and Aeronautics Fair to market their
defense industry products. As the article notes, the
“purchase of Turkish weapons, including armored
vehicles” is a possibility. Second, the regional
rivalry between Turkey and Saudi Arabia has
played a role in forming this alliance. The tension
between the two countries has risen, especially
after the killing of a Saudi journalist in Saudi
Arabia’s consulate in Istanbul. Additionally, Saudi
Arabia’s support for Kurdish groups in Syria has
been a point of contention for Turkey. Whether
Saudi Arabia will retaliate against Turkey’s effort
to weaken its influence in the Gulf remains to be
seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“Ankara, whose relations with Kuwait have been warming for the
past two years, recently signed a military cooperation agreement
with the Persian Gulf nation bordering Iraq and Saudi Arabia.”
Source: Fehim Tastekin. “Gulf countries concerned as Turkey cozies up to Kuwait,”
al-monitor.com, 19 October 2018. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/10/
turkey-gulf-rapprochement-with-kuwait-may-cause-tension.html
As repercussions from Turkey’s move to set up a military base in Qatar continue to
resonate, Ankara is going ahead with adding a military dimension to relations with
Kuwait. Ankara, whose relations with Kuwait have been warming for the past two
years, recently signed a military cooperation agreement with the Persian Gulf nation
bordering Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
According to the agreement signed by deputy chiefs of staff of the two countries during
the Turkey-Kuwait Military Cooperation Committee meeting, the two nations are
planning to share their military experiences and coordinate their activities beginning in
2019.
The agreement occurs amid the backdrop of Turkey’s close ties with the Muslim
Brotherhood, Turkish moves to become a shield for Qatar against the Saudi-United
Arab Emirates alliance, the decision by Riyadh to assist Kurds in Syria and the tensions
that erupted with this month’s disappearance of the Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi
in Istanbul.
Kuwait became concerned about the intentions of Mohammed bin Salman after he was
named Saudi Arabia’s crown prince last year…
Mohammed’s visit to Kuwait on Sept. 30 to discuss the recurring problems between the
two countries and the Qatar issue did not go well…
The crisis between the two countries escalated in 2014 due to disputes over their
common oil fields of Khafji and Wafra … In Kuwait’s political corridors, Mohammed is
now referred to as “little Saddam.”
To cope with these pressures, Kuwait has been approaching actors such as Turkey who
could help provide some form of protection…
A military accord with Turkey now raises the question of whether Kuwait, like Qatar, is
looking for military protection… a Kuwaiti-Turkish accord could lead to deployment of
Turkish troops in Kuwait… “The accord doesn’t rule out deployment of Turkish troops
in Kuwait and purchase of Turkish weapons, including armored vehicles, along the lines
of the Qatar-Turkey accord that defends Doha against Gulf countries,”…
Turkey’s efforts to sell defense industry products to Kuwait are not a secret. Turkey
participated in the 2017 Kuwaiti Defense and Aeronautics Fair with 23 companies.
Lebanese researcher Ali Mourad said… “Kuwaitis need a regional force like Turkey
to deal with Saudi ill intentions. They are truly afraid of a Saudi invasion because of a
hegemony crisis in the oil fields, …
…“This is not really what [Kuwaitis] want but they have no other choice. As a regional
force they can’t ask for help from Iran. There is no regional power other than Turkey.”
…Relations gained further momentum with the signing of six agreements during
the Ankara visit of Kuwaiti Prime Minister Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah in
September 2017.

OE Watch | December 2018

54

AFRICA
Mysterious Militants Threaten Burkina Faso amid
Security Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: On 10 October, the French-language Malian publication
journaldumali.com published the accompanying excerpted article about French support to
Burkina Faso as part of Operation Barkhane. The article described the emergency Burkina
Faso is facing, with more than 20 members of its security forces having been killed in the
two weeks before the article was published. France accepts the responsibility to provide
this support to Burkina Faso on the grounds that it supports national forces anywhere in
the Sahel-Saharan band, which in addition to Burkina Faso, also includes Mali, Niger,
Mauritania, and Chad. According to a commander in Operation Barkhane, who is quoted in
the article, France maintains a reserve capacity to support the other countries in the region
beyond Mali, including the ability to intervene in Burkina Faso by flying in troops from an
airbase in Niamey, Niger.
The article also confirms France is already carrying out cross-border operations with
Burkinabe ground forces and that France maintains special forces in the Burkinabe capital,
Ouagadougou, which have had to respond to al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)
terrorist attacks in that city. The article notes that France is also concerned about risk of the
violence spreading closer to the neighboring countries, such as Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire.
Another challenge that the article raises is that since the overthrow in late 2014 of
Burkinabe President Blaise Compaore, elite units of the army have been dissolved and
the Burkinabe forces have failed to recover their former assertiveness. They now seem
helpless in the face of the security crisis. Moreover, the current president is reluctant to
give the army too much power because of the country’s history of military coups.
One final challenge is that there are some groups operating in eastern Burkina Faso that
are not from the AQIM-aligned Ansaroul Islam. In fact, as the article mentions, France
is still trying to identify who these groups are that are now carrying out an increasing
number of attacks in that region and as a French officer notes, they are unclear how many
fighters are in that group. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Burkina Faso Map.

Source: Burkina Faso carte, public domain,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Burkina_Faso_carte.png

“At present, the French forces
are trying to identify the groups
at work in the east of the country,
where explosions and attacks are
multiplying.”

Source: “La force Barkhane les yeux rivés sur le Burkina (Barkhane force eyes on Burkina),” journaldumali.com, 10 October 2018. https://
www.journaldumali.com/2018/10/10/sahel-la-force-barkhane-les-yeux-rives-sur-le-burkina/
A victim of increasing attacks on its soil in recent months, Burkina Faso no longer hesitates to solicit the French Barkhane force, which
provides support to this country in the Sahel to stop the jihadist threat. At the request of Ouagadougou, the French army conducted an air
strike in northern Burkina Faso after an attack on a gendarmerie detachment that killed one person. Barkhane also sent two helicopters, a
Tiger and a Gazelle, to the eastern region of Pama, after the death of a Burkinabe soldier. If the French effort is actually concentrated in Mali,
“we always maintain a reserve intervention capacity to support the countries of the zone,” said one [commander] to Paris. “Barkhane has the
means to intervene quickly by air in Burkina from its base in Niamey, Niger,” said another source close to the case.
Meanwhile, French forces participated alongside the Burkinabe army in a reconnaissance mission, also in the east of the country, according
to military sources. Paris is openly worried about the rise in violence in northern and eastern Burkina Faso, and the risks of the contagion in
neighboring countries such as Ghana or Côte d’Ivoire.
Since the overthrow in late 2014 of President Blaise Compaore, which has resulted in the dissolution of elite units of the army, the Burkinabe
forces have failed to recover and seem helpless in the face of security degradation. In a country accustomed to attempted coups, the
Burkinabe president Roch Marc Christian Kaboré is reluctant to give much power to an army long loyal to Compaore.
At present, the French forces are trying to identify the groups at work in the east of the country, where explosions and attacks are
multiplying. For the last few weeks, groups have emerged in eastern Burkina Faso, which clearly do not belong to Ansaroul Islam, the jihadist
group in the north of the country responsible for several deadly attacks on the army, an officer said. “But we do not have enough elements yet
to specify the volume, [and] from where they come.”

OE Watch | December 2018

55

AFRICA
Fear of Islamist Terrorism Taking Root in South Africa
OE Watch Commentary: Several violent incidents this
year have hinted at Islamist terrorism taking root in South
Africa; however, some believe it is too early to detect a
pattern. As the accompanying excerpted article from the
South African Institute for Security Studies details, troubling
links to Islamist terrorism appear to be emerging. The crimes
in South Africa raising the alarm include: two deadly attacks
on mosques in KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape; the arrest
of the “Thulsie twins,” as they are known, for purportedly
plotting violence against Jewish and US interests; the murder of
a married couple of South African botanists by individuals with
purported links to ISIS; and several other incidents.

“Recent incidents may be unrelated, but there are enough
links to warrant vigilance around violent extremism.”

On 23 October, a Verulam magistrate charged 11 men with
murder, attempted murder, extortion, kidnapping, arson and
contraventions of the Explosives Act and terrorism act relating
to a mosque attack in Verulam in addition to other bombings.
A manual on how to make bombs and carry out assassinations,
ISIS propaganda and flags were found in the home of the
group’s ringleader. Yet another mosque attack occurred in
2018, this time in Malmesbury by a Somali national who
Samantha Lewthwaite, aka the White Widow, is one of several Islamists who previously hid in
South Africa.
stabbed parishioners, killing one before the police killed
Source: Interpol/Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Samantha_Lewthwaite_Interpol.jpg, Fair Use.
him. Although the perpetrator was a Sunni and the mosque
Source: Peter Fabricius, “Is Islamist Terrorism Starting to Emerge in South
was Sunni, it is believed the mosque was targeted because its
Africa,” Institute for Security Studies, 25 October 2018. https://issafrica.org/
leadership was considered too liberal.
iss-today/is-islamist-terrorism-starting-to-emerge-in-south-africa
Besides these recent events, there have been past indicators
that Islamic extremism has found a place in South Africa. As
an example, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, one of the suspects
in the 1998 al-Qaeda bombings of the US embassy in Nairobi,
was arrested in South Africa. Samantha Lewthwaite is another
example. A British national and alleged member of al-Shabaab,
who is often referred to as the white widow, she spent several
years hiding in South Africa.

Recent incidents may be unrelated, but there are enough links to warrant
vigilance around violent extremism.
Since the start of this year a number of violent incidents that could hint at
Islamist extremism have occurred in South Africa. Some analysts suspect
many of these episodes are connected, and that if one joins all the dots, they
outline a disturbing picture. Others believe it’s too early to detect a pattern.
Yet some links are emerging more clearly.
However Frank says it’s not quite clear if South Africa’s intelligence
authorities are ignoring evidence of current Islamist extremism or are just
hiding it to avoid causing alarm.

Cheryl Frank, head of the Transnational Threats and
International Crime program at the Institute for Security
Studies, notes South Africa has traditionally had a cautious
approach to counterterrorism. Frank also notes that South Africa’s perception of the problem is starting to change as the number of incidents
increase. However, as the article explains, with high levels of inequality and several minority communities feeling excluded, including not
only Muslims but white Afrikaners as well, South Africa is ripe for all sorts of extremism. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter
OE Watch | December 2018

56

AFRICA
Chad to Combat Boko Haram Closer to Nigerian Border
OE Watch Commentary: On 10 October, Boko Haram attacked the
Chadian army in the town of Kaiga Kindjiria, which is north of Lake Chad.
This was among the northernmost attacks Boko Haram ever conducted,
suggesting the group was expanding its area of operations. According to
the accompanying excerpted French-language article from tchadinfos.com,
62 Boko Haram members were killed during the operation.

“From now on, the Boko Haram elements will
see the Chadian army very close to them.”

The article discussed the reaction to the attack by Chadian President Idris
Deby. Deby visited the site of the battle on 17 October and during his visit
decided to relocate a Chadian military base to Kaiga Kindjiria. This means
the base will be located closer to Chad’s borders with Nigeria and Niger
at a distance of 18 kilometers and 14 kilometers, respectively. According
to the article, this will allow the Chadian soldiers to be in a more strategic
location and react more quickly, because Boko Haram has been operating
around the three countries’ border area. The article interviewed a military
officer, who stated that bringing the Chadian soldiers closer to the border
would also prevent Boko Haram from entering Chadian territory in the first
place and therefore protect the lives of civilians.
Deby also made an announcement during his visit to grant leave for
soldiers who have been in Kaiga Kindjiria for one year already. This is a
luxury that the Nigerian soldiers on the other side of the border have not
been afforded. There, where Boko Haram originated, the group’s attacks
have unsurprisingly been much more consistent and more severe than Chad
and soldiers have had their time in service extended. President Deby’s
strategy to move Chadian soldiers closer to the border and provide rest
to some soldiers was seemingly done on a whim during the visit, but it
nonetheless could be a welcome development for Chadian citizens in the
border region and for the soldiers at the new base in Kaiga Kindjiria. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Idriss Déby 2014 (cropped).

Source: Idriss Déby 2014 (cropped), open government license, v1.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Idriss_D%C3%A9by_2014_(cropped).jpg.

Source: “Terrorisme: le Président Deby est à Kaiga Kindjiria dernier lieu d’attaque de Boko Haram (President Deby is in Kaiga Kindjiria last
place of attack of Boko Haram),” tchadinfos.com, 17 October 2018. https://tchadinfos.com/tchad/terrorisme-le-president-deby-est-a-kaigakindjiria-dernier-lieu-dattaque-de-boko-haram/
Chadian Head of State Idriss Deby visited the Lake Chad region area of Kaiga Kindjiria on the border between Chad, Niger and Nigeria on
17 October to see first-hand the situation on the ground after the last attack. On 10 October, a position of the Chadian army was attacked by
elements of the nebulous Boko Haram sect in Kaiga Kindjiria where 62 terrorists were killed by soldiers of the Chadian army. President Deby
decided during his visit on 17 October to relocate Baga Sola’s No. 4 Military Zone to Kaiga Kindjiria, just a short way from the Nigerien and
Nigerian borders.
This decision is strategic because the nebulous Boko Haram sect is still committing its attacks in a radius very close to the Chad-NigerNigeria border. The President of the Republic has also granted relief for the soldiers who have been in this locality for one year. “From now
on, the Boko Haram elements will see the Chadian army very close to them,” said a military source. The proximity of the presence of the
Chadian defense and security forces will certainly prevent them from infiltrating Chadian territory and committing acts of barbarity.

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

OE Watch | December 2018

57

AFRICA
Boko Haram Execution of Midwife Demoralizes Nigeria
OE Watch Commentary: On 16 October the Nigerian publication Pulse.ng
published the accompanying excerpted article expressing dismay about Nigeria’s
inability to rescue Hauwa Liman before Boko Haram’s Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS)-loyal faction executed her days earlier. She was a 24-year old midwife working
as staff for the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Boko Haram had
kidnapped her during an attack on her worksite in Rann, Borno State earlier in the
year and threatened to kill her in September after the group killed another young
woman, who was also a staff member of the ICRC and kidnapped in that same raid in
Rann.
The article notes that when Hauwa Liman was kidnapped, it is ironic Nigerian
soldiers were protecting her worksite. The article emphasized it was not as if she was
in a vulnerable place, such as alone on a street. Even though she was in a seemingly
safe place, the jihadists still succeeded in kidnapping her. This represents a failure on
the part of the military, according to the article. Also ironic, according to the article, is
that her work was intended to save lives or help bring to life newborns, yet she herself
lost her life while doing this work.
Although the article recognizes that Nigerian government officials claim to have
done their best to negotiate Hauwa Liman’s freedom, it states that they cannot be
trusted given their record of inaccuracies and even deceit. The article emphasizes
the government failed her, but so did the society from which Boko Haram, after all,
emerged—that is, Nigerian society. In conclusion, the article argues that Hauwa
Liman’s death is an indicator of where Nigeria stands in the war against Boko Haram.
Despite government claims to have technically defeated Boko Haram, her death is a
“sad reminder” of how far Nigeria has to go to really defeat Boko Haram. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The government failed Liman the way it has failed everyone
still in Boko Haram custody.”

Source: Nigeria failed Hauwa Liman and led her to
death at Boko Haram’s feet,” Pulse.ng, 16 October
2018. https://www.pulse.ng/news/local/nigeriafailed-hauwa-liman-who-was-killed-by-boko-haramid8986011.html
The irony in the execution story of Hauwa Liman
is that she was kidnapped right before a battalion of
soldiers, right before tanks and an entire regimen.
She was not kidnapped on the streets of Borno or in
some nondescript community near Sambisa. Liman
was a 24-year-old midwife (Red Cross) On October
15, the terrorists took her life in the most brutal
manner imaginable after threatening to do exactly
that, last month.
She was a staff of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and she was in Borno to
tend to internally displaced persons fleeing Boko
Haram bombs and bullets. She was in Borno to help
nurse hearts, broken limbs and wounds and restore
smiles to the faces of the frustrated and dejected.
The government failed Liman the way it has failed
everyone still in Boko Haram custody.
It’s difficult to believe anyone in government these
days and there’s no reason why we should believe
the government’s spokesperson on this occasion.
The bottom-line is that we badly need to review our
nation’s security architecture and keep Nigerians a
lot safer. We are nowhere near defeating Boko Haram
technically or physically. Liman’s gruesome murder is
a sad reminder of how far we still have to go to deal
Boko Haram a fatal blow.

Boko Haram Hostages (2015).

Source: OtagesBokoHaram2015VOA, public domain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:OtagesBokoHaram2015VOA.PNG.

OE Watch | December 2018

58

AFRICA
African Standby Force: Still Not Ready for Primetime?
OE Watch Commentary: The African Union (AU) directed African Standby Force (ASF) is in the news
once again because there are still questions as to whether or not it is ready to deploy. This uncertainty
lingers despite its establishment in 2003 with an anticipated operational date of 2010. However, as the
accompanying excerpted article from the South African Institute for Security Studies explains, some
progress has been made in further standing up the force. One such effort was the establishment of the
first ASF continental logistics base in Douala, Cameroon in January of this year, an action that will
significantly boost the AU’s ability to provide logistical assistance during future peace support operations.
Although the ASF is referred to in the singular, it is actually comprised of five regional standby forces. In
2017, the AU heads of state and the Peace and Security Council mandated a team to assess the operational
readiness of each of those five forces. The subsequent report showed that while the West, South and East
regions had made substantial progress towards establishing their standby forces, the Central and North
Africa regions lagged behind.
With the ASF and its missions originally conceived fifteen years ago, the need to update some of the
founding concepts has been noted. Thus, the lessons learned from AU missions and growing security
threats arising from transnational criminal activity, terrorism, and humanitarian crises were part of the
discussions during several workshops held in October of this year. At the same time, a broader AU doctrine
on peace support operations was debated. As the article’s author states, new thinking is required regarding
the contexts in which the ASF would be deployed, and adds that whether or not the ASF is deployed is
dependent not just on the actual crises happening, but also political will.
Complicating the work of the policymakers trying to resolve the ASF’s technical issues is what to do with
another force, the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises (ACIRC), which like the ASF has
never deployed. ACIRC, which was supposed to provide rapid interventions pending the ASF becoming
operational, is comprised of units of 14 voluntary militaries that, unlike the ASF’s five geographicallyconstrained regional brigades, could be sent anywhere on the continent. There is concern though, that
friction could arise as ACIRC, which is itself a political issue, is possibly harmonized with the ASF.
The AU commission is tackling many of the ASF’s technical issues, some, but not all of which have been
detailed here. However, as the article’s author states, without political will on the part of African states and
regional bodies, the work towards new policies, doctrines, and concepts will merely be a paper exercise.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Fifteen years after (the African
Standby Force) was formed,
political backing by African states
is still the biggest challenge.”

Source: Ndubuisi Christian Ani,
“Africa: Is the African Standby
Force Any Closer to Being
Deployed?,” Institute for Security
Studies, 2 November 2018.
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/
is-the-african-standby-force-anycloser-to-being-deployed
Fifteen years after it was
formed, political backing by
African states is still the biggest
challenge.
The African Union (AU)directed African Standby Force
(ASF) has not been deployed
since its establishment in 2003.
This is despite the AU’s extensive
experience with peace support
operations in countries like
Burundi, Sudan, Somalia, Mali
and the Central African Republic
(CAR).
Over recent decades it has
become clear that the AU is
increasingly willing to engage
in peace enforcement missions,
unlike the UN which deploys
only after peace deals have
been reached. The AU Mission
in Somalia is an example of this
more offensive approach. An AU
peace support operation doctrine
would thus include deployment to
enforce peace and stabilize crisis
areas so that the UN could take
over.

“While some components of the Africa Standby Force, such as the East Africa one pictured here during a field training exercise,
have made substantial progress to being ready to deploy, others have not.”
Source: Chief Petty Officer Robert Gallagher, USN/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:East_Africa_Standby_Force_Field_Training_Exercise_DVIDS219773.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | December 2018

59

AFRICA
Amidst Concerns, AMISOM Prepares to Withdraw
from Somalia
OE Watch Commentary: The African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), after several delays, plans to begin
withdrawing its troops in February 2019, however, as the
accompanying excerpted article from The East African points
out, several troop-contributing nations are not keen on leaving.
Additionally, even though the troop withdrawal will be a
phased event, with the final ones not departing until 2021, there
are strong concerns that the Somali National Army (SNA) will
be unable to independently provide security for the nation.

“The African Union Mission in Somalia is going ahead
with plans to withdraw its troops in February next year
even though some troops-contributing countries are not
keen on leaving.”

The document guiding this phased withdrawal is known
as the Concept of Operations (CONOP) and was developed
by AMISOM leadership as well as representatives of the
Somali government and African Union (AU); the latter
because AMISOM is operated by the AU with approval of
the UN Security Council. CONOP, which in part focuses
on reconfiguring the Somali security forces, still needs to
be approved by AU and senior defense officials from troopcontributing countries.
General Adan Mulata, Kenya’s Assistant Chief of Defense
Forces in charge of operations, training, and doctrine, is one
who has expressed some hesitation in setting a firm date for
withdrawal. He noted that while AMISOM withdrawal is
inevitable, stakeholders should take into consideration the
conditions on the ground. General Mulata is not the only
Kenyan concerned about the timing. Kenya’s President
Uhuru Kenyatta for much of this past year has been critical
of AMISOM’s planned exit, stating that both the AU and UN
need to be practical because the SNA is not ready to assume
full responsibility for security. As Kenya borders Somalia
and has had to deal with the Somali based terrorist group al
Shabaab launching attacks in Kenya, any move that might
create a vacuum in Somalia that could allow al Shabaab to
strengthen is worrisome to President Kenyatta.
While Uganda does not border Somalia, its troops have been
a significant part of AMISOM. Uganda would like its troops
to continue serving there, provided new funding for them can
be found. That is quite uncertain as AMISOM, which entered
Somalia in 2007, has been struggling due to reduced and
irregular funding. A major blow in particular was the European
Union, which at one point was providing a $200 million
annual stipend to AMISOM, but reduced that by 20 percent.
Thus, while there are concerns that the CONOP timetable for
withdrawal may be too ambitious, it is uncertain if there is
financial support to stretch it out much further. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

Plans are for AMISOM troops, such as this Djiboutian soldier patrolling a base in
Beledweyne, Somalia, to depart Somalia.

Source: Skilla1st/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Djiboutian_Soldier_patrol_the_base_in_Beledweyne,_Somalia.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: Fred Oluoch, “AMISOM ready to withdraw,” The East African, 12
November 2018. https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/ea/Amisom-readyto-withdraw/4552908-4845956-ifb46r/index.html
The African Union Mission in Somalia is going ahead with plans to
withdraw its troops in February next year even though some troopscontributing countries are not keen on leaving.
Known as the Concept of Operations (CONOPs), the document will guide
Amisom’s activities and operations for the 2018-2021 period, marking the
final phase of the transition and eventual exit from Somalia.
According to Amisom spokesperson, Col Richard Omwega, the
CONOPS focuses on the implementation of Somalia Transition Plan and
reconfiguration of the military in preparation for conditional handover of
security responsibility to Somalia security forces, and opening and securing
of main supply routes in the country in a prioritized order.
However due to reduced and irregular funding, the UN Security Council
Resolution 2372 issued in 2017 had instructed Amisom to reduce its
uniformed personnel to a maximum 21,626 in readiness for a full pull-out in
2020.

OE Watch | December 2018

60

AFRICA
NGOs Tell Story of Southern Mali, One Post at a Time
OE Watch Commentary: Getting news about southern Mali is incredibly difficult, but rewarding when one can find it. There is no printed
press south of the capital Bamako and only three local radio stations. The radio stations have no archived internet record of their programming.
Most of the national and international press is focused on the central and northern regions, where the country is in a state of war. There have
been a number of NGOs working south of the capital and thanks to their press releases and official communiqués, a media picture of the security
situation in southern Mali is possible. However, due to safety issues most of the international NGOs have pulled out of southern Mali, preferring
to operate from their centrally located HQs in Bamako. This has made it even harder to get a media picture of what is taking place in the region.
For the time being, security in southern Mali is focused around food and there is real concern among many NGOs here that if the basic needs
of the population cannot be met, the threat of instability will increase or be exploited by those who hope to destabilize the region in similar
fashion to what is happening in the north of the country.
Consider the accompanying excerpt published by Islamic Relief Ireland regarding food security in Southern Mali and the recent post from
their Mali Facebook page noting a countrywide forum on climate change and addressing recent flooding in the area. The director of the
Oulessabougou office of Islamic Relief has publicly stated that the organization’s work to provide food security is a stabilizing factor on the
region.
While not widely reported, micro dams are a significant part of Islamic Relief’s food security strategy in southern Mali. Another micro dam
built by Islamic Relief will be inaugurated near the village of Siranama in early December, putting the number of micro dams in the region built
by Islamic Relief to over 10. The purpose of the dams is to collect water during the rainy season that can be stored for farming during the dry
season.
Finding information about micro dams in the press is particularly difficult. Reporting is also uneven from Islamic Relief and split up between
sub pages from Islamic Relief’s global presence. In fact, it was Islamic Relief Ireland, not Islamic Relief Mali, which recently reported on the
success of the micro dam near Banankoro, highlighting the benefits of the dam to nearby villagers. While the press releases of an NGO are
meant to highlight various projects and not provide in-depth reporting, when asked about the dams, a local farmer in Simidji inadvertently
supported Islamic Relief Mali’s claims that the micro dams provide a distinct agricultural benefit, lamenting that there was no micro dam near
his village.
At the same time, there is a concern in Mali about the impact that deforestation is having on social stability. For decades the forests of the
region have been chopped down for firewood essential for cooking the daily diet of corn and millet. Deforestation has been noted to cause a
shortened rainy season, a reduction in crop yields, forcing families to send their children to nearby goldmines for additional income. While the
press continues to focus its attention on the north of the country, NGOs provide the only, albeit sporadic and self-promoting, media picture of
local and international efforts to secure the south of the country. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

Notice of Islamic Relief’s Micro Dam in the Village of Mana in Southern Mali.
Source: Dodge Billingsley, Used with Permission.

OE Watch | December 2018

61

AFRICA
Continued: NGOs Tell Story of Southern Mali,
One Post at a Time
Source: “Atelier de Dialogue Talanoa organisé par Islamic Relief
avec ses partenaires dont le PAM et les services étatiques sur les
problématiques du changement climatique. (Talanoa Dialogue
Workshop organized by Islamic Relief with its partners including
WFP and state services on climate change issues.),” Islamic Relief
– Mali, Facebook, September 19, 2018. https://www.facebook.com/
irwmali/
…Working together to preserve our planet is of utmost urgency - we
must act now or pay the price of inaction.

Source: “Reflections from Mali,” Islamic Relief – Ireland, https://
www.islamic-relief.ie/reflections-from-mali/
…The impact this project had on over 1,200 people living there was
evident. Local women who used to spend much of their days walking
in the blistering heat to fetch water for their families now only had
to walk for a few seconds to have access to clean water for drinking,
cooking, cleaning and farming. The locals then brought us to see
the village mosque, which also had a tap in front of it so worshipers
could benefit from it by making ablution…

“Working together to preserve our planet is of utmost urgency - we must act now or pay the price of
inaction.”

TOP: Micro Dam near village of Banankoro, BOTTOM: Local Islamic Relief Director and Banankoro Village Representative survey Micro Dam .
Source: Dodge Billingsley, Used with Permission.

OE Watch | December 2018

62

AFRICA
Tiny Lesotho’s Large Military Budget
OE Watch Commentary: Completely surrounded by South Africa, the
tiny country of Lesotho spends 3.9 percent of its budget on defense. Some
South Africans believe that this is a large amount of defense spending
relative to other government expenditures. In the accompanying excerpted
article from the South African website The Conversation, the author
argues that Lesotho should cut its military spending, though interestingly,
he also argues going beyond a substantial cut to completely eliminating it
from the budget.

“By any standards – and particularly for a
country as impoverished as Lesotho – [the 3.9%
of government expenditure spent on defense] is an
indefensible amount of money.”

Starting with the economic argument, the article notes that in 2017
Lesotho allocated $52.6 million to defense, and that the country’s average
income for about 95 percent of the population is $346 per annum. With a
population of 2.2 million, if the military were eliminated and the money
distributed to the population, households with two adults would see an
increase of $68 per year; a considerable sum in Lesotho for a family mired
in poverty. Another reason given for eliminating the military is its historic
interference with the democratic process. Repeatedly, the military has been
used to thwart political opponents and has staged coups. Combined with a
poor human rights record, the military has been criticized as an obstacle to
democracy.
The final reason given for dissolving the military is that it serves no
significant security function. It has been well documented that in practice,
Lesotho’s external security is guaranteed by South Africa. Indeed, South
Africa is considered a military powerhouse in Africa and its defense
expenditures are 70 times that of Lesotho. There are, as the article points
out, 36 nations in the world without a regular army, although some do
have police that act as their country’s de facto military. Costa Rica was
given as an example, with its high expenditures on education and health
possible, in part, because it is not diverting resources to support an army.

Lesotho Defence Force Deputy Commander Maj. Gen. Motsomotso during
U.S. Army Africa cooridinated Medical Readiness Exercise 14-1, Feb. 3 - 14 in
Maseru, Lesotho. (2014).
Source: http://en.farsnews.com/newstext.aspx?nn=13930608000589, Fars News Agency, CC BY – SA 4.0.

The South African academic who penned this article realizes that there would be difficulties in demilitarization. For one, it would initially
require spending more money as severance pay and on other items necessary to close down the armed services. Still, per his calculations, in the
long run it would be worth it, not just for the economic benefits but also, as he notes, to strengthen the country’s democracy. While some may
argue that it is unlikely Lesotho will decrease its defense expenditure, and that arguments for maintaining it were not presented, the article’s
author has succeeded in bringing attention to the concerns that an impoverished, tiny, enclaved country has such a large military budget. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Geoffrey Thomas Harris, “How Lesotho could abandon its army and put the money to better use,” The Conversation, 11 November
2018. https://theconversation.com/how-lesotho-could-abandon-its-army-and-put-the-money-to-better-use-106179
By any standards – and particularly for a country as impoverished as Lesotho – this is an indefensible amount of money.
Second, from its inception, the Lesotho military has interfered with democratic processes and engaged in human rights abuses. Historically,
it has been used by the government to thwart political opposition. In 1986, of its own volition it staged a coup and took over political power. In
April 1994, a group of soldiers took four government ministers hostage, and killed the deputy prime minister. And in August 2014, the military
attempted another coup, but failed.
Third, the country’s poverty levels and poor socio-economic indicators mean that government’s budgetary resources must be allocated with
particular care. Almost 60% of its population earns less than USD$1.90 a day.

OE Watch | December 2018

63

AFRICA
China’s Racism Problem in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: While many in Africa are grateful for Chinese funding of numerous Africanbased megaprojects, initially China often brought its own workforce to construct the dams, railroads,
power plants, and numerous other infrastructure projects it was financing. This generated anger in the
African populace, who felt they were being left out of the employment opportunities these large-scale
undertakings should have provided. Following pushback from African governments, more African
workers have been hired onto Chinese-funded ventures in Africa. However, as the accompanying excerpt
from the Deutsche Welle website notes, this increased mixing of workers has not been without trouble, as
African workers claim the Chinese have exhibited racism against them.
The article’s author relates how Chinese workers bring their own cultural as well as political
perspectives when they set off to work in Africa. Because China is one of the most homogeneous countries
in the world, with 92 percent of the population belonging to the Han ethnic group and only 0.4 percent
born abroad, many Chinese have not had the opportunity to interact with people from significantly
different cultures than their own. As a political analyst quoted in the article noted, being indoctrinated
by one Chinese identity and one Chinese culture leads you to a xenophobic outlook. Differences in work
cultures aggravate the divide. For example, the Chinese often work without a break. Another difference,
according to the article, is that the Chinese tend to have a very hierarchical mindset, meaning they do what
the boss tells them to do as opposed to a more independent thinking approach.
There appears to be little to no effort on the part of the Chinese contingents to address the racism
issue. As the article explains, China is not promoting multiculturalism; instead its political indoctrination
programs promote Chinese identity and culture. Additionally, the Chinese government does not look at
it as a problem they need to address, thus leaving African governments to handle the situation. African
governments, however, are often slow to criticize the Chinese as they value Chinese investments in their
countries.
Looking at Africans in China reveals the situation is not much different. The Chinese city of Guangzhou
is home to 16,000 Africans, the largest population from the continent in Asia. While there have been some
meetings and exchanges to improve the situation, racism is still rampant and many hotels there do not
welcome African guests. The term “Chinafrica” noted in the article is a portmanteau reflecting China’s
large and influential presence in Africa. However, as the article describes, Africa welcomes Chinese
investment, but the racist mindset of some Chinese workers that accompanies those investments, not at all.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Chinese money is cranking up Africa’s economy. However, the conduct of some
Chinese people on the continent is causing displeasure among the locals.”

Source: Martina Schwikowski,
“The racist face of the Chinese
presence in Africa,” Deutsche
Welle, 9 November 2018. https://
www.dw.com/en/the-racistface-of-the-chinese-presence-inafrica/a-46223068
Chinese money is cranking up
Africa’s economy. However, the
conduct of some Chinese people
on the continent is causing
displeasure among the locals.
Does ‘Chinafrica’ have a racism
problem?
The construction phase of
the railway repeatedly hit the
headlines over allegations of
racism. Kenyan journalists
reported that Chinese workers
did not want to share a table
at lunchtime with their African
colleagues, and that insults and
humiliation were the order of the
day.
The Chinese government does
little against the racism of its
citizens. That comes as no
surprise to Steve Tsang. “China’s
governing elite does not really
have a strong incentive to deal
with bad behavior of citizens.
They leave that to the African
authorities,” he said.

While much of Africa has welcomed Chinese funding for large scale projects, for example the Mombasa-Nairobi railway pictured here, there have been complaints that
some Chinese workers attached to such projects exhibit racism against Africans.
Source: Mwangi Kirubi, https://www.flickr.com/photos/mwangee/34181402040/, CC BY-NC 2.0.

OE Watch | December 2018

64

AFRICA
Ethiopia Arrests 63 Senior Military
and Intelligence Officials
OE Watch Commentary: In a move by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed that furthers Ethiopia’s
break with its authoritarian past, 63 senior military and intelligence officers have been arrested.
The charges, according to the accompanying excerpted article from the East African news website,
include corruption for 27 officials and human rights abuses for the other 36. Such arrests, as the
article notes, are a rare move against the country’s very powerful security apparatus. There is even
more bad news for some in the security apparatus: the arrests do not appear to be over, as there is a
manhunt underway for additional suspects.
The suspected corruption, according to the country’s attorney general, Berhanu Tsegaye, occurred
at the military-run Metals and Engineering Corporation (METEC). While the company is involved
with the production of military equipment, it is also involved in civilian projects, including the
immense Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam the country is building. According to the attorney
general, $2 billion worth of goods were purchased by METEC officials without a bidding process.
With regards to the charges of human rights abuses, in an unusual move earlier this year Abiy
(note: in the Ethiopian naming convention this is how he is referred to) related that security officials
had engaged in abuses and torture. These were done with impunity. Furthermore, the attorney
general reported that some of the alleged abuses – including gang rapes, sodomy, waterboarding,
deprivation of sunlight, and prolonged exposure to heat and cold - supposedly occurred at secret
prisons in the country’s capital Addis Ababa, as well as other locations.

Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia is
breaking with the country’s authoritarian past.

Source: Mark Neyman/Government Press Office (Israel)/Wikimedia, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Abiy_Ahmed_Ali#/media/File:The_state_visit_of_
Reuven_Rivlin_to_Ethiopia,_May_2018_(6810)_(cropped).jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

Although Abiy has only been Prime Minister since early April of this year, he has steadily been burnishing his reformist credentials. It
has been noted how he has reached out to Eritrea in an attempt to defuse the long running tensions between the two countries. He has also
been working to privatize some of Ethiopia’s large state-owned enterprises. With this latest move to reign in corrupt members of the security
services, he continues to take Ethiopia in a new direction. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Ethiopia has arrested
63 senior military and
intelligence officers accused of
corruption and human-rights
abuses, the country’s attorney
general, Berhanu Tsegaye,
said Monday.”

Source: “Ethiopia arrests senior military and intelligence officers,” The East African/AFP, 12
November 2018. https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/africa/Ethiopia-arrests-senior-militaryand-intelligence-officers/4552902-4848578-e1fah9z/index.html
Ethiopia has arrested 63 senior military and intelligence officers accused of corruption and
human-rights abuses, the country’s attorney general, Berhanu Tsegaye, said Monday.
They represent a further flexing of power by reformist Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, who is
seeking to break with Ethiopia’s authoritarian past, analysts said.
On Monday, Berhanu outlined some of the allegations of abuse committed at secret prisons in
the capital Addis Ababa and elsewhere.
“Detainees were subjected to various abuses including gang rapes, sodomy, prolonged
exposure to extreme heat and cold, waterboarding and deprivation of sunlight,” he said.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | December 2018

65

LATIN AMERICA
Cubazuela Intelligence
OE Watch Commentary: There may have been a significant change, and perhaps purge at the Bolivarian Intelligence Service (Servicio
Bolivariano de Inteligencia, SEBIN) in Caracas. At least a change at the top. As of the end of October, General Gustavo González López is out
and Manuel Ricardo Cristopher Figuera is in, according to the accompanying excerpted article from Tal Cual. It was not a scheduled rotation.
General González’ whereabouts have since been in doubt, with reportage that he is in custody and under interrogation. According to the
accompanying reference from RunRun España, the precipitating incident was an ‘unclear event’ that happened around 27 October in which a
SEBIN motorcycle patrol seems to have put President Maduro in some jeopardy. Fortunately for regime stability, Maduro’s serene demeanor
and the quick action of his [probably Cuban] bodyguard, the motorcyclists were “reduced, disarmed and arrested” and the situation stabilized.
The reportage suggests that González is under suspicion for incomplete loyalty of some sort, always a challenge for an intelligence chief of a
dictatorial regime. According to the accompanying reference from Efecto Cocuyo, General González’ replacement, General Figuera, was a longtime Chávez aide and recently served in the billet from which González had been promoted. He will do fine, probably having good relations with
Cuban intelligence, which, according to other recent reporting, is now effectively in control of Bolivarian intelligence. It probably and apparently
already was, and it should not be lost on observers that SEBIN stands for Bolivarian Intelligence Service, not Venezuelan. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“...the incident led to the destitution of the director of SEBIN’.”

Source: “¿Alguien ha visto a
Gustavo González López? (Has
anyone seen Gustavo González
López?),” Tal Cual, 16 November
2018. http://talcualdigital.com/
index.php/2018/11/16/alguien-havisto-a-gustavo-gonzalez-lopez/
After Gustavo González López
was fired from SEBIN, little has
been known of his whereabouts.
Only rumors in the social networks
that announcements that the
General Counterintelligence
Directorate (DGCIM) are
generating.

Source: “Confirman que salida de jefe del Sebin
obedeció a incidente con caravana presidencial (It is
confirmed that the departure of the chief of SEBIN
owes to an incident with the presidential caravan),”
RunRun and EFE, 18 November 2018. http://runrun.
es/noticias/361608/confirman-que-salida-de-jefe-delsebin-obedecio-a-incidente-con-caravana-presidencial
…‘it was about to have a serious ending that could
have compromised the security of the head of state’…
’The situation was contained by the professionalism
with which the military accompaniment acted and the
serenity with which the president handled himself; the
motorcyclists were reduced, disarmed and arrested’…
the ‘incident led to the destitution of the director of
SEBIN’.

Source: “¿Quién es el nuevo director del
Sebin, Manuel Ricardo Cristopher Figuera?
(Who is the new director of SEBIN),”
Efecto Cocuyo, 31 October 2018. http://
efectococuyo.com/principales/quien-es-elnuevo-director-del-sebin/
The portal added that Cristopher Figuera
served up to the present as general director
of the Strategic Center for the Security and
Protection of the Homeland (CESSPA)…
What is CESSPA? This organ is in charge of
the unification of information about security,
defense, intelligence and internal order.
Before it was led by Cristopher Figuera, the
entity was under the command of General
González López.

El Helicoide de la Roca Tarpeya, a facility and prison belonging to the Bolivarian National Intelligence Service (SEBIN) (2008).
Source: Damián D. Fossi Salas [CC BY-SA 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Helicoide_roca_tarpeya_caracas.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

66

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela Imports Chinese ZTE Social Control System
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese telecommunications company, ZTE, helped Venezuela
create a social control system with a “smart” identity card. According to the accompanying
excerpted article from Caracas-based Descifrado, the card was created in January 2017 and
currently has over 18 million registered Venezuelans. El Carnet de la Patria, or the fatherland
card, allows the national government to monitor Venezuelans’ social, political, and economic
behavior. This was originally uncovered by Angus Berwick in Caracas and published in
Reuters. The investigation revealed that a database stores personal information, such as
social network presence, political membership, voting history, and even health records.
According to Descifrado, in April 2008, then-Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez sent officials
from the Ministry of Justice to visit their counterparts at the Chinese technology center in
Shenzhen and to learn about the operation in China. A decade later, Venezuela imported the
ZTE technology as part of an official $70 million effort to strengthen “national security.”
Venezuela hired ZTE in 2017 to develop the database with identity cards and create a mobile
payment system to use with the card.
According to the accompanying excerpt from El Siglo, a daily newspaper in Maracay,
Venezuela, CANTV is Venezuela’s state telecommunications company which depends
on ZTE for the database. A team of ZTE employees has been in Venezuela working with
CANTV since last year to establish the system. To convince citizens to use the card, a series
of benefits are offered such as holiday bonuses or special prices for certain products. The
Venezuelan Carnet de la Patria reverse. QR code, serial
accompanying statement by the office of Venezuela’s Vice President referenced President
and code redacted to protect owner’s identity (2018).
Source: Jamez42 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia
Maduro’s message to the people of Venezuela, that this a “social protection system” and
Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carnet_de_la_Patria_Obverse.jpg and
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carnet_de_la_Patria_Reverse.jpg.
that it promotes “the protection, social equality, solidarity, socialism, happiness and peace
of the Venezuelan people.” While the system allows Venezuelans access to subsidized food, health, and other social programs on which the
majority of people depend, they must provide the government with a significant amount of data in order to get what they need. End OE Watch
Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

“A team of ZTE employees now operates within a special unit of CANTV, Venezuela’s state
telecommunications company that manages the database”

Source: “ZTE ayuda a Venezuela a crear control social
al estilo chino con el carnet de la patria (ZTE helps
Venezuela create Chinese-style social control with
fatherland identity card),” Descifrado, 14 November
2018. http://www.descifrado.com/2018/11/14/la-ayudaque-recibe-el-gobierno-para-el-control-social-al-estilochino-con-el-carnet-de-la-patria/
“At ZTE headquarters in 2008, the Venezuelan
delegation learned how China was developing a system
that would help Beijing follow social, political, and
economic behavior through smart cards.”
“A team of ZTE employees now operates within a special
unit of CANTV, Venezuela’s state telecommunications
company that manages the database.”

Source: “Empresa china ZTE ha ayudado
al gobierno venezolano a implantar su
‘carnet de la patria’ (Chinese company
ZTE has helped the Venezuelan
government implement its own ‘identity
card’),” El Siglo, 15 November 2018.
https://elsiglo.com.ve/2018/11/15/
empresa-china-zte-ha-ayudado-algobierno-venezolano-a-implantar-sucarnet-de-la-patria/

Source: “Carnet de la Patria impulsa
la Protección Social al pueblo
venezolano (Identity card promotes
social protection for the people of
Venezuela),” Gobierno Bolivariano
de Venezuela, 14 November 2018.
http://www.vicepresidencia.gob.ve/
index.php/2018/11/14/carnet-de-lapatria-impulsa-la-proteccion-socialal-pueblo-venezolano/

“Through this card, citizens can access
grants and supplies, but they must also
provide the government with a large
amount of personal data.”

“It should be noted that to date,
18,396,476 Venezuelans are
registered in the social protection
system.”

OE Watch | December 2018

67

LATIN AMERICA
ELN and FARC Dissidents Actively Recruiting
Venezuelan Nationals
OE Watch Commentary: While an estimated 40 percent
of the FARC demobilized following the peace agreement
with the Santos administration, a number of members of
the group still feel frustrated with their current situation,
as they have had to shift from cocaine production to other
agricultural products and are not doing well financially.
Despite the discontent, they have stayed on, hoping the
Colombian government and key demobilized FARC leaders
will help them succeed. On the other hand, many former
FARC members never supported the peace agreement.
Hence, they left the FARC and are now known as
dissidents.
These dissidents have fought to find their way and most
have shifted into other criminal groups within Colombia.
It is also known that they are actively looking to broaden
their ranks by recruiting FARC members in Venezuela. The
National Liberation Army (ELN) is doing the same thing
as they also want to increase their total manpower. In some
cases, the ELN and FARC dissidents are working together
or forming alliances with other criminal groups, as they
want to take back the wealthiest FARC fronts still dedicated
to illegal activity in Colombia, as indicated in the excerpted
article from El Pais.
According to Juan Carlos Ortega, an analyst dedicated
to studying the Colombian armed conflict, the ELN and
dissident members of the FARC are trying to recruit
Venezuelan nationals to support their criminal enterprises.
These same groups seek to attract Venezuelans by force
or by promising to solve some of the problems caused by
the Venezuelan crisis. The Colombian military further
reported that they have evidence regarding the recruitment
of Venezuelan nationals in recent months. The excerpted
article from Periodista Digital notes that many have been
arrested while working with the ELN and FARC to commit
extortion and to traffic drugs/weapons.
The excerpted article from Meridiano 70 reports that
the ELN and FARC are not only targeting adults in
their recruitment efforts, but they are also looking to
indoctrinate children directly through school systems
within Venezuela or by bringing them back to Colombia.
The ELN and FARC provide them with items they may not
have such as food, magazines, word puzzles and coloring
books. They also give children presents at Christmas. The
article also notes that until political instability improves in
Venezuela, it is likely that Colombian criminal groups such
as the ELN and FARC will continue with their recruitment
process in the country. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“Given that the FARC now has its original base that did
demobilize in addition to dissident members, the dissidents
and the ELN are looking outside Colombia to recruit
and strengthen their ranks in an attempt to gain back the
wealthiest FARC fronts and gain territory.”
Source: “El paradero desconocido de lideres de las FARC despierta
preocupacion en Colombia (The Unknown Location of FARC leaders Raises
Concern in Colombia),” El Pais, 13 September 2018. https://elpais.com/
internacional/2018/09/12/colombia/1536774123_549145.html
The wealthiest fronts of the FARC are those in the Southern Bloc, especially
the 48th and 2nd fronts as their cocaine production remains high. These Blocs
are led by high ranking FARC leaders who are not required to remain in areas
of reconciliation as are lower ranking FARC members; many of which left the
FARC after the Peace Agreements in Havana and who are now considered
as FARC dissidents. Given that the FARC now has its original base that did
demobilize in addition to dissident members, the dissidents and the ELN are
looking outside Colombia to recruit and strengthen their ranks in an attempt to
gain back the wealthiest FARC fronts and gain territory.
Source: “Los grupos terroristas colombianos ELN y FARC reclutan a
venezolanos para engrosar sus filas (Colombian Terrorist groups to include the
ELN and FARC and Recruiting Venezuelan Nationals to Fill their Ranks),”
Periodista Digital, 15 October 2018. https://www.periodistadigital.com/america/
sociedad/2018/10/15/los-grupos-terroristas-colombianos-eln-y-farc-reclutan-avenezolanos-para-engrosar-sus-filas.shtml
Helder Giraldo, Commander of the Eighth Division of the Colombian National
Army, stated that his military unit has concrete cases of Venezuelan nationals
being recruited by the Domingo Lain Saenz Front of the ELN and by FARC
Fronts 1 and 28. These groups are targeting Venezuelan nationals who live
along the shared Colombia/Venezuela border.
Source: “El Eln y las disidencias de las Farc están reclutando venezolanos (The
ELN and FARC Dissidents are Recruiting Venezuelan Nationals),” Meridiano
70, 15 October 2018. https://meridiano70.co/el-eln-y-las-disidencias-de-las-farcestan-reclutando-venezolanos/
Not only are the ELN and FARC recruiting Venezuelan adults, they are also
looking to indoctrinate children directly through school systems in Venezuela
or by bringing them back to Colombia. Their objective with this type of
recruitment? Both groups need to increase total manpower by expanding their
ranks to try to increase their operational presence in areas where they do not
have it. Furthermore, the political situation in Venezuela is providing them with
the perfect opportunity to do so.

OE Watch | December 2018

68

LATIN AMERICA
More News on the ELN
OE Watch Commentary: Increasingly, the National Liberation
Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional, ELN), long considered the
bridesmaid of Colombian communist guerrilla groups, is appearing
in regional news. Now it seems to be entrenched in Venezuelan soil
and embedded into the Bolivarian territorial control structure run
by the Communist Party of Cuba and the United Socialist Party
of Venezuela. As noted in the first accompanying reference, from
Radio Santafé, the group has accelerated its counter-economy
hit-and-run attacks against Colombian oil infrastructure, with
those attacks being close to the Venezuelan border. In the second
reference, from La Patilla, María Ramírez, citing a major study
done in 2017 by the Colombian NGO, Ideas for Peace Foundation,
asserts what is being said by many sources -- that the ELN is
being found in strength throughout Venezuela and is not being
confronted by the regime of Nicolás Maduro. This is also noted in
the excerpted article from Venepress. The fourth reference, also
from Radio Santafé, is of a commentator who asks if it should no
longer be considered a “Colombian” guerrilla. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

Flag of the ELN.

Source: Fibonacci [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_ELN.svg.

“Aren’t these proofs sufficient to affirm that the ELN is
in essence a Venezuelan guerrilla?”

Source: Ariel Cabrera, “El Eln sigue dinamitando el oleoducto Caño Limón-Coveñas y causa grave emergencia en Arauca (The ELN
continues dynamiting the Caño Limón-Coveñas oil pipeline and causes a grave emergency in Arauca),” Radio Santafé, 13 November 2018.
http://www.radiosantafe.com/2018/11/13/eln-sigue-dinamitando-el-oleoducto-cano-limon-covenas-causa-grave-emergencia-en-arauca/
The ELN guerrilla continued its terrorist offensive in order to pressure the national [Colombian] government to reactivate the peace
dialogs…The oil pipeline was dynamited in Islas de Bojabá township in Saravena county… last week in the Cedeño township Toledo County in
Norte de Santander…In the last four days the same number of attacks against the oil pipeline have been registered and in the course of 2018
there have been 82 attacks…
Source: María Ramírez Cabello, “ELN explora suelo venezolano desde hace cinco años y se expande para controlar minas y pasos fronterizos
(ELN has been exploring Venezuelan ground for five years and is expanding to control mines and border crossings),” La Patilla, 7 November
2018. https://www.lapatilla.com/2018/11/07/eln-explora-suelo-venezolano-desde-hace-cinco-anos-y-se-expande-para-controlar-minas-ypasos-fronterizos/
…They detail that on Venezuelan soil the ELN has been able to establish itself in a great part of the border zone controlling fluvial movement
toward the interior of Venezuela, principally along the Autana, Cuao, Sipapo and Guayapo rivers…’Their interest is to establish themselves in
border crossing points to control the passage of gasoline, food, and gasoil (motor launch fuel)…as well as all smuggling, rents from drug and
arms trafficking, and control of mining along the banks of the Sipapo river’….”
Source: Fernando Tineo, “Venezuela: el ELN también está en estados con salida al mar (Venezuela: The ELN is also in states with Access to
the sea),” Venepress, 8 November 2018. https://venepress.com/politica/ELN-tambien-esta-en-estados-con-salida-al-mar1541703040682
In recent months it has been able to confirm that in the Sierra de San Luis, between the states of Lara and Falcón, ‘there are members
of the ELN,. For Tarazona [analyst], this is a strategic and geopolitical position in order to continue commercializing on what is obtained
from illegal mining by way of the islands of Curazao, Aruba y Bonaire…With respect to the number of persons that currently belong to this
organization, classified as terrorist, there would currently be operating inside Venezuelan territory, the Networks Foundation assures that
according to their field research approximately 50,000 men in the ELN, in the FARC dissidence and other groups…He assured that ‘the
guerrilla has five radio transmitters in Venezuelan territory and Conatel has dedicated itself to pursuing stations that question the leadership
of Nicolás Maduro, but does nothing against the Venezuelan and Colombian guerrilla’. Likewise, he indicated that when there are elections,
the guerrilla pressures citizens to vote in favor of the government.
Source: Mauricio Botero Caicedo, “¿Es el ELN una guerrilla venezolana? (Is the ELN a Venezuelan guerrilla Group?),” Radio Santafé, 15
November 2018. http://www.radiosantafe.com/2018/11/15/es-el-eln-una-guerrilla-venezolana/
…The NGO affirms that it identified ELN presence in 12 Venezuelan states, ‘about half the country…Aren’t these proofs sufficient to affirm
that the ELN is in essence a Venezuelan guerrilla?

OE Watch | December 2018

69

LATIN AMERICA
Internal Divisions within the FARC and the Reaction
of Remaining and Dissident FARC Members
OE Watch Commentary: Two years after the
FARC signed an agreement with the Colombian
government at the Colon Theatre in Bogotá, true
cracks within the group are beginning to show and it
is a split that can no longer be hidden behind claims
that the disbandment of the group has been a true
success. At the close of the peace talks, the FARC,
the Colombian government and even outsiders knew
that not all members would disarm. The top FARC
leadership, who are believed to only have come
forward with the peace agreement in order to avoid
prison time, have been accused of misappropriating
resources, adding to further distrust by lowerranking members. These factors are just a few of the
problems that are causing internal fractures within the
group. Other factors discussed in the accompanying
excerpted article from El Tiempo include the death
of top FARC Commander Pedro Antonio Marin (aka
Manuel Marulanda) in 2008 and his replacement,
Guillermo Leon Saenz Vargas, who was seen more as
an intellectual than a guerrilla commander.
Saenz Vargas was killed in 2011 and he was
succeeded by Rodrigo Londono Echeverri (aka
Timochenko), who actually sped up peace talks with
President Manuel Santos. To those guerrilla fighters
who were still active, they viewed the expedited
process as a betrayal to the group, as indicated in the
excerpted article from El Pais. It has been noted that
the FARC leadership proved incapable of generating
an atmosphere of unity surrounding the peace
process and the post-agreement politics caused more
disagreements and problems for the group.
While many of the former FARC members have
demobilized, there is still a large contingent that
never approved of the terms of the peace agreement.
For this reason, FARC dissidents have simply shifted
into other criminal groups within Colombia or
have moved to countries looking to recruit FARC
members, such as Mexico and Brazil. Those who
have stayed on with the FARC are frustrated because
they are barely making a living by moving from coca
production to legitimate crops. Finally, as discussed
in the last article from El Pais, those same dissidents
still residing in Colombia may work together with
other criminal groups to get back the wealthiest
FARC fronts still dedicated to illegal activity in the
country, despite the peace agreement. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“These members claim that those higher up in the chain of
command have mutually discredited themselves in addition to
suspicious handling of resources.”
Source: “La fractura en el FARC, profunda y inocultable (Divisions within the
FARC, Profound and Impossible to Hide),” El Tiempo, 2 September 2018. https://
www.eltiempo.com/politica/proceso-de-paz/la-fractura-en-la-farc-profunda-einocultable-263260
Divisions between top FARC leadership has been escalating since the start of the
Peace Talks in Havana as select key leaders wanted to remain a subversive group,
while others wanted to completely give up cocaine production/trafficking. Other
factors associated with internal FARC division are distrust of lower ranking members
with their key leadership. These members claim that those higher up in the chain of
command have mutually discredited themselves in addition to suspicious handling
of resources. Other factors that have caused divisions from the past include fast
paced changes in leadership due to the deaths of key leaders to include top FARC
Commander Pedro Antonio Marin aka Manuel Marulanda in 2008 (he had been
in charge of the group for 44 years at the time of his death). His replacement was
named as Guillermo Leon Saenz Vargas who introduced a new type of leadership
and influence within the FARC in which the “rural” style disappeared and was
replaced with a more “intellectual” style.
Source: “Timochenko’ analizó las disputas internas en la Farc y evitó referirse a
Iván Márquez (Timochenko Analizes Internal Disputes within the FARC and Fails
to Mention anything about Iván Márquez),” El Pais, 8 October 2018. https://www.
elpais.com.co/proceso-de-paz/timochenko-analizo-las-disputas-internas-en-la-farc-yevito-referirse-a-ivan-marquez.html
It was evident then that the FARC was already experiencing a crisis that was
unprecedented in its history, without military alternatives to solve it. In the armed
field, the insurgent group was withdrawing with few options for recovery. On
the other hand, accusations started to arise within the FARC to point out those
responsible for that military disaster, and blamed FARC negotiators in Havana
indicating the following: “Those in Havana are the politicians, but not those who
have fought in the mountains in Colombia. Now some bosses appear with a rifle only
to have their picture taken.” Timochenko in particular received significant blowback
from FARC followers as they felt he tried to move the Peace Process ahead too
quickly without taking into account what the group as a whole wanted.
Source: “El paradero desconocido de lideres de las FARC despierta preocupacion en
Colombia (The Unknown Location of FARC leaders Raises Concern in Colombia),”
El Pais, 13 September 2018. https://elpais.com/internacional/2018/09/12/
colombia/1536774123_549145.html
The wealthiest fronts of the FARC are those in the Southern Bloc, especially the
48th and 2nd fronts, because of their high levels of cocaine production. These
Blocs are led by high level FARC leaders who are not required to remain in areas
of reconciliation as are lower ranking FARC members who now feel marginalized.
Furthermore, any surplus from the aforementioned Front’s are given to other
high level FARC leaders. Discontent regarding what is happening with high
level leadership has led to the idea that dissident FARC members may attempt to
take power back from current FARC leaders, but at this point, that idea is simply
speculation due to the cost of what it would take to do so and the violence that would
invariably ensue.

OE Watch | December 2018

70

LATIN AMERICA
The Flow of Cuban Doctors
OE Watch Commentary: Could we use “Cherchez les médecins” or “In quo vadis medicos?” as new geostrategic sayings? Maybe, if we
are referring to the foreign strategy of the Cuban Communist Party. The regime in Havana is apparently pulling 11,000 medical personnel
out of Brazil, while putting a couple thousand more in Venezuela. This represents quite a shift in their strategic deployment footprint. As the
accompanying references note, the deployment of doctors by the Cuban regime is always more than a medical gesture. Along with the doctors
go less gentle agents of the Revolution, and the Cuban regime expects to get paid, not audited. Having to redeploy out of Brazil has to be a major
defeat. Reinforcing in Venezuela has to be part of an effort to avoid another. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…they keep track of their compatriots in the More Doctors program, and at the same time monitor
Brazilian authorities.”
Source: Verónica Goyzueta, “Cuba retira a más
de 11.000 médicos de Brasil tras las exigencias
de Bolsonaro (Following Bolsonaro’s demands,
Cuba withdraws more than 11,000 doctors from
Brazil),” Diario ABC, 15 November 2018. https://
www.abc.es/internacional/abci-cuba-retiramas-11000-medicos-brasil-tras-exigenciasbolsonaro-201811150315_noticia_amp.html
Announcements from President-elect Jair
Bolsonaro precipitated an announcement that
had been anticipated, given the clear ideological
differences between the Brazilian and the Cuban
regime. Wednesday, the government of Miguel
Díaz-Canel announced the departure of its doctors
in the social program that serves health clinics in the
most remote parts of Brazil. In a Thursday Twitter
message, Bolsonaro placed as conditions [for
continuation of the Cuban ‘More Doctors’ program]
that proofs of medical competence of the Cuban
doctors be conducted and that their salaries be given
to them directly.

Source: Editors, “Los espías cubanos
tendrán que salir de Brasil tras la
posesión de Bolsonaro (The Cuban
spies will have to leave Brazil following
the inauguration of Bolsonaro),” Diario
do Poder, Brasilia, 8 November 2018.
https://diariodopoder.com.br/espioescubanos-terao-de-abandonar-o-brasilapos-a-posse/
After the inauguration of President
Jair Bolsonaro in January, the
government will have to confront an
emblematic problem: the immediate
withdrawal, perhaps through expulsion,
of hundreds of Cuban spies…the
major part of the Cuban ‘intelligence
agents’ came to Brazil in the midst
of ten thousand Cubans in the ‘More
Doctors’ program. ...they keep track of
their compatriots in the More Doctors
program, and at the same time monitor
Brazilian authorities…

Source: Editors, “¡PARA ESTO SI HAY
DÓLARES! Cuba envía 500 médicos
más a Venezuela (For This Yes There Are
Dollars! Cuba sends 500 more doctors to
Venezuela),” DolarToday and EFE, 13
November 2018. https://dolartoday.com/
para-esto-si-hay-dolares-cuba-envia-500medicos-mas-venezuela/
Official media from the island today
informed that Cuba has sent a new
contingent of 500 specialists in General
Integral Medicine to Venezuela in order
to reinforce the collaboration that it
maintains in that sector with the South
American country…The two groups of
Cuban doctors have already traveled
to Caracas and the delivery will be
complete in December when the total sum
of collaborators from the Island doing
service in Venezuela will reach 21,700
including doctors and professionals with
other profiles…

Brazilian Health Minister, Alexandre Padilha, participates in the inaugural lecture of the module for the reception and evaluation of Cuban professionals for the second
phase of the Mais Médicos Program (2013).
Source: Marcello Casal Jr. / Agência Brasil [CC BY 3.0 br (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/br/deed.en)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mais_Medicos_Padilha.jpg.

OE Watch | December 2018

71

LATIN AMERICA
Panama: A Bridge in Latin America for China’s
“Belt and Road”?
OE Watch Commentary: After establishing formal diplomatic
relations with Panama in 2017, the People’s Republic of China
continues its efforts to strengthen these ties. As the accompanying
excerpt from the centrist Panama daily La Estrella points out,
Chinese authorities recently hosted a conference in Panama titled,
“Think Tank and Media Forum,” which provided an opportunity to
“exchange views and proposals about the future of the China-Latin
American economic cooperation.” During the conference, attendees
spoke about how this relationship is already bearing fruit, pointing
out that China-Panama cooperation has “resulted in the signing of
23 agreements in political, tourist, economic, and infrastructure
matters; among them, a light train that will connect Panama West
with Chiriqui that requires an investment of about $5 billion.” As
the excerpt points out, to facilitate greater cooperation between the
two countries, “in April of this year, a direct flight between China
and Panama was opened successfully.”

“In the last decade, China established diplomatic
relations with 24 countries of the 33 that make up the
Latin American region.”

Just as Panama served as a key juncture for trade in the Western
hemisphere in the past century, so today, China regards Panama
Goods From China Passing Through Panama Canal (2012).
Source: Katja Schulz from Washington, D. C., USA [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Goods_From_China_Passing_Through_Panama_Canal_-_Flickr_-_treegrow.jpg.
“as an important point of arrival in Latin America of the natural
extension of the 21st century Maritime Silk Road.” As the excerpt indicates, Panamanian officials “signed with China the Memorandum of
Understanding on Cooperation to Build together the Belt and Road.” Chinese authorities have not only made inroads with Panama, but as the
article explains, during “the last decade China established diplomatic relations with 24 countries of the 33 that make up the Latin American
region.” The article quotes a Chinese official who asserts that “relations with Latin America are an important part of Chinese diplomacy and
guided by the important exchanges of the countries have reached a level never seen before.” End OE Watch Commentary (Wedman)
Source: Larish Julio, “China Holds Forum in Panama to Strengthen Chinese-Latin American Relations,” La Estrella, 15 October 2018. http://
laestrella.com.pa/panama/nacional/china-panama-tienden-puente-para-fortalecer-relaciones-chino-latinoamericanas/24087867
With the recent establishment of diplomatic relations of Panama and the People’s Republic of China, the Asian giant carried out in the
Isthmian soil the first Think Tank and Media Forum. The conference organized by the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China and the
Association of Public Diplomacy of the Asian country had the purpose of reflecting and exchanging views and proposals about the future of
the China-Latin American economic cooperation….
During the event, the Chinese diplomats, in general, highlighted the role of Panama as a bridge of Latin America in China’s “Belt and
Road.”
“The forum ... serves as a bridge to strengthen the academic exchanges between China, Latin America, and the Caribbean, and the
promotion of the mutual understanding and friendship among the peoples…”
Meanwhile, Liu Biwei, the vice president of the Public Diplomacy Association of the People’s Republic of China said that the Think Tank
and Media Forum is a space to reflect on the important issue of relations of equality, mutual benefit, and shared development between China
and Latin America. Liu Biwei claimed that the relations with Latin America are an important part of Chinese diplomacy and guided by the
important exchanges of the countries have reached a level never seen before.
In this context, he recalled that in June 2017, the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Panama inaugurated a new era in
the bilateral relations that with the leadership and momentum of the two Heads of State, the cooperation between the two countries in various
fields have been developing “vigorously” and have gained a great leap, bringing tangible benefits to the two peoples. Likewise, in April of this
year, the direct flight between China and Panama was opened successfully, the first to travel directly to the Panamanian isthmus from Asia.
Liu Biwei also stressed that Panama, as an important point of arrival in Latin America of the natural extension of the 21st century Maritime
Silk Road signed with China the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation to Build together the “Belt and Road.”
“We must take advantage of this situation to strengthen the interaction of our development strategies and make the efforts to turn Panama
into a ‘bridgehead’ of the construction of the ‘Belt and Road’ initiative between China and Latin America, to benefit the two countries and
the two peoples,” he specified. He also mentioned that in the last decade China established diplomatic relations with 24 countries of the
33 that make up the Latin American region. Panama, the Dominican Republic, and El Salvador are the most recent ones. With this, ‘the
countries recognize the principle of one China,’ he stressed.
The diplomatic relations of Panama and China, which were established in June 2017, have resulted in the signing of 23 agreements in
political, tourist, economic, and infrastructure matters; among them, a light train that will connect Panama West with Chiriqui that requires
an investment of about $5 billion….
OE Watch | December 2018

72

LATIN AMERICA
Bolivian Government Steps Up Fight to Thwart
Entry of Illegal Contraband
OE Watch Commentary: There are an estimated
116 routes along the Chilean-Bolivian border that
are used by smugglers to move contraband from
Chile into Bolivia, according to information from
Carreteras Peligrosas. There are only six checkpoints
along the Bolivian border and they are only monitored
during certain times of the day, which allow
contraband to pass easily from Chile to Bolivia. It
has been reported that the starting point for illegal
contraband is in Iquique, northern Chile, where
smugglers operate in its duty-free zone.

“Deputy Minister Rodriguez stated on 22 October that the
losses caused by illegal smuggling from Chile to Bolivia has
cost the government approximately $1.5 billion over the six past
months.”
Source: “Pasos fronterizos entre Chile y Bolivia (Border Crossings between
Chile and Bolivia),” Carreteras Peligrosas, 21 September 2018. https://
carreteraspeligrosas.com/pasos-fronterizos-chile-y-bolivia/
There are at least 116 illegal smuggling routes along the Chilean-Bolivian border
that are used by smugglers to move contraband from Chile into Bolivia. This activity
is relatively easy as there are only 6 checkpoints along the Bolivian border and they
are only monitored during certain times of the day which allow contraband to pass
easily from Chile to Bolivia. The starting point for illegal contraband is in Iquique, in
northern Chile, where smugglers operate in its duty-free zone.

In September 2018, the Bolivian government stated
it would take action against illegal smuggling, but
until now, no changes have been made and smuggling
efforts continue to increase. This idea is suggested
by the Bolivian Deputy Anti-Smuggling Minister
Gonzalo Rodriguez, who states that the situation is
very sensitive due to negative impact of smuggling
on government coffers. The accompanying excerpted
article from La Razon provides additional information
as to how much money the Bolivian government has
allegedly lost due to illegal smuggling activity. This
same excerpt points out that at least 40 trucks with
contraband enter Bolivia on a daily basis.

Source: “Contrabando desde Chile suma $1.5MM en sies meses (Contraband
entering Boliva from Chile Costs the Country $1.5 billion over a 6 month
time period),” La Razon, 2 October 2018. http://www.la-razon.com/economia/
Contrabando-Chile-suma-MM-meses_0_3012898687.html

In early September, Rodriguez reported that by the
end of the month, the Bolivian government would
assign additional priority to establishing a strategy
against smuggling from Chile, which includes setting
up 24 military checkpoints along the Chilean border.
To date, this has not happened, but there are reports
that the Bolivian government is actively utilizing
military and police measures to stop the entrance of
trucks carrying contraband into the country. Some
of these methods are outlined in the excerpted article
from Eju.

Source: “Militares bolivianos destruyen con explosivos vías que utiliza el
contrabando en la frontera con Chile (Bolivian Military Utilizes Explosives to
Destroy Roads Utilized to Move Contraband from Chile),” Eju, 19 October 2018.
http://eju.tv/2018/10/militares-bolivianos-destruyen-con-explosivos-vias-que-utilizael-contrabando-en-la-frontera-con-chile/

The Bolivian government is also working to have at
least 10 of the 24 anticipated checkpoints completed
by the end of November 2018. As the excerpted
article from Pagina Siete reports, the border military
posts under construction are prefabricated and
designed to house the troops in charge of monitoring
and patrolling the border area. With the purpose of
optimizing the fight against smuggling, the Bolivian
government has decided to set up military posts with
state-of-the-art technology every 5 km or 10 km. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Deputy Minister Rodriguez stated on 22 October that the losses caused by illegal
smuggling from Chile to Bolivia has cost the government approximately $1.5 billion
over the six past months. He further added that smugglers operating in border areas
recruit policemen to protect their illegal activities and that at least 40 trucks with
contraband enter into Bolivia from Chile on a daily basis. The Bolivian government
has also concluded that 70 percent of the smuggled goods enter the country from
Chile.

Defense Minister Javier Zavaleta reported in late October 2018 that the Bolivian
government recently started using explosives to destroy roads most commonly used
by Chilean smugglers. Currently, the Bolivian Joint Task Force is in charge of this
activity, but no data has been reported as to where the detonations are taking place
or how many roads have been destroyed.
Source: “Edificarán 10 puestos militares en frontera con Chile hasta fin de
año (Bolivia Plans to Build 10 Military Posts along the Chilean border by
November 2018),” Pagina Siete, 24 October 2018. https://www.paginasiete.bo/
seguridad/2018/10/18/edificaran-10-puestos-militares-en-frontera-con-chile-hastafin-de-ano-197276.html
The Defense Ministry plans to have the first 10 anti-smuggling military posts
ready by the end of November 2018. The Ministry also indicated to build the same
number of military posts in 2019. All of the new posts will be equipped with stateof-the-art technology and will be emplaced along the border every 5 km or 10
km along the border Bolivian border. Additionally, the Bolivian government has
approximately 200 military troops patrolling and monitoring the border with Chile,
but the plan is to increase that number also. The government’s primary plan with the
aforementioned actions is to force smugglers to enter the country through primary
posts where customs offices are located.

OE Watch | December 2018

73

