community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #7
July 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

CHINA’S DRONE SWARMS (pg. 21)

EURASIA
3
4
5
6
7
7
8
9
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
18
19
20

AFRICA

Tactical Air Defense Readiness in Russian Far East
Will the Terminator be Terminated?
Tracking Down Jihadists in the Arctic
Sky-watching in the Cold
Upgrading Arctic Armor
Railroad Improvements in the Arctic
Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal on Kamchatka Peninsula
Upgrading the Arctic Air Fleet
Away All Boats!
A Recap of KADEX 2018
Azerbaijan’s Latest Weapons Acquisition
Moscow’s Role in the Karabakh Conflict After the ‘Velvet
Revolution’ in Armenia
Ukraine and Moldova Increase Border Control Measures
Russian Response to Polish “Threat”
The Kremlin’s Conference Bully Pulpit
Interview with “Discredited” Defense Minister
Proposal to Restore Veterans’ Benefits
The Russian PX System Turns 100
More Effective Military Training for College Students

INDO-PACIFIC
21
23
24
25
27
28

China Sets New Records for Aerial, Naval Drone Swarms
Chinese Advancement in Hypersonic Aircraft
China’s Holistic Security Concept Explained
Cyber Sovereignty and the PRC’s Vision for Global Internet
Governance
Chinese Universities Begin Recruiting Undergraduates for
AI Programs
China Confident in Shanghai Cooperation Organization’s
Antiterrorism Role

29
30
31

Marawi Rehabilitation Progress Slows in the Philippines
51
Establishment of the Action Coalition for Thailand: Is this
the Future Ruling Party?
52
Controversy over Co-authored Book by Former Heads of ISI
and RAW
53
54

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
32
34
35
37
38
39
40
41
41
42
43
44
44
45
46
47
48
50

Gaza’s Incendiary Kites
Khamenei: Muslim Unity only after Israel’s Destruction
New Russian Push to Strengthen Syrian Army, Dissolve
Loyalist Militias
Turkey’s Military Observation Posts in Idlib
Ramzan Kadyrov: Putin’s Bridge to Muslims in Syria and
Beyond
Iranian Biomass Remote-Sensing Satellite Developed
Iran’s Passive Defense Organization Establishes Space
Policy
Group Planning to Hack Bank in Iran Arrested
Cyberspace Should Promote Religious Teaching
Iran Cracks Down on Internet Café VPNs
Iranian Role in Turkish-Saudi Relations
Iran to Attend Russian Military Trade Show
Iranian Trade with Iraq Hits $10 billion
Who Took $30 Billion out of Iran?
Iranian Supreme Leader Discusses Missiles
Turkish Defense and Aviation Industry Performance Report
of 2017
Turkish Troops Lay Siege on the Qandil Mountains
Turkish-Greek Bilateral Migrant Readmission Agreement
Suspended

55
56
57
58
59
60

The Pan-African Dream…Open Borders; the Reality…
Increasing Border Disputes
Ethiopia Finally Accepts Border Demarcation, But Will a Strong
Peace with Eritrea Follow?
Ethnic Conflict and Self-Defense in Mali
Progress against al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb’s Furqan
Brigade
A New Threat in Mozambique
Nigerian Military Accused of Harassing Human Rights Accuser
Nigerian Army Confident in Returning IDPs Home
With More “Black Gold” in Gulf of Guinea, More Pirates
With Violent Protests Flaring, Can South Africa’s President Stem
the Economic Decline?
China Marginalizes Taiwan in Africa

LATIN AMERICA
61
62
63
64
65
66
66
67

The Media War within the War—the Battle for Narrative in
Mexico’s Cartel War
Mexican Cartel Expands Recruitment
Mothers’ Day Massacre in Nicaragua
Uruguay Faces New Security Issues Related to Regional Drug
Trafficking
The New Narco Profile in Colombia
Ivan Duque President Elect of Colombia
Polio in Venezuela
China’s Demand for Brazilian Food Products on the Rise

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 7

July | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Nurlan Aliyev
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Robert Kurz
Matthew Stein

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood
Elliott Zaagman

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gunduz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Drone Swarm.

Image Source: Derivative Work, based on By Halftermeyer [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from
Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Parrot_Airborne_MINIDRONE_flight_over_Alameda,_CA.JPG.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Tactical Air Defense Readiness in Russian Far East
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Pantsir S1 (Панцирь C1, NATO designation is the SA-22 Greyhound) is a relatively new system in
Russia’s Far East. The missile system is a truck or track mounted, medium-range surface-to-air missile launcher and dual 30mm autocannon
using phase array acquisition and tracking radar. It is designed to provide point air defense of important installations against aircraft, helicopters,
precision munitions, cruise missiles and UAVs and as well as additional protection for air defense units from close range enemy air attacks. One
of its main missions in the Eastern Military District is the protection of the S-400 (NATO designation SA-21 Growler) long range air defense
missile sites. Also interesting is how they adapt to the unique terrain of the Kamchatka Peninsula to predict enemy air avenues of approach. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: “Pantsir Air Defense Missile and
Gun System Crews begin Alert Duty in
Kamchatka,” Eastern Military District Press
Service, 18 May 2018. eng.mil.ru/en/news_
page/country/more.htm?id=12175976@
egnews

Source: Yuriy Rossolov, “Под прикрытием «Панциря» всегда спокойно (It Is Always
Calm under the Cover of a Pantsir),” Krasnaya Zveda, 30 May 2018. http://redstar.ru/podprikrytiem-pantsirya-vsegda-spokojno/

Combat crews of the Pantsir antiaircraft
missile and gun systems stationed on the
Kamchatka Peninsula have completed
the preparation of hardware and entered
upon air defense alert duty in accordance
with the air defense rotation plan. In
preparation, the crews passed theoretical
and practical training; the technical
servicing of air defense vehicles was
conducted; the readiness and functioning of
the assemblies, units, and combat modules
of the hardware were checked; and missiles
and gun ammunition was uploaded. Training
included a road march from garrison to alert
positions…

Bright multicolored balloons in the sky mean that someone has a joyful event: a wedding,
the birth of a child, or another occasion…They can end up in the field of view of the air
defense forces….”That is highly likely,” according to the Northeast Kamchatka Air Defense
Missile Regiment Pantsir-S1 Battalion Commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Oleg Afanasenko.
“We recently had such an incident. One of the crews that had gone on alert duty detected
an air balloon and tracked it using all systems over the course of several dozen kilometers”.
This small “UAV” was most likely covered with foil, which reflected the signal….

…Pantsir air defense missile and gun
systems protect the facilities of troops
and forces in Northeastern Russia and
the positions of S-400 Triumf surface-toair missile systems. Last year the Pantsir
antiaircraft missile and gun system crews
achieved an “excellent” rating in combat
training firing on the Ashuluk state range and
participated in various exercises and training
drills for their proper purpose.

A year has passed since several subunits of Pantsir-S air defense missile-gun systems went
on combat alert to defend Kamchatka’s air borders. During this time, the scouts of the skies
have become quite proficient. Some successes and missions still need some more work.

…The latest air defense missile-gun complex is equipped with several detection and
guidance systems, which can back up each other. Therefore, the enemy doesn’t have a
chance of surreptitiously approaching the vehicle.
The picture is somewhat different in Kamchatka. The volcanic terrain relief complicates
the mission of the air defender. But, in Lieutenant Colonel Oleg Afanasenko’s words, “this
makes service more interesting. With a skilled approach, one can transform terrain features
into advantages. “Let’s assume that the enemy possesses intelligence data of the Pantsir-S1’s
deployment location. From which side will he attack – from the one from which everything
is oriented toward, or from that side, where he will be able to approach the positions as
closely as possible, while remaining unnoticed by our radar or other detection systems?...
And in the event that an adversary is at an altitude that is beyond the reach of our weapon,
we have a ‘big brother’ – the S-400 air defense missile system. In short, by any measure,
punishment will be inevitable for penetrating into our air defense missile regiment’s area of
responsibility”…
..”We are totally integrated into the country’s PVO [air defense] System” – Lieutenant
Colonel Oleg Afanasenko stresses. “We are working based upon an integrated concept and
integrated command and control…

A Russian Pantsir-S1 combined short to medium range surface-to-air missile and anti-aircraft artillery weapon system.
Source: By Vitaliy Ragulin (Репетиция парада.) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pantsir-S1_vehicle.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

3

EURASIA
Will the Terminator be Terminated?
OE Watch Commentary: During the recent Victory
Day parade, the Kremlin leadership displayed some of
the latest weapons from its modern military arsenal. As a
traditional land power, there was no shortage of armored
fighting vehicles (both tracked and wheeled). One system
in particular, the Terminator (a tank support combat
vehicle, or BMPT), has generated considerable interest
among both domestic and foreign observers. In the brief
accompanying excerpt, from the moderately pro-Kremlin
source, Gazeta.Ru, the author takes a closer look at this
weapon system, pointing out some of its limitations and
negative characteristics.
Quoting a senior defense representative, it has “not
[been] easy to get the Terminator adopted for service.”
While initially designed to support tanks, particularly
in urban environments, the vehicle has been used and
tested in Syria “as well-protected heavy infantry combat
vehicles.” Moreover, the author quotes a military expert
who asserts “it is essential that BMPTs have highly
developed reconnaissance devices which out-perform
those of tanks,” but that the Terminator’s “reconnaissance
capabilities do not surpass the surveillance and fire
control equipment of those tanks.” This expert goes on to
point out that the ammunition for this BMPT is “stored
openly,” and that it has a larger crew (5) than that of a
tank (3). Most importantly, he stresses that this “BMPT is
currently more expensive than a tank.”
While the Terminator does pack a lot of firepower (“two
rapid-fire 30-mm cannon, 7.62-mm PKTM machine gun,
two AGS-17D automatic grenade launchers, as well as the
Ataka-T ATGM”), another drawback is that its chassis
“is created on the basis of the T-90 main battle tank.”
This chassis is not compatible with plans to develop the
module system based on the standardized heavy tracked
Armata platform. Despite these shortcomings, earlier
this year, “the Russian Defense Ministry signed the first
contract for the supply of 18 Terminators to the troops.”
The article concludes with two other poignant
observations. First, during the Victory Day parade, when
the vehicle was first shown to the public, it was operated
by representatives of the manufacturer, because “at the
time of the parade the army had not sufficiently mastered
this vehicle.” Second, because of sanctions, the Russian
military has been unable to actually test the vehicle’s
anti-tank capabilities during training because they lack
the “fire and strike laser simulators” which a German
company was supposed to provide. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Finally, a very important factor is that
the BMPT is currently more expensive
than a tank…”

Source: Mikhail Khodarenok, “Дороже танка: что не так с БМПТ Терминатор
(More Expensive Than a Tank: What Is Wrong with the Terminator Tank
Support Combat Vehicle),” Gazeta.Ru, 30 May 2018. https://www.gazeta.ru/
army/2018/05/30/11776345.shtml
…The first batch of Terminator BMPTs will be delivered to the 90th Guards Tank
Division in the third or fourth quarter of this year for field tests to clarify the
forms and methods of using the BMPT during combat action by the tank division,
according to TASS…. “It was not easy to get the Terminator adopted for service,”
a senior source in the Russian defense industry complex told Gazeta.Ru.
… “To promptly detect tank-threatening targets, first of all man-portable
and mobile antitank systems, it is essential that BMPTs have highly developed
reconnaissance devices which out-perform those of tanks,” Viktor Murakhovskiy,
editor-in-chief of the Arsenal Otechestva journal, explained to Gazeta.Ru. But
currently, according to the expert, the BMPT’s reconnaissance capabilities do not
surpass the surveillance and fire control equipment of those tanks. “That is, we
are getting a vehicle with the exact same capabilities — panoramic sight, thermal
imaging module, and so on, as a main battle tank,” Murakhovskiy stated.
But the tank is significantly superior to the BMPT in terms of firepower, the
expert emphasized. It has a 125-mm weapon with a high-explosive fragmentation
projectile and a barrel-launched PTUR [antitank guided missile], with the missile
inside an armored compartment, unlike the BMPT where these products are stored
openly. The BMPT crew of five, while the tank has three, also cannot be counted
as an advantage of the BMPT, the publication’s source emphasized.
According to Murakhovskiy, this is rather a lot for a vehicle which in general
is not even regarded as a main combat unit but is a support vehicle. Moreover,
the crews of armored combat vehicles are now equipped with contract military
personnel and this ultimately leads to an increase in the cost of operating the
equipment.
“Finally, a very important factor is that the BMPT is currently more expensive
than a tank,” Viktor Murakhovskiy emphasized. As a result, it becomes clear why
the Defense Ministry could not decide on the role and place of the BMPT.
“However, in this regard, the Terminator was helped a lot by Syria,” Gazeta-Ru’s
source in the Russian defense industry complex said. According to him, several
vehicles were sent to the combat zone and acquitted themselves very well there.
However, not as tank support combat vehicles — there were no large-scale tank
battles in Syria — but as well-protected heavy infantry combat vehicles….
…The Terminator is created on the basis of the T-90 main battle tank. It is
equipped with two rapid-fire 30-mm cannon, 7.62-mm PKTM machine gun, two
AGS-17D automatic grenade launchers, as well as the Ataka-T ATGM…. This
year, the Russian Defense Ministry signed the first contract for the supply of 18
Terminators to the troops
…The Terminator was first shown in May this year during the Victory parade
on Red Square. As is typical, the driver-mechanics of the tank support combat
vehicles passing through the country’s main square, were representatives of the
manufacturer. At the time of the parade the army had not sufficiently mastered this
vehicle.
…According to Murakhovskiy, since the BMPT is intended for engagement with
the enemy on the battlefield in visible conditions, it is desirable that such exercises
are bilateral and with the use of fire and strike laser simulators for all assets
involved in such exercises.
“Unfortunately, we do not have such a capability today, because Germany could
supply us with the necessary equipment, but in the light of recent events, relations
with German companies engaged in the production of such products were upset,”
Murakhovskiy recalled.
OE Watch | July 2018

4

EURASIA
Tracking Down Jihadists in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: While defending against attacking brigades of jihadists
invading from Norway and Finland is clearly way out there, during the Cold War, US
troops stationed in Europe also trained to fight against Viet Cong guerrillas and North
Vietnamese regulars. Recently in Russia’s Arctic region, “terrorists” and “jihadists”
have been featured in training scenarios. Clearly the terrain and weather were not a
match in these scenarios, but training needs to take place and a notional, if far-fetched,
enemy is needed. It may also be politically more astute than openly training against
your neighbor, especially since the Pechenga training area is adjacent to Norway. Either
the 200th Separate Motorized Coastal Rifle Brigade or the 80th Separate Motorized
Arctic Rifle Brigade had some good combined arms training and employed at least
one battalion tactical group in the exercise. These Arctic brigades deploy regularly in
support of Arctic riverine landings, amphibious landings and joint and combined arms
exercises. The battalion tactical group concept fits well with the maritime transport
provided by the Northern Fleet. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The BTG-1 commander has two
tours of duty to Syria under his belt. He
saw from personal experience that in
tactical training sessions it is necessary
to teach every serviceman techniques of
performing additional reconnaissance
regardless of the amount of information
received from the reconnaissance
subunit.”

Source: Marina Shcherbakova: “В Заполярье обезвредили «террористов» на «джихад-мобилях» (‘Terrorists’ in ‘Jihad Mobiles’ Were
Neutralized in the Zapolyarye),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 16 May 2018. redstar.ru/v-zapolyare-obezvredili-terroristov-na-dzhihad-mobilyah/
Everything began early in the morning with an alert and short forced march to the area where, according to the exercise scenario, groups of
“terrorists” had been detected. They were located along the Russian State Border…The notional enemy had dispersed on the terrain, taking
shelter in low-lying areas and on the tops of round top mountains. Taking this into consideration, the motorized rifle subunits took up a
defense of a considerable area.
Before the beginning of the active phase of the exercise, the headquarters platoon of the 1st Self-Propelled Howitzer Artillery Battalion
posted range guards throughout the territory where combat training activities were conducted and set up communications…
Then the placid stillness was disrupted by the piercing sound of a bugle. Sergeant Vladimir Belousov raised a red flag and a ‘genuine’ battle
began on the practice range. Deafening salvos of tank guns and artillery pieces sounded. They thundered unceasingly, and when rare minutes
of relative calm appeared, the rattle of machineguns and assault rifles carries from afar…
The “enemy” crossed a water obstacle and began an attack in brigade columns and then in battalion columns. Then the conditional
terrorists deployed laterally and launched an attack, but their attempt to take our forward edge of defense brought no success. Our troops
successfully inflicted defeat with the weapons of artillery, motorized rifle, and tank subunits…
After some time a new group of “terrorists” had been detected moving in “ jihad mobiles” in the direction of the military post of Verkhneye
Luostari. Then the fire of artillery pieces destroyed the “enemy” forces. The battle was waged in various phases of the exercise by 10 tanks,
24 artillery pieces, and 15 air defense weapons. This combat training operation was conducted successfully by the 1st Battalion Tactical
Group (BTG-1), formed on the basis of the 1st Motorized Rifle Battalion commanded by Major Sergey Boyko.
…A total of 240 pieces of military and special equipment and around 1,200 servicemen were in action in the exercise. All participants of
the “battle” were contract servicemen. Many had taken part in the special operation in Syria and made their substantial contribution to the
fight against the IGIL [Islamic State]…The BTG-1 commander has two tours of duty to Syria under his belt. He saw from personal experience
that in tactical training sessions it is necessary to teach every serviceman techniques of performing additional reconnaissance regardless of
the amount of information received from the reconnaissance subunit. This is because in Syria the terrorists often use homemade unmanned
aerial vehicles that “IGIL craftsmen” stuff with mines and grenades. That is why drills to detect and destroy them are held regularly in the
Zapolyar’ye throughout the year…
After the exercise concluded, Colonel Pelipai, commander of the Northern Fleet separate motorized rifle brigade, remarked that all the
personnel’s actions in firing organic weapons were done correctly. The inspection of the level of coordination of the main subunits and
attached weapons of the senior commander also provided a positive result…This exercise was one phase of the motorized rifle brigade’s
preparation for command and staff exercise Manevr [Maneuver]-2018, planned for September.

OE Watch | July 2018

5

EURASIA
Sky-watching in the Cold
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian MOD has put a lot of equipment
and effort into improving the air defense posture of the Arctic approaches
into Russia. The new radar are supposedly capable of detecting small
and electronically-masked objects in flight. Russian air defenders are
well aware that the shortest route between Russia and the US is over
the North Pole. While many of the Arctic exercises are mounted against
small groups of “terrorists” and “jihadists,” as the accompanying article
indicates the prevention of strategic attack is a priority mission of the air
defense community. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“‘Inspections of this type take place every three
to five years,’ Colonel Bogodukhov stated. ‘We
are committed to achieving a score no lower than
‘good’ and I consider that if it is less than that, we
have no right to be serving’.”

Source: Aleksandr Panyushkin, “Глаза и уши ПВО (The Eyes and Ears of Air Defense),” Na Strazhe Zapolyarya (On Guard in the Polar
Region), 1 June 2018.
According to the regimental commander, Colonel Daniil Bogodukhov, the radar regiment monitors everything that flies past in its zone of
responsibility, including civilian aircraft. There is a single goal -- in no circumstances to allow a violation of the border.
“Foreign aircraft are constantly flying along our frontiers. Mostly these are Finnish border and forestry patrol helicopters. That is no
big deal although they sometimes approach within a kilometer of our territory-which does not contravene international norms in any way.
Intelligence-gathering aircraft from countries of the North Atlantic Alliance quite often ‘drop by’ to take a look. These need to be watched
closely.”
During the winter training period the unit’s personnel provided radar support for Northern Fleet aviation. Recently, the regiment assisted
Tu-95 strategic bombers on a long-range flight. It has frequently supported Tu-22M3 strategic bombers on flights over the Arctic Ocean and
western Atlantic. This makes a major contribution to enhancing our defense capabilities…
“We have…technologies that identify and track UAVs. They have been tested and proven their effectiveness. Because combat drones are the
main problem and source of danger emerging from terrorist organizations, we have proven that we can successfully counter them.”
…The radar regiment includes more than 10 sub-units that are stationed across a fairly large area. In a recent exercise scenario, a group of
saboteurs attacked a radar battalion based in Zapolyarnoye. An anti-terrorism sub-unit from a motorized rifle formation in Pechenga came
to its assistance. With our forces in close coordination, the enemy was very rapidly eliminated. Similar exercises have been held…and the
troops have always displayed an outstanding level of military proficiency.
There is also close coordination and constant exchange of information with Russian Federation Federal Security Service border forces. Not
everything can be detected with radar so intelligence from visual means is always useful.
…The main event of the upcoming summer training period is an inspection by the Russian Federation Defense Ministry Main Directorate for
Performance Monitoring and Oversight…personnel are being prepared…hardware is being evaluated, and supplies accumulated. There will
soon be an expedition to the Ashuluk training ground, where combat missions will be handled directly in field conditions.
“Inspections of this type take place every three to five years,” Colonel Bogodukhov stated. “We are committed to achieving a score no lower
than ‘good’ and I consider that if it is less than that, we have no right to be serving. Especially since in recent years the regiment has been
completely re-equipped. We now have advanced equipment and it is…operationally ready. In terms of performance and specifications, it has
no equal in the world. It is mobile, which makes the radar regiment more survivable and more capable in combat.”

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | July 2018

6

EURASIA
Upgrading Arctic Armor
OE Watch Commentary: The 125mm T-80 was designed and entered production during
the last years of the Soviet Union. While Russia continues to design and field new tanks, its
older tanks are rebuilt and upgraded for the contemporary battlefield. As this article states,
the T-80BMV will become the primary Arctic tank and has the standard three-man crew
and an automatic loader. The Refleks laser-beam riding tank-fired guided missile (tandem
hollow charge warhead) extends the range of the T-80 gun from three to five kilometers.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The T-80BVM tanks were selected
to equip the arctic brigades due to
their gas-turbine engines… which are
easier to start in severe cold.”

Source: Bogdan Stepovoy, Aleksey Ramm, and Nikolay Surkov, “Полярных стрелков усилят «реактивными» танками (They Will
Reinforce the Polar Riflemen with ‘Jet-Propelled’ Tanks),” Izvestia, 5 June 2018. https://iz.ru/744163/bogdan-stepovoi-aleksei-ramm-nikolaisurkov/poliarnykh-strelkov-usiliat-reaktivnymi-tankami
T-80BVM tanks, which have been nicknamed “ jet-propelled” due to the speed and characteristic sound of the engine, have begun to arrive
in the arctic units. The reequipping should be completed by the end of this year…A Ministry of Defense spokesmen stated that equipping 80th
Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade (OMSBr), which is based in the Village of Pechenga, Murmansk Oblast, with T-80BVM tanks will be totally
completed by the end of 2018. The 200th Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade will also obtain these armored vehicles in the future.
The T-80BVM tanks were selected to equip the arctic brigades due to their gas-turbine engines… which are easier to start in severe cold. At
an air temperature below 40 degrees, these vehicles achieve operational readiness in a matter of minutes…Heating a frozen diesel engine can
require 30-40 or more minutes. Furthermore, the gas-turbine engine provides the T-80 with unique speed and maneuvering characteristics.
The T-80BVM’s gas-turbine engine design is similar to helicopter engines. The compressed atmospheric air from the compressor enters the
combustion chamber together with the fuel. While igniting, they form a gas under high pressure. The energy of the gas is transformed into
mechanical energy in the turbines through the rotation of the blades. In the Army, these tanks have obtained the nickname “ jet-propelled”
for the characteristic “aircraft” sound, which the gas-turbine engine emits during start-up. But in motion, in contrast to diesel tanks, the T-80
with the gas turbine engine becomes practically silent…
Besides the upgrade of the generator and starter, the modernized armored vehicles will get the “Sosna-U” state-of-the-art fire control
system…It has a state-of-the-art thermal imaging device, laser rangefinder, and automatic target tracker. The fire control system will
increase the tank’s weapon capabilities and the effectiveness and range of target destruction using conventional munitions. The T-80BVM
will also get “Refleks” tank guided weapon system…There are supersonic missiles, which are launched from the gun tube, and are guided to
the target using a laser beam.
Approximately 3,000 T-80 tanks that have not undergone modernization are located at Ministry of Defense storage facilities...A total of over
10,000 of these armored vehicles were manufactured.

Railroad Improvements in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: As the Russian energy
giant Gazprom announced, they are upgrading
their locomotives on their northernmost rail line,
servicing the oil and gas rich Yamal Peninsula.
Yamal produces the liquefied natural gas (LNG)
that the locomotives will run on and is involved
in promotion of LNG sales to the Atlantic and
Pacific basins. This is big business for Russia and a
major feature of the Russian development of Arctic
resources. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“According to Gazprom, the deal,
which was signed during the St.
Petersburg Economic Forum, the
Sinara Group will provide the serial
production of locomotives running on
liquefied natural gas (LNG)”

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Gazprom orders 24 LNG locomotives for Arctic railway,”
The Independent Barents Observer, 28 May 2018. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/
industry-and-energy/2018/05/gazprom-orders-24-lng-locomotives-yamal-railway
Sinara Transport Machines, a Russian company based in Yekaterinburg, will build and
deliver the new locomotives. They will be used on Gazprom’s railway line in the Yamal
Peninsula.
According to Gazprom, the deal, which was signed during the St. Petersburg Economic
Forum, the Sinara Group will provide the serial production of locomotives running
on liquefied natural gas (LNG). A total of ten 1,200 horse power and fourteen 2,000
horsepower locomotives will be delivered by 2024.
…Gazprom subsidiary GazpromTrans operates the 572 kilometer-long Yamal railway
between the stations of Obskaya and Karskaya. In the future, this line could be
extended to nearby Kharasavey, as well as Sabetta on the northeastern tip of the Yamal
Peninsula.
It is the world’s northernmost railway. It opened in 2011 in connection with Gazprom’s
development of the grand gas field Bovanenkovo. Today it constitutes a key part of the
company’s logistics in the area. The line ends in the station of Karskaya, a point located
at 70° north. It includes five stations and 12 double track sections. There are 70 bridges
with a total length of 12 kilometers.
OE Watch | July 2018

7

EURASIA
Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal on Kamchatka Peninsula
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s efforts to
open the Northeast Passage for commercial trade
continues as the Pacific terminal has now been
located on the Kamchatka Peninsula. Ice class
vessels will carry liquefied natural gas (LNG)
to Kamchatka, where it will be transferred to
storage facilities or directly to waiting tankers for
distribution to Pacific customers. The LNG will
initially originate from the Yamal fields in the
White Sea. Russia has discovered other potential
Arctic petroleum and natural gas fields that could
be incorporated into this effort. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Bechenvinka was originally built in
the 1960s as base for submarines for
the Soviet Pacific Fleet.”

Map of Russia - Kamchatka Krai.

Source: By Marmelad [CC BY-SA 2.5 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_Russia_-_Kamchatka_Krai_(2008-03).svg.

Source: Atle Staalesen, “New Arctic transshipment hub is built in former submarine base,” The Independent Barents Observer, 18 May 2018.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-and-energy/2018/05/new-arctic-transshipment-hub-built-former-submarine-base
The Russian natural gas company now confirms that the projected transshipment hub will be located in Bechevinka, the abandoned Navy
compound in Kamchatka. It will cost up to 1.5 billion [rubles] and have a capacity of up to 20 million tons of LNG per year, Novatek Deputy
Head Aleksandr Fridman told Interfax.
It will be a crucial component in Novatek’s out-shipment scheme for LNG produced in the Arctic…A key share of the liquefied gas is aimed at
the Asian market and Novatek and partners are building a big fleet of ice-class carriers able to autonomously sail through Arctic waters.
In Bechevinka, the powerful specialized tankers will unload the LNG, whereupon conventional carriers will bring it further to the markets…
Bechenvinka was originally built in the 1960s as base for submarines for the Soviet Pacific Fleet. In 1971, a total of 12 subs from the 112th
Submarine Brigade moved in. Its village was a small community with eight three-story apartment buildings, a school, kindergarten, shop,
post office, as well as a central heating facility. The only connection with the surrounding world was a weekly ship which sailed to the city of
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatka. The base was fully abandoned in 1996 and the submarines transferred to another nearby Navy base.

Arctic LNG tanker Christophe de Margerie, a flagship in a line of 15 similar vessels, 2017.
Source: President of Russia, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/54680, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | July 2018

8

EURASIA
Upgrading the Arctic Air Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: As reported by the Russian Ministry of Defense, some AN-72 military
transport aircraft will be modified for use in Arctic conditions. The Russian AN-72 (NATO designation
Coaler) was designed as a short-takeoff-and landing military transport aircraft for unprepared strips.
It was first in production in 1977 and has been incorporated into commercial aviation as the AN-74.
It has long been a mainstay of Arctic and Antarctic aviation, because it can be fitted with wheel-skis
landing gear, de-icing equipment and other severe weather upgrades as well as airdrop cargo. It has a
five-man crew and can handle 52 passenger or ten tons of cargo with a range over 2,500 miles. Adding
the additional fuel capacity will facilitate flight operations in the vast Arctic region. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“The primary task is to
increase the takeoff weight
from 32 tons to 34.8 tons. This
will permit it to carry more
fuel and a greater payload.”

Source: Yevgeniy Devyatyarov, Aleksey Ramm, and Aleksandr Kruglov, “Ан-72 добавят взлетной массы (They Will Add Takeoff Weight to
the An-72),” Izvestia, 7 June 2018. https://iz.ru/743135/evgenii-deviatiarov-aleksei-ramm-aleksandr-kruglov/72-dobaviat-vzletnoi-massy
A Russian Ministry of Defense spokesman announced that the Military has furnished…its requirements to modify the An-72 military
transport aircraft…for use…in Arctic conditions. The primary task is to increase the takeoff weight from 32 tons to 34.8 tons. This will permit
it to carry more fuel and a greater payload.
Six An-72 aircraft, two from Naval Aviation, and four from the Aerospace Forces, are initially involved. All of them are based at Moscow’s
Ostafyevo Airfield…Specialists will study the operational life of the airframe and the landing gear design, conduct static strength analyses,
and analyze cracks and areas of corrosion damage in order to verify the durability of the aircraft for continuous operation…
Aircraft engineers have successfully managed to combine good takeoff and landing and high-performance flight characteristics in the An-72
light military transport aircraft. Thanks to the landing gear’s all-terrain capability and the comparatively short takeoff run (less than one
kilometer), the aircraft in the civilian version is being actively employed in the Arctic. In this region, the construction and maintenance of
landing strips is extremely expensive. The An-72 is also being used for landings on ice floes. When so doing, the aircraft cannot carry a heavy
cargo due to the need to install a ramp and a heavy all-terrain landing gear, and also increased reliability and survivability requirements.

Away All Boats!
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Russian Northern Fleet, “The Northern Fleet has embarked on
its largest exercise in ten years.” The Northern Sea Fleet is the largest of Russia’s four fleets, so when they do
scramble, it is of interest. Of particular interest is that the fleet has all three of its large amphibious landing ships
present and participating. The Northern Fleet has been a frequent contributor of its large amphibious landing
ships to the supply effort in Syria, which is putting a maintenance strain on Russian amphibious landing ships.
Clearly there will be an amphibious landing component to the exercises. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Northern Fleet
has embarked on its
largest exercise in ten
years.”

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Alarm-drill: 36 Russian warships sail out to Barents Sea,” The Independent Barents Observer, 13 June 2018.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2018/06/36-russian-warships-sails-out-barents-sea
According to the Russian Northern Fleet Press Release of 13 June, “The Northern Fleet has embarked on its largest exercise in ten years.” A
total of 36 warships and support vessels are currently sailing to the Barents Sea. Also, about 20 aircraft are airborne. Along the coast of the
Kola Peninsula, more than 150 different rocket- and artillery weapon systems and other special equipment are deployed. Large areas in the
Barents Sea are now closed off for civilian shipping and overflights by civilian passenger aircraft. The drill will last until the end of next week
[23 June].
The press-service of the Northern Fleet explained that the exercise is a full-range defensive action to combat a massive enemy attack. The
fleet will conduct firing with various naval weapons, including launching cruise-missiles, mines and torpedoes and other missiles. Among
the warships are the missile cruiser “Marshal Ustinov”, the anti-submarine ship “Severomorsk”, the destroyer “Admiral Ushakov”, the
large landing ships “Kondapoga”, “Georgy Pobedonosets” and “Aleksandr Obrakovsky”….nuclear-powered and diesel submarines are also
participating….
The press-spokesman at Norway’s military Joint Head Quarters, Major Brynjar Stordal, stated that Norway was not informed about the
naval exercise. “Russian forces in the north have, over time, had a relatively high level of activity in different fields, something they have
the right to do within own territory and in international waters and airspace”….Russia’s military activities in areas close to Norway are of
course monitored in order to “maintain a satisfactory understanding of the situation.”
Source: “Almost 40 ships, submarines taking part in large-scale Northern Fleet drills,” Interfax, 13 June 2018.
The Russian Northern Fleet will test new weapons during the largest exercise in the past ten years…”Thirty-six warships, submarines and
supply vessels, some 20 aircraft, over 150 units of weapons, military and special equipment, coastal rocket artillery and ground forces,
marine infantry and air defense troops will be involved in the largest exercise of the Northern Fleet in the past decade….”
OE Watch | July 2018

9

EURASIA
A Recap of KADEX 2018
OE Watch Commentary: Past iterations of Kazakhstan’s
Defense Exhibition (KADEX), an event held biennially, have
stood as good indicators of the how the country’s defense
industry is developing and the partnerships the Kazakh
government is pursuing to increase the industry’s capabilities.
The accompanying excerpted articles report on KADEX-2018
and a few of the contracts the Kazakh government signed
and the information provides an update on the growth of
Kazakhstan’s defense industry.
Both articles come from the Russian-language news
website Inform Buro and the article from 26 May notes
some of the contracts the Kazakh government signed with
foreign defense companies, including an agreement with
India’s ZenTechnologies Limited for the “joint production of
different training-simulators for the training of specialists”
and with Serbia’s Yugoimport SPDR for the “assembly
and production of weapons and military equipment in
Kazakhstan, in particular, the modernization of the D-20 and
D-30 howitzers and joint production of the ‘Alas’ antitank
rockets.” Both agreements are for the joint production of
weapons or equipment, which is similar to a number of past
agreements, but it is worth noting that the refurbishment of
the two types of Russian howitzers is taking place with a
Serbian company, not with a Russian one.
The article from 30 May mentions some of the features
of the exhibition, including that it was organized “by the
newly set up Ministry of Defense and Aerospace Industry,”
that for the first time there were three national pavilions for
“Turkey, China and Russia” and that the “largest pavilion at
the exhibition was given to Russia.” While the government of
Kazakhstan publicized agreements with a number of foreign
partners, the exhibition also resulted in a “contract with the
(Russian) Irkut Corporation for the delivery of eight Su-30SM
multipurpose fighters.” While the purchase of Su-30 fighters
will not include joint production, the latest KADEX shows
that the Kazakh government still puts a high priority on its
partnership with Russia.
Lastly, the article mentions that one of the Kazakh defense
enterprises “made an agreement to send one Alan for testing
in Uzbekistan.” The production of armored vehicles over
the past few years, ranging from the 4x4 Alan to the more
heavily armored variants of the Arlan, has been a successful
example of Kazakhstan’s defense industry to date. While the
agreement for testing the Alan in Uzbekistan is a small step,
it is something to note if the Kazakh government makes a
move to begin exporting defense articles. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“For the first time at the exhibition three national pavilions
operated – Turkey, China and Russia.”
Source: “KADEX-2018: Казахстан и Сербия договорились о производстве
противотанковых ракет (KADEX-2018: Kazakhstan and Serbia reached an
agreement on the production of antitank rockets),” Inform Buro, 26 May 2018.
https://informburo.kz/novosti/kadex-2018-kazahstan-i-serbiya-dogovorilis-oproizvodstve-protivotankovyh-raket.html
…More than 20 documents with foreign partners have been signed with
“Kazakhstan Engineering” enterprises.
…(Joint-stock company) “SM Kirov” and the Indian “ZenTechnologies
Limited” agreed on the joint production of different training-simulators for the
training of specialists…
The Petropavlovsk Factory of Heavy Engineering and the Serbian
Yugoimport SPDR signed a memorandum on the cooperation on the assembly
and production of weapons and military equipment in Kazakhstan, in
particular, the modernization of the D-20 and D-30 howitzers and joint
production of the “Alas” antitank rockets…
Source: Bedenko, Grigoriy. “Как проходила военная выставка
KADEX-2018 (How the military exhibition KADEX-2018 took place),”
Inform Buro, 30 May 2018. https://informburo.kz/stati/kak-prohodilavoennaya-vystavka-kadex-2018-fotoreportazh.html
…The international exhibition of weapons and military equipment KADEX
(Kazakhstan Defense Exhibition) is taking place in our country for the fifth
time, and for the first time it was organized not by the Ministry of Defense, but
by the newly set up Ministry of Defense and Aerospace Industry. The concept
of the exhibition has changed a little…instead of strictly military aspects,
areas like information security and space exploration are present here…
…Exhibition of products by 318 companies from 28 countries were presented.
The representatives of most exhibitions were from Russia, China, Turkey,
Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil, Germany, Israel, India, Spain, Italy, the
Netherlands, the USA and Serbia…For the first time at the exhibition three
national pavilions operated – Turkey, China and Russia. Kazakh enterprises
presented at the other pavilions…Additionally, for the first time a separate
pavilion devoted to the space industry operated…
The largest pavilion at the exhibition was given to Russia, where it was
represented by 58 companies…One of the most notable events for our armed
forces can be considered the signing of a contract with the Irkut Corporation
for the delivery of eight Su-30SM multipurpose fighters…
At KADEX-2018 we presented the range of our products, from the lightly
armored 4x4 Alan to the “Arlanov” of various modifications…Within the
framework of the exhibition, we made an agreement to send one Alan for
testing in Uzbekistan…

OE Watch | July 2018

10

EURASIA
Azerbaijan’s Latest Weapons Acquisition
OE Watch Commentary: The government of
Azerbaijan highly publicizes its acquisitions of weapons
and equipment and as the accompanying excerpted
articles report, the most recent significant acquisition
includes the Belarusian “Polonez” multiple rocket
launcher system and the Israeli “LORA” (LOng Range
Attack), a low-trajectory ballistic missile that can be
launched from multiple platforms. While the acquisition
certainly strengthens Azerbaijan’s capabilities, the
articles provide additional things to consider.
The articles from Kavkazskiy Uzel, a Russianlanguage news website with a focus on the Caucasus,
and Haqqin, also a Russian-language news website
with reported ties to the government, reported on the
acquisition and both made references to Armenia’s
Iskander ballistic missile system. Some see the recent
acquisition as Azerbaijan’s answer to Armenia’s
Iskanders. In addition to this, Kavkazskiy Uzel mentions
how the deal to acquire the Polonez likely took place
during the Azerbaijan’s defense minister’s “official
visit to Belarus on 9-10 October 2017,” while Haqqin
notes other that “missile systems could also have been
purchased in Russia.” Some analysts in the region
believe the Azerbaijani government’s latest acquisition
represents another step to diversify security cooperation
partners, specifically, to rely less on Russia or push the
Russian government for better deals.
The other articles represent the reaction to the
acquisition in Armenia, with the article from
Armenpress noting how “Armenia had blocked its
fellow CSTO colleague from selling the Polonez
systems to Azerbaijan” earlier this year, but that the
sale and delivery ultimately went through. The article
from News Armenia dates back to October 2017, when
news first broke that Azerbaijan’s defense minister
visited Belarus. It notes that the Armenian government
has known for some time of Azerbaijan’s interest in
the Polonez system. A regional military analyst also
noted that “Azerbaijan already has a solid collection of
MLRS.” While Armenian officials are likely concerned
with Azerbaijan’s latest acquisition, it appears that they
do not consider the Polonez or LORA to be more of a
threat than what they currently face. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“Information about Azerbaijan’s
intent to purchase the MLRS ‘Polonez’
has long been exaggerated and is by no
means ‘news’.”

Source: “Medjid, Faik. “Азербайджан продемонстрировал новые ракетные
комплексы (Azerbaijan demonstrated new missile systems),” Kavkazskiy Uzel, 12
June 2018. http://www.kavkaz-uzel.eu/articles/321585/
…the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan received the operational-tactical missile
systems “Polonez” and LORA, of Belarusian and Israeli production, respectively…
Azerbaijan’s Defense Minister, Zakir Hasanov, made an official visit to Belarus on
9-10 October 2017. His delegation visited the research and production facilities of
the military-industrial complex of Belarus…
...(the Polozen) is designed to destroy nuclear and chemical facilities, main
military groupings, air and air defense assets, command posts, and radio-electronic
facilities in enemy territory. The LORA (Long-Range Artillery Missile) system
serves a similar function…the acquisition of the Polonaise and LORA systems by
the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan neutralizes the threats from Armenia’s Iskander
rockets…
Source: “Чем азербайджанский «Полонез» лучше армянского «Искандера»
(What Azerbaijan’s “Polonez” is better for than Armenia’s “Iskander”),” Haqqin, 13
June 2018. https://haqqin.az/investigations/130495
…the missile carries out random or programmed evasive action during the flight to
the target, impeding the detection and interception of it…The Belarusian “Polonez”
is often classified as a multiple rocket launch system, but it is actually closer to an
operational-tactical missile system…
What could have been purchased instead of this?
There are a lot of Russian weapons in Azerbaijan’s army. The BTR-82A, T-90S
tanks, the 2S31 “Vena” and other weapons were recently purchased. Missile
systems could also have been purchased in Russia. Russia has the Iskander…
…the Russian system loses to the Belarusian in deployment time by a factor of two:
the Russian system can fire at two targets, the Belarusian system – eight…The only
thing the Belarusian system is weaker on is the power of the warhead…
Source: “Stepan Kocharyan, “Despite blocking attempts, Belarus eventually
delivers multiple rocket launchers to Azerbaijan,” Armenpress, 11 June 2018.
https://armenpress.am/eng/news/937000.html
Belarus has eventually supplied Azerbaijan with the Polonez multiple rocket
launchers, according to Azerbaijani media…In April, Russian Kommersant
newspaper reported that Belarus is planning to implement its first export of the
systems, and the newspaper mentioned Azerbaijan as a likely client.
…Earlier in February, Russian newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda reported that
Armenia had blocked its fellow CSTO colleague from selling the Polonez systems to
Azerbaijan. “We wanted to sell Polonez to Azerbaijan. But Armenia, our colleague
in the CSTO, opposed this. The deal didn’t take place,” Belarusian military analyst
Alexander Alesin had said. Nevertheless, the official photos of the Azerbaijani
defense ministry from today’s event clearly show the Polonez systems in Azerbaijan.
Source: “Эксперт: Закупка Азербайджаном РСЗО «Полонез» не может быть
равноценной армянским «Искандерам» (Expert: Azerbaijan’s purchase of the
MLRS “Polonez” is not an equivalent to Armenia’s “Iskander”),” News Armenia, 12
October 2017. https://news.am/rus/news/414737.html
Information about Azerbaijan’s intent to purchase the MLRS “Polonez” has long
been exaggerated and is by no means “news”…According to the military expert
(Arkady Grigoryan), Azerbaijan already has a solid collection of MLRS – the (BM30) “Smerch,” the (T-122) “Sakarya” and now the “Polonez”…

OE Watch | July 2018

11

EURASIA
Moscow’s Role in the Karabakh Conflict After the
‘Velvet Revolution’ in Armenia
by Nurlan Aliyev
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 82, dated 30 May 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/moscows-role-in-the-karabakh-conflict-after-the-velvet-revolution-in-armenia/

OE Watch Commentary: On May 17, the “president” of the separatist occupied Republic
of Abkhazia, Raul Khajimba, received representatives of the foreign ministries of the Russian
Federation and three separatist territories in the former Soviet space—the “Republic of South
Ossetia” (Tskhinvali Region), the “Pridnestrovia Moldova Republic” (Transnistria) and the
“Republic of Artsakh” (formerly known as “Nagorno-Karabakh Republic”). Hikmet Hajiyev,
the press secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, denounced Russia’s role in
this event and its willingness to meet with separatist Karabakh officials. In response, the Russian
foreign ministry stated, “Mr. Hajiyev knows that [Moscow’s position regarding Karabakh] has
never implied the refusal to participate in specific international events simply because there might
be the possibility of inadvertently meeting with Karabakh’s representatives”. Significantly, these
tensions along the Baku-Moscow axis arose against the background of potential escalation in the
confrontation between Baku and Yerevan, following the change in Armenia’s government due to
the “Velvet Revolution” that erupted there this spring.
Even before those developments, the new Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan’s
statements regarding the Karabakh conflict as well as the responses from Azerbaijani officials
hinted that positive outcomes in negotiations going forward would be unlikely, at least in the
short term. According to Washington-based South Caucasus expert Thomas de Waal, “The
danger here is that if an Armenian leader openly asserts sovereignty over Nagorny Karabakh [sic]
and says that the Azerbaijani lands around it, which Armenian forces captured in 1993–1994,
cannot be returned, there is nothing left to negotiate about with Baku, and the two sides are back
on the road to war.”
In such a situation, Russia could continue to orchestrate escalation and de-escalation phases of
the conflict, depending on its interests at the time. Meanwhile, the new Armenian government
has resolved to continue bolstering its country’s strategic relations with Russia. During his recent
meeting with President Vladimir Putin, Pashinyan underscored Russian-Armenian strategiclevel ties and stressed the importance of further strengthening relations, including military
cooperation.

“This is the most dangerous
situation for any country…it is
enough to remember the situation
of Georgia and Azerbaijan in the
early ’90s.”
Source: “Л евон Тер-Петросян:
Угрожающее государственности опасное
положение (Levon Ter-Petrosyan: the
dangerous situation threatening statehood),”
Armenpress, 17 May 2018. https://armenpress.
am/rus/news/933812.html
The first President of Armenia, Levon TerPetrosyan, published an article on website
ilur.am, where he talks about the situation
threatening statehood…“…one important
circumstance is not considered: today
Pashinyan is the Prime Minister of Armenia,
whose most important function is provide for
the normal function of government bodies…”
…“This is the most dangerous situation for any
country…it is enough to remember the situation
of Georgia and Azerbaijan in the early ‘90s….”

In recent weeks, military clashes between the two South Caucasus adversaries have shifted toward the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic of
Azerbaijan. Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev visited military bases in the Nakhchivan exclave, on May 16, and stated that the Armed Forces there
are equipped with modern weapons to prevent enemy provocations and to be able to launch counterattacks. Several days later, Armenia’s defense and
foreign ministers visited bases located near their country’s border with Nakhchivan and instructed commanders there “to strictly thwart any attempts
of the adversary.” Subsequently, on May 20, an Azerbaijani soldier was killed along the same frontline. That same day, the Armenian defense
ministry announced that the Armenian Army expects to receive from Russia Tor-M2 short-range air-defense systems within a few months. It is worth
pointing out that after the realization of arms deliveries connected to a 2015 Russian preferential military loan for $200 million, Yerevan was offered a
second loan—for $100 million. For Moscow, improving the regional military balance is less important than buying influence in the region.
Russia has recently put pressure on Azerbaijan by raising the possibility of decreasing future arms exports to this state. Hence, Azerbaijan is
intensifying efforts to diversify its arms imports beyond Russia. Recently, the Russian newspaper Kommersant announced that, in 2018, Azerbaijan
will be one of the first importers of the Belarusian-produced (and co-developed with China) Polonaise multiple launch rocket system. Additionally,
the Pakistan Aeronautical Complex announced that Azerbaijan might purchase several of its JF-17 Thunder multi-role combat aircraft in 2019.
Furthermore, Azerbaijan has also deepened its military cooperation with China.
Not only is Russia suspected of having played a silent kingmaker role in Armenia’s revolution, it also seems to have stepped in to prevent
Azerbaijan from militarily attempting to regain control over its Armenian-occupied regions during the protests in Yerevan. Notably, as the “Velvet
Revolution” unfolded, Sergey Naryshkin, the head of Russia’s Foreign Intelligence Service, suddenly traveled to Baku, almost certainly to discuss the
situation in Armenia with Azerbaijan’s political leadership. It is worth noting that Azerbaijan lost control over Karabakh and its adjacent regions in
the 1990s under similar conditions of domestic political turmoil. Even the first president of Armenia, Levon Ter-Petrosyan, urged his country’s new
leadership and the public not to repeat the mistakes Azerbaijan and Georgia made in the 1990s—allowing internal political upheaval to result in de
facto territorial losses.
Thus, in all probability, there will be little or no tangible progress over the coming years in settling the Karabakh conflict between Azerbaijan and
Armenia. And in fact, additional short-term military clashes are likely. Under these conditions, Moscow will continue to exert control over both
sides of the conflict by exploiting the Karabakh issue. It seems that not even the popular revolt against corruption and cronyism that replaced the
government in Armenia can be expected to positively influence the resolution of the conflict, at least for now. End OE Watch Commentary (Aliyev)
OE Watch | July 2018

12

EURASIA
Ukraine and Moldova Increase Border Control Measures
OE Watch Commentary: Since a 1990-1992 separatist
conflict that left Transnistria a de facto autonomous republic,
Moldova has been unable to control 454 kilometers of its
border with Ukraine; i.e., that portion of its eastern border
that runs alongside the breakaway republic. Russia has used
that segment of Moldova’s border to sustain Transnistria
economically and to support approximately 1,500 Russian
troops stationed there, where nearly 50 percent of the
population has Russian citizenship. The accompanying
excerpted articles from sources in the region report on how
Ukraine and Moldova are emplacing multiple, jointly manned
checkpoints on the Ukrainian side of their shared border,
some of which will be specifically opposite Moldova’s Russiabacked, breakaway Transnistria region. The program began
on 17 July 2017 when Ukraine’s President Petro Poroshenko
and Moldovan Prime Minister Pavel Filip opened the first
joint crossing point. Up to seven additional checkpoints will
be established in the near-term under stronger bilateral border
control agreements negotiated last fall.
The excerpt from the Moldovan State News Agency (dated
23 May) announces Chisinau’s recent and final approval
of Moldovan-Ukrainian protocols addressing forthcoming
joint control over border checkpoints directly across from
Transnistria. The excerpt from Transnistria’s Pridnestrovye
news agency describes the separatist region’s frustration with
Chisinau’s rejection of Transnistrian independence and its
concern over Chisinau’s newfound control over Transnistria’s
eastern border. The article references how both Transnistria
and Russia perceive this as part of a greater “economic
blockade” that began in 2015, when Ukraine canceled an
agreement allowing Russia to cross its territory to supply
Russian troops in the breakaway republic. The other excerpt
from the Moldovan State News Agency (dated 30 May) quotes
Moldova’s position that the joint border checkpoints across
from Transnistria are a purely bilateral arrangement with
Ukraine, and are not an issue for discussion in the recurring
Moldova-Transnistria Settlement negotiations.
Ukraine committed to helping Moldova immediately
following Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea, its support
to separatists in Ukraine’s Donbass region, and a growing
concern that the Kremlin would attempt to connect these areas
geographically with pro-Russian Transnistria. Perceiving
Ukraine’s own separatist challenges similar to those in
Moldova, President Poroshenko has stated that the joint border
checkpoints are intended not just to help Moldova regain
control over its border, but are part of a broader effort to
help restore Moldova’s territorial integrity. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kurz)

Transnistria-Ukraine Border Checkpoint, 2014.

Source: By Julian Nitzsche [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Transnistria_Ukraine_Checkpoint.JPG.

Source: V. Bercu, “Controlul comun moldo-ucrainean va fi instituit
în acest an în opt puncte de trecere a frontierei (Moldovan-Ukrainian
Joint Control to be Established at Eight Border Checkpoints in 2018),”
Moldovan State News Agency, 23 May 2018. https://www.moldpres.md/en/
news/2018/05/23/18004292
The cabinet of ministers today approved . . . the signing of protocols on
the organization of joint control at eight Moldovan-Ukrainian border
checkpoints. The joint control of people, transport means, goods and objects
at the joint Moldovan-Ukrainian border checkpoints is provided for in the
agreement signed by the two states’ governments on 6 October 2017.
Source: Ekaterina Borodina, “Cмертельно опасная иллюзия (A Potentially
Dangerous Illusion),” Pridnestrovye, 28 May 2018.
http://newspmr.com/novosti-pmr/politika/17816
Until [Transnistria] is recognized, any statements on reconciliation are
nothing else but demagogy. …Moldova boosted control at the DniesterUkrainian border, thus almost closing the circle of economic blockade around
the Dniester region. …These actions only confirm concerns that the change
of Moldova’s tactics in forcing the Dniester region [to accept its conditions]
is behind the intensification of the talks, rather than Chisinau’s peaceful
intentions.
Source: “La Roma s-a desfășurat o nouă rundă oficială de negocieri în
formatul ‘5+2’ (New Official round of 5+2 Talks on Transnistrian Settlement
Held in Rome),” Moldovan State News Agency, 30 May 2018. https://www.
moldpres.md/en/news/2018/05/30/18004541
At the [Transnistria Settlement] meeting, chief negotiator of Chisinau,
Deputy Premier Cristina Lesnic, reiterated and pointed out the necessity
of . . . avoiding on the agenda the issues related to bilateral relations
between Moldova and Ukraine (for instance: joint control of the central
[Transnistrian] segment of the Moldovan–Ukrainian border)…

“The joint control of people, transport means, goods and objects at the joint Moldovan-Ukrainian border
checkpoints is provided for in the agreement signed by the two states’ governments on 6 October 2017.”
OE Watch | July 2018

13

EURASIA
Russian Response to Polish “Threat”
OE Watch Commentary: As might be expected, the Kremlin
leadership has reacted negatively to a recent Polish proposal to
“host significant forces from the US Army on its territory, while
footing the bill for the US formation’s presence.” As the first
accompanying excerpt from the moderate news site, Vedomosti
points out, such a move “could provoke a further escalation of
Russia’s military and political standoff with the West.” The article
quotes a European expert who suggests that the Polish offer
is predicated on “doubts about the ability of European NATO
member countries to provide it with fast and effective assistance
in the case of a military threat.”
The excerpt describes the escalation of tensions between Russia
and the West, offering a more balanced approach by reminding
readers of certain Kremlin officials who have been guilty of “not
always well-judged verbal interventions” regarding the possible
use of Russian force. The article goes on to suggest that “Russia’s
reaction [to this possible American base on Polish territory] may
be more drastic than the Soviet one.” It concludes on an ominous
note, quoting a senior Kremlin official who asserts that “such
actions will trigger a reciprocal response in order to reestablish
the disrupted parity” by perhaps stationing “additional Iskanders
in the Baltic.”
The second accompanying excerpt comes from the centrist,
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, and while the focus on the article deals
with current Russian-Belarus relations, it also refers to possible
Russian fallout should an American division be relocated to
Poland. It describes earlier Kremlin efforts to convince the
leadership in Belarus to agree to locate a Russian military airbase
within their country. Despite their close ties (especially in the
military sphere), the Lukashenko government has been able
to delay such a move. However, given the possibility of a new
American base in Poland, the article quotes the Belarusian Foreign
Minister, who asserts that while “at present we do not intend to
station new foreign military bases on Belarusian territory, because
we want stability in our region…. However, we have to take
account of the steps that will be taken by our neighbors.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: “Pavel Aptekar, “Сколько стоит защита от России? (What Does
Protection From Russia Cost?),” Vedomosti, 29 May 2018. https://www.
vedomosti.ru/opinion/articles/2018/05/29/771000-skolko-zaschita-rossii
…Poland’s aspiration to host significant forces from the US Army on
its territory, while footing the bill for the US formation’s presence, is a
bad signal, confirming the growth of mutual mistrust between Europe,
particularly the former Soviet bloc countries, and Russia. The presence
of one division in Poland is not capable of radically changing the balance
of forces in the region, however, it could provoke a further escalation of
Russia’s military and political standoff with the West…. The need for the
deployment of a powerful US formation, the document’s authors believe, is
driven by Russia’s “aggressive” attempts to destroy the European security
structure that has been created in recent decades….
The request results from Warsaw’s doubts about the ability of European
NATO member countries to provide it with fast and effective assistance
in the case of a military threat, thinks Timofey Bordachev, director of
the Center for Comprehensive European and International Studies of the
National Research University Higher School of Economics.
…Poland is not the only European country ready to pay excessively for
its fear of Russia.
…It is not just the exercises, and the stationing of additional troops and
the latest military hardware in the western regions of Russia (in particular
Iskander missiles, which according to the official line from Moscow, are
stationed in Kaliningradskaya Oblast in response to the rollout of the US
missile defense system in Poland, Czech Republic, and Romania) that are
making Europeans nervous, but also the not always well-judged verbal
interventions.
…It is not yet known whether Washington will agree to deploy a whole
division to Eastern Europe. …Nevertheless, this will lead to an increase in
tension, and provoke the other side to take retaliatory measures, playing
into the hands of the hawks of both sides. …Dmitriy Peskov, President
Vladimir Putin’s press secretary, has already stated that the stationing
of a US military base is Poland’s sovereign right, but added that such
actions will trigger a reciprocal response in order to reestablish the
disrupted parity. And the prospect of additional Iskanders stationed in the
Baltic is no laughing matter, but a cause for alarm.

“…Dmitriy Peskov, President Vladimir Putin’s press secretary, has already stated that the stationing
of a US military base is Poland’s sovereign right, but added that such actions will trigger a reciprocal
response in order to reestablish the disrupted parity.”
Source: “Anton Khodasevich, “У Минска нарастает напряжение на восточном направлении (Minsk Has Rising Tension in Eastern
Direction),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 4 June 2018. http://www.ng.ru/cis/2018-06-04/1_7238_minsk.html
…These painful issues could include the topic of military cooperation, experts argue. In particular, the question of stationing a Russian
airbase on Belarusian territory, which has been deferred “until better times.” In the past Aleksandr Lukashenko has “ fended it off,” but last
week the issue was made topical by a report that Poland allegedly is longing to station American armored divisions on its territory. Belarusian
Foreign Minister Vladimir Makey was even asked to comment on the issue during his visit to Brussels. “At present we do not intend to station
new foreign military bases on Belarusian territory, because we want stability in our region. We do not want to be a disturber of the peace.
However, we have to take account of the steps that will be taken by our neighbors,” Vladimir Makey said.
In the opinion of political observer Aleksandr Kraskovskiy, the very fact of the emergence of the report about Poland’s intentions, and the
interpretation of Makey’s statement as a sign of Belarus’s readiness to reconsider its position on the airbase, could be elements of pressure on
the Belarusian leadership in this matter. “So far, there has been no official approach by Poland to the United States about a base. Let alone a
decision by Washington, of course. But Moscow is already stirring up the media and creating the conditions for a fresh phase of pressure on
Minsk over the stationing of a military base on Belarusian territory,” the expert writes.
OE Watch | July 2018

14

EURASIA
The Kremlin’s Conference Bully Pulpit
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin leadership continues
to host and exploit international security conferences to spread
its narrative regarding Russia’s role in the global environment.
Besides the annual Moscow Conference on International Security
(MCIS) hosted by the Russian Ministry of Defense, the Kremlin
also sponsors an annual security conference arranged by the
Russian Federation Security Council to discuss matters related
to terrorism, illegal narcotics, and other transnational issues.
As the accompanying brief excerpt from the moderate daily,
Kommersant, points out, this year’s conference was held in Sochi,
where “delegations from 118 countries took part,” and where these
representatives were treated to the Kremlin’s perspective on global
security.
Attendance among visiting countries at this conference has
more than doubled since its inception in 2010. While this year’s
conference was ostensibly dedicated to combating terrorism and
narcotics trafficking, many of the Russian speakers used this forum
to criticize US/Western policies and actions. Indeed, when opening
the conference, Russian Federation Security Council Secretary
Nikolay Patrushev, presented an address by President Vladimir
Putin, which stated that “certain members of the international
community are increasingly frequently trying to ignore universally
recognized norms and principles of international law, resorting to
the use of military force while bypassing the UN Security Council,
abandoning negotiations as the key instrument for resolving disputes
between states.” Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov clarified
which “certain members” Putin was referring to when Lavrov
asserted that “the United States and its closest allies did not support”
an attitude of “mutual respect,” but “preferred to take the course of
building mechanisms to dominate in all areas.”
Lavrov went on to stress Washington’s designs “to create a
unipolar world order,” asserting that “updated key US doctrines (on
nuclear issues, national security, and defense) are permeated with
confrontational ideas.” He labeled Western sanctions against Russia
as “illegitimate means of economic coercion,” failing to mention
the Kremlin’s continued aggression against Ukraine. Instead,
Lavrov blamed the “Ukrainian leadership” for “not only sabotaging
the [Minsk] peace process, but also trying to undermine its very
essence,” warning that “the conflict in the east may erupt with new
force. They [the Ukrainians] are playing with fire.”
The article ends on a cautionary note, pointing out that in between
conference sessions, attendees had the opportunity to learn about
“the Russian military-industrial complex,” where they could have
“their photographs taken with grenade launchers, fire at targets in
an electronic shooting gallery, examined unmanned aerial vehicles,
etc…” In its bid to dominate the information realm, the Kremlin
continues to host and exploit international conference platforms
to promulgate its views towards global security. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Russian Federation Foreign Minister Sergey
Lavrov continued… ‘All these years we have done as
much as possible to promote cooperation based in
mutual respect. Unfortunately, the United States and
its closest allies did not support this attitude’.”
Source: “Pavel Tarasenko and Mikhail Korostikov, “Силовики провели
игры в Сочи: Конференция по безопасности побила олимпийский
рекорд (Law Enforcers Hold Games in Sochi. Security Conference
Breaks Olympic Record),” Kommersant, 26 April 2018. https://www.
kommersant.ru/doc/3613944
The two-day international meeting of high-ranking officials responsible
for security issues in Sochi ends on 26 April. This time the event, which
is held every year under the aegis of the Russian Federation Security
Council, was unprecedented in size -- delegations from 118 countries
took part….
…Note that this is the ninth time the Russian Federation security
officials have held a meeting like this. Forty-three countries were
represented at the first forum in 2010, which was also in Sochi.
…Opening the conference, Russian Federation Security Council
Secretary Nikolay Patrushev explained which issues these were.
First, he read an address by President Vladimir Putin, which said:
“Certain members of the international community are increasingly
frequently trying to ignore universally recognized norms and principles
of international law, resorting to the use of military force while
bypassing the UN Security Council, abandoning negotiations as the key
instrument for resolving disputes between states.”
Russian Federation Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov continued… “All
these years we have done as much as possible to promote cooperation
based in mutual respect. Unfortunately, the United States and its closest
allies did not support this attitude. They preferred to take the course of
building mechanisms to dominate in all areas.”
…The Minister said that the updated key US doctrines (on
nuclear issues, national security, and defense) are permeated with
confrontational ideas. He criticized the “use of illegitimate means
of economic coercion and the reliance on unfair competition.” …He
warned against further attempts “to create a unipolar world order.”
…As well as the United States and NATO, the Minister also criticized
the Ukrainian leadership because it is “not only sabotaging the peace
process, but also trying to undermine its very essence.” “The conflict
in the east may erupt with new force. They are playing with fire,” he
warned.
…In the breaks between debates, attendees at the Sochi conference
learned about the achievements of the Russian military-industrial
complex from an exhibition -- they had their photographs taken with
grenade launchers, fired at targets in an electronic shooting gallery,
examined unmanned aerial vehicles…

OE Watch | July 2018

15

EURASIA
Interview with “Discredited” Defense Minister
OE Watch Commentary: Just over a decade ago, after the Russian military’s mediocre performance
in the August 2008 conflict with Georgia, Russian defense officials began a significant reform program.
Besides modernizing various weapon systems and improving overall living conditions for military
personnel, the intent was to remove the old mobilizational scaffolding of the Soviet military and replace
it with a more streamlined structure to enhance combat readiness and C2.
There were some blunders along the way, and the defense minister at the time, Anatoliy Serdyukov,
became the target for those who did not agree with the scope or scale of reform. While many of the
reforms were carried out, Serdyukov was ultimately dismissed in December 2012 under pressure
from corruption allegations. Since his dismissal, while still working within the Russian government,
Serdyukov has maintained a low profile. The brief accompanying excerpt from the moderate news
source, Kommersant, includes the first in-depth interview with Serdyukov since his removal. In it,
Serdyukov describes some of the challenges he faced as defense minister as well as some of the details
behind his efforts to reform the military.
While admittedly lacking experience in military affairs, Serdyukov was given the task of improving
the status and living conditions for military personnel as well as enhancing combat readiness. He
described the enormous task of reducing and consolidating the former Soviet structure, stating “we
had 22,800 military camps in the armed forces,” and cutting this down to about 700 by the time he was
Former Russian Minister of Defense, Anatoliy
removed. He also describes the efforts to tackle the military housing problem, which at the time, lacked
Serdyukov.
Source: mil.ru https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datei:Anatoliy_Eduardovich_
“a unified system for registering those who needed housing…. Each division has its own lists,” which
Serdyukov.jpg. CCA 4.0.
changed every time an officer moved. Serdyukov helped to enact policies which consolidated these
lists, allowing the military to largely resolve the housing problem.
Serdyukov admits that the military’s poor performance during the Georgian conflict proved to be the impetus for reform. He describes how
military commanders “had to position repair units every 20-30 kilometers” along the attack route into Georgia, because combat vehicles needed
constant repair. He also refers to his efforts to improve readiness by removing excess senior officer billets. This reduction, combined with other
efforts to consolidate redundant operations, riled those in uniform (and retirees), which in turn, aggravated the overall reform effort. Serdyukov
reminds readers, however, that all the reform efforts were first approved by the Supreme Commander (Putin), suggesting that he was used as a
hatchet by the Kremlin.
Despite the sharp criticism he received at the time (some of which was deserved, according to some Russians), former Defense Minister
Serdyukov was responsible for carrying out many painful, but necessary reforms within the Russian military. While Serdyukov fails to talk
about the corruption charges which led to his dismissal, the complete interview provides many valuable insights into the reform efforts which
ultimately led to the improved status of today’s armed forces in Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Radical military reform got rid of the superfluous generals and reduced staffs, demanded a fundamentally
different approach to military service. Therefore, the Minister’s initiatives were opposed by a part of the
officer corps, who did not want changes.”

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
(continued)
OE Watch | July 2018

16

EURASIA
Continued: Interview with “Discredited” Defense Minister
Source: Vladimir Shcherbakov, “Американцы в шоке от новых роботов Шойгу; Решение Москвы включить в парадный расчет на 9
мая боевых роботов вызвало приступ паники на Западе (Americans Shocked by Shoygu’s New Robots: Moscow’s Decision To Include
Combat Robots in 9 May Parade Detail Occasions Fit of Panic in West,)” Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 27 April 2018. http://nvo.ng.ru/
armament/2018-04-27/100_uran9.html
Ten years ago, reform began, which changed the country’s armed forces. And the first minister of defense, who brought the army in line with
modern requirements, Anatoly Serdyukov [AS], as happens with the reformers, did not hear kind words and lost his post…. This is the only
interview that Serdyukov gave after leaving the ministry. He was interviewed by Leonid Mlechin [LM]….
…[LM]- What were the main challenges you faced?
[AS] - Two main problems. Social - money allowance and housing for servicemen, as well as schools and kindergartens in military towns,
employment of wives. And the second: how to change the attitude of servicemen toward military service? The problems were interrelated: one
cannot demand full-fledged service from soldiers and officers, without creating decent living conditions….
[LM]- Did you feel the support of the supreme commander-in-chief?
[AS] Neither I nor the central office of the Ministry of Defense did anything without first getting the approval of the Supreme Commander….
…At the time of the beginning of the reform, we did not have a unified system for registering those who needed housing. Each division has
its own lists. The officer changes the place of service and again becomes registered on the new place. Naturally, you are put at the end of
the line, unless, of course, you are the division commander. Three years later, you move again. And again the last in line. We made a single
electronic register for those in need of housing. You can see in the computer how your turn is moving and where are some of the apartments….
…We had 22,800 military camps in the armed forces….
[LM]- Did you managed to reduce the number of military towns?
[AS]- When I left, there were 700. And proceeded from the fact that 120 should remain….
[LM]- Did the Georgian war affect you greatly?
[AS] “The war showed why reform was needed.” Everyone saw everything. The war itself was not, of course, unexpected. We understood
that sooner or later the conflict would arise…. But during the fighting, we had to install repair units every 20-30 kilometers – to repair the
equipment so that it could move on….
[LM] Radical military reform got rid of the superfluous generals and reduced staffs, demanded a fundamentally different approach to
military service. Therefore, the Minister’s initiatives were opposed by a part of the officer corps, who did not want changes. The retirees did
not hide their grievances, they spoke out frankly and publicly…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | July 2018

17

EURASIA
Proposal to Restore Veterans’ Benefits
OE Watch Commentary: While Russian military veterans enjoy a number
of government benefits, modern Russia has no equivalent to the US Veterans
Administration. As such, depending on the type of uniformed service and
current place of residence, there is often a wide disparity of benefits and care
provided to Russian military veterans (those who have served 20 years or
more). The accompanying excerpt from Russia’s main government newspaper,
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, discusses a proposed initiative which would guarantee
military veteran benefits regardless of where the veteran lives within Russia.
The article explains that some of the disparity in benefits stems from a past
decision which mandated that providing benefits to these veterans be shifted
from the federal level “onto local and regional administrations.” Unfortunately,
President Putin meeting with military veterans, May 2007.
while the federal government transferred the responsibility, they did not always
Source:Kremlin.ru http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/39334 CC BY 4.0.
provide the necessary funding for the local authorities, or even if they did, local
The crux of the problem is the military
authorities had other uses for the money. For example, the article points out that
even if “a military pensioner has a right to travel on public transportation free
veterans’ loss of federal status, which was
of charge,” he/she may not be able to exercise this benefit if residing in “Tula
previously enshrined in legislation…
or Khabarovsk.” This is also true for the more important benefits: “healthcare,
housing and municipal services, and the notorious housing problem.” The article describes how the current legislation negatively affects those
who might be considering a military career: “Look what awaits you, Lieutenant, when you are sent into the reserve or into retirement.”

“

”

Guaranteeing veterans’ benefits at the federal level will be an expensive proposition. As the article points out, the number of Russians
who would benefit from this proposed change is “43 million people, one third of the country’s population.” The article also discusses the
possibility of creating “a Federal Agency for Veterans’ Affairs,” which would be responsible for “rendering assistance to veterans,” among
other functions. These are just proposals and some believe it is not surprising that the main government newspaper would include such an
article just prior to the Victory Day celebrations. Whether such changes to improve assistance to Russian military veterans are actually
carried out remains to be seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: “Mikhail Falaleyev, “Льготы могут вернуться: Статус ветеранов военной службы предлагают повысить (Benefits May Be
Restored. It is Proposed that Military Service Veterans’ Status Be Raised),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 7 May 2018. https://rg.ru/2018/05/07/vrosgvardii-predlozhili-vernut-lgoty-veteranam-voennoj-sluzhby.html
Military service veterans, that is to say, people who have served for 20 years or more in the security structures, must have their benefits
reinstated at federal level, which means amending the Federal Law “On Veterans.” Such an initiative has been proposed by the All-Russia
Public Organization of Veterans of the Troops of Law and Order (Rosgvardiya) whose council is headed up by retired Lieutenant General Petr
Rovenskiy.
The matter concerns not only former soldiers and officers of the internal troops -- now the National Guard -- but also pensioners of all
categories, branches of the Army, and security departments. And this means 43 million people, one third of the country’s population. The crux
of the problem is the military veterans’ loss of federal status, which was previously enshrined in legislation…. Apparently, it was decided during
some economically difficult period that budget money be saved and a “small” ruse be adopted -- to shift the care of ex-service personnel onto
local and regional administrations.
Ostensibly, all of the declared benefits have remained, but only within the boundaries of specific territories where, again, specific veterans
reside. Let’s say a military pensioner has a right to travel on public transportation free of charge. But if he lives in Moscow, say, it applies only
within the capital. In Tula or Khabarovsk, he will already have to buy a ticket for the bus at his own expense. In the same way, too, a resident
of Kursk, for example, will be compelled to pay his fare on the capital’s subway. And this is only one aspect of the “benefits war.” But there are
also healthcare, housing and municipal services, and the notorious “housing problem.” Furthermore, there are known cases where even the
supposedly home administration simply forgets about its own veterans.
The officials’ logic is understandable. Since everything has been farmed out to local authorities and the federal “obligation” has been long
gone, it is possible to save money on old people whom no one needs any more. Or rather, to remove the monies they are obliged to allocate for
veterans from their own budget. But who will check and discover this, and when?
It is clear that such an attitude to a person does not raise the self-esteem, not only of a military pensioner, but also of a young officer who,
someday, will also have to become the same kind of military pensioner. As if to say: “Look what awaits you, Lieutenant, when you are sent into
the reserve or into retirement.”…
…But then, veterans care not only about their own prosperous old age. They are still fully prepared and able to serve the Fatherland. They are
proposing the creation of a Federal Agency for Veterans’ Affairs. After all, a similar agency for youth affairs exists, and extremely effectively. It
is anticipated that this agency will render assistance to veterans, engage in charity work, put up memorial plaques and commemorative signs,
and tend graves….
OE Watch | July 2018

18

EURASIA
The Russian PX System Turns 100
OE Watch Commentary: Clothing and feeding a military in a country the size of Russia is no small task. Where in the past, these tasks
were handled by military personnel, over the past decade the Russian military leadership has tested various outsourcing models which ensure
that these tasks are performed in a responsive and cost-effective manner by private industry and civilian personnel. In the accompanying
excerpted article, the authoritative weekly, Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer (Military-Industry Courier) recently interviewed the chief of the
Voentorg Joint-Stock Company, which is responsible for “providing commercial domestic service for servicemen and their family members.”
The article begins by noting that Voentorg will soon be celebrating its 100th anniversary, and while the ownership structure has changed,
besides feeding the military, it is responsible for “cleaning and laundry services, producing and delivering clothing and related gear,
individual tailoring of military uniform clothing items.” It employs more than 3,500 personnel, providing services “from Kaliningrad to the
Kuril Islands, including Russia’s military bases, which include Humaymim [airbase] in Syria.”
While closely aligned with the Russian Ministry of Defense, the article stresses “that Voentorg is not state-subsidized but exists absolutely
in market conditions -- on a self-sufficiency basis.” The director points out that one of its sources of income is the new Patriot Park, where
during exhibitions, “we daily provide quality meals for up to 6,000 people.” As the stature of Russia’s military has improved over the past
decade, so too has everything associated with the military’s commercial branding. Capitalizing on this renewed popularity, Voentorg also is
responsible for “promoting the “Army of Russia” brand for the purpose of giving the country’s young generation a patriotic education.” The
excerpt also points out that Voentorg has linked up with one of Russia’s largest grocery chains to better deliver products to soldiers and their
families stationed in remote locations. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…One must take it into account that Voentorg is not state-subsidized but exists absolutely in market
conditions -- on a self-sufficiency basis.”

Source: Falichev Oleg, “Вежливые люди из Военторга (The Polite People from Voentorg),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 15 May 2018.
https://vpk-news.ru/articles/42645
…How do matters stand in this organization today, which will be 100 years old on 16 November? What challenges does its leadership face?
VPK’s questions were answered by Vladimir Pavlov, the Voentorg JSC’s general director.
[Oleg Falichev] Vladimir Vladimirovich, what is your joint-stock company today? What changes most clearly confirm its new status?
[Vladimir Pavlov] …Today, once more, it is playing a significant role in providing commercial domestic service for servicemen and their
family members.
The Voentorg JSC is the holding structure’s head company for organizing catering in the places where military personnel serve and live. We
are in charge of ablutions and laundry services, producing and delivering clothing and related gear, individual tailoring of military uniform
clothing items. Along with this, we organize catering and military commercial domestic service for soldiers and their family members. An
important role is accorded to instilling patriotism and popularizing the Armed Forces through promoting the “Army of Russia” brand style.
Voentorg carries out its work from Kaliningrad to the Kuril Islands, including Russia’s military bases, which include Humaymim [airbase] in
Syria.
…Our system maintains 3,500 jobs and more than 2,500 items of trade and services. In 2017 alone, 2,600 tons of provisions were transported
to the Far North regions, the volume of laundry services was 32,000 tons, and that of the clothing and gear service deliveries was more than
120 million pieces….
…One must take it into account that Voentorg is not state-subsidized but exists absolutely in market conditions -- on a self-sufficiency basis.
Nevertheless, we rigorously fulfill the minister’s demands and, I will not hide the fact, we part company, without remorse, with those who do not
know how to work or who attempt to hold on to something.
…We have done a great deal for the “Patriot” park, literally investing our heart and soul in it. All the public catering and trade have been
organized by our forces, and no one could have done it better than us. In the central dining hall (350 places) alone, we daily provide quality
meals for up to 6,000 people on Army Forum days.
…I may say today, with full responsibility, that outsourcing produced quality results in food-catering for service personnel. In this matter,
many things have changed for the better. The Army today enjoys good food. The majority of Army mess halls are in no way inferior to students’
dining halls, sometimes even better.
…[OF] And how did the idea of creating a chain of “Voentorg Pyaterochka” stores come about?
[VP] We opened the first “Voentorg Pyaterochka” store at the end of 2014, in Vlasikha …Previously, servicemen and their families were
forced to travel 15-20 km from the military camp to obtain their goods. When we opened the store, they thanked us with tears in their eyes.
Voentorg had ended up just one step away, offering a wide range of goods, high quality, and popular prices…. Our social mission is to create
privileges for service personnel -- social prestige vis-a-vis the civilian population, if you like.
In conclusion, I will once again emphasize that Voentorg JSC’s entire revenue from financial and economic activities is directed at developing
the material and technical base for providing commercial domestic service for service personnel and their family members, and also at
promoting the “Army of Russia” brand for the purpose of giving the country’s young generation a patriotic education….
OE Watch | July 2018

19

EURASIA
More Effective Military Training for College Students
OE Watch Commentary: The current Kremlin leadership
has worked diligently over the past several years to raise
the level of patriotism within Russia. As the accompanying
excerpt from the official Russian news site, RIA Novosti,
points out, today 92 percent of the population consider
themselves to be Russian patriots. As the Kremlin-sponsored
media constantly repeats, an important aspect of patriotism is
the willingness of young Russian men to defend their country
by completing mandatory military service. The excerpt
from the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya, describes proposed
changes which will allow for greater numbers of college
students to satisfy their military service requirement while
studying, while at the same time improving the overall quality
of their military training.

Source: “Число считающих себя патриотами россиян выросло до 92%,
показал опрос (A survey shows that the number of Russians who consider
themselves patriots has grown to 92%),” RIA Novosti, 9 June 2018. https://ria.
ru/society/20180609/1522401833.html

Currently, a young Russian (male) college student can
satisfy his mandatory military service requirement by
enrolling in a supplemental course of instruction, in what
the excerpt describes as a “military faculty.” Depending on
his course and length of enrollment in this military training,
upon graduation, he will receive a reserve assignment either
as an officer or enlisted. He might also join the military as
a contract soldier. As the Izvestiya excerpt points out, these
military faculties are only available in 72 Russian universities,
where there are approximately 66,000 young Russians
enrolled. While all the details have yet to be worked out, the
proposed change will remove these military faculties and
replace them with consolidated “military teaching centers.”

If a bill devised by the Defense Ministry secures endorsement at all
levels, there will no longer be military faculties in Russia’s VUZes [higher
educational establishments]. To be exact, they will no longer exist under their
conventional title: A standard system of military teaching centers based on
them will be created throughout Russia….

This change, if implemented, would allow for all students,
regardless if their university had a military faculty, to receive
military training while enrolled in college, thus satisfying
a portion of their mandatory military obligation (they
would still have to fulfill their reserve commitment upon
graduation). More importantly, by establishing “military
teaching centers” the Russian Ministry of Defense (MoD) will
“standardize the system of military training” that students
receive and “will make for more effective utilization of the
training materials base, equipment, and drill weapons.”
Even with patriotic sentiments at record levels, this proposed
change indicates that the Russian MoD is still tinkering with
how to satisfy the mandatory military service requirement
for those enrolled in college, while at the same time
creating a well-trained reserve component. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“According to the February figures that
Shoygu read out, there were 66,000 young
people in Russia taking military studies
without interrupting their VUZ [higher
education] programs.”

The proportion of Russians who call themselves patriots reached a maximum
in the last 18 years; today this feeling is characteristic of 92% of our fellow
citizens… , the poll of the All-Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion
(VCIOM ) on the eve of the Day of Russia.
Source: “Yekaterina Korniyenko, “В одну упряжку; Чем обернется реформа
военной подготовки в российских вузах (Harnessed Together: What the
Outcome Will Be of the Reform of Military Training in Russia’s VUZes),”
Izvestiya, 7 June 2018. https://iz.ru/752640/ekaterina-korinenko/v-odnuupriazhku

A draft law altering the system of military instruction in civilian VUZes was
put before the State Duma on Tuesday 5 June. The initiative, authored by
the Russian Federation Defense Ministry, was submitted to the lower house
of parliament by the government. According to the document, it is planned
to replace military faculties with military teaching centers. This will make it
possible to give the system a standard denominator, the department thinks….
The thinking behind this document is that concentrating all teaching in
military teaching centers will make for more effective utilization of the training
materials base, equipment, and drill weapons….
The training given in military faculties and military centers differs in more
than just the program. In a specialized faculty students spend one day a week
on military training study for a period of eighteen months -- sometimes more,
depending on the specialization. At the end of the course they go to musters
that last on average around a month. After completing the teaching they are
given the rank of reserve officer, NCO, or enlisted man and released from
draft service, although they have the opportunity to serve out the time on
contract if they wish….
“The military teaching centers will be created within the framework of the
existing personnel order and do not entail any increase in the total number
of citizens summoned for military training,” the Cabinet announcement
emphasizes. “The bill’s objective is to increase the efficiency with which the
process of teaching VUZ students in their existing areas of military training is
managed.”
…. Four new military faculties were organized in 2013 through-2016, when
the total reached 72.
…“You and I have talked a lot about how we need the maximum number of
young people to be given the opportunity of undergoing military training and
obtaining a military specialism in VUZes. We are carrying on that work,”
General of the Army Sergey Shoygu, Defense Minister, stated on 28 May. “We
have begun to see comprehensive training centers. These include both military
faculties and military institutes.” According to the February figures that
Shoygu read out, there were 66,000 young people in Russia taking military
studies without interrupting their VUZ programs.

OE Watch | July 2018

20

INDO-PACIFIC
China Sets New Records for Aerial, Naval Drone Swarms
OE Watch Commentary: In mid-May, Chinese
electronics and defense state-owned enterprise China
Electronics Technology Group Corporation (CETC) held
another demonstration of its fixed-wing drone technology.
As reported by the accompanying excerpted article from
Xinhua, the test successfully demonstrated the ability to
launch, control, maneuver, and recover a swarm of 200
individual small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). CETC
previously tested a swarm of 119 drones in June 2017. CETC
also tested a pair of folding-wing UAVs that are able to
vary their wingspan based on mission requirements. While
the drones are small and have limited payload, CETC and
other Chinese research institutes and companies are clearly
investing a lot of effort into the technology.
Civilian companies, such as drone giant Ehang have used
multi-rotor drones’ hover capability to put on spectacular
displays such as a 1374-drone light show over Xi’an in May.
While the civilian use may seem harmless, the technology
is viewed as having important military applications.
Research labs under China’s National University of Defense
Technology have also carried out smaller-scale tests of
drone swarms. Chinese strategists see aerial drones as a
major disruptive technology that could give China an
advantage against potential adversaries. However, aerial
drones are not the only area seeing Chinese investment.

Figure 3-12. UAS swarm attack role.

Source: CATP 3-01.8, Techniques for Combined Arms for Air Defense,” July 2016. https://fas.org/irp/doddir/army/atp3-01-8.pdf, Distribution Unlimited.

Naval strategists have long warned of the threat
numerous small combatants have to large warships.
Chinese companies have begun experiments with naval
drone swarms. In June, Chinese company Yunzhou Tech [
云州只能] posted a video of 56 naval drones carrying out
complex maneuvers in China’s southern coast as reported
by the excerpted article from Global Times. The company’s
website advertises a host of applications for the system,
from environmental surveying to firefighting. Additional
demonstrations by the same company have shown variants
armed with light machine guns.
As the computing power available for individual drones
Notable Chinese UAV Swarm Demonstrations.
Source: Created by Peter Wood.
becomes more powerful, control methods are refined,
sensors become smaller and manufacturing becomes cheaper, the size and effectiveness of these swarms can be expected to expand significantly.
While these public tests currently have limited combat capability, their rapid increase in size suggests that initial real-world capabilities are
perhaps just around the corner. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2018

21

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China Sets New Records for Aerial, Naval
Drone Swarms
“Using artificial intelligence technology, the company vowed to promote the ‘shark swarm’ to be used in
daily duty and for real sea battles and to safeguard Chinese territorial waters all the time.”
Source: “200架无人机集群飞行：我国再次刷新固定翼无人机集群
飞行纪录 (200-UAV Drone Swarm Takes Flight: China Again Sets New
Record for Fixed-Wing Drone Swarm Flight),” Xinhua, 15 May 2018.
http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2018-05/15/c_1122835745.htm

Source: “Unmanned ‘shark swarm’ to be used in sea battles,
military patrols,” Global Times, 5 June 2018. http://www.
globaltimes.cn/content/1105736.shtml

China Electronics Technology Group Corporation (CETC) today
successfully launched a 200-UAV fixed wing drone swarm, setting a
new record after its previous record of 119. CETC also successfully held
China’s first successful low-altitude test of a pair of small-scale foldingwing UAVs.

A Guangdong company has tested 56 unmanned boats and is
working with the military to develop a “shark swarm” for sea
battles and military patrols. The unmanned drone-like vessels
were tested in formation and demonstrated their potential for
military use in the sea near Zhuhai, Guangdong Province,
according to a statement the company sent to the Global Times on
Tuesday.

It is understood that swarm Intelligence is universally regarded as
a disruptive technology as the core of unmanned systems artificial
intelligence human intelligence. Through aerial networks, autonomous
control, group intelligence decision-making, Large-scale, low-cost
multi-functional drone swarm can be applied to missions such as
sensing and emergency communications.
Not including CETC’s achievements with UAV swarm tests, CETC has
also revealed a new special action plan for next generation Artificial
Intelligence. CETC Chairman Xiong Qunli [熊群力] explained that
data intelligence, machine intelligence, swarm intelligence are the three
major directions that will form the core of its research. A large learning
center, an open source visual big database, and a swarm intelligence
innovation platform will allow CETC to quickly adapt AI applications to
address concrete real-world problems.

The boats reportedly avoided islands and reefs, crossed bridges
and tunnels, turned and changed their formation into the shape of
an aircraft carrier with the slogan “civil-military.”
South China-based manufacturer Yunzhou Tech, also known as
Oceanalpha, is cooperating with the Chinese arms industry to put
the “shark swarm” into the hands of the People’s Liberation Army
(PLA), the statement said.
Using artificial intelligence technology, the company vowed to
promote the “shark swarm” to be used in daily duty and for real
sea battles and to safeguard Chinese territorial waters all the
time, the statement said.

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues

OE Watch | July 2018

22

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Advancement in Hypersonic Aircraft
OE Watch Commentary: In May, photos of a hypersonic
test vehicle on display at a civil-military exhibition in Beijing
stoked speculation about China’s progress in developing
the technology. Hypersonics, generally defined as vehicles
capable of speed in excess of Mach 5 (3,836 mph at sea level),
are regarded as an important next-generation technology,
but pose significant challenges due to the extreme heat and
stresses created by the high speed.

“The Lingyun’s first launch test was completed at the
end of 2015. However... relevant research on the ramjet
concept has been carried out for a long time.”

China has been exploring manned and unmanned
hypersonic platforms for ISR or strike capabilities since
the 1980s, but information on tests was scarce until the
mid-2010s, when China began to regularly test its DF-ZF
wave-riding missile. Development of the “Lingyun” by
China Aerospace Science & Industry Corp’s (CASIC) Third
Academy, the National University of Defense Technology and
Harbin University began in 2005, and may represent a parallel
but different element of hypersonic vehicle development as
reported by the accompanying excerpted article from Sina
Military.
Notably, the “Lingyun” near-space Hypersonic Common
Use Test Flight Platform [凌云临近空间高超声速通用试飞
平台], to give it its full name, has four ramjet-like scoops and
is pictured as capable of vertical launch from a rail system.
Ramjets engines are typically a requirement for air-breathing
(non-ballistic) hypersonic platforms, and could offer platforms
with much greater range compared to the DF-ZF. Scramjets,
which operate at even higher speeds, have fewer parts but
greater design requirements. Additionally, the platform’s
external resemblance to the Russian Kinzhal (Dagger) air
launched hypersonic missile has stoked speculation that the
Lingyun is a testbed for a similar capability.
Given the significant engineering challenges posed by
hypersonics, China has needed to invest in large R&D
projects. In March, an interview with China Central
Television (CCTV) revealed that a Key State Laboratory
under the Chinese Academy of Sciences is building what
will be the world’s fastest hypersonic wind tunnel, as
noted in the excerpted article from Xinhua. China also
appears to be following historic precedent by placing senior
scientists familiar with strategic weapons programs in
key leadership positions. The 2017 appointment of Major
General Deng Xiaogang [邓小刚] to be Commandant of the
National University of Defense Technology, for example,
is a perhaps an indication of the importance that the PLA
accords to hypersonic technology. Deng, who has had a
lengthy academic and research career, is an expert in the
mathematical modeling (specifically computational fluid
dynamics) vital to hypersonic development.
China, Russia and the United States are all engaged in
expansive hypersonic systems research programs. For China
in particular, the system offers a potential way to avoid antimissile defense systems, or to provide faster long-range strike.
The appearance of platforms such as the Lingyun, despite
being a testbed, are important markers of China’s progress
with this technology. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Chinese Hypersonic Gliding Vehicle.

Source: By Wikicommons User果壳军事, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/49/Chinese_Hypersonic_Gliding_Vehicle.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

Source: “中国公开临近空间高超音速试飞平台 3年前完成首射 (“China’s
Publicizes Nearspace Hypersonic Test Flight Platform, Completed Initial Test
Flight 3 Years Before”),” Sina Military, 24 May 2018. http://mil.news.sina.
com.cn/jssd/2018-05-24/doc-ihaysvix6355941.shtml
According to public information, the Lingyun’s first launch test was
completed at the end of 2015. However, as early as around 2005, a large
number of scientific research institutes such as the China Aerospace Science
and Industry Third Hospital, as well as national defense and science and
technology universities, Harbin Institute of Technology and other military
and local colleges and universities appeared in various academic journals,
indicating that relevant research on the ramjet concept has been carried out
for a long time.
As mentioned earlier, its main defense unit, the National University of
Science and Technology of China, has carried out relevant preparatory
studies very early. It is precisely because of outstanding achievements in this
field that in November 2017, the leader of the team, Prof. Wang Zhenguo [王振
国], was elected to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering.
Source: “China builds world’s fastest wind tunnel to spur spaceplane
development,” Xinhua, 19 March 2018. http://www.xinhuanet.com/
english/2018-03/19/c_137050751.htm
China is building the world’s fastest hypersonic wind tunnel to help with the
development of spaceplanes. Han Guilai, a researcher with China’s State Key
Laboratory of High Temperature Gas Dynamics of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS) said the current wind tunnel could simulate flights ranging
from Mach 5 to 9. Researchers from CAS in Beijing have successfully tested
one hypersonic plane in a wind tunnel at such speeds. The new tunnel will
help China to take the lead on wind tunnel building, though competition from
other countries is still fierce, according to Han.

OE Watch | July 2018

23

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Holistic Security Concept Explained
OE Watch Commentary: Speaking at the first meeting of
China’s National Security Commission (中央国家安全委员会)
in April 2014, Xi Jinping argued for the adoption of a “holistic
view of security.” The Holistic Security Concept (总体国家安
全观) has since become one of Xi’s hallmark ideas on security
and been widely adopted by Chinese Communist Party media. In
2015, the concept was inserted into China’s semi-regular military
white paper as demonstrated by the accompanying excerpts.
The concept’s core characteristic is its combination of internal
and external security factors as a single idea. Xi argues that,
particularly from the perspective of a political party which
dominates a nation but which is subject to internal and external
threats, all aspects should be taken into consideration. Holistic
security highlights the twin challenges Chinese leaders face:
a complex international environment in which China has both
long-standing security interests and increasingly global on one
hand, and dramatic domestic issues that range from severe
desertification, social inequality and economic transformation.
Xi’s argument is that if the (Party) state wishes to survive it
must address these issues as a single set of problems, rather
than breaking them out into traditional fields such as internal or
external, military vs development.
Placing all of China’s internal and domestic pressures under the
same framework also raises the importance of the Party as center
of power. All issues—be they military or even agricultural—are
expected to be addressed in a whole-of-government, regimented
or even campaign-like manner. Speaking in April 2018 at
the 19th meeting of the National Security Commission, Xi
emphasized that for China stability and development were key
goals, and that achieving them required understanding China’s
National Security through the holistic framework. This helps
explain why, for example, aspects such as culture are viewed as
potential vectors for ideas that could weaken national security,
and therefore require active guidance. While China can be
expected to continue its rapid military modernization and
advance in other traditional security fields, it is clear that their
leadership has ‘widened its lens’ and will be tackling other issues
with the understanding that they will have a direct impact on
China’s overall security. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “习近平：全面贯彻落实总体国家安全观 开创新时代国家
安全工作新局面 (Xi Jinping: Comprehensively Implement the Holistic
National Security Concept, Begin a New Era of National Security
Work in the New Situation),” 17 April 2018. http://cpc.people.com.cn/
n1/2018/0417/c64094-29932536.html
We must not only be good at using the development results to consolidate
the strength of national security, but also be good at creating a safe
environment conducive to economic and social development, political
security and the organic unity of the supremacy of national interests.
People’s security is the objective of national security. Political security is
the foundation of national security. The supremacy of national interests
is the norm of national security, to prevent and effectively deal with
risks, to maintain and shape national security, to shape higher-level,
more forward-looking safeguards, to play a role as a responsible big
nation, to work together with other countries in the world to promote the
establishment of a community of human destiny, and to adhere to scientific
overall planning.”
Source: “Xi Jinping, “A Holistic View of National Security,” The
Governance of China, Foreign Languages Press Co. Ltd, Beijing, China,
2014.
We must pay close attention to both traditional and non-traditional
security, and build a national security system that integrates such elements
as political, homeland, military, economic, cultural, social, science and
technology, information, ecological, resource and nuclear security. We
should pay close attention to both development and security. The former is
the foundation of the latter while the latter is a precondition for the former.
Source: “中国的军事战略 (China’s Military Strategy),” China Ministry
of Defense, 26 May 2015. http://www.mod.gov.cn/auth/2015-05/26/
content_4586723.htm
In the new circumstances, the national security issues facing China
encompass far more subjects, extend over a greater range, and cover
a longer time span than at any time in the country’s history. Internally
and externally, the factors at play are more complex than ever before.
Therefore, it is necessary to uphold a holistic view of national security,
balance internal and external security, homeland and citizen security,
traditional and nontraditional security, subsistence and development
security, and China’s own security and the common security of the world.

“Therefore, it is necessary to uphold a holistic view of national security, balance internal and external
security, homeland and citizen security, traditional and nontraditional security, subsistence and
development security, and China’s own security and the common security of the world.”

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094
OE Watch | July 2018

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Cyber Sovereignty and the PRC’s Vision for Global
Internet Governance
by Elliott Zaagman
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 10, dated 5 June 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/cyber-sovereignty-and-the-prcs-vision-for-global-internet-governance/

OE Watch Commentary: Over the past eighteen months, major Western media outlets have followed every step of Facebook’s slow and painful
fall from grace, including the recent Cambridge Analytica scandal. However, while the stories focus heavily on Trump and Putin, it is CCP
General Secretary Xi Jinping who may benefit the most from a collective loss of faith in Western cyber systems and institutions. While the world’s
attention has focused on accusations of collusion and election hacking, the Chinese leader has been promoting a homegrown PRC approach to
technology, the internet, and governance, one that seeks to embed the PRC’s concept of “cyber sovereignty” in the institutions of global internet
governance.
Although progress to date has been patchy and there is disagreement within the PRC as to how cyber sovereignty should be defined, other
previous PRC efforts to shape technical standards and norms globally suggest that the cyber sovereignty campaign is likely to grow in scope,
specificity, and sophistication. Growing global legitimacy for Beijing’s approach to internet management could have concerning implications for
online freedom of expression, both within the PRC, and in countries who see it as an attractive alternative to a more open, decentralized US-led
approach. Also worth watching are the ways in which the PRC’s efforts to build support for its cybergovernance model interact with its growing
technical cooperation with Belt and Road partner nations.
Amidst growing skepticism that an open, unmanaged internet is inherently beneficial, Xi has projected himself and his ambitions onto the global
stage with a confidence that stands in stark contrast to the low-profile approach of his recent predecessors. China’s stepped-up efforts to promote
its vision of global governance include a push to enshrine its version of the internet as a model for other countries. In a statement to China’s fourthannual World Internet Conference, held in December of 2017 and attended by the CEOs of Google and Apple, Xi rallied support for this model,
referred to as “cyber sovereignty”.
Beijing’s policy apparatus has yet to produce a precise, agreed-upon definition of the term “cyber sovereignty”; however, the term, at least in
principle, consistently describes the idea that sovereign nations should be granted control over networks and data within their borders, to manage
as they see fit. While this principle may seem unobjectionable on first glance, it must be understood within the context of Beijing’s determination
to defend its own model of internet management: sophisticated, systematic censorship through a well-developed “Great Firewall,” and strict
requirements for local data storage imposed upon all firms operating within its borders.
A report released at the December 2017 World Internet Conference by the Chinese Academy of Cyberspace Studies called for an “establishment
of a multinational, democratic and transparent global internet governance system” through the United Nations, a theme that has become
consistent in statements from Xi and PRC government offices. “Multinational” in this case is a reference to the “multilateral” approach to internet
management favored by China, Russia, and other nations, which would give national governments a larger role in managing the global internet.
This language was also echoed in the PRC’s first-ever white paper on international cyberspace cooperation, jointly published by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Public Security in March 2017.
Interestingly, in its section on “Reform of the Global Internet Governance System”, the white paper says that “China will push for institutional
reform of the UN Internet Governance Forum to enable it to play a greater role in Internet governance, strengthen its decision-making capacity,
secure steady funding, and introduce open and transparent procedures in its member election and report submission.” The IGF is a UN-convened
annual meeting of internet governance stakeholders, with little real decision-making power. The UN and its affiliate organizations have been a
consistent focus of PRC’s attempts to win support for its evolving vision of a nationally managed internet.
The PRC has also sought to build acceptance of its technical and cyber diplomacy through the technology-focused dimensions of the Belt
and Road Initiative, increasingly described in official PRC statements as a “digital Silk Road.” The joint communique issued at the close of last
year’s Belt and Road Forum in Beijing announced pledges by participating nations to cooperate on “telecommunications and information and
communication technology”, so as to “put into place an international infrastructure network over time.” Although there are, as of yet, no signs that
the PRC’s efforts to gain acceptance for its technology and internet governance efforts have extended into direct assistance to countries wishing to
turn them towards authoritarian ends, it is not difficult to imagine this as a potential next step.
It is important to understand, however, that these countries’ cooperation with the PRC does not take place in a vacuum. While there is much
hand-wringing over automation-driven job loss in developed countries, developing countries are just as concerned over the potential impact of
automation on the low-skill, repetitive positions upon which many of their citizens rely. Such an outcome, coupled with a population boom—in
Africa in particular—could exacerbate already high levels of youth unemployment. Governments need ways to provide the stability their people
demand. For some, support for the PRC’s global internet and governance agenda may prove a more attractive means to that end. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zaagman)

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2018

25

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Cyber Sovereignty and the PRC’s Vision for
Global Internet Governance
“A report by Deloitte and China Venture released in September said China had 98 unicorns – 40 per cent
of the world’s companies valued at at least US$1 billion before listing. The growth has been in large part
due to the widespread use of internet applications in China, making the country a leader in services from
cashless payments to bike sharing.”
Source: Jun Mai, “Xi Jinping renews ‘cyber sovereignty’ call at China’s top meeting of internet minds,” SCMP, 3 December 2017.
http://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/2122683/xi-jinping-renews-cyber-sovereignty-call-chinas-top
…Xi said developments online were raising many new challenges to sovereignty and security, and China was “willing to work with the
international community to respect cyberspace sovereignty and promote partnerships”. The letter underscores Xi’s previous cyber sovereignty
calls to the conference in which he has promoted the idea that all countries have the right to regulate the internet within their own borders…
Xi’s presidency has coincided with extraordinary growth and tighter censorship online in China. Tencent and Alibaba are now among the world’s
most valued internet companies, followed by an army of powerful players such as Baidu, JD.com and handset maker Xiaomi…A report by Deloitte
and China Venture released in September said China had 98 unicorns – 40 per cent of the world’s companies valued at at least US$1 billion before
listing. The growth has been in large part due to the widespread use of internet applications in China, making the country a leader in services from
cashless payments to bike sharing…Zhejiang party chief Che Jun said Xi “had pointed to the future path of the world’s internet development and
governance” and showcased China’s responsibility as a major internet country…

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES

OE Watch | July 2018

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Universities Begin Recruiting Undergraduates
for AI Programs
OE Watch Commentary: Earlier this year China’s
Ministry of Education released a plan to recruit more
incoming undergraduate students into engineering and
programming majors focused on Artificial Intelligence
(AI). The plan encourages colleges and universities to
explore engineering courses that integrate AI with other
subjects, including both traditional science fields such as
computer science, mathematics and statistics with other
fields, including law and sociology. China’s traditional top
universities such as Qinghua and Peking University have
established AI programs, but there is a major effort to
expand the availability of AI courses across the country.
By 2020, 100 of these majors involving AI will be set up,
along with 50 AI-focused colleges and research centers
as reported by the accompanying excerpted articles from
Caijing and Xinhua.
Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing are two
keystones of “Made in China 2025,” China’s plan
to leapfrog its economy from export-focused light
manufacturing to higher-value advanced manufacturing
goods. Creating a workforce with the required skills is
an important corollary to state backing of laboratories
and expanded research budgets. A separate plan, the
“New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development
Plan” released in 2017, lays out milestones for AI and
cites the technology as a “new economic growth point”
for China. The plan forecasts that by 2025 AI will
provide an economic bonanza in intelligent agriculture,
national defense construction, and other fields, and the
scale of AI’s core industry will be more than 400 billion
RMB (roughly $62 billion USD). Related industries are
predicted to exceed 5 trillion RMB (more than $770
billion USD).
While directly recruiting students into AI-focused
courses will help, it is doubtful that the scale of such
initial steps will be able to meet the demand from China’s
rapidly expanding AI sector, or that a sufficiently large
proportion of China’s labor force will be able to gain the
skills to make them competitive in the new economy. The
2017 plan for example, laments that “cutting-edge talent
for AI is far from meeting demand.” China’s “whole-ofgovernment” approach to promoting innovation has had
some notable successes, but these limiting factors should
encourage observers to be cautious when calculating
China’s global competitiveness in AI. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

“In July last year, the State Council issued
a plan for new generation AI, pledging
to make the industry a major new growth
engine and improve people’s life by 2020
and make the country the world’s center
and leader for AI innovation by 2030.”

Source: “China rides waves of artificial intelligence,” Xinhua, 18 May 2018.
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-05/18/c_137188776.htm
Riding the global waves of artificial intelligence (AI), China aims to improve the
productivity and inject new momentum into its economy by encouraging more
players to tap the fledging industry.
“China should seize opportunities to boost innovation in deep learning, smart
algorithms and chips, and modernize industries with AI technologies,” Lin
Nianxiu, deputy head of the National Development and Reform Commission
(NDRC) (China’s top economic planning agency), told a room of entrepreneurs,
researchers and policy-makers at the congress, which was held from May 16 to
18.
In July last year, the State Council issued a plan for new generation AI, pledging
to make the industry a major new growth engine and improve people’s life by 2020
and make the country the world’s center and leader for AI innovation by 2030.
China’s AI industry output last year was 18 billion yuan (roughly $2.85 billion
USD) and value of related industries reached 220 billion yuan, according to the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.
According to a survey of 408 intelligent companies by the Chinese Institute of
New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Strategies (CINGAIDS), “The
development of intelligent technologies is not only the endogenous driving force
for China’s economic development, but contributes to the prosperity of the world
as well.”
Source: “国内高校首次规模招收AI专业本科生 (Universities Begin Recruiting
AI Undergraduate Students For the First Time),” Caijing, 19 June 2018. http://
industry.caijing.com.cn/20180619/4472285.shtml
More than 70 domestic universities and colleges have set up artificial
intelligence-related majors, including Xidian University, Nanjing University,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, and for the first time this
year, have launched undergraduate direct enrollment [for these programs].
Many colleges and universities incorporate computers and artificial intelligence
into the professional categories of self-enrollment and comprehensive evaluation.
For example, Nanjing University will recruit 10 undergraduate freshmen
of artificial intelligence this year through independent enrollment. Nanjing
University’s self-enrollment of computer science disciplines generally requires
candidates to win national finals of three or more awards in any discipline of
the Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Information Technology
Olympiad.
In addition to these colleges and universities that have already started recruiting,
more colleges and universities are preparing to set up artificial intelligencefocused courses.
Tsinghua University has established a leading group for cross-disciplinary
research, and has issued a number of documents and degree assessment systems
that support interdisciplinary cross-smart research. The Institute of Artificial
Intelligence at Nanjing University has established two professional orientations:
machine learning, data mining, and intelligent systems and applications. By
adopting a new curriculum setting and training model, pattern recognition and
computer vision are set in core courses such as machine learning, and they are
utilized.
Some teachers suggested that because of the many research directions of
artificial intelligence, many colleges and universities generally only make clear
the research direction of artificial intelligence at the graduate student stage, and
they have high requirements for learning. Therefore, laying a solid foundation is
very important.
OE Watch | July 2018

27

INDO-PACIFIC
China Confident in Shanghai Cooperation
Organization’s Antiterrorism Role
OE Watch Commentary: This year’s Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit on 9-10 June
in Qingdao, China was overshadowed in the media by
the summit in Singapore where US President Donald
Trump met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un.
Nevertheless, at the SCO Summit China’s head of
the International Cooperation Bureau of the Ministry
of Public Security, Liao Jinrong, gave a briefing to
the press on China’s perspectives on SCO progress.
According to the excerpted Chinese language article
from Sohu.com on 8 June, Liao Jinrong claimed that
the SCO had stopped hundreds of terrorist attacks and
arrested a large number of members of international
terrorist groups. As is typical of SCO-related
statements, Liao Jinrong also emphasized the SCO’s
commitment to stopping religious extremists, national
separatists and terrorist forces.
Liao Jinrong also highlighted that the Summit in
Qingdao was the first one since the SCO expanded
Meeting of the Chinese President with the heads of military delegations of the SCO member States (2018).
to include India and Pakistan. Some analysts
Source: Министерство обороны Российской Федерации, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Meeting_of_the_Chinese_President_with_the_heads_of_military_delegations_of_
the_SCO_member_States_(2018)_02.jpg, (CC-by-4.0).
have questioned whether these two rival countries
would slow down the SCO; however, Liao Jinrong focused on the influence that having them would bring the SCO, including in population,
geographic area, and economic size. He therefore does not appear fazed by these two countries as member states hampering the SCO.
On the whole, Liao Jinrong sees the SCO space as stable and credits the organization for being one of the factors behind this. Nevertheless,
according to his statement, he still sees terrorism as the number one challenge for the SCO in the future. It is likely therefore that future SCO
cooperation and training activities will have an antiterrorism focus even though it is easy to forget that the SCO was originally intended to be
an economic, not security-based, organization. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Over the years, through cooperation, member states have stopped hundreds of terrorist attacks, arrested
a large number of members of international terrorist organizations, seized a large number of guns and
explosives, and destroyed many armed training bases established in the region.”
Source: “中国公安部国际合作局局长：上合把反恐作为重中之重” (“Director of the Bureau of International Cooperation of the Ministry
of Public Security of China: SCO took anti-terrorism as a top priority”), sohu.com, 8 June 2018. http://www.sohu.com/a/234650254_161795
Liao Jinrong, head of the International Cooperation Bureau of the Ministry of Public Security of China, briefed the first press conference of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Qingdao Summit. “Over the years, through cooperation, member states have stopped hundreds of
terrorist attacks, arrested a large number of members of international terrorist organizations, seized a large number of guns and explosives,
and destroyed many armed training bases established in the region.” At the press conference, Liao Jinrong first reported the achievements
of the SCO in recent years. He said the SCO has signed a series of agreements in the area of cracking down on three forces (religious
extremism, national separatism, and violent and terrorist forces) and anti-drugs, border defense, and other law enforcement cooperation
fields. In addition, the SCO has also carried out various exercises in recent years, including the Tianshan series of exercises, as well as cyber
counter-terrorism exercises.
With regard to the participation of India and Pakistan, Liao Jinrong said that Pakistan and India are very important countries in the region
and pointed out that Pakistan and India face different security challenges and there are also different laws and cultures.

OE Watch | July 2018

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Marawi Rehabilitation Progress Slows in the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: In May 2017 the Philippine armed forces began
engaging in clashes that lasted for five months with the Maute Group, which
was a locally rooted, but regionally connected pro-Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) militia. Now, according to the accompanying excerpted article
which was published on Philstar.com on 23 May, the task force manager
in charge of rebuilding Marawi says that the city’s rehabilitation process
could still take over a year or more. Only then will the debris be fully
removed and residents be able to rebuild their properties. The problems with
rehabilitation of Marawi, however, also extend to repairing sewage networks,
telecommunications and electricity lines. It has been noted that the government
needs to contract with a developer to assist in rebuilding, while at the same
time recognize it must do a better job of seeking input from the displaced
civilians to ensure that their needs are met and their input is respected.
The immediate next step, according to the article, is for the displaced
civilians to move to temporary shelters where they will stay until they can
move back into regular housing in the city. However, the article also highlights
that the government is unclear on the budget needed to rebuild the city, let
alone the specifics of compensating people who will not be able to rebuild their
houses because of new infrastructure projects, such as road widening. This
article shows that long after the battle itself, the trauma in Marawi persists.
Though the article does not indicate there is a chance for the militia to reappear
in Marawi in the near future, it is evident that if the government cannot
provide for the city’s residents during the rehabilitation period, then it will
struggle to win their loyalty or confidence. There is concern that this could be
a favorable outcome for the insurgent remnants’ longer term prospects in the
area. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “A year after Marawi siege, gov’t uncertain when
rehabilitation will start,” philstar.com, 23 May 2018. https://
www.philstar.com/headlines/2018/05/23/1818036/year-aftermarawi-siege-govt-uncertain-when-rehabilitation-will-start
A year after Marawi City was decimated by a five-month
battle, the government is yet to start the rehabilitation of the
Islamic city, with officials eyeing the middle of next month
as the start of the rebuilding process. According to Felix
Castro, Task Force Bagon Marawi field office manager, it
might take between 12 to 18 more months of debris clearing
and “horizontal preparations” before residents will be
allowed to rebuild their property in the war-ravaged city.
Horizontal preparations include the laying of sewage
networks, telecommunications and electricity lines and road
expansion.
Castro said the government has only identified a proponent
for the rehabilitation, not a developer, as negotiations are
still ongoing and the final plan is still being threshed out.
He said that input from stakeholders will be considered
in crafting the final plan, which would be subject to
negotiations with the government
Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao Assemblyman
Zia Alonto Adiong said that an open communication line
between the government and the affected communities is
important to ensure that people’s frustrations are not used to
mount another armed rebellion.

“It might take between 12 to 18 more months of debris clearing and ‘horizontal preparations’ before
residents will be allowed to rebuild their property in the war-ravaged city.”

“Marawi Ground Zero.”

Source: Philippine Information Agency, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marawi_Ground_Zero.jpg, CC-BY-2.0..

OE Watch | July 2018

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Establishment of the Action Coalition for Thailand:
Is this the Future Ruling Party?
OE Watch Commentary: Many political parties
in Thailand have sprouted up over the years, but one,
the Action Coalition for Thailand (ACT), known as
“Ruamphalang Prachachartthai,” has been drawing a lot of
attention lately. As highlighted in the three accompanying
excerpted articles, written in Thailand’s The Nation Online
and Bangkok Post, the formation of ACT is noteworthy
because of the involved players, who were leaders of the now
defunct People’s Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC).
It was the PDRC that sparked the 2013-2014 street protests
that resulted in the 2014 coup, which ousted Prime Minister
Yingluck Shinawatra from power.

Source: “Former Protesters to Form Political Party,” The Nation Online, 1 June
2018. http://www.nationmultimedia.com/detail/politics/30346812

One of ACT’s co-founders, Suthep Thaugsuban, who
was once the secretary-general of the Democrat Party,
headed the PDRC until its demise in 2014. According to
the articles, Suthep will not hold any executive position in
the party. Instead, some claim he will only be an ordinary
party member, but some feel he will still be an important
representation of the party. ACT is a political party that,
according to Suthep, stands for “upholding the monarchy,
transforming the country into a democracy at every level,
respecting people’s will, and accepting people’s power in
directing politics...” The big push, according to the articles,
is for national reform.

Suriyasai (Katasila), Prasan (Marukapitak) and Thani (Thaugsuban) are
formerly key figures in the PDRC, which led massive street protests between
November 2013 and May 2014 against the government led by the Pheu Thai
Party. The rally culminated in a military coup in May 2014 that overthrew the
administration.

Also noteworthy are comments made by Prasarn
Marukapitak, one of the co-founders of the party. Prasarn
would neither confirm nor deny that the party would support
General Prayut Chan-o-cha as a prime ministerial candidate
for the upcoming February elections, should he be proposed;
General Prayut Chan-o-cha had assumed the role of prime
minister following the coup. However, Prasarn did say that
Prayut’s work on reform over the past four years would be
a foundation for the future. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

“Gen Prayut’s work on reform over the past
four years since he took power in a coup
would be the foundation for the future.”

In addition to Anek, those attending the meeting will be former Democrat
Party secretary-general Suthep Thaugsuban, who headed the PDRC until its
demise following the 2014 coup, Rangsit University deputy dean Suriyasai
Katasila and former National Reform Assembly member Prasan Marukapitak,
according to Thani Thaugsuban, a former Democrat MP and Suthep’s younger
brother.
Suthep (Thaugsuban) will be just an ordinary party member, with no executive
position in the party and no political positions in the future, according to Anek
(Laothamatas). He also said that having Suthep as a member, the ACT could be
viewed as “Suthep’s party”.

Source: ACT Appeals to Former PDRC Members,” Bangkok Post, 2 June 2018.
https://www.bangkokpost.com/news/politics/1477593/new-party-appeals-topdrc-fans
Mr Prasarn (Marukapitak, a former member of the Group of 40 senators)
declined to say whether his party would support Gen Prayut Chan-o-cha if he
is proposed as a prime ministerial candidate following elections expected in
February next year.
He said only that Gen Prayut’s work on reform over the past four years since
he took power in a coup would be the foundation for the future.
“It’s too early to tell and we need to respect our members’ wishes. So let’s not
tie us to Gen Prayut. Tie us to national reform instead,” he said.
Source: “Suthep to Co-Found ACT Party,” Bangkok Post, 3 June 2018. https://
www.bangkokpost.com/news/politics/1477641/suthep-to-co-found-act-party
SuthepThaugsuban, former secretary-general of the now-defunct People’s
Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC) street protest, announced yesterday he
would join as a co-founder of the Ruamphalang Prachachartthai Party, or the
Action Coalition for Thailand (ACT).
Political observers believe the ACT Party is likely to be a reincarnation of the
PDRC as the involvement of Mr Suthep has largely given the impression that it
is “Suthep’s Party”. However, the former protest firebrand denies it.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377
OE Watch | July 2018

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Controversy over Co-authored Book by Former
Heads of ISI and RAW
OE Watch Commentary: Discussions of
the various conflicts and issues between India
and Pakistan from a regional perspective took
a new turn in late May with the publication of
a book co-authored by retired General Asad
Durrani, the former head of Pakistan’s InterServices Intelligence (ISI), and A.S. Dulat, the
former head of India’s Research and Analysis
Wing (RAW). The accompanying excerpted
sources from Pakistan and India discuss the book
and some of the impact that it has had in both
countries.

Source: Baqir Sajjad Syed. “Army to investigate former ISI chief over claims in book,”
Dawn, 29 May 2018. https://www.dawn.com/news/1410634

The article from Dawn, a widely-read
newspaper in Pakistan, reports on the Pakistani
Army’s investigation into Durrani following
publication of the book and that he has been
placed on an “Exit Control List,” preventing
him from traveling outside the country while
the investigation takes place. The article notes
that Durrani may have violated “Section 55 of
the Military Law, which relates to “conduct
unbecoming of an officer”,” and that this “is
considered to have a very wide scope.” The
article also mentions what many other sources in
Pakistan reported, that at the very least, Durrani
“could be at fault for not getting prior permission
for the book,” not that he revealed any classified
information.

The two former spies have in the book touched upon some of thorny issues that have kept
Pakistan-India ties strained for decades and at times pushed them to the brink of war.
These issues include terrorism, particularly the Mumbai attacks, Kashmir, spy wars and
the influence of defence bureaucracies and spy agencies in the two countries.

The article from India’s The Quint, an Englishlanguage news website, mentions how the book
was “mediated by journalist Aditya Sinha” and
examines one of the sections of the book that
likely contributed to Durrani’s legal issues. In
the book’s discussion on the case of Kulbhushan
Jadhav, a Research and Analysis Wing agent
who was arrested in Pakistan (allegedly in
Balochistan) and charged with espionage, the
article notes that Durrani “holds the Pakistani
establishment responsible for the “faulty”
handling of Balochistan” and he was quoted
saying “From the very beginning, Pakistan’s
handling of Balochistan has been faulty.” Both
authors spoke fairly candidly about a number of
issues throughout the book, but there has been
no mention of Dulat facing any consequences
from the Indian government. It remains to be
seen what, if any, disciplinary action is taken
against Durrani, but the book marks a significant
moment in Indian-Pakistani relations. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

The Pakistan Army on Monday set up a ‘court of inquiry’ to investigate former director
general of Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) retired Lt Gen Asad Durrani’s collaboration
with A.S. Dulat, former chief of Indian spy agency RAW (Research and Analysis Wing), in
what is being seen as a lightning-rod book project that has stirred heated controversy…
“A formal court of inquiry headed by a serving lieutenant general has been ordered to
probe the matter in detail. Competent authority has been approached to place the name
of Lieutenant General Asad Durrani (retd) on Exit Control List (ECL),” ISPR Director
General Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor tweeted…The book The Spy Chronicles: RAW, ISI, and the
Illusion of Peace was last week launched in India…

The military is taking it as a potential case of violation of ‘Military Code of Conduct’,
which it says is applicable to all serving and retired military personnel. Section 55 of
the Military Law, which relates to “conduct unbecoming of an officer” is considered to
have a very wide scope…In the worst-case scenario, former military officers fear, court
martial proceedings could be initiated against him…many believe that he did not spill
any classified secrets. Defence analysts, however, say he could be at fault for not getting
prior permission for the book and then not getting his part vetted and cleared by the army,
which is the usual procedure.
Source: “Spy Chronicles: What Got Gen Durrani Into Trouble With the ISI,” The Quint,
5 June 2018. https://www.thequint.com/lifestyle/books/spy-chronicles-what-got-asaddurrani-into-trouble-with-isi
…The book in question is an extensive dialogue between former RAW chief AS Dulat and
Durrani, former chief of Pakistan’s premier intelligence agency Inter Services Intelligence
(ISI), mediated by journalist Aditya Sinha. Durrani headed ISI from August 1990 till
March 1992…
The two discuss issues that have long haunted the two nations, but never found a place
on the political agenda. Here are few excerpts from the book that have got Durrani into
trouble.
Discussing the arrest of retired navy officer Kulbhushan Jadhav from the Pakistani
province of Balochistan on charges of espionage in March 2016, former RAW chief Dulat
says, “If this were a RAW operation, and he was a RAW spy, then it’s a pretty sloppy
operation.”
On the other hand, Gen Durrani said Pakistan’s arrest of Yadav for “being a spy” was
an attempt by the country to “counter the Indian threat after Pathankot.”…Durrani goes
to say that since India was looking for links between Pathankot attack and Pakistani
establishment, this was Pakistan’s counter argument, “We know you’ve been doing this (in
Balochistan).”…
Asad Durrani also holds the Pakistani establishment responsible for the “ faulty”
handling of Balochistan. “From the very beginning, Pakistan’s handling of Balochistan
has been faulty. No one understood that it was complex better than the founder himself.”…

“The military is taking it as a potential case of violation of ‘Military Code of Conduct’, which it says is
applicable to all serving and retired military personnel. Section 55 of the Military Law, which relates to
‘conduct unbecoming of an officer’ is considered to have a very wide scope.”
OE Watch | July 2018

31

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Gaza’s Incendiary Kites
OE Watch Commentary: In the first two months of Gaza’s “Great March of
Return,” which began on 30 March 2018, Israeli officials claim that “incendiary
kites” from various protest sites in Gaza scorched over 4,000 acres of land in
Israeli-controlled territory abutting the strip, causing millions of dollars in
damage, especially to the agricultural sector. The rudimentary kites have emerged
as a surprise asymmetric challenge for Israel, as detailed in the following
excerpted articles from local news sources.
The “incendiary kites” consist of simple, home-made kites made of sticks,
plastic and string, with a flammable object (a Molotov cocktail or tightly wound
burlap doused in diesel and engine oil) attached to the tail. The kites are built
and launched from protest sites in Gaza, and once they have crossed the border
wall their string is cut so they fall in Israeli-controlled territory. Flying kites is
a common pastime for Gaza’s children, particularly on windy summer days,
and the idea of transforming them into tools for arson appears to have emerged
spontaneously, according to media accounts. Nonetheless, as the accompanying
article from al-Quds claims, some degree of organization to the kite-making may
be emerging, centered around a group calling itself the “Sons of Zoari,” named
after Mohammed Zoari, a Tunisian drone technician who helped Hamas before
being killed in 2016. No central organization or patron is needed, though, as the
simple method and low cost make the technique accessible to nearly anyone.
There are particularities to Gaza’s geography which account for the
effectiveness of these kites, including the proximity between Gaza and the Israeli
settlements; the strong, warm winds which carry the kites eastward from the
Gaza enclave and help fan the flames once the incendiary object has fallen to the
ground; and, a recent drought which parched the area’s vegetation, making
it particularly flammable. The tactic now appears to have moved to the West
Bank, and according to the second accompanying excerpt from the Times
of Israel, incendiary kites were launched from there into adjacent Israeli
settlements in early June. One of the kites, according to the report, “struck a
power line, causing a power outage in the area for several hours.”
The kites have also been used for propaganda purposes. Some kites have had
swastikas drawn on them, while others carry pictures of Palestinian protesters
recently killed by Israeli snipers. Some have been used to drop flyers on the
Israeli side of the wall, warning of a “hot summer” to come and telling Israeli
settlers to leave Palestinian land. The unexpected effectiveness of these kites
means they are likely to be further refined and possibly modified. Already, some
kites appear to have been fitted with video cameras. Helium balloons have been
used in lieu of kites, due to their greater range (4-5 kilometers). Reports of small
drones outfitted with explosives were also recently reported, as the excerpted
article from al-Modon notes.
Gaza’s incendiary kites join Improvised Rocket-Assisted Munitions (IRAMs)
and commercial drones in the list of aerial asymmetric tactics emerging
in the region. The kites are the simplest and cheapest, which means they
can be deployed in greater numbers by a larger pool of militants. Israel has
attempted several methods to counter the kites, including aerial bombing,
threatened targeting of those who fly the kites, using commercial drones to
bring them down, and putting the fires out before they are able to spread. The
final accompanying passage, an opinion piece written in Egypt’s semi-official
al-Ahram, notes how Israel’s vaunted “Iron Dome” air defense system “has
been completely powerless in the face of incendiary kites.” Low-tech swarms
have been identified as a potential vulnerability in this air defense system and
incendiary kites are a case in point, albeit one whose effects are limited by its
primitiveness. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Recovered Incendiary Kite.

Source: By Nizzan Cohen [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Burning-Kite_used_by_Gaza_Palestinins_to_fire_Israeli_fields.jpg.

Source:
‫طائرات غزة الورقية املُشتعلة تؤ ّرق األوساط اإلسرائيلية‬...
Nour Abu Aisha. “Gaza Incendiary Kites Haunt Israel,”
al-Quds, 10 June 2018. http://www.alquds.co.uk/?p=951951
Despite the extremely low cost of producing the kites,
which may be around one US dollar for each kite, the losses
on the Israeli side have been worth millions of dollars…
These incendiary kites have haunted the Israeli military
and political class, especially since all the Israeli Army’s
attempts at dealing with them technologically have failed.
They have also caused anger among the political and
military classes in Israel, and worried public opinion, due
to the inability to deal with them… According to Palestinian
rebel “Abu Mohammed” (18 years of age) that the number
of Palestinians joining the “Zoari Unit” is very large and
numbers in the thousands. Speaking to Anatolia News
Agency, he added that the size of the kites depends on the
target site. If the agricultural land on the Israeli side is
planted with green trees, this requires large kites whose
diameter is over a meter and a half, in order to successfully
start a fire. If, however, the land is planted with herbs and
shrubbery a smaller kite can start a fire… The funds for
making the kites comes from the rebels themselves, given
the low costs. Abu Mohammed denied that any Palestinian
faction or group provided them with support… The idea of
flying burning kites across the border has developed into
helium balloons with burning materials attached to their
tail, he added, noting that they can reach further than the
kites can, as far as 4-5 meters inside of Israel. Late last
May, Israel’s Channel 2 said that Palestinian protesters in
Gaza had launched around 300 kites since the start of the
March for Return, which started late last March.

(continued)

OE Watch | July 2018

32

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Gaza’s Incendiary Kites
“…These incendiary kites have haunted the Israeli military and political class…”
Source: “Following Gaza border blazes, ‘terror kites’
see first use in West Bank,” Times of Israel, 8 June
2018. https://www.timesofisrael.com/following-gazaborder-blazes-terror-kites-see-first-use-in-west-bank

Source:‫غزة طائرة مفخخة عبرت السياج الحدودي‬.
“Gaza: Explosive Aircraft Crosses the
Border Wall,” al-Modon, 28 May 2018.
https://goo.gl/7ug6Wu

Mimicking tactics that have been increasingly used
as part of violent Gaza border protests in recent
weeks, Palestinians in the West Bank launched what
are believed to be the first incendiary kites used there
Thursday.

Early Monday, the spokesman for the
Israeli Army said that days before a
small drone carrying explosives had
been found near the wall surrounding
the Gaza Strip… “The drone was
launched from Gaza some nights ago. It
crossed the wall in the northern sector
and landed there. It was found by
soldiers, and after examining it and its
contents they found explosives…”

The kites were flown over the settlements of Matan,
Yarhiv and Nirit, three Jewish communities in the West
Bank near the central Israeli city of Kfar Saba.
One of the kites caused a fire in a field, which was
quickly put out without major damage, while another
struck a power line, causing a power outage in the area
for several hours.

Source:
‫الطائرات الورقية واملقاومة املبدعة‬
Hassan Abu Taleb. “Kites and the
Innovative Resistance,” al-Ahram, 11
June 2018. http://www.ahram.org.eg/
NewsQ/655426.aspx
Israel built its advanced missile shield
at a cost of 2 billion dollars to defend
against locally manufactured rockets
occasionally fired by Palestinian military
resistance groups toward settlements
built on Gaza’s periphery. This socalled Iron Dome, however, has been
completely powerless in the face of
incendiary kites which fall on the seized
Palestinian land and burn the agriculture
and facilities found there.

Field of Eshkol Regional Council Burnt by Incendiary Kites.

Source: By Nizzan Cohen [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Demege_caused_by_palestinian_fire-kites_2.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

33

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Khamenei: Muslim Unity only after Israel’s Destruction
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic
of Iran sees itself not as leader of the Shi’ite world
but, more broadly, as leader of the Islamic world. It
is for this reason that Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei
often speaks to ambassadors from Islamic countries
on important Islamic holidays like Eid al-Fitr. In this
year’s speech, in the accompanying excerpt here,
Khamenei doubles down on the Iranian enmity to
Israel; i.e., “the Zionist regime.” While antipathy to and
rejection of Israel by the Islamic Republic is nothing
new and, indeed, is a cornerstone of the Islamic
Republic’s foundation, Khamenei’s most recent address
is important because it comes against the backdrop
of growing détente between Israel and many of Iran’s
Arab rivals. Indeed, Khamenei justifies Iranian
involvement in Syria, Yemen, and Iraq by placing them
in the lens of a broader US-Israel conspiracy.
Khamenei’s verbal aggression toward Israel and
his commitment to see the “Zionist regime perish”
suggest that there will be no mitigation of diplomatic
concern with regard to Iranian support for anti-Israel
terrorist groups like Hamas and Hezbollah as well as
efforts by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and
Iranian proxies to consolidate footholds in southern
Syria. Indeed, while Khamenei’s hostility toward Israel
is often seen as simply ideological, his argument that
Israel’s existence prevents Muslim unity explains Iran’s
growing emphasis on confronting Israel directly. End
OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Biyanat dar Didar Mosevalan-e Nizam va Safaraye Keshvarzhaye Islami (Statement in a Meeting of [Iranian] officials and Ambassadors of
Islamic Countries),” Khamenei.ir, 15 June 2018. http://farsi.khamenei.ir/speechcontent?id=39947
I congratulate you, this dear and distinguished audience and ambassadors from
Islamic countries, on this happy Eid, and to the great and faithful nation of Iran,
and the Islamic ummah [people], and we ask God almighty, let us celebrate the Eid
and bless the Islamic ummah and celebrate the feast….
Dear brothers and sisters! Today the policy of arrogant [powers] is to create rifts
and differences among Muslim nation, within these nations, and between these
nations. And this is what the conspirators of criminal America and Zionists have
plotted for our region, signs of which can be observed in the region, one of the
most important Islamic areas, and you see the signs of it: the Yemeni bloodshed, the
events of Syria, the events that were in Iraq, and the rest of the Muslim countries…
And another important point is the Zionist regime, which has essentially placed this
regime in the heart of the Muslim world in order to create a dispute. The Zionist
regime is not going to last long. All historic experiences prove this with certainty;
because this regime has a fundamental problem. That some spineless states think
they can establish diplomatic relations-- open or covert-- with the Zionist Regime
cannot resolve the conflict against Palestine. The problems of the Zionist regime do
not stem from its relation with other governments and cannot be resolved if a few
countries shamelessly develop relations with it. The fundamental problem lies at the
regime’s illegitimacy… Typically having a common enemy will bring about unity;
however, this enemy [the Zionist Regime] has brought about conflicts, hypocrisy,
and conspiracies among some leaders of Islamic countries. Once the Zionist regime
perishes, Muslims will find their way back to unity… A regime based on falsehood
will surely be destroyed by God’s help and with the efforts of Muslim nations”.

“Once the Zionist regime perishes, Muslims will find their way back to unity.”

Khamenei addresses diplomats from Islamic countries.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://farsi.khamenei.ir/ndata/news/39935/C/13970325_5839935.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

34

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
New Russian Push to Strengthen Syrian Army,
Dissolve Loyalist Militias
OE Watch Commentary: Local reports hint that Russia is embarking
on a broad plan to systematically root out looting and corruption within
the Syrian Armed Forces, while at the same time pushing the Syrian
government to dissolve all loyalist militias. The accompanying excerpted
passages from Arabic-language media outlets provide further details on
these important developments.
In early May 2018, as the Syrian government was completing its recapture
of the Damascus suburbs, images surfaced online of pro-government
fighters driving off with truckloads of appliances, furniture and scraps
looted from the abandoned and largely destroyed neighborhoods. Several
days later, a video circulated on social media showing the arrest of three
looters - presumably loyalist fighters - by Russian military police. Syrian
loyalist social media reaction was split, with some decrying it as a breach
of sovereignty and others applauding the crackdown on lawlessness. The
official Facebook page for Russian military forces in Syria, cited in the
first accompanying passage from the pro-opposition news website Orient
News, confirmed the arrests and stated that “Russian forces will not allow
violations to occur in the areas that were liberated with our help. Members of
one of the fighting groups were arrested for violating the law in an area south
of Damascus.”
The second accompanying passage, from the Qatari daily al-Araby alJadid, claims that the Russian military has begun monitoring and inspecting
all Syrian military units and administrative agencies in order to root out
corruption and incompetence. The article argues that the “Russians are
attempting to slowly restructure the [Syrian] army by removing officers,
NCOs, and corrupt individuals, and relying on officers who were previously
marginalized and who often were disgruntled with the corrupt officers who
marginalized them in the first place. They are now playing an important role
in disclosing existing violations, capitalizing on their trust in the Russian
commissions’ ability to protect them and change the situation.”
In a parallel move highlighted in the third accompanying article, also from
al-Araby al-Jadid, Russia appears to have encouraged if not ordered the
dissolution of all Syrian loyalist militias. With crucial help from Iran, these
militias played a vital role in preventing regime collapse in the early stages of
the Syrian conflict. Although this is not the first time that the dissolution of
loyalist militias is mentioned, the efforts appear to be serious. All militia-run
checkpoints in Damascus are set to be disbanded, recruitment into militias
is to end, and militiamen are to either settle their status with the government
or join the Syrian military. The first major businessman/militia-leader to
be targeted, according to the passage from the Lebanese news website alModon, is Ayman Jaber. Jaber is married to one of Bashar al-Assad’s cousins
but has clashed with other members of the al-Assad extended family. An oil,
steel and aluminum tycoon, Jaber together with his brother established and
financed the “Desert Hawks,” one of the Syrian conflict’s most effective and
successful loyalist militias. Jaber’s fall from grace has been swift, and he is
now a wanted man whose properties and funds have been seized and whose
militia has been disarmed by force. According to the article’s author, several
other loyalist militia leaders are next on the list, including Bassam al-Hassan,
a Republican Guard officer credited with establishing the loyalist National
Defense Forces (NDF). End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Source:
‫لحظة إلقاء القبض على شبيحة يسرقون في جنوب دمشق‬
“Moment Shabbiha Looters Arrested in Southern Damascus
(Video),” Orient News, 27 May 2018. https://goo.gl/ueh5xW
Responding to the [arrest of the looters], Russia’s “Hmeimim
Base Central Channel” wrote on its Facebook page, in response
to a question on whether the looters had been arrested by
chance or from instructions from higher command: “Without
a doubt Russian forces will not allow violations to occur in the
areas that were liberated with our help. Members of one of the
fighting groups were arrested for violating the law in an area
south of Damascus.”
Source:
‫تفتيش ورقابة روسية على جيش النظام السوري‬
Rayan Mohammed. “Russian Inspections and Monitoring for the
Syrian Regime Army,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 29 May 2018, https://
goo.gl/Dm2Xbx
… According to a military source, the Russian military is
now undertaking monitoring and inspection of the various
Syrian military and administrative units aiming to curb the
widespread corruption that permeates it. The Hmeimim base
has taken on these responsibilities via inspection and monitoring
commissions, through which it controls accountability,
appointments and compensation within the military, in addition
to controlling all of the regime’s military formations.
An officer in the Syrian military told al-Araby al-Jadid that
“Russian officers in Syria based in Hmeimim have recently
began to undertake monitoring visits to various military units
and administrative centers.” He added that the inspections
comprise various issues, including food, preparedness, weapons
and ammunition. They even investigate issues of illegal
absences, as officers are sometimes given open-ended leave in
exchange for large sums of money…
The military source believes that “Russians are attempting
to slowly restructure the [Syrian] army by removing officers,
NCOs, and corrupt individuals, and relying on officers who were
previously marginalized and who often were disgruntled with
the corrupt officers who marginalized them in the first place.
They are now playing an important role in disclosing existing
violations, capitalizing on their trust in the Russian commissions’
ability to protect them and change the situation.”
The same source added that “Russian monitoring and
inspection offices exist in every regime military administration
and unit, providing constant monitoring in this way”…
Russia previously began working to attract trusted military
figures who graduated from Russian military academies, and
began to highlight them and expand allegiance to Russia within
the regime military. Russia appears to be counting on controlling
the Syrian military in the period following the political solution,
in turn curbing Iran’s role within Syria’s military to a minimal
level. Russia currently appears to have absolute control over
the Syrian military. Russians also appear to have filled in all the
blanks at the top of the regime and high military commands…

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2018

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: New Russian Push to Strengthen
Syrian Army, Dissolve Loyalist Militias
“…Russian forces will not allow violations to occur in the areas that were liberated with our help…”
Source:
‫النظام السوري يبدأ بحل مليشياته بقرار روسي‬
Yazen Shahdawi. “Syrian Regime Begins to Dissolve Militias Complying with Russian
Decision,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 8 June 2018. https://goo.gl/PtFqv8
Al-Araby al-Jadid, in a new development, learned of various directives issued from
the Hmeimim Base on the Syrian coast, most importantly one calling on all security
branches of the regime to remove the security barriers within Damascus that are
manned by the the popular committees, national defense forces and other militias.
These will be handed over to the Syrian Interior Ministry’s police forces, under
supervision of the Russian military police.
A directive was also issued calling for the disbanding of all militias and gangs
working for the regime’s various branches and senior official, such as Suheil al-Hassan
“The Tiger”…
In the same context, an order was issued to stop the recruitment into all these different
militias, with the volunteers fighting in them to either have their status resolved, join the
regime’s armed forces, or enlist in the 5th Assault Corps…
According to Fahd, a young man in Lattakia, clashes broke out in rural Lattakia and
Tartous between Russian military police and Syrian security forces, on the one hand,
and Ayman Jaber’s militias, on the other hand, as they refused to hand their weapons
and security IDs over to the military, fearing that they would lose their power…
Source:
‫ملاذا ُيالحق األسد رجال أعماله‬
Mohaned al-Haj Ali. “Why is Assad Prosecuting his Businessmen?” al-Modon, 1 June
2018. https://goo.gl/Y3avDx
The timing between the end of the battle for Damascus and its surroundings and the
news of the prosecution of Syrian businessmen who until recently were close to the
Assad and Makhlouf families is no coincidence. These businessmen played a vital role
in lengthening the life of the regime and financing militias, from the National Defense
Forces to the “Desert Hawks”…
The first target of the regime’s crackdown was Ayman Jaber, an oil man and principal
financier of the “Desert Hawks” and “Naval Commandos,” commanded by his brother
Mohammed… Many names have been floated as targets after Ayman Jaber, most
notably Bassam Marhaj (Bassam al-Hassan), one of the founders of the National
Defense Forces and a close figure in the military-security camp of the regime. This is a
high-level name, and thus much about him is likely to be leaked in the coming period…

Video allegedly showing Russian Military Police arresting
Syrian looters.

Source: Yemen al-Said Facebook Page, Video Screenshot, https://www.facebook.com/yamman.alsaeed/
videos/940872589406887.

OE Watch | July 2018

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Military Observation Posts in Idlib
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey has completed its 12th
military post around the rebel-held Syrian province of Idlib
to prevent ground attacks as part of the Astana deal with
Russia and Iran to create de-escalation zones in Syria. The
Turkish Armed Forces built the first post in October 2017
and eventually completed 12 posts, encircling all of Idlib.
Each of these posts has one mechanized infantry company
reinforced with armor. The accompanying excerpted
passage, which was written for the daily newspaper Hürriyet
by a veteran Turkish foreign policy journalist, sheds light
on these posts and the role they may play in the power
dynamics in Syria.
The author states that as it was agreed upon in Astana,
Turkey was to build these posts on the rebel held side of
the border areas and Russia and Iran were to build on the
al-Assad regime-controlled side of the territory. These
observation posts were to function as a security buffer
zone between the rebels and the al-Assad regime forces.
According to the author, this is the riskiest cross-border
operation Turkey has undertaken to date, since it increases
the possibility of a face-off between the al-Assad regime and
the Turkish forces if al-Assad decides to go after opposition
forces in Idlib. Having Iran and Russia also establish deescalation zones could prevent a possible face-off between
the Turkish army and Syrian regime forces.
According to the author, after making serious advances
against the opposition in and around Damascus, and in
northern Syria, the possibility of al-Assad staging an attack
on Idlib cannot be taken lightly. Under the Astana accord,
Russia and Iran have to prevent the al-Assad regime from
staging such an operation. The author argues that “it is
still useful to note, however, the possibility that the Assad
regime may defy pressure from Russia and act on its own.”
Since Russia and Iran have shown interest in maintaining
good relations with Turkey, the possibility of al-Assad
regime acting without Moscow and Tehran’s consent carries
a greater risk for al-Assad. Besides, risking a potential
confrontation with the Syrian Regime, the presence of
al-Qaeda-affiliated groups such as Hayat Tahrir al-Sham
(HTS), pose challenges to Turkey. If Turkish relations with
the HTS, which has been designated as a terrorist group by
the United States and Russia, sours, the Turkish observation
posts will be the nearest targets for the HTS and Salafists
groups. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“It’s possible to say that the mission of the Turkish Army in
Idlib is the riskiest cross-border operation it has undertaken
to date.”
Source: Sedat Ergin, “Türkiye’nin İdlib sınavı asıl şimdi başlıyor, (Turkey’s
actual Idlib test starts now),” Hurriyet, 18 May 2018. http://www.
hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sedat-ergin/turkiyenin-idlib-sinavi-asil-simdibasliyor-40840399
Turkey with the establishment of the 12th observation post the other day in the
deconfliction zone in Idlib has completed its obligation of the responsibility it
took on as part of the Astana process that it started with Russia and Iran.
…TAF [Turkish Armed Forces] after establishing the first one in October
[2017], within seven months has created 12 small scale military bases in this
region, each of which is estimated to be in the size of an infantry unit. As we
can see on the map, besides three observing posts in the north adjoining Afrin,
we see that the remaining nine draw an arc coming from the north to the
south, then curving southwestward to reach [the Turkish town of] Yayladağı.
According to the tripartite agreement, Turkey is to set up observation posts
within the border separating the regime and the opposition. Within the
framework of the agreement, Russia and Iran also have to establish similar
observation posts on the side of the regime-controlled areas.
As a result, these observation posts facing each other from the two sides will
form a “green zone” -like security corridor between the opposition and the
al-Assad regime forces…The Russian forces also are expected to be deployed
to the regime side of deescalation zone… Iran is expected to build observation
posts as well…
It’s possible to say that the mission of the Turkish Army in Idlib is the riskiest
cross-border operation it has undertaken to date.
A responsibility of such a scale brings a series of problems…One of the first
ones is the possibility of al-Assad regime’s attack on opposition in the Idlib
region…Such an operation carries the potential of a face-off between Turkish
and al-Assad forces.
…a fight between the regime and opposition in Idlib will trigger a wave of
migration towards Turkey.
Under the Astana agreement, Russia and Iran have to prevent the Assad
regime from mounting such an operation. It is still useful to note, however, the
possibility that the Assad regime may defy pressure from Russia and act on its
own
…The main problem in Idlib is one of the opposition actors al-Qaeda’s Syrian
affiliate Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS)…. The responsibility undertaken by
Turkey in Idlib inevitably brings up the question of how relations between
Turkey and the HTS will develop.

OE Watch | July 2018

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Ramzan Kadyrov: Putin’s Bridge to Muslims in Syria
and Beyond
OE Watch Commentary: When it comes to military
strength, Russia reigns supreme among the Syrian
government’s foreign backers. Yet in terms of influence on
the ground, Iran is entrenched in ways that make it hard
for Moscow to compete, especially given Iran’s greater
geographical and cultural proximity to Syria and its people.
Over the past two years, however, Ramzan Kadyrov and
his battalions of Chechen military police deployed in Syria
have helped Moscow strengthen its influence with the local
population, especially in Syria’s main cities. The fact that
Kadyrov and his Chechen battalions are Muslims provides the
Kremlin with a soft-power asset that it otherwise lacks, and as
a result they have emerged as a vital cog in Russian President
Vladimir Putin’s policy toward Syria, as the accompanying
excerpted articles suggest.
The first accompanying article, posted in the Frenchlanguage online journal Orient XXI, notes how Kadyrov has
positioned himself as “a defender of the Muslims” and as such
is “helping the Kremlin to appear as a friend of Muslims.”
The article notes that many Russian analysts “are impressed
by the dexterity with which Ramzan Kadyrov managed to
make himself useful to the Kremlin, even indispensable, while
playing his own cards.” Indeed, the Syrian intervention has
allowed Kadyrov “to train his own armed forces,” and some
believe that his actions in Syria and other Muslim countries
are meant to hedge against the possibility of deteriorating
relations with the Kremlin, a way for Kadyrov to build “his
own support and networks elsewhere than in Russia, under the
pretext of asserting Russian soft power towards the Muslim
world… in case it goes badly again between Moscow and its
turbulent Caucasian Republic.”
Kadyrov’s two main vehicles for positioning himself as
an important ally and benefactor of loyalist Syrians are
a foundation named after his father, which has disbursed
humanitarian aid and provided funds to rebuild the grand
mosques in the cities of Homs and Aleppo, and the battalions
of Muslim-majority Chechen military police. Kadyrov’s
military police battalions are present in Sunni-majority areas
of Syria’s three main cities (Aleppo, Homs, Damascus).
These areas were reclaimed by pro-government forces (with
Russian assistance) from overtly religious rebel fighters, some
of them residents of these very communities. One of the
key challenges facing these military police forces is how to
deal with local supporters of Iranian-backed militias. As the
accompanying article from al-Jazeera describes, friction has
developed in the reclaimed Damascus suburbs near the Shi’i
enclave of Saida Zaynab. Although the Chechen police have
sought to “win over the population” and “from the outset dealt
decisively and forcefully toward the Shi’i militias,” members
of the Shi’i militias have begun “pressuring for the formation
of quasi-popular committees to protect the area in order to
diminish the presence and influence of Russian military police
and replace them with local forces with links to Iran.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…Mr Kadyrov is helping the Kremlin to appear as a
friend of Muslims…”
Source: Regis Gente. “L’implication surprenante de la Tchétchénie en Syrie
(Chechnya’s Surprising Intervention in Syria),” Orient XXI, 10 May 2018.
https://orientxxi.info/
magazine/l-implication-surprenante-de-la-tchetchenie-en-syrie,2445
“Ramzan Kadyrov immediately wanted to use the situation in the Middle
East, as soon as Russia became involved militarily in Syria in September 2015.
He did it first to stand as a defender of Muslims. This allows him to pretend to
be the good Muslim in Chechnya, as opposed to what he calls “bad Muslims”:
the Islamists and all those who oppose his regime and what they see as
Russian colonialism. But at the same time - and this is crucial - Mr Kadyrov is
helping the Kremlin to appear as a friend of Muslims…
“This is important for Ramzan Kadyrov not only because he is doing so
well for the Kremlin and pretends to be a peace-maker fighting against bad
Muslims, terrorists, but also because it allows him to train his own armed
forces. That’s why, people around me say, Kadyrov wants his men to rotate
permanently. Why? Because he thinks of the post-Putin era, that it is not
certain that he will then enjoy the same support from the Kremlin and that
things could even go wrong,” says a Russian expert who has anonymity
because of the sensitivity of the subject…
Several observers of the small Caucasian Republic are impressed by the
dexterity with which Ramzan Kadyrov managed to make himself useful to the
Kremlin, even indispensable, while playing his own cards. “Kadyrov is brutal,
rude, uneducated and yet, to my surprise, I must admit that he has managed
to make his way and to impose himself in a hostile environment. Because we
are still talking about his good relationship with Putin, but it’s forgetting that
a lot of people at FSB3, GRU, Kremlin, etc. hate him,” says an observer in
Moscow…
Akhmet Yarlykapov hardly believes it: “Chechnya is a case too unique and
too outside the logic of the Middle East. The other development implied by
Kadyrov’s action in Syria or Libya is the construction of his own support and
networks elsewhere than in Russia, under the pretext of asserting Russian
soft power towards the Muslim world… in case it goes badly again between
Moscow and its turbulent Caucasian Republic.”
Source:
‫صراع روسي إيراني على النفوذ بجنوب دمشق‬
Sulafa Jabour. “Russian-Iranian Competition for Influence in Southern
Damascus,” al-Jazeera, 29 May 2018. https://goo.gl/sqpn3o
The spokesman referred to an attempt by Russian police, who are Muslims
of Chechen origin, to win over the population through proper treatment
and welcoming complaints being lodged through the various centers spread
throughout the region, as well as confronting the violations committed by
the various loyalist factions and militias…. Mohammed told al-Jazeera that
Russian police had from the outset dealt decisively and forcefully toward
the Shi’i militias present in the southern suburbs of Damascus next to Saida
Zaynab. They had threatened to bomb the headquarters of these militias
after gunfire and kidnappings committed against local civilians. In the same
context, Faris Salama, a resident of the area, spoke of the role played by some
reconciliation committees, which aim to strengthen local and Iranian presence
by pressuring for the formation of quasi-popular committees to protect the
area in order to diminish the presence and influence of Russian military police
and replace them with local forces with links to Iran with the pretext of no
longer needing the Russians…
OE Watch | July 2018

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Biomass Remote-Sensing Satellite Developed
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian Space Agency has successfully
launched at least six satellites, although all but one or two have fallen
from orbit within days, weeks, or months. Iranian officials arguably utilize
the ability to launch satellites as cover to develop dual use technologies
that could bolster Iranian intercontinental ballistic missile capabilities.
In the accompanying excerpted article, Morteza Barari, the director of
the Iranian Space Agency, speaks about commercializing remote-sensing
satellites. While this may represent a genuine desire to augment the Iranian
Space Agency’s budget, it may also reflect cooperation with China. On
6 September 2008, China launched the Huanjing, an earth observation
satellite which it had developed jointly with Iran and Thailand; Tehran’s
investment represented about 15 percent of the total project cost.
Even if the joint satellite project with China has developed to a
commercial/operational phase, Barari’s optimism about being able to
tap a $60 billion market seems wildly exaggerated given international
commercial constraints on doing business in Iran, even if sanctions were
not re-imposed. Given this fact, it seems likely that the Sino-Iranian
satellite cooperation focuses instead on the development of sensors which
can be used for more conventional observation and espionage. Of course,
for Iran to derive benefit from such capabilities and maintain its autonomy
from China, the Iranian Space Agency will not only have to launch new
satellites, but also find a way to keep them in orbit. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“The Iran Space Agency... has developed a plan
entitled, ‘Remote Sensing Satellite Biomass’.”
Source: “Tarh zist bavam mahvareh senjesh az dur tadvin shod
(Biomass Remote-Sensing Satellite Developed),” Mashregh
News, 16 May 2018. https://goo.gl/rCAVQi
Morteza Barari [director of the Iran Space Agency] wrote on
his Instagram page, “There are currently about 600 satellites
available [internationally] for remote sensing, transmitting
several terabytes of data and imagery per day,” and he said
that “The remote sensing industry will have a $60 billion
market in 2018 and is expected to grow at least 14 percent by
2020 to reach $76 billion,” and he stated, “The Iran Space
Agency, with the aim of monitoring and determining the
optimal exploitation of the land and its valuable resources
based on the basic needs of the country, has developed a plan
entitled, “Remote Sensing Satellite Biomass,” which will take
advantage of the high capacity of this field in the creation and
development of basic space businesses and its role in providing
application services to the community in different areas.

Safir space launch vehicle carrying Fajr satellite.

Source: Tasnim News Agency [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Safir_space_launch_vehicle_carrying_Fajr_satellite_09.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran’s Passive Defense Organization Establishes
Space Policy
OE Watch Commentary: Within the greater bureaucracy
of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), the Passive
Defense Organization has increasingly taken a high profile. In
the accompanying excerpted article, General Gholam-Reza
Jalali, commander of the Passive Defense Organization, seeks
to lay claim to setting the Islamic Republic’s and IRGC’s space
policy. Given the Passive Defense Organization’s historic
focus on cyberwarfare, greater involvement in Iranian space
policy suggests both that the Passive Defense Organization
increasingly seeks to become a signals-intelligence outfit and
also that IRGC plans a greater focus on expansion into space
and satellites.
The Iranian press is far from free and not every organization
that holds a seminar will find itself the recipient of nationwide
coverage. That the state-controlled press covered the Iranian
Space Research Institute conference indicates that within the
Islamic Republic’s broader and overlapping bureaucracies,
the Passive Defense Organization has effectively consolidated
control over space policy and has shouldered out other
competitors. Regardless, the fact that Jalali featured so
prominently at a Space Research Institute event highlights the
militarization of space research and, indeed, more broadly the
IRGC’s involvement in any potentially dual-use field. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The Passive Defense Organization must develop a
framework and approach for space.”
Source: “Pish Navis Sanad Rahbardi Pedafand Gher‘amal Hawzeh Feza’e
Keshavar Nehayi Shod (Draft Strategy Document for the Passive Defense of
the Country’s Space Domain Finalized),” Fars News Agency, 21 May 2018.
https://goo.gl/khofnw
A draft strategic document for passive defense in the space field was
finalized at the Iran Space Research Institute in the presence of General
[Gholam-Reza] Jalali, commander of the Passive Defense Organization,
several of his deputies and experts in the field. At the beginning of the
seminar, General Jalali offered congratulations on the occasion of the holy
month of Ramadan, and said, “We hope that we can discuss this topic in this
space and in this meeting of experts, and sum it up so that it can become
the basis for communication in the field of passive defense of the space
domain.” Jalali said, “The Passive Defense Organization must develop
a framework and approach for space on the basis of the principles and
policies communicated by the Supreme Leader of the Revolution, and it acts
alongside them, so that the different domains of passive defense are matched,
and defines a framework and concept and forms a strategic document.” He
added, “We must identify and evaluate the [country’s] space-related fields
and categorize them at vital, sensitive, and important and identify threats to
them effectively in order to address threats, and present solutions.”

Gholam Reza Jalali, head of the Passive Defense Organization.

Source: DefaPress.ir, http://defapress.ir/IDNA_media/image/2014/10/47214_orig.jpg, all rights reserved use of the content is permitted by mentioning the source.

OE Watch | July 2018

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Group Planning to Hack Bank in Iran Arrested
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps’ (IRGC) Passive
Defense Organization usually defines cyber
defense as efforts to prevent foreign infiltration of
Iranian government and national security systems,
and press releases from Iran’s Cyber Police often
focus on either morals crimes or stopping those
using the internet to ridicule or insult the Islamic
Republic’s religious leadership. The accompanying
excerpted article, however, reveals another element
of cybercrime in Iran: insiders compromising
systems for profit. The episode also sheds light
on the nature of the Iranian security state. It
The Official Seal of Islamic Republic
references in passing the Intelligence Ministry’s
of Iran Cyberspace Police (FATA).
maintenance of provincial offices to investigate
Source: By MrInfo2012 [Public domain], from Wikimedia
Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IRI.NAJA.
and handle what in many other states would be a
FATA_(New).svg.
simple police matter. The Intelligence Ministry
involvement in this bank hacker case also suggests that, despite the proliferation of
organizations involved in cyber policy in Iran, the Intelligence Ministry remains
paramount. Unclear is who the potential victim(s) would have been. Ordinary
Iranians do not trust Iranian banks and often try instead convert their savings to
gold or hard currency, like US dollars or Euros. This raises the possibility that the
hackers sought to embezzle from a state-owned or IRGC-owned enterprise. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“A group of hackers... sought to
infiltrate, sabotage, and embezzle.”
Source: “Dastgiri Yek Gorueh Hakari keh Ghasad-e
Ekhlal far Nezam-e Banki Dashtand (Arrest of a
Group of Hackers Aiming to Disrupt the Banking
System),” Fars News Agency, 28 May 2018. www.
farsnews.com/13970307000323
Hasan Rafiqi said: According to reports from
the Intelligence Ministry’s office for the Esfahan
province, a group of hackers with the cooperation
of two employees from one of the provincial banks,
sought to infiltrate, sabotage, and embezzle from
customer accounts. But, after a judicial order, and
the members of this group were arrested before they
could commit any crimes. The Esfahan prosecutor
said those arrested had confessed that they intended
to infiltrate the banking system and access customer
information in order to conduct criminal acts.
According to the Esfahan prosecutor, nine people
were arrested in this regard.

Cyberspace Should Promote Religious Teaching
OE Watch Commentary:
The Islamic Republic of Iran is,
at its heart, an ideological state
dedicated to the promotion not
simply of Shi’ism, but of Islam
more broadly. While much of the
debate surrounding Iran’s cyber
policy focuses on its potential
offense against outside powers or
attempts to constrain free access
to the internet and social media,
Abbas Salehi.
the accompanying excerpted
Source: Islamic Republic News Agency, http://img8.irna.ir/1397/13970324/82942803/n8294280372388065.jpg.
article highlighting a speech
by the Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance underlines the Islamic Republic’s
efforts to use new technology to export its religious vision. While putting Quranic
commentaries and other religious texts online might on one hand in theory add an
important resource to those engaged in the study of Shi’ism, on the other it may signal
greater aggressiveness in Iranian efforts to fulfill its constitutional imperative to
export revolution. After all, Morocco has now twice broken diplomatic relations with
Iran in part because of Iranian efforts to proselytize Shi’ism among its population.
Often, this proselytization occurs online as a mechanism to avoid ordinary security.
Indeed, online proselytization can be an effective tool. Both Al Qaeda and ISIS
attracted an international array of recruits and encouraged lone wolf attacks based
on magazines and texts placed online. Shi’ism, of course, does not necessarily equate
with extremism—indeed, theological and historically, it is anything but extreme—but
if the Iranian government decides to increase its online presence under the guide of
religious education, it efforts would likely tend toward promotion of extremism. End
OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The use of cyberspace for
dissemination of the Quran should be
maximized.”
Source: “Quran dar Fezayi Mojazi ra Jedi Begerim
(We Must Take Seriously the Quran in Cyberspace),”
Islamic Consultative Assembly News Agency, 14 June
2018. https://goo.gl/1y76uh
The minister of culture and Islamic guidance, with
emphasis on getting the Quran into cyberspace, said,
the Quran must emerge and appear in this space, and
the use of cyberspace for the publication of Quranic
texts and commentaries should be maximized. Sayyid
Abbas Salehi pointed out the importance of new
communication technologies and social networks on
one hand and, on the other, the importance of the
Quran in cyberspace, and remarked, “This space
has become a reality in our lives today and therefore,
Quranic topics and issues should be seen more
deeply in the digital space….”
A member of the Supreme Council of the Cultural
Revolution, [Salehi] said: “We believe that the use
and enjoyment of digital and virtual space will be a
positive step towards utilizing the potential of this
area in promoting the dissemination of Quranic and
religious teachings.
OE Watch | July 2018

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Cracks Down on Internet Café VPNs
OE Watch Commentary: In the wake of recent and continuing labor unrest
and political protest in Iran, the Iranian government has engaged in a widespread
debate about how to control cyberspace. While Iranian security forces and the
Intelligence Ministry have moved to ban social media applications like Telegram
and the regime has restarted a broader debate about creation of a national
intranet, there has been comparatively little focus on how the public accesses the
internet.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has long officially banned virtual private
networks (VPNs) but, just as with the prohibition on satellite television receiver
dishes, Iranians widely ignored such prohibitions. This flouting of the law
extends to the managers of Iran’s internet cafes. The accompanying excerpted
article from a news agency affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps reports that Iran’s national police force has begun to counter this with a
crackdown on internet cafes using VPNs.
Such an action against utilizing VPNs, if obeyed and successful, will close an
important loophole that enabled Iranians to browse the internet anonymously
and communicate and coordinate with each other through anonymous email
accounts. After all, while Iran hosts a number of private and semi-private
internet service providers, because all must be licensed through the government,
there is widespread suspicion about their use on politically sensitive issues. That
dial-up service is still common among these ISPs also drives many Iranians to
utilize internet cafes, if only to take advantage of faster and more reliable service.
Some believe that inspections and raids on internet cafes may help the regime
control and guard against anti-regime communications, but it may prove to be
a Pyrrhic victory if the antagonism such a policy and raids drives the Iranian
public further away from the regime. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The chief of the Law Enforcement Forces
has announced a ban on the use of VPNs and
filterers at Internet cafes.”
Source: “Barkhorad-e Entezami ba Kafe-netha-ye
Istifandeh Konandeh az Filtirshokan (Police Crackdown
on Internet Cafes Using VPNs),” Tasnim News Agency,
20 May 2018. https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/
news/1397/02/30/1730491
The chairman of the Computer Technology Union of
Tehran, with reference to the growing use of VPNs in the
country, said, “The head of the Law Enforcement Forces
has given police chiefs urgent new regulations” Mehdi
Mirmehdi, in a conversation with a correspondent from
the International Technology Journalists’ Club, pointed to
the heightened use of VPNs these days, and said the new
chief of the Law Enforcement Forces has announced a ban
on the use of VPNs and filterers at Internet cafes during a
speech to the Computer Technology Union of Tehran and
said we have provided the regulations to these business
units. The chairman of the Computer Technology Union
of Tehran added, “Certainly, such rules and regulations
existed before this year, but I supposed that with the
increased use of VPNs and because of the obstruction of
foreign messengers [Telegram], these regulations have
been conveyed emphatically. He emphasized that the Law
Enforcement Forces are the only institution that can act
without a warrant, and said, “Therefore, all classes should
be bound to comply with the notification rules of this
institution so that they do not encounter legal proceedings
in the face of inspections.”

An Internet café in Tehran.

Source: Farhang News, http://www.farhangnews.ir/sites/default/files/content/images/story/94-06/15/farhangnews_144429-415993-1441533273.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Role in Turkish-Saudi Relations
OE Watch Commentary: The regional rivalry between Saudi
Arabia and Iran affects how these countries interact with Turkey.
The way the Saudi media portrays Turkey and the way Turkish
media portrays Saudi Arabia does not depict friendly relations.
The accompanying excerpted article, from the pro-government
Turkish daily Yeni Safak and written by the deputy chairman
of the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP), argues
that Iran is the determining factor in the evolution of Turkey’s
relations with Saudi Arabia.

“Turkey will never support Iran against Saudi Arabia,
but it will never deem Iran as an enemy either.”

According to the author, Turkey’s relations with Iran affects its
relations with Saudi Arabia because Saudi Arabia perceives Iran
as a direct threat on many fronts, such as Yemen, Lebanon, Syria,
and Iraq. Anytime Turkey provides support to Iran, as it did with
regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on
Iran’s nuclear program, Saudi Arabia becomes anxious. However,
the author argues that Saudi Arabia’s anxiety originates from a
misunderstanding about Turkey’s attitude; that is, “Turkey will
never support Iran against Saudi Arabia, but it will never deem
Iran as an enemy either.”
The author further argues that Iran’s threats to Saudi Arabia
also disturb Turkey, as it strongly opposes the sectarian
and expansionist policies of Iran in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen.
Therefore, Turkey stands closer to Saudi Arabia than Iran since
it perceives Iran’s sectarian threat toward Saudi Arabia as a
threat to its own security. Having said that, Turkey’s support of
Iran’s nuclear program was based on the principle that everyone,
even Iran, reserves a right to peaceful nuclear energy. Turkey’s
objective seems to be to solve a dispute without taking sides and
to prevent carrying the dispute to the level of hostility. End OE
Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani Welcomes Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Source: By Spc. Rick Rzepka [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:101st%2BAirborne%2BDivision%2BIron%2BHammer.jpg.

Source: Yasin Aktay, “Iranian factor in Turkey and Saudi Arabia relations,” Yeni Safak, 28 May 2018. https://www.yenisafak.com/yazarlar/
yasinaktay/turkiye-ve-suudi-arabistan-iliskilerinde-iran-faktoru-2045834
One of the most important subjects determining Turkey- Saudi Arabia relations is Iran. Turkey’s relations with Iran, in a way, have an effect
on its relations with Saudi Arabia. This is because Iran is a direct threat to Saudi Arabia, and it confronts Iran on many fronts. Saudi Arabia
fights alongside the coalition that it has formed against the Houthis who are supported by Iran in Yemen. It perceives an Iranian threat in
Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and most importantly on its own borders.
The Saudis get anxious about Turkey’s support for Iran, especially with regard to the nuclear energy program in the UN Security Council
and most recently against the withdrawal of the U.S. from the agreement. However, this anxiety originates from a misunderstanding about
Turkey’s attitude. Turkey will never support Iran against Saudi Arabia, but it will never deem Iran as an enemy either.
…Iran’s activities threatening Saudi Arabia also disturb Turkey and… Turkey certainly stands closer to Saudi Arabia. It strongly opposes
the sectarian and expansionist policies implemented by Iran in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen, and it is especially anxious about these policies.
Specifically, it will not refrain from perceiving Iran’s sectarian threat toward Saudi Arabia as a threat toward itself.
On the other hand, Turkey’s support of Iran’s nuclear program does not mean that it is embracing Iran’s activities and mistakes in other
areas. Turkey bases its support completely on principal that everyone, even Iran, has the right to peaceful nuclear energy. However, no one…
has the right to a nuclear weapons program.
…Why do the powers that stay silent to the nuclear weapons of Israel oppose the peaceful nuclear weapons of Iran? The goal is to articulate
this question…The goal of course cannot be taking the side of Iran against Saudi Arabia…With this stance, Turkey both gave a strong message
that we can solve our own problems within the regions and expressed that we can very well practice our own independent policies...In this
way, a method has been found to solve a dispute without taking sides and to prevent the dispute from reaching the level of hostility.

OE Watch | July 2018

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran to Attend Russian Military Trade Show
OE Watch Commentary: With a number of sanctions lifted by the 2015 Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the corollary UN Security Council Resolution
2231, Iran began to openly consider upgrading its military with foreign weapons
purchases, especially from Russia and China (see, for example, “Iran-China Air Force
Cooperation on Horizon?” OE Watch, December 2015; “Iran Purchases AK-103s from
Russia,” OE Watch, October 2016; “Iran: New Amphibious Aircraft,” OE Watch, January
2018). The end of many US sanctions waivers has undercut commercial investment in Iran,
but it does not seem to have tempered the Iranian government’s enthusiasm to augment
its capabilities with purchases abroad. In the accompanying excerpted article, the Iranian
military announces that it will send representatives to Army-2018, one of Russia’s largest
military equipment exercises and trade shows (see: http://www.rusarmyexpo.com/).
Attendance, of course, does not necessarily lead to a purchase. Iranian participation,
however, may indicate that frequent Iranian government rhetoric about the capabilities of
its indigenous military industry is exaggerated and that it is not going to let the Islamic
Republic’s growing economic difficulties undermine budgetary support for the military.
Simply put, if authorities in Tehran are forced to choose between supporting the military
and improving the lives of ordinary Iranian civilians, they will choose the former. That the
Islamic Republic talks about participation in Army-2018 over Max Aerospace, an Indian
military exhibition, also illustrates that close economic ties between Tehran and New Delhi
will not be enough to push the Islamic Republic out of Russia’s geopolitical orbit. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“(This event) will have 1,200 military
and civilian organizations present.”
Source: “Amadegi Iran baraye Hazur dar
Festival-e Bozorg-e Nizami Rusiyeh (Iran Ready
to Attend Russia’s Grand Military Festival),”
Fars News Agency, 20 May 2018. https://goo.gl/
sGTvxd
The Fourth Grand Exhibition of Russian
military technology, “Army[-2018]” under
the slogan “Product Life Cycle,” will be
held this summer in Kubinka, to the west
of Moscow. This event, which is in fact
considered the main competitor and main
rival and future replacement for the “Max”
aerospace exhibition, will be held in an area
of 500 thousand square meters and will have
1200 companies, institutes and military and
civilian organizations and Russian technology
companies present.

Iranian Trade with Iraq Hits $10 billion
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s border with Iraq is the country’s largest and, in the
wake of Saddam Hussein’s ouster, the Iranian government has quickly increased its
trade and investment with Iraq. In the accompanying excerpted article from Pars Today,
the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting’s rebranded world service, the Iranian
ambassador in Baghdad says that bilateral trade has reached $10 billion. He also said
that gas and electricity are the two most important elements of bilateral cooperation.
While Iran-Iraq trade has skyrocketed, the ambassador’s remarks also illustrate the
growing divergence between Iranian attitudes toward trade with Iraq, and much more
reticent Iraqi attitudes toward trade with Iran. While Iraqis—especially in Najaf and
Karbala—appreciate the benefits of Iranian religious tourism to Iraq’s Shi’ite shrines
and Iraqi governors say they have made up their electricity shortfall with purchases
from Iran, ordinary Iraqis increasingly resent the dumping of cheap and often inferior
Iranian goods into the Iraqi market. Fifteen years after Saddam Hussein’s ouster, many
Iraqi businessmen accuse Iranian economic policies of undercutting Iraq’s full recovery.
That said, Ambassador Masjedi’s mention about Iran’s greater role than the United
States in defeating ISIS voices a constant theme of Iranian propaganda and reinforces a
perception which remains widespread in Iraq. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Iraj Masjedi, Iranian Ambassador to Iraq, speaks to a crowd at the Iranian embassy in Baghdad.
Source: Islamic Republic News Agency, http://img8.irna.ir/1397/13970324/82942854/n82942854-72388178.jpg.

“The value of Iran-Iraq trade has
already reached $10 billion.”
Source: “Safir-e Iran dar Baghdad: Arzesh-e
Mobadelat-e tejari Iran va Iraq beh 10 milliard dolar
rasideh ast (The Iranian Ambassador in Baghdad:
The Value of Trade Exchanges between Iran and
Iraq are $10 billion),” Pars Today, 14 June 2018.
http://parstoday.com/dari/news/iran-i77282
The ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to Baghdad on Thursday evening said, “The value
of Iran-Iraq trade has already reached $10 billion
per year.” Iraj Masjedi added that this figure was
relatively acceptable, but given the great cultural,
historical and political shared between the two
nations, it must increase. The ambassador of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in Iraq, also emphasizing
that Iran and Iraq are brothers and friends. He
noted that the Islamic Republic of Iran will always
[stand] alongside Iraq. Masjidi stipulated that Iran,
as it stood by Iraq during its war on terror, in the
era of reconstruction, will also stand alongside the
Iraqi government and nation in all cultural, social
and economic fields.[He added] “The Islamic State
terrorist group which committed many crimes
beginning in 2014 with the financial and military
support of the United States and Arab states like
Saudi Arabia, invaded large parts of northern and
western Iraq and carried out countless crimes.
Following this, Iraq urged Iran to help Baghdad
fight the terrorists.”
OE Watch | July 2018

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Who Took $30 Billion out of Iran?
OE Watch Commentary: In the course of a May parliamentary debate in Iran,
Mohammad Reza Pour-Ebrahimi, chairman of the parliament’s economic affairs
committee and a politician affiliated with the Islamic Republic’s reformist camp,
revealed that $30 billion left Iran in the first couple months of the 2018 calendar
year. The accompanying excerpted article addresses the various theories as to
what has caused this capital flight. The chief of Iran’s chamber of commerce
sought to downplay the statistic, and suggested that it represented money spent
by Iranians going on tours abroad. While Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei
has subsequently urged Iranians not to travel abroad but instead take their
vacations inside Iran, however, the money flight as tourism theory is credible
from a certain perspective. While many Iranians do travel to Dubai or Istanbul
for shopping, the $30 billion number spent in just a few months is far greater
than what Iranian statistics say they spend abroad in a year. For comparison,
the number is also greater than the official defense budget. Meanwhile, Iranian
economist Haydar Hosseini said in an interview published in the Iran Labor
News Agency, that Iranians transferred $27 billion abroad in 2017.
In addition to this, government spokesman Mohammad Baqer Nobakht
suggested that the $30 billion sum represented real estate investment abroad.
If that were true, and it may be, then Iranian officials are either trying to evade
sanctions through front companies or simply stashing money abroad so that it
remains accessible to them even if the regime falters. Indeed, the transfers seem
to coincide with the outbreak of widespread political protest in Iran.
It is well known that opaque and autocratic regimes often embezzle, and
corruption is rife. But, to move so much money so quickly suggests panic may
now be supplanting greed as Iranian security forces have failed to smother
protests and instead seem to be playing “whack-a-mole.” Even regime loyalists
recognize with nationwide protests erupting in 1999, 2001, 2009, and now 20172018, that unrest is happening with greater frequency and the embers of internal
opposition are becoming increasingly difficult to smother. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“How could an amount approximately equal
to the annual oil revenue be taken outside the
country in ‘two or three’ months?”
Source: “Cheh Kasani 30 miliard dolar sarmayeh ra az
Keshvar Kharej Kardand? (Who Took $30 Billion out
of the Country?),” Saham News, 24 May 2018. http://
sahamnews.org/2018/05/310424/
“A sum of $30 billion was taken out of Iran in the last two
or three months of the previous year [roughly January
1-March 20, 2018]. This controversial sentence was
uttered by Mohammad Reza Pur-Ebrahimi, head of the
Majles Economic Affairs Committee…Some individuals’
interpretation was that he was referring to dollars
taken outside the country by travelers. But this claim
is inconsistent with Iran’s won statistical calculations.
Because the amount taken outside the country in a year
is much less than this figure, how could an amount
approximately equal to the annual oil revenue be taken
outside the country in “two or three” months?
Government Spokesman Mohammad Baqer Nobakht
is of the opinion that these sums were spent on buying
properties outside the country. Of course, international
statistics also indicate that the amount of Iranians’
investment abroad has increased by two to five percent.
Majid Salimi, head of the Chamber of Commerce’s
Investment Committee, also said to Shahrvand that
such figures show escape of capital, because whenever
economic conditions worsen, some quickly take their
money outside Iran through exchange bureaus.

Mohammad Reza Pour-Ebrahimi, chairman of the Iranian parliament’s economic affairs committee.
Source: Azad News Agency, http://www.ana.ir/Media/Image/1394/09/16/635850808043562831.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Supreme Leader Discusses Missiles
OE Watch Commentary: A nuclear weapons program has three basic components:
fissile material acquisition, warhead design, and delivery systems. The 2015 Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was meant to prevent the former. International
Atomic Energy Agency reports, such as the 8 November 2011 Board of Governors
report (GOV/2011/65) and annex outlining the “Possible Military Dimensions” (PMD)
of Iran’s nuclear program, documented Iran’s warhead design work, as allegedly does
the nuclear archives exposed on 30 April 2018 by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu. Again, however, IAEA reports subsequent to the JCPOA suggest that the
Iranian suspension of their PMD activity continues. However, the Islamic Republic
continues to double down upon its development of ballistic missiles.
UN Security Council Resolution 2231, which folded elements of the JCPOA
into broader international formality, however, diluted precedent with regard to the
international approach toward Iran’s ballistic missiles. UN Security Council Resolution
1929 had stated that the Security Council “decides that Iran shall not undertake any
activity related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons,” thus making
irrelevant Iranian government excuses on dual use missiles. Annex B Paragraph 3 of
UNSCR 2231, however, “called upon [Iran] not to undertake any activity related to
ballistic missiles designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.” In practice,
Tehran interpreted this to mean that Iran could develop ballistic missiles so long as they
could conceivably serve a purpose other than simply carrying a nuclear warhead.
Much post-JCPOA diplomacy focuses on addressing Iran’s ballistic missile program.
The Iranian government, however, shows no inclination to halt its work. Indeed, since
the signing of the JCPOA, it has conducted more than two dozen ballistic missile
tests, including models capable of carrying a nuclear warhead. In the accompanying
excerpted speech, Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, reiterates the Iranian red line on any
diplomatic compromise which would rein in Iranian missile development. He infuses
Iran’s missile work both with national pride and also historical necessity based on Iran’s
experience during the Iran-Iraq War. Importantly, however, his speech appears as much
to quash internal dissent about the cost of Iran’s missile work as to engage in bluster
toward the West. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Missiles are a source of security and
they are a strong point.”
Source: “Biyanat dar Marasem Bist va Nahmin
Salgard Rahalet-e Imam Khomeini (Statement
on the 29th Anniversary of the Death of Imam
Khomeini),” Khamenei.ir, 4 June 2018. http://farsi.
khamenei.ir/speech-content?id=39796
Building various missiles and missile power is
a source of security in the country. Our youth do
not remember the day when Tehran was burning
under the fire of the enemy’s round-the-clock missile
strikes. The houses were collapsing and the people
were being killed and this was happening in Tehran,
let alone the cities which were involved in the war –
Dezful, Ahwaz, Shush and other cities. The enemy’s
missiles would even reach distant cities, but we
did not have any missiles and weapons to defend
ourselves. We had to just wait and watch! Today,
our youth have managed to become the first missile
power in the region! The enemy knows that if he
launches one, he will receive ten [audience chant
“Death to America, Death to Israel”]! So, missiles
are a source of security and they are a strong point.
Notice that the enemy has focused on the issue of
missiles and unfortunately, some people inside the
country are echoing his words, saying, “What is the
use of missiles?”

Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei speaks on the 29th Anniversary of Ayatollah Khomeini’s death.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://farsi.khamenei.ir/ndata/news/39792/C/13970314_12739792.jpg.

OE Watch | July 2018

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Defense and Aviation Industry Performance
Report of 2017
OE Watch Commentary: Since the July 2016 Coup attempt, Turkey has tried
to prove that its military still stands strong across all capacities. The defense
industry, with the support of the government, has displayed its products on
several high-profile occasions over the past several months. The Defense and
Aviation Industry Manufacturers Association released its 2017 annual sector
performance report in May 2018 and the information in it provides insight on how
the defense industry of Turkey is developing. Excerpts from the accompanying
24-page report reflect a statistical assessment of the Turkish defense industry’s
performance for 2017, compiled using datasets provided by members.

“The increase in the state support [for the
product and technology development] has
reached to a record level in the past year.”

The report is broken down into six major sections: turnover, exports, received
orders, imports, product, and technology development and employment.
According to the report, the industry had nearly $6.7 billion turnover with a 12
percent increase from last year. With nearly $2.4 billion in sales, the land vehicles
and systems had the biggest turnover. Military aviation products had $1.13 billion,
weapons, ammunition and missiles had $828 million, civil aviation products
had $650 million, naval products $569 million, military maintenance had $171
million, logistics had $134 million, and an undefined other category had $650
Source: Savunma ve Havacılık Sanayii Imalatçılar Derneği
million turnover in 2017.
(The Defense and Aviation Industry Manufacturers
Association), “Savunma ve Havacılık Sanayii Performans
Exports were $1.82 billion with a 6.6 percent decrease compared to 2016,
Raporu 2017, (Defense and Aviation Industry Performance
while $684 million worth of final products were sold to end users and the rest of
Report 2017),” sasad.org.tr, May 2018. http://www.sasad.
the intermediate products were sold to foreign companies. The figures from the
org.tr/uploaded/Sasad-Performans-Raporu-2017.pdf
report indicate that exports had been slowing down since 2014 as it highlights
that the industry has reached the phase of sustained growth. While the largest
The compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) in the period
exporters have been US and European companies, the report underscores the
of 2012-2017 is determined as 2.32%. This data was 12%
importance of increasing sales orders to the Middle East, the Central Asian
between 2011 and 2016.
Turkic republics and the South Asia-Pacific region.
The turnover was realized significantly above the previous
The industry increased the resources allocated to product and technology
development. Additionally, compared to previous years the government has
provided a record high amount of support. The report suggests that to minimize
reliance on foreign made products there is a need to focus on developing locally
made products. According to the report, the sector employed 44,740 people in
2017 with a 30 percent increase compared to 2016. The sector employed highly
skilled individuals and increasingly those who have had academic careers.
The industry received slightly over $8 billion worth of orders which were
32.39 percent less than 2016. Land vehicles and systems received the highest
numbers of orders with civil aviation products receiving the second highest.
The report states that there is a need for the industry to increase its orders.
Compared to the previous year, the imports were up by 20 percent with over
$1.54 billion. According to the report, the increase in imports comes from the
foreign-made components required for the increasing domestic production and
companies stocking up on more products in case of an embargo in the future.
Half of the industry’s imports are European and American products, showing
the Turkish defense industry’s reliance on foreign technology despite Turkey’s
national bravado. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

year. In a year when there has been a lag in the turnover
increase in the last 3 years and some economic troubles
have occurred, this development is regarded as very
positive in terms of sustainability of the industry.

A slight positive development (3.7%) is seen in the export
revenues of the year 2017 when compared with the data
of the previous year…[even though] export has decreased
by 6.62%. The weight of the exports is considered to be an
important development for the offshore market as well as
for the US and Europe…
There is a steady increase in the equity allocated to
product and technology development…The increase in the
state support has reached to a record level in the past year.
It is very important to ensure that sector players to keep up
with towards increasing equity allocations for product and
technology development…Data collected on employment
indicates that there is an increase of employment in the
industry compared to the previous year.

OE Watch | July 2018

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Troops Lay Siege on the Qandil Mountains
OE Watch Commentary: The Turkish Armed Forces have been quietly
putting up military outposts since March 2018 in mountainous areas near
the Qandil Mountains, where the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which
has been waging a war and conducting terrorist attacks against Turkey on
and off since 1984, has its headquarters. Recently, however, a day does not
go by without news or a statement from a government official regarding
a Turkish operation against the PKK’s stronghold in the mountains
ahead of the 24 June snap elections. The first accompanying excerpted
passage is by a Turkish columnist in Hurriyet, considered close to the
government, and the second one is written for Al-Monitor by a Kurdish
journalist based in the city of Diyarbakir, the largest Kurdish city
in Turkey. While the first accompanying passage tries to answer the
question of how the operation is taking place, the second one delves
into the timing of the operation and whether achieving a successful
outcome is feasible.
The Hurriyet passage differentiates this operation from the previous
ones because it argues that this time Turkey has a long-term action
plan of not only removing the PKK, but also establishing bases in
strategic locations in the Qandil Mountains. While the operation
started in March, the final blow is yet to come as Turkish forces
gradually progress into the heart of the mountain. The author quotes
Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, saying “[t]here will be
four-way cooperation between Turkey, the US, Baghdad, and Arbil”
to conduct this operation against the PKK. The operation will be
taken in the following stages: First, the pathways between Qandil and
Turkey will be severed by establishing bases in strategic locations.
Second, air strikes will target the PKK’s organizational infrastructure
by destroying its training camps, communication, headquarters,
ammunition depots, and shelters. Third, with the continuous support of
fighter jets and artillery fire, the ground offensive will take place.
According to the Al-Monitor passage, statements by government
officials “in the midst of a heated election campaign dominated by
nationalist bluster” raises questions over Ankara’s motive regarding
the operation. On 2 June Turkish Interior Minister Süleyman Soylu
revealed that the Turkish forces had advanced over 16 miles into
northern Iraq’s Qandil Mountains. The next day, while campaigning
in Diyarbakir, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan stated that “Qandil’s
turn is coming.” Government spokesperson Bekir Bozdağ said after a
Cabinet meeting “anything can happen anytime” signaling an operation
in Qandil.
Despite bold statements by Turkish officials, the author quotes the
former Turkish consul general in Arbil stating an operation on such a
scale “would be neither a realistic nor a rational objective in terms of
scope, topography and regional politics” as Turkey would also need
the consent of Bagdad, Arbil, and Tehran. The article notes if Turkey
still launches the operation, it will be the riskiest operation in its fight
against the PKK as the terrain favors the latter. Turkish control of “the
supply lines and infiltration routes of the PKK” will keep “the PKK
away from Turkish borders.” End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“After Qandil is cleared of the PKK…Temporary
bases will be established in Qandil so the PKK
cannot return… Qandil will no longer belong to
the PKK but will be a Turkish military base.”
Source: Abdulkadir Selvi, “A different concept will be applied
in Qandil,” Hurriyet, 7 June 2018. http://www.hurriyet.
com.tr/yazarlar/abdulkadir-selvi/kandile-farkli-bir-konseptuygulanacak-40860079
There have previously been other operations in Iraq’s Qandil
Mountains, the headquarters of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK)…However, this time…a long-term action plan is being
executed.
The Qandil operation started on March 10 from within our
borders. The passageways the PKK has used to sneak into Turkey
from Qandil, their bases, ammunition stores, and the areas in which
they have planted mines have all been cleared.
A total of 11 large-scale regional bases have been established…
This is just the groundwork. A big operation is being prepared…
The PKK has eight to 10 camps in Qandil…The region will be
struck by war planes for days and will be softened with artillery
fire, making it ready for the operation.
In his statement…Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu had
said “There will be four-way cooperation between Turkey, the U.S.,
Baghdad, and Arbil” against the PKK…
It is understood that a different dialogue is being maintained with
Iran. Because without cooperation with Iran, the Qandil operation
will be insufficient, as part of Qandil is on land that belongs to
Iran. PKK leaders Cemil Bayık and Murat Karayılan are said to be
utilizing sheltered areas on the Iranian side.
In the first stage, ties between Qandil and Turkey are being
severed.
…The PKK’s training quarters, communication, headquarters, and
ammunition depots, and shelters will be destroyed in air operations,
which will last for days. The organization’s infrastructure will be
destroyed.
…Following air operations, a ground offensive is expected to take
place, with the support of artillery fire. During the period of the
operation, war planes and artillery fires are expected to provide
continuous support to the ground units as needed.
After Qandil is cleared of the PKK…Temporary bases will be
established in Qandil so the PKK cannot return… Qandil will no
longer belong to the PKK but will be a Turkish military base…the
Turkish flag that will be planted in Qandil will continue to wave
there, just like in Syria’s Jarabulus, al-Bab, and Afrin.

(continued)
OE Watch | July 2018

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkish Troops Lay Siege on the Qandil
Mountains
“After Qandil is cleared of the PKK…Temporary bases will be established in Qandil so the PKK cannot
return… Qandil will no longer belong to the PKK but will be a Turkish military base.”
Source: Mahmut Bozarslan, “What’s behind Turkish threat to invade PKK stronghold in Iraq?,” Al-Monitor, 6 June 2018. https://www.almonitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/06/turkey-iraqi-kurdistan-is-qandil-objective-attainable.html
A flurry of statements by Turkish leaders in recent days have heralded a ground operation on the Qandil Mountains in northern Iraq, where
the leadership and major camps of the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) are based.
The warnings come amid heightened Turkish efforts to curb Kurdish militants, …in the midst of a heated election campaign dominated by
nationalist bluster, raising questions over Ankara’s motive.
Turkish Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu was the first to reveal June 2 that Turkish troops had penetrated 26-27 kilometers (some 16 miles)…
advancing toward Qandil. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said the following day during a campaign trip to Diyarbakir that “Qandil’s turn
is coming.” Government spokesman Bekir Bozdag followed up with remarks after a Cabinet meeting that “anything can happen anytime”
regarding Qandil…
Turkish commandos were inside northern Iraq, quietly putting up military outposts in the Sidekan area, north of Hakurk, which is adjacent
to Qandil and a major route for PKK infiltrations into Turkey. Ankara’s objectives, he wrote, were “to eliminate the PKK’s setup at Sidekan”
that allows infiltration into Turkey and “to ensure 24/7 domination” of the area through temporary military camps while opening a corridor to
Qandil…
The low-key advance proceeded amid official silence, though Turkey’s regular airstrikes in the region continued and reports appeared
occasionally in the media about a ground incursion…
According to PKK sources, the ground incursion began from the Hakurk and Bradost regions following airstrikes mid-December. On March
11, the PKK said the operation had entered a new phase, as the troops backed by artillery sought to seize control of the Bradost region…
Now, with the louder statements coming out of Ankara, the Turkish military appears to have set its sights on Qandil…But how realistic is the
prospect?
The first hurdle that comes to mind is the terrain. Qandil is a sprawling mountain range that abuts both the Turkish and Iranian borders
of Iraqi Kurdistan and abounds with deep ravines, cliffs and caves. Due to the formidable topography, coupled with regional political
constraints, “cleansing Qandil” has remained an elusive aim for successive Turkish governments, despite relentless air raids on PKK hideouts
in the area…
“This, I think, would be neither a realistic nor a rational objective in terms of scope, topography and regional politics,” he said. “I don’t
believe an operation on such a scale could be launched and conducted without the consent of Baghdad and the support of Tehran and against
the will of Erbil and the KRG public.”

Qandil Mountain, Hajiawa, Kurdistan.

Source:By Wary Abdullah [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Qandil_mountain,_Hajiawa,_Kurdistan-_Iraq.jpg

OE Watch | July 2018

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish-Greek Bilateral Migrant Readmission
Agreement Suspended
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 June Turkish Foreign
Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu announced that Turkey has
suspended its bilateral migrant readmission agreement
with Greece after a Greek court released eight former
Turkish soldiers who fled to Greece a day after
the coup attempt on 15 July 2016. This agreement
provided the legal backbone of the migrant agreement
which was signed on 18 March 2016 between Turkey
and the European Union (EU) to curtail the flow of
irregular migration from Turkey to Greek islands.
The agreement has significantly decreased the
irregular migration from Turkey to the EU despite
tense Turkish-Greek relations. The accompanying
excerpted article from Turkey’s English-language
Hurriyet Daily News describes what has led to
suspending this bilateral agreement.
The author argues that looking at this from the
Turkish perspective, a remark made “by Greek
Defense Minister Panos Kammenos on June 6 seems
to have been the straw that broke the camel’s back.”
In response to the Turkish government spokesperson
Bekir Bozdağ’s statement that said Turkey would
“track down and bring back” the eight fugitive
soldiers, Kammenos stated “he would bring the issue
up during a NATO meeting.” Greece has refused
to extradite these eight soldiers to Turkey because
it believes “they would not receive a fair trial under
the state of emergency” that continues in Turkey.
Two Greek soldiers jailed in Turkey since March
of this year face espionage charges. Perhaps most
importantly, the author states that Kammenos has
also resurfaced the issue of the uninhabited Aegean
islets of Kardak/Imia, which brought the two NATO
allies to the brink of a war in 1996. End OE Watch
Commentary (Gunduz)

“…Turkish government spokesman Bekir Bozdağ… Turkey would
eventually ‘track down and bring back’ eight fugitive soldiers
suspected in the coup attempt who were set free by Greece…”
Source: Murat Yetkin, “Have we seen this Turkish-Greek movie before?,” Hurriyet
Daily News, 8 June 2018. http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/opinion/murat-yetkin/
have-we-seen-this-turkish-greek-movie-before-132972
Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu announced that Turkey had suspended the
bilateral re-admission agreement with Greece for the control of illegal migration…
…thanks to [the agreement] the level of irregular migration from Turkey to
European Union countries had dropped considerably despite growing problems
between the two sides.
But when looked at from the Turkish side of the Aegean, a remark by Greek Defense
Minister Panos Kammenos on June 6 seems to have been the straw that broke the
camel’s back. In reply to a statement from Turkish government spokesman Bekir
Bozdağ that Turkey would eventually “track down and bring back” eight fugitive
soldiers suspected in the coup attempt who were set free by Greece, Kammenos said
he would bring the issue up during a NATO meeting. The soldiers had fled to Greece
in a Turkish army helicopter in the early hours of July 16, 2016 after it had become
clear that the military coup attempt launched on the night of July 15 was failing.
…Greece has declined to extradite the soldiers to Turkey, saying they would not
receive a fair trial under the state of emergency declared after the coup attempt. This
is despite Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’ words to President Tayyip Erdoğan
last year in Athens that Greece would not tolerate coup plotters.
…There are also two Greek soldiers jailed in Turkey after crossing the joint border
and indicted on espionage charges.
…Kammenos has repeatedly brought up the issue of the uninhabited Kardak/Imia
islets in the Aegean Sea, very close to the Turkish mainland, which brought the two
NATO members to the brink of a war in early 1996.
…Migration from the Middle East to EU countries had dropped quickly due to
measures implemented due to the cooperation between Turkey and Greece.

Map with Greece and Turkey Highlighted.

Source: Marmelad [CC BY-SA 2.5 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Greece_Turkey_Locator.svg.

OE Watch | July 2018

50

AFRICA
The Pan-African Dream…Open Borders; the Reality…
Increasing Border Disputes
OE Watch Commentary: It is not that Africa wants closed
borders. Indeed, as the accompanying article from the South
African Institute for Security Studies explains, there is a big
push for open borders in order to promote the free movement
of people, goods and services. There is even a day set aside
– African Border Day – to inspire members of the African
Union (AU) to step up implementation of both the AU
Border Programme and the AU Convention on Cross-Border
Cooperation, often referred to as the Niamey Convention.
Additional measures, such as the Protocol on the Free
Movement of Persons and the African Continental Free Trade
Agreement have followed. However, wanting open borders is
proving to be not always enough to overcome the difficulties
in implementing them.
When the continent’s countries started to gain
independence from their colonial rulers, the African Union’s
forerunner, the Organization of African Unity, declared that One of the tasks of the Marine Regiment of the Rwanda Defense Forces, pictured here on Lake
Kivu, is patrolling the Rwanda/Democratic Republic of the Congo border.
even though boundaries had been drawn by Europeans with
Source: By Ingoman (James Dahl) [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somalia_map_states_regions_districts.png.
little regard to economic, political or geographic factors,
they should remain in order to avoid violent border disputes. Despite that well-intentioned effort, border disputes have proliferated. Helping to
fuel those disputes is the fact that demarcation of Africa’s 83,000 km of land borders was supposed to be finalized by 2017, but is presently only
about a third completed. It now appears the job will more likely be finished in 2022, adding several more years of uncertainty regarding the
exact location of borders in multiple regions.
Ironically, although the call is for more open borders, in many places the borders are too porous, leading to a number of problems. It is
often said that for many African governments their reach does not extend beyond the cities, and thus borders which are in the hinterlands are
not secure. The AU Border Programme is designed in part to help member nations address the security issues associated with these overly
open borders, because, as noted in the article, these areas become a haven for organized crime and terrorist groups. There are numerous other
problems associated with open borders. They tend to be the location of natural disasters and often either depleted resources or the presence of
valuable ones. Coordination and cooperation between African governments has proven to be difficult.
Overall the idea of forming a seamless continent appeals to many in Africa. There have been setbacks, including the birth of a new nation,
South Sudan, as well as a number of disputed borders. There are also obstacles, including those with vested interests in keeping the borders
as they were originally drawn, but many continue to push hard for a new Africa. The AU’s Agenda 2063 plan, formulated in 2013, calls for a
united Africa by 2063, leaving 45 years from now for the continent to fulfill the pan-African dream. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Nevertheless border disputes have proliferated, and the ambitious programme of demarcating boundaries
seems never-ending.”
Source: Peter Fabricius, “Can Africa’s borders really become bridges?” Institute for Security Studies, 7 June 2018. https://issafrica.org/isstoday/can-africas-borders-really-become-bridges
Another way of looking at the patchy support for the protocol could be that a country like South Africa, especially, which is already a major
recipient of economic migrants from the rest of the continent, is the most wary about throwing open its borders even wider.
Nevertheless border disputes have proliferated, and the ambitious programme of demarcating boundaries seems never-ending. Originally the
deadline for finalising such demarcation was set at 2017, but in 2016 the AU extended it to 2022.
[The AU’s Commissioner for Peace and Security Smaïl] Chergui said last year that border disputes had increased mainly because of the
discovery of natural resources straddling both land and sea borders. He said the increase in disputes could be measured by the corresponding
use of international courts and tribunals to settle these differences.

OE Watch | July 2018

51

AFRICA
Ethiopia Finally Accepts Border Demarcation, But Will a
Strong Peace with Eritrea Follow?
OE Watch Commentary: When the EritreanEthiopian War ended in 2000 after two years of
fighting, there were hopes that a lasting peace
could be found between these countries (two of the
world’s poorest) after suffering tens of thousands
of casualties and spending hundreds of millions
of dollars on the conflict. The Algiers Agreement,
which ended this costly war, included among its
provisions that a commission would make the final
decision regarding their border. Both countries
agreed to accept this demarcation decision as
binding. Ethiopia was unhappy though, when the
town of Badme was awarded to Eritrea, and as a
result was unwilling to fully implement the Algiers
Agreement; that is, as noted in the accompanying
excerpted article from the Ethiopian Herald
newspaper, until now.
The Algiers Agreement, signed in 2000, led to the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea being demarcated.

Source: Skilla1st/modified , https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eritrean–Ethiopian_War_Map_1998.png, CC BY-SA 3.0.
Such a move by Ethiopia’s Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed Ali is being welcomed by many within the country as well as the international community. Since Ali (a former army officer)
assumed office just a few months ago, he has implemented several other initiatives, including releasing thousands of political prisoners, holding
reconciliation talks with the opposition, and lifting the nation’s state of emergency, that as the accompanying article relates, is shaking up the
country’s political landscape.

Ethiopia must now withdraw from Badme, but as one analyst said, it was not just border issues that led to war with Eritrea, there were also
historical, economic and regional military interests. Thus, while considered a positive step, it is uncertain that lasting peace will be achieved
by the Ethiopian Prime Minister. One factor greatly complicating the situation is Eritrea’s President, Isaias Afwerk, whose repression has
been noted as so severe that the country has earned the moniker “Africa’s North Korea.” Although Eritrea uses its longstanding adversarial
relationship with Ethiopia to help justify its repression in the name of security, Ethiopia relinquishing Badme is not certain to result in Eritrean
regime change. Thus, while Ethiopia is moving forward on many fronts with reforms, its necessary partner in this situation remains at odds.
At the time this commentary was written, Eritrea had still not responded to Ethiopia’s outstretched hand. However, there is, as the article
points out, hope, or at least incentives. Both nations could eventually benefit from an agreement, and not just from a reduction in military
spending. Back when Ethiopia and Eritrea were united as a federation, landlocked Ethiopia used Eritrean ports, and while Ethiopia has found
ports in other countries to use since the federation dissolved, Eritrean ones would be particularly convenient for some Ethiopian exports and
imports.
The expectation is that there will be discussions between the countries before full implementation of the Algiers Agreement would occur.
Eritrea, in having Badme returned, would be seen as an early winner in the process, but Afwerk, who is starting to see cracks in the hold he
has on his country as young people recently and bravely began to protest, is still viewed as a wildcard. His regime survived in part because he
painted Ethiopia as unwilling to make peace, but that unwillingness no longer appears to be the case. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“But the readiness of the Ethiopian government alone is not sufficient for the successful implementation of
the peace accord. In addition, the basic causes of war are still unsolved.”
Source: Tsegaye Talahun and Haftu Gebrezgabiher, “Ethiopia’s Call for Implementation of the Algier’s Agreement,” The Ethiopian Herald,
7 June 2018. http://www.ethpress.gov.et/herald/index.php/news/national-news/item/12048-ethiopia-s-call-for-implementation-of-algiersagreement
But the readiness of the Ethiopian government alone is not sufficient for the successful implementation of the peace Accord. In addition, the
basic causes of war are still unsolved. There are basic practical challenges to implement the agreement.
“Hence, the Eritrean government wants to use the conflict as a survival strategy. Giving away Badime (the disputed area) would not change
the behavior of the Asmara region.
By its nature [the] Eritrean government is not ready to accept Ethiopia’s call as it does not want to see a strong state in the region, Bekele [a
lecturer at Addis Ababa University] notes.
OE Watch | July 2018

52

AFRICA
Ethnic Conflict and Self-Defense in Mali
OE Watch Commentary: In the accompanying excerpted
article, the French-language Mondafrique published an interview
of a Fulani (Peul) militant leader in Mali on 30 May, which
highlights how the brewing conflict in central Mali is unique
because members of ethnic Fulani militias have allied with
jihadists in Mali to fight against rival ethnic Dogon communities.
The Fulani militia leader who uses the alias Bacar Sow and was
interviewed, however, has joined a new armed group called the
Alliance for Salvation in the Sahel (SSA). The SSA is essentially
a Fulani self-defense group that protects the Fulanis against rival
ethnic groups, including Dogons. However, the SSA vows to also
defend against any force, including the jihadists, who seek to harm
any community in the region.
Bacar Sow is optimistic about the SSA and said he is one of its
financiers. Though the group has only 100 armed members, he
claims it can restore order in parts of central Mali where there is a
security vacuum. Nevertheless, there is a sectarian tone in Bacar
Sow’s responses to questions. For example, he says the Dogon
militia is the aggressor and is killing peaceful Fulanis and says the
Fulanis are caught in the middle between the Dogons on one side
and the jihadists on the other side who target the Fulanis for not
joining them. He argues that the Fulani are the main ethnic and
linguistic group in central Mali and that the other ethnic groups
in the area should follow Fulani cultural practices and that the
Fulanis have still been marginalized.
Bacar Sow argues for a development-based approach and
considers his militia to also be an advocate for better governance.
Indeed, he says the militia formed after receiving political support,
so the SSA can, in turn, use its influence to campaign for more
funding for schools, electricity and infrastructure in the region.
One of the key takeaways from the interview of Bacar Sow in
the article is that the SSA’s key challenge will be to live up to its
promise to represent all ethnic groups through its self-defense
activities and advocacy for development and not be seen as a
partisan pro-Fulani militia. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“We are not just a militia that is there to defend a
single community, a single locality or a single village;
our movement has broader ambitions.”
Source: “Mali, notre entretien avec un chef Peul armé (Mali, our
interview with an armed Peul leader),” Mondafrique, 30 May 2018.
https://mondafrique.com/mali-notre-entretien-avec-le-chef-peul-dunemilice-armee/
More than 700 km from Bamako, in central Mali, towards the Dogon
country in areas where state authority is almost absent, there have
deadly clashes between the Fulani and Dogon communities for months.
The Fulani are accused of joining the ranks of jihadists to fight against
the Dogon. This ethnic conflict of unprecedented violence has claimed
many lives. In this infernal climate of attacks and retaliation that could
shatter the long cohabitation between these two ethnic groups, a new
armed group, the Alliance for Salvation in the Sahel (SSA), announced
last week its formation and the start of operations in the area.
Its leader, Bacar Sow is a Fulani who presents himself as a financier.
He says, “At present, we are sufficiently ready in men and arms. We rose
up and started to act with the main goal of eliminating the dozo militia
that is killing peaceful citizens. We are a politico-military movement
that defends the Fulani and all the marginalized communities of central
and northeastern Mali. The Fulani are accused of being jihadists, projihadists or accomplices of jihadists, while they are victims of jihadists
as are other communities. The Dogons are for us are like brothers, but
we notice lately that there are people who take advantage of the Fulanis
and the other communities. So we rose up to secure our villages and our
property against any aggressor, be it the dozo militia or other forces that
want to attack our peaceful communities. We have a vision, a program
for the development of our localities, for solidarity, for education. But
first we must succeed in securing and eradicating impunity, anything
that can hinder our development. We see ourselves as neglected by the
central state, so it is our responsibility to truly create opportunities and
development initiatives.”

Armed Islamist fighters race near the Mauritania-Mali border on May 21st.

Source: Jemal Ould Mohamed Oumar, (CC BY 2.0), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Armed_Islamist_fighters_race_near_the_Mauritania-Mali_border_on_May_21st.jpg..

OE Watch | July 2018

53

AFRICA
Progress against al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb’s
Furqan Brigade
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 May the excerpted French
language article from maliactu.net discussed the UN Mission for
the Stabilisation of Mali’s (MINUSMA) successes against al-Qaeda
in the Islamic Maghreb’s (AQIM) Furqan Brigade. This brigade,
according to the article, mixes tactics of terrorism with criminal
activities and is highly active in central Mali. The article states,
however, the MINUSMA has gained momentum against the Furqan
brigade as a result of repelling a major attack on a MINUSMA base
and killing the brigade’s leader. The article says that the downturn
in the Furqan brigade’s activities has meant that the population
has less worries about the brigade carrying out beheadings and
disturbing communities.
Separately, the article notes that AQIM is experiencing internal
tensions. Some of its members have defected, while other
commanders have begun to fight among themselves. Some members
have, according to the article, denounced the jihadist leader Ag
Ghaly. The article also notes that French airstrikes have weakened
the Furqan brigade. The result is that Timbuktu is no longer able
to serve as a local base for the jihadists in the region. Nevertheless,
banditry and other forms of criminality persist.
It is certainly too early to consider the end to the insurgency in
Mali imminent, especially given the rise of various ethnic-based
militias and self-defense groups in the country that are armed, and
often violent. However, if this article is any indication, AQIM’s
Mali-based operation, the Furqan brigade, is likely to see more
retraction and less expansion in the near future. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“In Timbuktu, it is already said that AQIM is plagued
by betrayals of its own members, giving rise to internal
squabbles.”
Source: Terrorisme au Nord Mali: AQMI chercherait-il à cacher la mort
d’un de ses chefs (Terrorism in the North Mali: AQIM seeks to hide
the death of one of its leaders),” maliactu.nnet, 28 May 2018. http://
maliactu.net/terrorisme-au-nord-mali-aqmi-chercherait-il-a-cacher-lamort-dun-de-ses-chefs/
Since the failure of the attack on the Timbuktu MINUSMA Platform,
al-Furqan seems particularly weakened. For several weeks, the region
of Timbuktu has no news of Mohamed Ould Salem Mohamed, alias
Talha al-Liby, who is of Mauritanian origin and head of the criminal
group al-Furqan. In the region, you will not find anyone to worry about
his fate. You will meet rather a population which feels relieved by this
disappearance and which feels that it will soon be able to start living
normally again. Thus, the dark years, the death sentences pronounced
by the Judges of AQIM, those of cruelty, beheadings and community
persecution seem to be behind us. In Timbuktu, it is already said
that AQIM is plagued by betrayals of its own members, giving rise to
internal squabbles. With the progressive dismantling of al-Furqan, it
is the local base of AQIM in the region of Timbuktu that is affected,
that is to say the system of religious radicalism steeped in banditry is
gradually falling apart.

Mauritanian troops are on guard after accounts of al-Qaeda movement along the Mali-Mauritania border region.
Source: Magharebia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mauritanian_troops-Mali-Mauritania_border-2010.jpg, (CC BY-SA 2.0).

OE Watch | July 2018

54

AFRICA
A New Threat in Mozambique
OE Watch Commentary: In late May, 10 people were reportedly
killed and beheaded in an attack in northern Mozambique, including
a village chief who had reported to the police about a group called
al-Shabab that had been hiding out in the area. Several days later this
group released a photo online with an Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) flag. According to the excerpted article in the Portugueselanguage source Verdade from 23 May, the Mozambican government is
trying to better understand what was driving this most recent attack and
an earlier one in October 2017 by the same group.
One Mozambican expert has found that the group has a military wing
that trained in Congo, Tanzania, Kenya and Somalia, although it is still
a separate group, albeit with the same name, from al-Shabab in Somalia
(“al-Shabab” means “the youth” in Arabic).
The group, according to the article, formed several years ago and was
called Ahlu Sunnah Wa-Jamma, but created the military wing named
al-Shabab only in 2015 after the group came into conflict with local
leaders over differing interpretations of Islam. The group also refuses to
speak with local government officials and does not send their children to
public schools because they do not accord with the group’s interpretation
of Islam. They also tend to be unemployed, from lower social classes
and from the Kimwani ethnic group of northern Mozambique.
The assessment of a local religious leader is that the community from
which the Mozambican al-Shabab group hails has been marginalized
from government power and employment. As a result, this has led
youths to seek new dreams, a new family and a new brotherhood in
the al-Shabab group. Another hindrance to their upward mobility is
the traditional structures in which the elders hold the most important
positions and do not cede power for the youth voice.
Though the leadership of al-Shabab is opaque, the article says there
are around 1000 total people with direct or indirect links to the group,
that some fired customs officers and policemen have trained them, and
that they raise funds through smuggling. Evidently, this group is still
somewhat of a mystery, but it clearly retains the potential to carry out
more attacks. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Msumbiji Cabo Delgado.

Source: Kipala, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Msumbiji_Cabo_Delgado.PNG, CC-BY-2.0.

“They do not take their children to formal schools
because it is a sin, and they are armed with white
weapons to symbolize jihad. They do not accept
dialogue with local administrative structures. They
do not agree to dialogue with anyone.”

Source: “Al Shabaab moçambicano são jovens marginalizados que criam instabilidade para negócio ilícito de madeira, marfim e rubis
das suas lideranças (Al Shabaab are marginalized youths who create instability for the illicit trade in timber, ivory and rubies from their
leaders),” Verdade, 23 May 2018. http://www.verdade.co.mz/tema-de-fundo/35-themadefundo/65831-al-shabaab-mocambicano-sao-jovensmarginalizados-que-criam-instabilidade-para-negocio-ilicito-de-madeira-marfim-e-rubis-das-suas-liderancasThe youth movement that has been carrying out attacks on civilians and facing the Defense and Security Forces since October 2017 near
Palma in the province of Cabo Delgado, particularly in the district of Mocímboa da Praia, has contributed to the deaths of hundreds of
people, and is called al-Shabab. But Sheikh Saide Habibe, co-author of a study presented in Maputo, broke the confusion of “thinking that it
is an extension of Somalia’s radical group because the methods are similar.”
Academic João Pereira, another co-author, corroborated the government’s version of them being “terrorists” and revealed that the military
wing of the group was trained in the Congo, Tanzania, Kenya and Somalia and intends only to create “instability in the region to allow illicit
business in which its leaders are involved.”
They do not take their children to formal schools because it is a sin, and they are armed with white weapons to symbolize jihad. They do not
accept dialogue with local administrative structures. They do not agree to dialogue with anyone. For many of these young people the group
also represents an opportunity to challenge local authorities. The study found that the social base of the group “are young people socially
marginalized, without formal employment, without schooling, most of these young people are ethnic Kimwani. These young people start to feel
marginalized and seek to gain space, except that this space is occupied by traditional leaderships.”
The study, which did not present conclusions, determined that the money that funds this movement “comes mainly from two sources: illegal
activities (wood, charcoal, ivory, rubies) and there are also donations from outside and from inside.”
OE Watch | July 2018

55

AFRICA
Nigerian Military Accused of Harassing Human Rights
Accuser
OE Watch Commentary: Purely from the perspective of
capturing and holding land, the Nigerian military’s operation
against Boko Haram has been successful. It has managed to
recapture and hold vast swathes of territory that the terrorist
organization, beginning in July 2014, placed under its control.
However, as the accompanying excerpted articles relate, there
are accusations that during the process of wresting control of the
territory back from Boko Haram, the Nigerian military committed
numerous crimes against civilians living in those areas.
The accusations against the Nigerian military are detailed in a
report from Amnesty International titled, “They Betrayed Us.”
Rape, arbitrary detention, and torture are just some of the charges
leveled against the soldiers and the Civilian Joint Task Force
(a civilian militia that is closely allied with the military). The
military’s response to Amnesty’s release of this report, according
to the first article from the Nigerian paper Premium Times, has
reportedly been to deny the findings, smear Amnesty’s work, and
even try to intimidate the organization. Those tactics resulted in
Amnesty essentially claiming that rather than taking action on the
issues raised in the report, the Nigerian military instead is taking
actions against the organization. The organization went on to
say how it has not just been the Nigerian military who Amnesty
has accused of maltreatment of civilians; past reports have also
accused Boko Haram of horrific abuses.
Interestingly, as detailed in the second article from the Nigerian
newspaper Daily Trust, which was published shortly after
Amnesty International released their report, a communiqué from
the Second International Conference on Terrorism and Small
Arms Conflict in Nigeria argued that a special task force should
be established to respond to reports emanating from Amnesty
International, UNICEF, and their associates. It also argued
for withdrawal from the International Criminal Court (ICC),
essentially accusing the ICC of harassment and intimidation of
the military and thus preventing the military from successfully
defeating Boko Haram.
The Daily Trust article states how the Second International
Conference was organized by Global Amnesty Watch, though it is
not possible to discern much about this organization – whose name
is quite similar to that of Amnesty International – regarding the
basis for their perspectives. The Nigerian military stands accused
of systematic patterns of violence against a vulnerable civilian
population as well as harassing its accuser, Amnesty International.
However, as a communiqué from the military’s defenders point
out, Amnesty International is not the only organization to point a
finger at the military’s alleged atrocities, making for a defense that
appears to strengthen the case against the military, not weaken it.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“A recent report by the organization showed how
soldiers raped Boko Haram victims in displaced
persons camps. The military has denied the report as
false, just as it denied previous reports.”

Nigerian soldiers in the village of Zenam Kelouri, 2016.

Source: Nicolas Pinault/VOA, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nigerian_Army_Boko_Haram_demonstration.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Azeezat Adedigba, “Nigerian military’s threat, intimidation
won’t deter us – Amnesty International,” Premium Times, 8 June 2018.
https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/271477-nigerianmilitarys-threat-intimidation-wont-deter-us-amnesty-international.html
A recent report by the organization showed how soldiers raped Boko
Haram victims in displaced persons camps. The military has denied the
report as false, just as it denied previous reports.
“Rather than taking action to address the issues raised in this report,
like investigating countless allegations of rape and other war crimes, the
Nigerian military has fallen back on its usual hostile tactics of denials
and threats,” said Osai Ojigho, Director of Amnesty International
Nigeria.
Source: Clement A. Oloyede, “Nigeria Urged to Exit ICC,”
AllAfrica.com/Daily Trust, 30 May 2018. http://allafrica.com/
stories/201805300120.html
Nigeria has been advised to exit the International Criminal Court
(ICC) if it intends to successfully fight the war against terrorism. This
was contained in a communiqué at the end of the 2nd International
Conference on Terrorism and Small Arms Conflict in Nigeria organised
by the Global Amnesty Watch (GAW)…
In the communiqué signed by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee,
Mutiullah Olasupo, participants, including human rights lawyers and
experts on peace and conflicts, agreed that a special task team should
be set up to review and respond to any report emanating from Amnesty
International, UNICEF or their associates.

OE Watch | July 2018

56

AFRICA
Nigerian Army Confident in Returning IDPs Home
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 June the accompanying excerpted article in the
Nigerian publication Today quoted Nigeria’s Chief of Army staff, Tukar Buratai,
who announced that an operation to return internally displaced persons (IDPs) to
their hometowns in northern Borno State will continue. Buratai is from Borno State,
which has been hit hardest by the Boko Haram insurgency. This is notwithstanding
that insurgents in the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)-loyal faction of Boko
Haram are still active in parts of northern Borno State. According to Buratai,
to facilitate the return of the IDPs, engineers from the Nigerian army will help
civilians build their homes and clear mines from farms as well as provide security.
Among the challenges facing Buratai, according to the article, is that the rainy
season will soon be approaching and it will be more difficult to resettle people
back in their homes once it starts, because the crops they need to survive must be
planted before the rain comes. This is why he says fast execution is very important.
Separately, according to the article, Buratai has also been planning for the Nigerian
Army Day Celebration from 1-6 July. The celebration, which is intended to coincide
with the return of IDPs to their homes, will allow the Nigerian army display their
capabilities and new equipment. Because it is a trade fair, it will also allow different
weapons manufacturers from Nigeria and abroad to exhibit their products.
The article portrays Buratai as confident in both the military’s capabilities and
the likely success of returning the IDPs to their homes. With the rainy season soon
to come and Boko Haram still active, there will certainly be pressure on him to meet
the expectations he has set. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Let me state here that Operation Last Hold is primarily
aimed at relocating IDPs from their various camps to their
country home.”

Source: “How Bama IDPs will return home – Gov.
Shettima,” Today, 5 June 2018. https://www.today.ng/
news/nigeria/general-buratai-operation-hold-relocateidps-communities-119977
The Chief of Army Staff, Lt.-Gen. Tukur Buratai, has
restated that the ongoing “Operation Last Hold” in
Borno North and Lake Chad Basin is “primarily aimed
at relocating IDPs to their communities”. Buratai made
the remark when he inaugurated a 20-man committee
for the 2018 “Nigerian Army Day Celebration –
NADCEL” billed to be held between July 1 and July 6 in
Borno North. He said, “Let me state here that operation
last hold is primarily aimed at relocating IDPs from
their various camps to their country homes.
We want to quickly see that they re-establish their
lives again through the reconstruction of their homes
which the Nigerian army engineers will give them the
support. The rainy season is fast approaching and
the need for us to move quickly to resettle the people
back in their ancestral homes is very, very critical at
this point. Buratai said, “We are also going to display
our capabilities in terms of our equipment holding.”
He added that both local and international military
equipment manufacturers would exhibit their wares
during the celebration.

Senior Civil Affairs officer Dr. Opiyo Ododa hands a bag of salt to one of the residents at Siliga Amerikanka Camp for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), one of the
donations provided to families by Nigerian Formed Police Unit.
Source:AMISOM Public Information, “2014 04 food donation-9 (13714158224),” https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2014_04_food_donation-9_(13714158224).jpg, CC-BY-0.0.

OE Watch | July 2018

57

AFRICA
With More “Black Gold” in Gulf of Guinea, More Pirates
OE Watch Commentary: While most Americans are probably aware of piracy off Africa’s
east coast, especially after the movie Captain Phillips, as the accompanying article from the
South African website DefenceWeb details, piracy is growing significantly off Africa’s west
coast, with 97 incidents recorded in 2017, an uptick from the previous year. Additionally, there
was an increase in the number of kidnapped sailors held captive for longer than a day, with 90 in
2017 and 56 in 2016. Thus, the State of Maritime Piracy 2017 report issued by Oceans Beyond
Piracy (OBP), an organization that tracks piracy around the world, considers the Gulf of Guinea
to be a hotbed of pirate activity.
The 2017 tally of incidents, mostly involving tankers and bulk carriers, includes: one for
hijacking, seven for robbery, eight armed robbery, and 21 kidnappings. There were also 42 failed
attempts. There was only one incident where naval forces arrived in time to prevent the pirates
from getting away with goods or hostages. That can be attributed to the Nigerian navy, but
since Nigeria does not have laws specifically against piracy, the only charges that could be made
against the perpetrators were limited to related actions.
As in 2016, the vast majority of the attacks occurred off the Niger Delta, with none occurring
south of the Equator. Unfortunately, a new trend was noted in the 2017 attacks; some of the
attacks took place on ships anchored in ports along the coast. Perhaps partly in response to this,
Nigeria, Ghana, Togo and Benin established secure zones near major ports, which are clearly
demarcated areas where ships can safely anchor while waiting for a berth or to transfer cargo. In
Nigeria the military supplies the personnel and weapons for these zones, in Ghana the Ports and
Harbor Authority provides security patrols, and in both Benin and Togo their navies perform the
necessary patrols.
The $9.3 million these ports expended for additional security in 2017 is just a part of the
cost of West African piracy. OBP estimates the total cost of piracy for 2017 in that region to
be $818.1 million, including $367 million for contracted maritime security and $68 million for
naval activities. That is up from the total for 2016, which came in at $793.7 million. Although
this article does not describe the purported reasons for the increase in piracy, other publications
mention increased traffic in the Gulf of Guinea as one possible factor behind the rise. With
the price of crude oil, one of Nigeria’s main exports, going up, the pirates have an even greater
incentive to steal some of that black gold in the holds of ships off West Africa. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

Source: “Piracy off West Africa remains
high,” DefenceWeb, 30 May 2018.
http://www.defenceweb.co.za/index.
php?option=com_content&view=arti
cle&id=51866:piracy-off-west-africaremains-high&catid=108:maritimesecurity&Itemid=233
Piracy remains at elevated levels in West
African waters, with 97 incidents recorded
in 2017, including an increase in successful
kidnappings compared to the previous year.
Regional navies continued to enhance
their enforcement capabilities through
the acquisition of new naval assets, more
multinational exercises, and further
development of the Yaoundé Process-based
information sharing architecture. This
is reflected in an increase in the patrol
days recorded for regional navies and a
27 percent increased rate of responses to
attack incidents by maritime enforcement
agencies.
The Oceans Beyond Piracy report
comes as Nigerian pirates released 11
crewmembers who were taken hostage on
21 April off Port Harcourt. The crew of the
FWN Rapide were held for a month before
being released.

“Piracy remains at elevated levels in West African waters, with 97 incidents recorded in 2017, including
an increase in successful kidnappings compared to the previous year.”

A Montage of Somali pirates on the MV Faina off the east coast of Africa.

Source: Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Jason R. Zalasky, USN, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Somali_Pirates.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | July 2018

58

AFRICA
With Violent Protests Flaring, Can South Africa’s President
Stem the Economic Decline?
OE Watch Commentary: When Cyril Ramaphosa
became the President of South Africa on 15 February
2018, many had great hopes that he could turn the
economy around following the significant damage
the previous president, Jacob Zuma, had wrought with
economic policies and multiple corruption scandals.
Indeed, following Ramaphosa’s state of the nation
address, some speeches describing a “New Dawn,” and
a new budget, the markets rose and the people cheered.
However, as the accompanying article from the South
African media site The Conversation details, the initial
euphoria appears to be giving way to impatience. Many
longstanding grievances remain unaddressed, corruption
is still endemic, and basic services are still wanting.
Adding to the bad news, the real gross domestic product
for the country fell by 2.2 percent in the first quarter of
2018.

“The failure by the ANC government to deliver basic services
and endemic corruption is driving people to the streets.”

If there is one bright spot in the economy it is that
South African President Cyril Ramaphosa at a press conference.
Source: News Measurements/modified, https://www.flickr.com/photos/149338007@N03/40251635992/in/photolist-24jUa31, Public Domain.
the credit-rating agency Standard & Poor’s, which last
year downgraded the country’s sovereign rating to subinvestment grade, has, at least not yet, downgraded it any further this year. While it is good news that the country’s rating has not continued
to deteriorate, it is also an indication that not enough has been done to raise it from its low level. Ramaphosa has made big changes at several
government institutions, including police and prosecuting agencies, that were ravaged by the massive corruption and patronage occurring under
Zuma. He has also made changes at key state-owned enterprises, such as the power utility, Eskom, and the defense company, Denel. Thus, it
is clear he is trying to make a positive impact. However, as the article points out, he’s not undertaking the structural reforms that are really
necessary to stoke the economy.
An additional problem his administration seems unable to adequately tackle is unemployment, which officially stands at 26.7 percent. Youth
unemployment is a startling 52 percent plus and no dramatic departures from previous policies have been presented so far to drastically alter
these numbers. Increasing the number of government workers does not seem likely, as the civil service rolls are already bloated. Against the
backdrop of these problems is the country’s growing debt burden. With rising social needs, a declining economy, and financial burdens from
state-owned enterprises, it will be difficult to find any additional monies to help ameliorate these difficulties.
A few months before Ramaphosa took office, the African National Congress (ANC), responding to pressure from its base to address income
inequality and poverty, passed a resolution favoring expropriation of land without compensation. As a member of the ANC and now president,
he finds himself trying to strike a balance between two sets of issues: income inequality and poverty on the one hand and maintaining property
rights and ensuring food security on the other.
Ramaphosa has only been in office for a few months. However, the violent protests that have broken out in parts of the country, including
those that forced him to return home early from a trip to London where he was attempting to reassure global investors he would tackle
corruption and improve governance, signal that any honeymoon period he had since assuming office is, as the article states, probably over. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Misheck Mutize, “Patience with Ramaphosa’s presidency is waning among South Africans,” The Conversation, 5 June 2018. https://
theconversation.com/patience-with-ramaphosas-presidency-is-waning-among-south-africans-97467
Given the depths to which Zuma had taken the country, it was easy for the Ramaphosa euphoria to emerge.
But it would seem that the honeymoon is over. Patience is waning and giving way to protests against long standing grievances. The failure
by the ANC government to deliver basic services and endemic corruption is driving people to the streets.
And finally there are the disturbing uncertainties around the ANC’s move to undertake expropriation of land without compensation. This is
undermining the pledge to restore policy certainty and improve economic growth.
The main priority of the government should be centered on growing the economy to create jobs and reduce poverty. This could be achieved
with structural economic reforms. These could include liberalizing the labor market by making changes to the employment laws to lower the
costs of hiring and firing workers in order to improve the ability of companies to respond to market shocks.

OE Watch | July 2018

59

AFRICA
China Marginalizes Taiwan in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: And then there was one. As the
accompanying article from the South African Institute for
Security Studies details, following China’s big push into Africa
over the past two decades, there is now only one country on the
continent that still recognizes Taiwan…the Kingdom of eSwatini,
perhaps better known by its former name, Swaziland. The last
African nation to break with Taiwan was Burkina Faso, which
severed its formal diplomatic ties with Taiwan on 24 May 2018
and then two days later established them with China. Taiwan was
angry, expressing “disappointment and outrage,” that after having
made significant contributions to Burkina Faso’s economic
development, national security, and social stability for over two
decades, the west African nation would no longer be recognizing
it, instead succumbing to Chinese diplomacy. Thus, it is not so
much bullying that causes countries to switch to China as it is the
opportunity for massive infrastructure investments.
The article points out the irony in Taiwan’s snipe about
China resorting to dollar diplomacy, because at one point in
time recognition often went to the highest bidder between both
nations. By 2008 Taiwan and China realized many of the African
countries were playing them off each other and quietly called off
this very expensive auction. However, things changed in 2016
when President Tsai Ing-wen came to power in Taiwan. Her
Democratic Progressive Party leans more towards independence
than the previous Kuomintang ruling party. As a result, the
competition for obtaining allies heated up, but with China being
much larger and wealthier, Taiwan finds itself at a distinct
disadvantage. Today, the number of countries around the world
that recognize it is only in the teens.
In pursuing recognition, Taiwan has not proven to be
particularly picky, sometimes aligning itself with whom some see
as less than savory characters. Such is the case of the Kingdom
of eSwatini, ruled by Africa’s last absolute monarchy. Political
parties have been banned there since 1973. Taipei contributed
$1.3 million towards King Mswati III’s birthday celebration and
another $30 million to subsidize the royal jet; this in a country
with a large number of impoverished people.

“Taiwan has now become an almost forgotten casualty
of China’s big drive into Africa over the past two
decades.”
Source: Peter Fabricius, “Taiwan has lost all its friends in Africa – except
eSwatini,” Institute for Security Studies, 31 May 2018. https://issafrica.
org/iss-today/taiwan-has-lost-all-its-friends-in-africa-except-eswatini
Taiwan has now become an almost forgotten casualty of China’s big drive
into Africa over the past two decades. Most African countries switched
recognition after China edged Taiwan out of its permanent seat on the UN
Security Council in 1971. Quite a few holdouts remained on Taiwan’s side,
but they steadily abandoned it.
But Van Staden doesn’t think African nations are necessarily being
bullied into switching. The attractions of befriending a China resurgent
in Africa – such as the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation and the Belt
and Road Initiative with all their infrastructure investments – have simply
become irresistible.
Does it matter that Taiwan is being forced to retreat from Africa? Most
analysts think it’s inevitable and therefore irrelevant. China’s One Policy
is seen as so clearly non-negotiable that African states have simply given
in to China’s increasingly muscular diplomacy.

With Chinese making massive investments in Africa, only one nation on the continent
still formally recognizes Taiwan, the tiny Kingdom of eSwatini, formerly known as
Swaziland.
Source:User:Vardion/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LocationSwaziland.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

The article recognizes that it is probably inevitable that the Kingdom of eSwatini will also eventually choose China. Since China strictly
enforces its One China policy, the Kingdom of eSwatini will not be able to recognize both nations, leaving Taiwan without any African
countries formally recognizing it. However, while it is true that many African nations aspire to be like the People’s Republic of China, some
believe that Taiwan offers a better model for African development...originally a dictatorship, it evolved into a democracy with a dynamic
economy. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | July 2018

60

LATIN AMERICA
The Media War within the War—the Battle for Narrative
in Mexico’s Cartel War
OE Watch Commentary: Earlier this month a
group of Mexican naval infantry, identified by the
word “MARINA” across their body armor, became
caught up in a demonstration that turned violent
quickly while on a logistics run in Ciudad Guzman
in the state of Jalisco. Thanks to today’s media
environment, there are multiple versions or sides of
this story, including numerous video accounts of the
demonstration-turned-attack on the naval personnel
and their vehicles filmed on cell phones and posted to
YouTube.

“Nemesio Oseguera Cervantes aka El Mencho, leader of the
CJNG, ordered an escalation of violence and demonstrations
to expel Mexican naval elements from Jalisco after the arrest
of various operators of the criminal organization, including
Rosalinda ‘N’, wife of the criminal leader.”

Eventually, the naval infantrymen resorted to firing
shots into the air to disperse the crowd and likely saved
themselves. According to the accompanying excerpted
blog post which appeared on Elblogdelnarco, which
is known for collecting and summarizing drug cartel
related stories from across Mexico, the office of
the Secretary of the Navy (SEMAR) described the
demonstration (partially through its twitter feed, see:
@SEMAR_mx) as being promoted, or infiltrated,
by supporters of Cartel Jalisco Nueva Generacion or
CJNG, New Generation Jalisco Cartel. Indeed, the
light pickup trucks the navy used were vandalized in
the incident and spray-painted with the cartel acronym
CJNG, suggesting at least some demonstrators might
have affiliation with, or at least preference for, the
cartel over the Mexican armed forces. Other parts of
the videos now residing on social media clearly show
the same demonstrators kicking, hitting and throwing
Naval Infantry from Mexico’s 16th Naval Infantry Battalion at their check point in the town of Punta Mita,
rocks and other projectiles at the naval personnel.
Nayarit.
According to the Elblogdelnarco post, SEMAR
attributed the confrontation to CJNG lashing out
against what the government has stated is a series
of recent successes against the cartel, including
the recent capture of Rosalinda “N”, the wife of
cartel leader El Mencho. One item missing from the
SEMAR’s explanation however, but seen in multiple
Youtube videos (including “Demonstration in Protest
of the Disappearance of Ulises Cárdenas,” see:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBAO1budbm8)
is the connection and possible excuse for the
demonstration—the assumed abduction and killing
of Ulises Cárdenas. Ulises is a 17-year old who
disappeared months ago and is thought by many
locals to be the victim of extrajudicial abduction by
a naval infantry unit. For some in Mexico, this is
another narrative at odds with SEMAR’s narrative.

Source: Author’s own photo. Author gives express permission to use photo.

Source: “Confirmado Ataque del CJNG a Marinos en Ciudad Guzmán LIderada
por ‘El 15’ (Confirmed attack on Naval Infantry Personnel by CJNG in Ciudad
Guzman lead by ‘El 15’),” ElBlogdelnarco.com, June 6, 2018. https://elblogdelnarco.
com/2018/06/06/CONFIRMADO-ATAQUE-DEL-CJNG-A-MARINOS-ENCIUDAD-GUZMAN-LIDERADA-POR-EL-15/
Nemesio Oseguera Cervantes aka El Mencho, leader of the CJNG, ordered an
escalation of violence and demonstrations to expel Mexican naval elements from
Jalisco after the arrest of various operators of the criminal organization, including
Rosalinda “N”, wife of the criminal leader…
Images that have been collected of the attack on the sailors, reveal two groups of
young demonstrators between 17 and 25 years. One of the groups is distinguished by
wearing white shirts and are the ones that vandalized and painted the units of the Navy
with the initials of the CJNG…

There is no doubt that Mexico is embroiled in a violent war between the government and drug cartels. Tens of thousands of citizens have been
caught in the crossfire, and the rules of engagement appear to benefit the cartels that mete out violence on an unprecedented scale, while the
Mexican armed forces are expected to protect against civilian casualties at all times. There have been previous incidents where naval and army
units battling cartel personnel have killed civilians, and possibly worse. The specific case of Ulises Cárdenas, which has become somewhat of
a local rallying cry to mobilize elements of the population against local Mexican armed forces, could remain a narrative flashpoint in the war
between the Mexican government and the cartel in the states of Jalisco and Nayarit. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)
OE Watch | July 2018

61

LATIN AMERICA
Mexican Cartel Expands Recruitment
OE Watch Commentary: Back in March of 2017, the Colombian
magazine Semana reported that the largest criminal organization in
South America, the Brazilian Primeiro Comando da Capital (PCC,
or the First Capital Command), is actively looking to recruit FARC
dissidents who do not want to take part in the demobilization process,
as noted in the accompanying excerpted article. The article discussed
several possible issues with this type of alignment. Fast forward to
June 2018 and it appears that the New Generation Cartel of Jalisco
(CJNG) is looking to recruit FARC dissidents, but not necessarily for
the same reasons as the PCC.
There are obvious reasons for two highly powerful criminal groups
to recruit FARC dissidents, but that does not necessarily mean they
are the same. As the Semana article notes, there are multiple reasons
why the PCC is interested in aligning with FARC dissidents and
these have not changed since 2017. These include the opportunity to
receive weapons and training needed to fight against Brazil’s armed
forces and to gain control of key trafficking routes in Colombia. With
a presence in two-thirds of Brazil, the PCC is currently considered
Brazil’s largest and most powerful criminal group. It also maintains
powerful ties with criminal groups in Bolivia and Paraguay. Given
these links, the proposed recruitment of FARC dissidents could
further strengthen the PCC and even increase trafficking operations
in the region.
The CJNG was created by former Sinaloa Cartel operatives, but
the Sinaloa Cartel remains the largest and most powerful cartel in
Mexico, because key leaders within the group have managed to work
together in harmony despite the arrest of Chapo Guzman in 2014.
After breaking off from the Sinaloa Cartel, the CJNG grew rapidly,
but could not match the power of Sinaloa. As history in Mexico
continues to repeat itself with cartels such as Los Zetas and the Gulf
Cartel, internal clashes are destroying the group as indicated in the
excerpted article from Mundo Hispanico. This same source indicated
that several CJNG operators are fighting for ultimate control of the
group. For this reason, select rival factions are looking to bring in
FARC dissidents to reinforce their ranks and protect their immense
power base, which includes control of key trafficking routes, multimillion dollar profits and status, and other things as discussed in the
excerpted article from Infobae.
When looking at the PCC and the CJNG, it becomes obvious that
both are recruiting outside help to protect their interests and to gain
power. The one difference noted in a number of sources regarding
FARC recruitment is that the PCC is stable and not fighting within
its ranks. Still, it is interesting to note how, despite the fact the
FARC was supposedly dismantled, they remain active and powerful
criminal groups look to them for assistance given their extensive
knowledge in paramilitary operations. End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

“The PCC, the largest criminal organization in
South America, is looking to recruit FARC dissidents
in an effort to obtain weapons and military training
needed to fight against Brazil’s armed forces.”
Source: “Las grandes pandillas brasileñas reclutan disidentes
de las FARC (Powerful Brazilian Gangs Look to Recruit FARC
Dissidents),” Semana, 1 February 2017. http://www.semana.com/
nacion/articulo/pccde-brasil-recluta-a-disidentes-de-las-farc/514105
The PCC, the largest criminal organization in South America, is
looking to recruit FARC dissidents in an effort to obtain weapons
and military training needed to fight against Brazil’s armed forces.
Simultaneously, the PCC is also interested in expanding their
operations into Colombia with the intent of cutting out intermediaries
to obtain cocaine directly to lower costs of procurement.
Source: “Arrestan a la esposa del líder del cártel de Jalisco ‘El
Mencho’ (Wife of CJNG Leader “El Mencho” Arrested),” Mundo
Hispanico, 27 May 2018. https://mundohispanico.com/dinero/
arrestan-a-la-esposa-del-lider-del-cartel-de-jalisco-el-mencho
Rosalinda Gonzalez Valencia is considered “The Female Boss”
of the CJNG for two reasons. First, because she is the wife of the
group’s leader; El Mencho. Second, she has allegedly infiltrated
intelligence sectors of the federal government to further the group’s
interests. Following her arrest in late May, she spoke informally about
the current state of affairs within the CJNG in Mexico. During the
informal conversation, she confirmed rumors that were already being
circulated in Jalisco: that the cartel is going through an internal war
and that there are divisions within the organization.
Source: “Un gobernador mexicano afirmó que un cártel narco recluta
a ex guerrilleros colombianos y militares extranjeros (Mexican
Governor Confirms that CJNG is Recruiting Former Colombian
Paramilitary Operators in Addition to Military Personnel from other
Countries),” Infobae, 30 May 2018. https://www.infobae.com/
america/mexico/2018/05/30/un-gobernador-mexicano-afirmo-queun-cartel-narco-recluta-a-ex-guerrilleros-colombianos-y-militaresextranjeros/
According to intelligence reports by Mexican agencies, the CJNG
is actively recruiting FARC dissidents that were left without work
after much of the group dismantled following the closure of the peace
accords negotiated by the Colombian government and key FARC
leaders.

OE Watch | July 2018

62

LATIN AMERICA
Mothers’ Day Massacre in Nicaragua
OE Watch Commentary: Nicaragua’s political
commotion continues. This month, Nicaraguans
experienced an ugly event that might be evidence that
the country is on a Venezuela-like slide. Mothers’
Day in Nicaragua was 30 May, and this year it was
an occasion for some marches honoring mothers as
well as some demonstrations dishonoring the Ortega
regime. As the accompanying excerpted reference
from La Prensa reported, the government’s response
was murderous, with some 15 demonstrators killed.
The second accompanying excerpted reference from
La Prensa is a longer piece describing the scene.
Part of the report’s accusation (based on some
immediate forensic evidence) is that several of the
deaths were caused by snipers using Dragunov rifles.
The excerpted reference from El Mundo reports that
Daniel Ortega has offered to move up presidential
elections to appease the disaffected. The move
seems very Maduro/Venezuela-like. Anti-Ortega
commentators are claiming it as a sign of regime
weakness, but if experience from Venezuela is to be
a guide, promised elections will not be legitimate
and will not decrease Ortega’s control or improve
conditions. Ortega’s regime is a key member of the
region’s Bolivarian Alliance, which features the ruling
parties of Cuba, Ecuador, Bolivia and Venezuela,
among others. Ortega’s Sandinista party also shares
the iconography and rhetoric of other MarxistLeninist parties identified within the hemisphere’s
Forum of Sao Paulo. A number of those parties
have taken the reins of national governments in
the hemisphere. In terms of the overall, long-term
material well-being of their countries’ populations,
the performances of those parties while in power has
been poor to disastrous. Nevertheless, it appears that
Ortega’s regime faces no effective threat, electoral
or otherwise, to its continuance in power. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…parallels between the Nicaraguan and Venezuelan conflicts
are evident…”
Source: Lucía Navas, “Gobierno reconoce 15 muertos y 199 lesionados en masacre
del Día de las Madres (Government admits 15 dead and 199 wounded on Mothers’
Day),” La Prensa, 31 May 2018. https://www.laprensa.com.ni/2018/05/31/
politica/2428114-gobierno-reconoce-15-muertos-y-199-lesionados-en-masacre-deldia-de-las-madres
“…This Thursday, the government of Daniel Ortega admitted that 15 persons
died and 199 were left wounded in the massacre on Mothers’ Day, which in the
communique they attributed to a ‘delinquent conspiracy’, skirting responsibility
whatever in spite of video evidence of attacks from swat teams, which circulated on
social media, in addition to the accusations of the victims…”
Source: Martha Vásquez, Elizabeth Romero and Cinthya Tórrez, “Daniel Ortega
baña de sangre el Día de las Madres en Nicaragua (Daniel Ortega bathes Mothers’
Day in Nicaragua in blood),” La Prensa, 31 May 2018. https://www.laprensa.com.
ni/2018/05/31/nacionales/2427993-daniel-ortega-bana-de-sangre-el-dia-de-lasmadres-en-nicaragua
“The people crouched trying to avoid the bullets. Some in the crowd tried to repel
the shooting, but at the front of the battle they were left dead and wounded by
gunshot. Confrontation was also taking place on the street of the UNI [National
University of Engineering]. Here the situation completely went out of control when
officers on motorcycles arrived shooting and the crowd ran for its life toward the
south…Weapons specialists explained to Carmona [Executive Secretary of the
Permanent Human Rights Commission (CPDH) Marcos Carmona] that the deceased
presented a characteristic similar to ‘an exposition of cerebral mass’ that would make
one presume that the rifle used was not an AK47, but rather a Dragunov…”
Source: Daniel Lozano, “Ortega ofrece adelantar las elecciones presidenciales
en Nicaragua (Ortega offers to move up the presidential elections in
Nicaragua to 2019),” El Mundo, 12 June 2018. http://www.elmundo.es/
internacional/2018/06/12/5b1fed7f268e3e263b8b4597.html
“The parallels between the Nicaraguan and Venezuelan conflicts are evident
beyond the fact that they are revolutionary allies, bolivarian and sandinist, whose top
leadership groups are united by strong umbilical cords.”

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | July 2018

63

LATIN AMERICA
Uruguay Faces New Security Issues Related to
Regional Drug Trafficking
OE Watch Commentary: Uruguay has a long history of low
violence levels and minimal drug trafficking activity. However, the
country is geographically located between Brazil and Argentina,
which are major drug export countries for the European market. As
markets in the aforementioned countries continued to grow, Uruguay
became a transshipment, export, and consumer nation. For these
reasons, a number of news sources over the past couple of years have
associated the uptick in drug trafficking with higher than normal
violence levels and increased drug use in the country, as discussed in
the accompanying excerpted article from El Observador. Ironically,
counter drug experts anticipated that all of these things would
happen back in 2015, but no steps were taken to thwart the growth of
trafficking and criminality at that time.
In regards to violence levels, the excerpted article from El Clarín
discusses how violence levels in Uruguay have increased from 29
percent in 2012 to 45 percent in 2017. Thus far in 2018, authorities
report that violence continues to grow. This same source attributes
increased violence levels to turf wars, as local criminal groups attempt
to establish themselves as vendors or transporters for larger cartels
operating in the region.
While reports have laid out the current situation in Uruguay, some
sources are quick to note that the country’s problem is coming to
the point where it managed to grow more quickly than expected. For
Map of Uruguay, showing major cities.
example, the excerpted article from El Pais points out that Brazilian
Source: By CIA (CIA, The World Factbook, 2004 (internet version)) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Uruguay-CIA_WFB_Map_(2004).png.
cartels are deeply infiltrated in the country and operate as the principal
cocaine exporters out of Montevideo (Uruguay’s capital city).
Additionally, the article points out that at least 20 smaller trafficking organizations are working diligently to establish themselves in the country.
These so called organizations are dedicated to micro trafficking (selling to the local economy) and have attracted criminals from countries to
include Mexico, Colombia, and Brazil. Ultimately, the articles point to two facts: drug trafficking in Uruguay is on the rise and can likely be
tied to increased violence. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Brazil currently dominates the cocaine export market in Uruguay, but in recent years, at least 20
criminal organizations dedicated to trafficking drugs have moved into Uruguay to sell locally and to export
to Europe.”
Source: “El crimen organizado ya está aquí (Organized Crime has Arrived),” El Observador, 23 May 2016. https://www.elobservador.com.uy/
el-crimen-organizado-ya-esta-aqui-n914361
A report by Uruguayan newspaper El Observador anticipated that both violence and crime would increase starting back in 2015. Even public
officials recognized that similar trafficking problems faced by Brazil and Argentina were slowing moving into the country. In fact, these same
officials predicted that Uruguay would become an export hub for cocaine shipments to Europe and that drug consumption in the country
would increase and they were correct. Today, Uruguay has the third largest cocaine consumer base in South America, behind Chile and
Argentina.
Source: “Uruguay: de ser un remanso de paz a tener una violencia cada vez mayor (Uruguay: From a Haven of Peace to Growing Violence),”
El Clarín, 1 May 2018. https://www.clarin.com/mundo/uruguay-remanso-paz-tener-violencia-vez-mayor_0_ryVwngI6G.html
Eduardo Bonomi, Uruguay’s Interior Security Minister reported that turf wars between local criminal groups are a principal motivator of
violence in Uruguay. Bonomi further indicated that over the last 7 years, the homicide rate in the country increased from 29% in 2012 to 45%
in 2017. He also stated that in 2018, 58% of all reported homicides have been related to drug trafficking feuds.
Source: “Investigan a 20 carteles por introducir droga en Uruguay (Authorities Investigate 20 Cartels and Their Activity in Uruguay),” El
Pais, 20 May 2018. https://www.elpais.com.uy/informacion/politica/investigan-carteles-introducir-droga-uruguay.html
Brazil currently dominates the cocaine export market in Uruguay, but in recent years, at least 20 criminal organizations dedicated to
trafficking drugs have moved into Uruguay to sell locally and to export to Europe.
OE Watch | July 2018

64

LATIN AMERICA
The New Narco Profile in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: Long gone are the days when drug lords in Colombia such as Pablo Escobar recorded and released videos of him
and his cronies doing ostentatious or horrific acts to draw attention. In fact, today’s most prominent narcos prefer obscurity, realizing that
anonymity is directly linked to staying safe and avoiding arrest. The accompanying excerpted article from Vanguardia discusses this idea and
points out the desire of narcos to remain “invisible.”
This idea is further reiterated by the fact that today’s Colombian drug trafficker is more likely to dress in clothes made in Colombia rather
than by famous designers. Furthermore, instead of driving flashy cars such as Ferraris, many choose more common vehicles like Toyotas and
opt to live in middle to upper class apartments as opposed to huge mansions. In short, the new Colombian narco works to maintain the façade
of a respectable businessman. This concept is relatively new in Colombia and other areas in which drug lords reside, such as Mexico and Peru.
The excerpted article from Animal Politico reports how today’s “Pablo Escobars” may never touch a kilo of cocaine or wield a gold-plated 9mm
pistol, but are instead using advanced technology to conduct business. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“New age narcos are protecting their communication networks like never before by using highly encrypted
cell phones to conduct business rather than risk exposing themselves in public.”
Source: “Los invisibles, la nueva generación del narcotrafico (The
Invisibles, a New Generation of Narcotraffickers),” Vanguardia,
15 March, 2018. http://www.vanguardia.com/colombia/427415los-invisibles-la-nueva-generacion-del-narcotrafico

Source: “Cómo son los BlackBerry ultraseguros que usan cárteles
del narcotráfico en México (Mexican Cartels Use Ultra Secure Cell
Phones),” Animal Politico, 16 March 2018. https://www.animalpolitico.
com/2018/03/telefonos-blackberry-phantom-secure-narcotrafico/

The “invisible” drug traffickers is well dressed but not
ostentatious. He or she lives in a middle to upper class
apartment and appears to be a respectable businessman/woman
who does not wish to draw attention to themselves. These
invisibles come from two generations: the first has spent years
in the business and has survived by staying below the radar.
The second is the narco son or daughter who was born into
the business and learned how to behave like an invisible from
relatives.

New age narcos are protecting their communication networks like
never before by using highly encrypted cell phones to conduct business
rather than risk exposing themselves in public. Characteristics of these
phones are that they do not have camera, internet, microphone, or
GPS applications. These same phones are incapable of voice or video
recording. Furthermore, each encrypted device utilizes PGP (Pretty
Good Privacy) software which allows narcos to encrypt emails and texts.
To date, no known intelligence organization has been able to break into
devices encrypted with this software.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | July 2018

65

LATIN AMERICA
Ivan Duque President Elect of Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: On Sunday, 17 June, Colombians
elected Ivan Duque president as reported by the accompanying
excerpt from Colombia.com. He will be inaugurated on or
about 6 August; Marta Lucía Ramírez is the vice-President
elect. Baring calamity, his first term will run until 2022.
President-elect Duque has been critical of the power-sharing
agreement that outgoing President Juan Manuel Santos reached
with leaders of the FARC. Mr. Duque’s opponent Gustavo
Petro enthusiastically supported the FARC agreement. Given
that the agreement was the front and center issue during the
campaign, it seems likely that after inauguration, President
Duque will perceive a mandate to take steps, if cautiously, to
dismantle the agreement and begin to pursue a more assertive if
not aggressive policy toward the FARC and its allies. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

A Conversation with Iván Duque Márquez, March 2018.

Source: Inter-American Dialogue Flickr Account, https://www.flickr.com/photos/the_dialogue/27103914568, CC BY 2.0.

Source: Editors, “Resultados Elecciones Presidenciales 2018,”
Colombia.com, 17 June 2018. https://www.colombia.com/
elecciones/2018/presidenciales/

Source: Inter-American Dialog, “A Conversation with Iván Duque
Márquez,” Flickr, 31 22 March 2018. https://www.flickr.com/photos/
the_dialogue/27103914568

“Iván Duque, Partido Centro Democrático - 53.97%; Gustavo
Petro, Coalición Petro Presidente-41.81% ”

“He has had an impressive career, including a stint at the InterAmerican Development Bank, and he holds masters [sic] degrees in
public management from Georgetown University and international legal
studies from American University.”

Polio in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: Along with riots in Honduras,
the volcanic eruption in Guatemala and the threat of a dam
burst in Colombia comes this especially unfortunate piece
of news for the epidemiology community. Poliomyelitis
has been diagnosed in Venezuela. The Pan-American
Health Organization reports that the patient lives in a subimmunized indigenous community in Amacuro Delta
state. The political and economic situation in Venezuela is
perpetually said to be in crisis, but things apparently can get
perpetually worse. The accompanying image is from a timely
article from the US Army Press which, however, concerns flu
vaccinations. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…there are three other suspected cases...”
28th Combat Support Hospital preparing influenza vaccines.

Source: Army Photo by Capt. Erick Thronson, found in Kimball Johnson, “Vaccines, What NCOs Need to Know,” NCO Press, 29 Dec 2017, https://www.
armyupress.army.mil/Journals/NCO-Journal/Archives/2017/December/Vaccines/, Public Domain.

Source: Editors, “OPS reporta caso de polio en Venezuela tras 29 años de haber sido radicada (The Pan-American Health Organization reports
a case of polio in Venezuela after 29 years of it having been eradicated),” La Prensa, 10 June 2018. https://www.prensa.com/salud_y_ciencia/
OPS-reporta-polio-Venezuela-radicada_0_5049994990.html
“…The organization detailed that the child did not have prior vaccinations and is a ‘resident of a sub-immunized indigenous community’ in
Amacuro Delta state, where conditions of extreme poverty prevail. Doctor José Félix Oletta, ex-minister of health, assured the press agency
that the last case of poliomyelitis in Venezuela was reported in 1989 and confirmed that ‘there are three other suspected cases’, also in Delta
Amacuro…”

OE Watch | July 2018

66

LATIN AMERICA
China’s Demand for Brazilian Food Products on the Rise
OE Watch Commentary: China’s presence spreading throughout Latin America is nothing new. What is significant is that in 2000, China
was not even in Brazil’s top five trade export markets, but Beijing has been Brasília’s main trading partner every year since 2009, as indicated
in the accompanying excerpted article from Mazars. This excerpt points out that soybeans from Mato Grosso are highly desired by China and
account for more than 40 percent of Brazil’s total exports to China; a number that is only expected to increase in the coming years.
Because of its interest in Brazilian soybeans, China is investing heavily to upgrade Brazil’s infrastructure to move soybeans from the
landlocked Mata Grosso, since half of the country’s soybeans are produced here. To date, an estimated $20 billion in funds from China are
already being used to renovate the railways and roads to bring Brazilian soybeans to port at a lower cost. As part of this investment, which
has been ongoing for almost 7 years, new infrastructure financed by Chinese money is making the cost of export cheaper as discussed in the
excerpted article from La Prensa. As the excerpted article from Globo.com points out, China is not only interested in soybeans. In fact, the
Asian giant has been involved in more than 250 separate projects in the country since 2013. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)
Source: “Relações e negócios
entre Brasil e China (Brazilian
and Chinese Trade Continues
to Grow),” Mazars, 20 March
2018. https://por.mazars.com.br/
Pagina-Inicial/Noticias/NossoConteudo/Relacoes-e-negociosentre-Brasil-e-China
Trade between Brazil and
China is expected to grow in the
coming years as the Asian giant
needs more and more food to
support its population. Specific
food products desired by China
from Brazil are soybeans and
milk.

Source: “Apetito de China impulsa precios de la
soya brasileña (Chinese Appetite for Brazilian Soy
Comes with a Cost),” La Prensa, 5 April 2018.
https://impresa.prensa.com/economia/Apetito-Chinaimpulsa-precios-brasilena_0_5000499969.html
Exporting soybeans from Brazil to China is not
a cheap endeavor, but with more than $20 million
in investments, things are finally changing, but the
exportation process is still not cheap. Traditionally,
exportation has been expensive because for the
past 5 decades, Mato Grosso (state which produces
largest quantity of soybeans in the country)
antiquated railways and roads were used to
transverse the 1,300 mile route to get to export sites.

Source: “Investimento da China no Brasil
em 2017 atingiu máxima de 7 anos (China’s
Investment in Brazil in 2017 Reached 7 Years
Record),” Globo.com, 9 January 2018. https://
g1.globo.com/economia/noticia/investimento-dachina-no-brasil-em-2017-atingiu-maxima-de-7anos.ghtml
2017 marked China’s most significant year of
investment in China. However, investment in the
region is not new and is used as a means to obtain
commodities. According to this source, China was
involved in 250 projects in Brazil between 2003
and 2017, with a total of $123.9 billion. Of these,
93 projects were confirmed and totaled $53.5
billion. New investments are also slated for 2018.

“According to this source, China was involved in 250 projects in Brazil between 2003 and 2017, with a
total of $123.9 billion.”

Soybean plantation in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Source: By Tiago Fioreze [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PlantacaodeSoja.JPG.

OE Watch | July 2018

67

