community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #3
March 2018

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

STABILITY
IN AFRICA
AFRICA
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Turkey’s Expanding Military Presence in Africa
Foreign Forces in Africa
Mali’s Civil Protection Challenge
Why Can’t Kenyan Forces Defeat al-Shabaab in Kenya?
The Destabilizing Stability Doctrine
Abubakar Shekau…Dead Man Running
The Risk of the “Somalization” of the Sahel
Boko Haram Psyop on Chibok Girls Continue
Conflict, Cash, and Cholera
Namibia: Hangry Soldiers

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
14
15
17
18
18
19
20
22

Turkey Eyes Police/Military Cooperation with Azerbaijan
and Kyrgyzstan
Egypt-Turkey Friction Over Political Order in the “Levant
Basin”
Iran: Warship Sinks after Mishap
Iran: Telegram Giving Data to US and Israel
Iran Develops UAS with “Smart Bomb” Capability
Iran: US Sponsoring Islamic State in Afghanistan
Iran: Winning Hearts and Minds in Deir Ezzor
Raqqa’s Minefields

LATIN AMERICA
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Military Training Key to Panama’s Success in Counter Drug
Operations
Venezuela Continues to Disappear
Venezuela’s PDVSA on the Verge of Collapse, Deepening
the Country’s Economic Crisis
Colombian Urban What-Is-Wrong List
What Did FARC Leaders Expect?
Peruvian Cocaine Production Associated with Possible
Shining Path Resurgence?
Cuba to Build Massive Windfarms with Chinese Assistance
Mexican Army Seizes Claymore Mines, Rifles, and Drugs in
Tamaulipas

ASIA-PACIFIC
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
41
42
43
44

MILF Leaders Seek Lessons Learned from Indonesia
Indonesia, Malaysia Have Right of Hot Pursuit in
Philippines
Papua New Guinea Balances Between China and Australia
Maldives: Troubled Waters in the Indian Ocean and
Growing Relations with China
Maldives: Troubled Waters in the Indian Ocean and
Growing Relations with China
Xinjiang Ethnic Harmonization by Quartering and
Relocation
Is China’s Afghanistan Strategy Modeled on Russia in Syria?
China’s Evolving Nuclear Strategy: Will China Drop “No First
Use?”
China Promotes Increased Maritime Capabilities
Photos Paint a Point of No Return over the Disputed South
China Sea
Chinese Su-35s Fly Patrols in the South China Sea for the
First Time
Chinese Aviation Academies Introduce Free Air Combat
Training

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
45
46
47
49
50

Is the Chinese Air Force Ramping up for Further Action
Following the 2017 Doklam Standoff?
Another Potential Hit to China-Pakistan Relations
CPEC: “Iron Brothers,” Unequal Partners
Mirziyoyev’s Reforms Reach the National Security Service
(SNB)
The Russian-South Ossetian Armed Forces Agreement
Takes Shape

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
51
52
55
57
58
59
62
64
65
66
67
68
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78

Considering Information War
General Gerasimov on the Syrian Campaign
The Development of the Forpost UAV
Specialist Training for Russian UAV Pilots
Russia Developing Top-Attack Tank Mine
Russian Expeditionary Capabilities, a Relatively Low Priority
Engineer Troops Organizational Reforms
Promised Pay Raise for Military
Sacrificing Beans for Bullets
Strengthening Civil Defense
Pros and Cons of Legalizing Private Military Companies
The Russian Narrative of US Biological Weapons Research in
the CIS
Ukrainian Perception of Javelin
The Eastern Military District and Pacific Fleet Control the
Eastern Entrance to the Russian Arctic
Arctic S-400 reaches operational status
Birthrate Soars Among Service Families in the Arctic
Career Appeal of KGB
“Russia’s Patriot Act”: New Law Empowers FSB
His Holiness Patriarch Cyril Tells Parliament What Keeps Him Up
at Night
The “Electronic Concentration Camp” of National
Cryptocurrencies
Russian Speculation about the Cryptoyuan

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.
The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 8 | Issue 3

March | 2018

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Alma Keshavarz
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn
Dodge Billingsley

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Zach Kelsay

		
Asia-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Nan Li
Spencer Shanks
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

		
Caucasus,
Central and South Asia

Sudha Ramachandran
Matthew Stein
Cindy Hurst

		
Russia, Ukraine

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Mica Hall
Kaitlyn Johnson
Boris Vainer
Tom Wilhelm

ON THE COVER:
A Nigerien Soldier During Exercise Flintlock 2017, Diffa, Niger.

Source: US Army photo by Spc. Zayid Ballesteros, http://www.africom.mil/media-room/article/28739/flintlock-2017-builds-trustin-niger, Public Domain.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

AFRICA
Turkey’s Expanding Military Presence in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: In late December,
Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan traveled
to Africa for official visits to Sudan, Chad and
Tunisia. The visits resulted in important military
agreements with Sudan and Tunisia in particular.
The efforts are part of Turkey’s broader effort to
establish a military and diplomatic presence in
Africa. The accompanying passages from Turkish
and Middle Eastern sources discuss the significance
of these initiatives.
The visit to Sudan resulted in 13 agreements,
including one which entails Turkey leasing Sudan’s
Suakin Island, on the Red Sea. As the first passage
from the website of TRT World, an English news
channel based in Istanbul, notes, the agreement to
lease Suakin Island is significant because Suakin
is at “the crossroads between Aden Gulf and the
Red Sea, and Saudi Arabia and East Africa.” Other
agreements include a new airport for the Sudanese
capital of Khartoum, a free-trade zone in Port
Sudan, a port and shipyards for military and civilian
ships in the Red Sea. The two countries’ chiefs of
staff also agreed to develop military cooperation.
The second passage from Al-Monitor, a news
website with analysts from the Middle East, notes
that the agreement caused panic in Arab countries,
especially in Egypt and Saudi Arabia, where
there is concern that Suakin Island will become a
military base for Turkey. As the passage points out,
“Egyptians fear that a Turkish military alliance with
Sudan could actually upset the power balance in the
region... Saudis fear that a base in Sudan controlled
by Turkey — which is cooperating with Iran —
could become a springboard of support for the
Qatar- and Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen.”
The third passage, from the Turkish-language
daily newspaper Milliyet, is a report about Sudan’s
announcement that the agreement signed with
Turkey regarding Suakin Island does not pose a
security threat for Arab countries. It should be
noted that Turkey already has a military presence
in Africa via its recently opened military base in
Somalia. The base has about 200 Turkish personnel
and a military academy to train Somali officers.
As the final passage from Karar, a proTopographic map in English of the Red Sea.
Source: By Eric Gaba via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ARed_Sea_topographic_map-en.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0.
government Turkish-language newspaper notes,
Erdoğan’s visit to Tunisia resulted in a military
cooperation agreement with Tunisia to train Tunisian soldiers in Turkey and to invest in Tunisia’s defense field. These are all part of
Ankara’s initiatives in Africa, which significantly increased in 2005 when Ankara declared that year “The Year of Africa” and a number of
unprecedented high-level visits took place, culminating in Turkey obtaining observer status in the African Union. Since then, Turkey has
been an active player in Africa, with hopes that its initiatives on the continent will elevate its status as a key regional and global power. (For
more information, see Karen Kaya and Jason Warner, “Turkey and Africa: A Rising Military Partnership?” https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/200295). End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

3

AFRICA
Continued: Turkey’s Expanding Military Presence
in Africa
“Turkey is temporarily taking over the island for reconstruction. Suakin is at the crossroads between Aden
Gulf and the Red Sea, and Saudi Arabia and East Africa. The move is another step for Turkey’s engagement
policy in Africa.”
Source: Ali Topchi, “Why is Sudan’s Suakin island important for Turkey?” TRTworld.com, 26 December 2017. https://www.trtworld.com/
turkey/why-is-sudan-s-suakin-island-important-for-turkey--13630
Turkey is temporarily taking over the island for reconstruction. Suakin is at the crossroads between Aden Gulf and the Red Sea, and Saudi
Arabia and East Africa. The move is another step for Turkey’s engagement policy in Africa.
Source: Fehim Tastekin, “Erdoğan’s Ottoman dream causes storm in Red Sea,” Al Monitor.com, 3 January 2018. http://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/originals/2018/01/turkey-sudan-cooperation-sparks-worry-in-gulf.html#ixzz55nyPG8SW
During his visit to Sudan, Erdoğan signed 13 agreements covering a new airport for the capital Khartoum, a free-trade zone in Port Sudan,
a port and shipyards for military and civilian ships in the Red Sea, grain silos at various locations, a university, a hospital and power stations.
The countries are targeting an annual trade volume between them of $10 billion, up from the current $500 million. The two countries induced
panic in the Arab world when, in addition to Turkey gaining temporary control of Suakin Island, the two countries’ chiefs of staff agreed to
develop military cooperation.
Whether the island will become a military base is open to speculation, but the port project for military and civilian ships and the accord of
military cooperation are enough to raise eyebrows, especially in Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Egyptians fear that a Turkish military alliance with
Sudan could actually upset the power balance in the region... Saudis fear that a base in Sudan controlled by Turkey — which is cooperating
with Iran — could become a springboard of support for the Qatar- and Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen.
Source: “Türkiye hakkındakı iddialara Sudan’dan jet açıklama! (Speedy response from Sudan regarding allegations about Turkey),” Milliyet.
com.tr, 28 December 2017. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/sudan-in-turkiye-ile-sevakin-adasi-gundem-2580966/
Sudan announced that the agreement signed with Turkey regarding Suakin Island during [Turkish] President Erdoğan’s visit does not pose a
security threat for Arap countries.
Source: “Türkiye ile Tunus arasında 4 anlaşma imzalandı (Turkey and Tunisia signed four agreements),” Karar.com, 27 December 2017. http://
www.karar.com/guncel-haberler/turkiye-ile-tunus-arasinda-4-anlasma-imzalandi-704345
The Military Cooperation Agreement was signed by [Turkish] Defense Miniser Nurettin Canikli and Tunisian Defense Minister Abdulkerim
ez-Zubeydi.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/dsp_template.aspx?dpID=377

OE Watch | March 2018

4

AFRICA
Foreign Forces in Africa
OE Watch Commentary: The presence of foreign militaries in
Africa has changed since 2000. Back then, as the accompanying article
relates, it was mostly France supplying units along with a few from
the US and what the article’s author describes as “niche deployments,”
such as UN forces. That scene has changed dramatically. Although
China made the headlines for opening a military base not far from US
forces deployed in Djibouti, less publicized is that small but strategic
Djibouti also hosts bases and/or units from France, Italy, Japan, and
Germany. Both India and Saudi Arabia are also considering opening
bases there. As for Russia, it wanted to partner with the Chinese base
but could not, so it is now believed to be in talks with Sudan for a place
of its own.

“The United States in particular, but also France,
have had a lot of flak for their military presence
in Africa. However a surprising number of other
foreign powers have quietly been putting boots on
African soil over the past couple of decades, though
attracting little attention..”

The scramble is not just for Djibouti. Following the opening of its
base in Eritrea, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) is now in the process
of establishing one in Somaliland, a portion of northwestern Somalia
that has declared itself independent, but which no other country
formally recognizes. India has facilities in Madagascar and Mauritius
and besides contemplating a Djibouti base, has been considering a
deeper presence in the Seychelles. And, there are still the French,
who while they may no longer be the near monopoly foreign power in
Africa they were in 2000, currently maintain a significant presence
in Africa, especially in the Sahel. France, with its long history of
involvement in Africa, is described in the article as remaining that
continent’s key foreign power.
As for the reasons behind the growing presence of foreign
military powers in Africa, the article emphasizes three: insecurity in
several regions, self-interest, and conflict among countries outside of
Africa. With regards to insecurity, the European nations and the US
are focused on attacking Islamist extremists. However, the article
adds that they are also pursuing their own business interests, citing
their growing commercial presence on the continent as perhaps an
indication that this is the case.
More complex is the reason for the growing presence of Middle
Eastern militaries in Africa. It is possibly related to international
posturing between the two factions - which includes Saudi Arabia, the
UAE, and Bahrain on one side and on the other, Qatar - embroiled in
the Gulf crisis. Somalia has so far managed to stay neutral in the Gulf
crisis even though it hosts bases from Turkey, which sides with Qatar,
and the UAE, which opposes Qatar. Meanwhile, the UAE’s Eritrea
base is part of its joint campaign with Saudi Arabia against Iranianbacked Houthi rebels in Yemen, just across the Bab al-Mandab Strait.
Against this backdrop there are warnings that African countries could
be sucked in as proxies for the conflict among these Middle Eastern
countries.
The African Union (AU) finds itself not in control of most
of these ventures as the majority are through bilateral agreements
between the host countries and foreign governments. Even though the
AU may want to at least monitor these militaries to ensure they are not
harming African interests, it lacks both a mandate and the capability
to do so. Indeed, it is doubtful, as the article states, that the AU even
knows the scale of military expansion in Africa, a situation especially
true in places such as Libya and Somalia, where numerous foreign
militaries are involved. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

The American flag being raised over Camp Lemonier, Djibouti.

Source: US Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Regina L. Brown, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:US_
Navy_070911-N-3285B-157_Storekeeper_1st_Class_David_Trimble_and_Religious_Program_Specialist_1st_Class_Wayne_George_raise_a_
flag_over_Camp_Lemonier.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Peter Fabricius, “AU Summit 30: Should Africa Worry About
a Growing Foreign Military Presence?” Institute for Security Studies
(South Africa), 25 January 2018. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/ausummit-30-should-africa-worry-about-a-growing-foreign-militarypresence
The United States in particular, but also France, have had a lot
of flak for their military presence in Africa. However a surprising
number of other foreign powers have quietly been putting boots on
African soil over the past couple of decades, though attracting little
attention.
Yann Bedzigui, a researcher in the ISS Peace and Security Research
Programme in Addis Ababa, says, ‘The issue of foreign military
bases has been a source of concern for many member states of the
Peace and Security Council (PSC). However it is a complicated issue.
Hosting a foreign military base is a sovereign decision. Since the PSC
and the AU in general have tended to emphasize sovereignty above
all, its leverage is quite limited.’
[Institute for Security Studies’] Leijenaar believes the AU would
like to keep control of foreign military activity or at least play some
coordinating role, and have an intelligence overview of all such
military activities on the continent. ‘But they just don’t have the
capacity to do that, for one thing,’ she says.

OE Watch | March 2018

5

AFRICA
Mali’s Civil Protection Challenge
OE Watch Commentary: Personal security has deteriorated in large parts
of the north and central regions of Mali. These parts of the country have been
engaged in an insurgency war which has lasted for a number of years. Organized
crime and trafficking has become more common, much of it introduced by the
insurgent groups controlling large swaths of Malian territory. That makes sense
– based on statistical evidence from other global hotspots, where the rule of law
breaks down and the central government struggles to control territory. The first
source, in addition to providing an update on Malian military personnel killedin-action during a recent one-week period, makes reference to the lack of police
and civil protection in the Gao region, particularly in Menaka. This suggests
that part of the problem may be the state of the police forces guaranteeing
personal security within the country.
The second source, written two years ago, addresses this very question. It
suggested then that the condition of the police and domestic security forces in
Mali were, and continue to be, partially to blame for what is becoming a general
lack of personal security across the country, including the capital and southern
regions, with armed robbery being the most frequent crime. The second article
also suggested that if armed robbery and other crimes cannot be stopped across
the entire country, it would not only threaten the local population, but also
threaten international aid work, on which significant segments of the population
of Mali depend.

Source: “Régions de Ménaka et de Mopti: Sept Militaires
Tues En Une Semaine (Regions of Menaka and Mopti:
Seven Military Personal Killed in one Week),” L’Essor,
February 6, 2018. http://www.essor.ml/regions-de-menakaet-de-mopti-sept-militaires-tues-en-une-semaine/
Terrorist groups continue to occupy parts of the territory
where they extort money and engage in various types of
trafficking.
Source: “Sécurité et protection civile : Le Mali face à
l’insécurité grandissante (Security and Civil Protection:
Mali Faces Growing Insecurity),”www.Malinet.net, October
19, 2015. http://www.malinet.net/les-citoyens-sexpriment/
securite-et-protection-civile-le-mali-face-a-linsecuritegrandissante/
If the fight against terrorism and the attacks of rebel
groups is or must be done through a concerted action
between the defense and security forces of Mali and those
formed by the international coalition, domestic crime
is exclusively the business of Malian authorities. Any
weakness at this level, calls into question the national
policy on security and civil protection.

It is not easy to gather crime statistics from the numerous cities, towns,
and villages, even in the relatively peaceful south. Consider Ouelessabougou
(population roughly 50,000), about two hours drive south of the capital. Ouelessabougou has no local written news outlets and only three local
radio stations. A number of Western charities also operate in and around Ouelessabougou. While the dire prediction given two years ago in the
second source has not come to pass, NGOs based in Ouelessabougou have been advised to enhance security infrastructure and planning.
While Bamako and the southern part of the country have been largely exempt thus far from the war in the north, there is continued pressure to
ensure domestic security in this part of the country. This may be hard to do given everything else the semi-stable Malian government is dealing
with, particularly fending off enemies of the state to the north and east of the country. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“Terrorist groups continue to occupy parts of the territory where they extort money and engage in various
types of trafficking.”

United Nations Military Convoy between Bamako and Ouelessabougou.
Source: Dodge Billingsley, used with author’s permission.

OE Watch | March 2018

6

AFRICA
Why Can’t Kenyan Forces Defeat al-Shabaab in Kenya?
OE Watch Commentary: While much has been written in the Western press
about al-Shabaab in Somalia, the terrorist group’s activities in Kenya, except for
large-scale attacks such as the one at the Westgate Mall, tend to go unreported.
However, as the accompanying article relates, al-Shabaab is also active in
launching relatively small-scale attacks in certain Kenyan regions that border
Somalia. To be sure, after several years of trying, Kenya has made progress
against the terrorists, but it still does not appear to have the answer as to how
to completely remove al-Shabaab from its territory. In the three years since
Kenya launched Operation Linda Boni to flush the terrorist organization out of
Boni Forest – an operation that was later extended to several other areas – the
terrorists have proven adept at exploiting the security forces’ weaknesses as well
as appealing to Kenyan al-Shabaab sympathizers.
Numerous reasons are given in the article for Kenya’s failure to defeat
al-Shabaab, with a lack of cooperation between the local populace and the
security forces being the biggest one. Most notably, the government has failed
to deploy to these embattled regions personnel who understand the local culture
and thus could foster important relationships which lead to the residents sharing
important information with the security forces. As a result, little in the way of
key intelligence is being gathered through local contacts.

Source: Kalume Kazungu and Mohamed Ahmed, “Poor
communication, low morale derail battle against Shabaab,”
Daily Nation (Kenya), 28 January 2018. https://www.
nation.co.ke/news/war-on-Shabaab-has-dragged-on-inthree-counties-/1056-4282534-8wi48hz/index.html
Lack of cooperation between locals and security agencies
has been cited for the government’s failure to wipe out
Al-Shabaab in three counties, three years since Operation
Linda Boni was launched.
The poor state of the Garsen-Lamu road that has remained
untarmacked since independence, despite the launch of
works by President Uhuru Kenyatta last March, has further
made it easy for the terrorists to plant explosives.
When the government launched Operation Linda Boni in
2015, many thought the terrorists would be flushed out of
the forest within a few years. But this was not to be as the
terrorists still cause havoc despite the presence of Kenya
Defence Forces and police officers in Lamu, Tana River
and Garissa counties where the operation falls.

According to the article, cultural expertise is not all the security personnel
lack; they also lack morale, a consequence at least in part due to their not
receiving allowances they believe they are owed. Food and living quarters are also reportedly issues, further eroding the troops’ already low
spirits.

As described, one part of these beleaguered soldiers’ job is to protect motorists, but frequently in these regions the roads are of extremely
poor quality, forcing drivers to slow down and thus providing al-Shabaab with easy targets. Once they complete their ambush, the terrorists can
readily cross the porous border into Somalia, waiting to slip again into Kenya and launch yet another attack. Meanwhile, there is a financial
incentive for some “tenderpreneurs” as they’re called - a portmanteau of tender and entrepreneur with tender referring to government contracts to keep the conflict going as they find provisioning soldiers to be quite lucrative.
One more factor compounding the situation that the article points out is the perceived presence of al-Shabaab sympathizers among the
Kenyan populace. Operation Linda Boni Director Joseph Kanyiri recently accused locals of working with al-Shabaab, enabling the terrorists to
not only continue their attacks but also to make it difficult to arrest them. Additionally, some Kenyans have travelled to Somalia to train with the
terrorist group and have now returned home, having become radicalized. The article also posits that these returnees are recruiting local youths to
join the group.
Director Kanyiri relates that the Kenyan security forces are in total control of the situation, and that considerable progress has been made
against the terrorists. While this may be true, the article’s authors paint a different picture, one of ongoing and deep trouble with the attempt
to quell al-Shabaab on the Kenyan side of the border, a view reinforced with every al-Shabaab attack on a car driving slowly along a curvy,
potholed road. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Lack of cooperation between locals and security agencies has been cited for the government’s failure to
wipe out Al-Shabaab in three counties, three years since Operation Linda Boni was launched.”
Kenyan soldiers have made progress against al-shabaab in Kenya but have not been able to completely eliminate them from Kenyan soil.

Source: US military or DoD employee, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?search=kenya+military&title=Special:Search&go=Go&searchToken=dc9vx13akozfcip8jgu4nayxa#/media/File:Kenyan_soilders_marching.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | March 2018

7

AFRICA
The Destabilizing Stability Doctrine
OE Watch Commentary: For much of Africa the question is
“At what price stability?” For the author of the accompanying
article, that price could be the rule of law, democracy, or free
and fair elections. The main example the article provides is
that of the 2017 elections in Kenya. The incumbent won the
contested vote, and the opposition turned to the courts to
challenge the outcome. The Supreme Court, to the surprise of
many, ordered a do-over, but the hurried process with which the
new round of voting ensued, along with an opposition boycott,
resulted in more than 15 million people refusing to participate
in what was regularly described as an illegitimate election.
Even with the Kenyan electoral commission declaring that the
second vote was a shambles, foreign ambassadors, according
to the article, emphasized stability, essentially placing it above
credible elections. It should be noted, however, that nowhere
in the article does it mention that any foreign ambassadors
were interviewed or given an opportunity to refute such an
assessment.

“In the name of this ‘Stability Doctrine’, foreign
governments tip the political balance in favor of existing
power and the state.”
Source: Nanjala Nyabola, “Will the Stability Doctrine in Africa destabilise
the world?”African Arguments, 23 January 2018. http://africanarguments.
org/2018/01/23/will-the-stability-doctrine-in-africa-destabilise-the-world/
In the name of this “Stability Doctrine”, foreign governments tip the
political balance in favour of existing power and the state. They bolster the
short-term status quo, even if that means disregarding visible discontent and
overlooking state abuses. They pick power over protesters, and privilege the
interests of others over those of the citizens in the countries at hand.
The Stability Doctrine treats Africa as a place to make as much money as
quickly as possible, not a place where people live, love and exist. It ensures
African countries continue to play a position in the periphery of global
politics, providing raw materials, markets, and an acquiescent labour force
for multinational corporations.

The reality, however, is that while outsiders are tipping the scales in favor
The article intimated that much of this foreign diplomatic
of wealth and the status quo in the corridors of power, African countries are
attitude is ascribed to corporations needing stability before
growing increasingly inhospitable for many of their citizens, particularly the
risking significant investments in a country. This is occurring
youth.
at the same time as many foreign governments, because of
economic limitations or frustration with past efforts, are
trying to extract themselves from becoming involved in the governance and government of individual African nations. The result is that foreign
governments, in order to provide a stable milieu for investing, tend to favor the existing power, thus bolstering the status quo even if it means
overlooking discontent and state abuses.
While such an approach may yield stability now, in the long run it could actually be counterproductive as people become increasingly
frustrated that their desire for liberal democracy is being subjugated to elites and corporations. Thus, that push for stability could paradoxically
be increasing instability.
The author relates that it has not always been this way. Back in the Cold War era there was an emphasis on creating long-term allies. What
has changed, especially in the last ten years, is the rise of China, Turkey, and other non-Western economic countries that have challenged the
West’s economic dominance of the African continent. According to the author, foreign policymakers, including Westerners, have weakened their
insistence on good governance not just to push stability, but also in order to enable their corporations to compete in this new environment where
not all players are going to follow the old rules. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

When a River Runs Through It: Riverine Operations in Contemporary Conflict
By LTC (R) Lester Grau, LTC (R) Leroy Denniston
Waterways and population centers will be factors in future war. Frequently they will be collocated and will become operational
key terrain. Riverine operations will be a part of future military actions and will be an Army problem. The best way to prepare for
a future problem is through study, training, and equipment design and development.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195094

OE Watch | March 2018

8

AFRICA
Abubakar Shekau…Dead Man Running
OE Watch Commentary: Abubakar Shekau, the leader of the Boko
Haram terrorist group, was reported by the Nigerian army to be on the run.
According to the accompanying excerpted article, the military based their
assessment of Shekau on information provided by surrendered insurgents.
Additional intelligence supposedly revealed that he could not withstand the
pressure from the counterinsurgency campaign the Nigerian government
has been conducting against his Sambisa Forest hideout, and that he
disguised himself as a woman using various hijabs to facilitate his escape.

“The Nigerian Army Tuesday claimed that the
factional leader of the Boko Haram terrorists,
Abubakar Shekau is on the run disguising as a
woman in different hijabs.”

While Shekau abandoning his fighters would be welcome news by
the many Nigerians Boko Haram has terrorized over the years, it must be
remembered that there have also been repeated reports of his death. The
earliest one was in 2009, the same year he assumed leadership of Boko
Haram following the execution of its founder, Mohammed Yusuf. Shekau
however, surfaced in a July 2010 video, dispelling the earlier reports of his
demise. Over the years there were repeated claims of his being killed, only
to have him reappear in videos, claiming how he enjoyed orchestrating
an attack that took 180 lives, or laughing after abducting over 200 girls in
Chibok, an action that received worldwide attention.
Some Nigerian media claim he was killed and that imposters
have taken his place. His supposed use of body doubles just adds to the
confusion. The Nigerian military has not helped the situation, earlier
announcing he was dead, and now saying he has run off because he could
not deal with the sustained tempo of fighting. Dead or furtive fugitive, he
cannot be both.
To be sure, there has definitely been progress against Boko Haram
in Nigeria, with the armed forces, through Operation Deep Punch II.
The operation cleared terrorists from large areas of Sambisa Forest,
including Camp Zairo, which served as Boko Haram’s headquarters.
After that successful operation, the Nigerian military declared the
terrorist organization defeated, but a surge of attacks by the group has,
like Shekau’s reappearances, cast doubt on the government.
It may be true that Shekau fled the fighting, disguised as a woman
and reportedly alternating the colors of his hijab between black and
blue, however, probably no one would be surprised to see this brutal and
violent terrorist fight again. After all, not even his own death seems to
stop him. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

The Nigerian army claims Boko Haram leader Abubakar Shekau, in the middle,
fled the scene of recent fighting disguised as a woman.
Source:tiny.cc/jinnews, https://goo.gl/YSvMvW, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

Source: Segun Olaniyi, “Shekau on the run, disguised as a woman,
Nigerian Army says,” The Guardian (Nigeria), 13 February 2018.
https://guardian.ng/news/shekau-on-the-run-disguised-as-womannigerian-army-says/
The Nigerian Army Tuesday claimed that the factional leader
of the Boko Haram terrorists, Abubakar Shekau is on the run
disguising as a woman in different hijabs.
The Director Army Public Relations, Brig. Gen Sani Usman
said in a statement on Tuesday that credible information from
surrendered insurgents indicated that the factional leader of
the group could not sustain the tempo of the heat of the ongoing
counterinsurgency going on in the forest.
[Troops] have also rescued civilians being held hostages by the
terrorists, recovered arms, ammunition, Improvised Explosives
Devices (IED) factories and making materials as well as other
equipment.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR
by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | March 2018

9

AFRICA
The Risk of the “Somalization” of the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 January an article in the Frenchlanguage courrierinternational.com discussed perspectives from
the Sahel on the ongoing violence in the region. There has been an
increase in landmine and suicide attacks in Mali, and according to the
article, the militants are sending a message to the G5 Sahel, which
comprises Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and Niger and
receives the support of up to 4,000 French troops in the region. The
G5 was created in 2014 but has recently attracted significant publicity,
according to the article, because of the launch of a new operation
codenamed Pagnali, which means “thunder” in the local Fulani
language.
The article expressed concern that due to pressure on terrorists in
Syria, Iraq, and Afghanistan they may relocate to the Sahel, where the
operational environment is more permissive for them, specifically that
a “‘Somalization’ of the Sahel region is under way.” This could lead to
a scenario where various jihadists from around the world collect in the
region, which is already overwhelmed with disorder. This is the prime
reason why the article urges the G5 Sahel to act immediately to restore
order and prevent the region from becoming like Somalia.
Among the biggest victims of this situation of insecurity, according
to the article, are civilians. The article points to an example of a group
that traveled from Burkina Faso to a market in Boni in central Mali
but their vehicle hit a mine that killed women and children. Making
things more difficult, this attack, like many others, remain unclaimed,
although the article notes it is clear that the terrorists who operate in
the area are responsible. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Everything suggests that hunted jihadists in Syria,
Iraq and Afghanistan and from around the world have
made an appointment in the Sahel.”
Source: “Multiplication des attaques terroristes: la “somalisation”
du Sahel est en marche (Multiplication of terrorist attacks:
the “Somalization” of the Sahel is underway),” www.
courrierinternational.com, 30 January 2018. https://www.
courrierinternational.com/article/multiplication-des-attaquesterroristes-la-somalisation-du-sahel-est-en-marche
The joint G5 was announced with much publicity, but it is slow to
see the light of day. It is possible new attacks have been perpetrated
to taunt the leaders of the subregion. The G5 Sahel just launched the
anti-jihadist operation Pagnali (which means “thunder” in Fulani).
While leaders prepare the response, Allah’s lunatics are also refining
their strategies. Aware that they will not be able to stand up to the
troops of the sub-region, the terrorists have decided to multiply their
acts of despair, in this case the suicide bombings and the attacks with
mines. The “Somalization” of the Sahel region is under way, to say
the least. It is urgent to act. Everything suggests that hunted jihadists
in Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan and from around the world have made
an appointment in the Sahel.
On January 25, 26 Malian and Burkinabe civilians, including women
and children, died in another attack. Their vehicle from Burkina
Faso, which was traveling to the Boni market in central Mali, jumped
on a mine.

Ansar Dine Tombouctou.

Source: Magharebia, “Ansar Dine Tombouctou,” https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ansar_Dine_Tombouctou.JPG, (CC-BY-2.0).

OE Watch | March 2018

10

AFRICA
Boko Haram Psyop on Chibok Girls Continue
OE Watch Commentary: On 15 January the excerpted article appeared
in the Nigerian publication Vanguard. It discussed a video Boko Haram
released showing a group of 14 of the schoolgirls kidnapped in Chibok,
Nigeria in April 2014. Wearing blue niqabs and with three of them holding
babies, one of the girls spoke to the camera and said that the Boko Haram
leader Abubakr Shekau had married them off and taken care of them and
that they no longer wanted to return home. The article notes that there is
no way to tell whether the girls were under duress or speaking voluntarily
but the video came nearly a year after the last exchange of 82 schoolgirls
in May 2017 between Boko Haram and the Nigerian government and one
month after one of the Chibok schoolgirls was found near the border with
Cameroon. After the exchange in May 2017 Boko Haram released a similar
video with four girls wearing black niqabs in which they held guns and also
said they did not want to return home.
The latest video, like the May 2017 video, is part of psychological
operation by Boko Haram against Nigerian society and the government.
There are currently no reports of negotiations underway between the
Nigerian government or international organizations and Boko Haram, as
was the case when the last exchange was made with Boko Haram. This
could mean this video indicates the door on negotiations has been sealed.
Whether or not the girls have Stockholm syndrome, their fate will be
in the hands of Boko Haram for the foreseeable future. Only a rescue
operation or revived negotiations with Boko Haram may allow them to be
free again. However, even if free, it is unclear whether some of the girls
featured in the videos would indeed want to leave their Boko Haram captors
and new so-called husbands and whether they would be able to reintegrate
once back home. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“We are the Chibok girls… By the grace of Allah, we will
not return to you.”

August 2016 ‘Proof of Life’ Video Showing Dozens of Kidnapped Chibok Girls
Source: VOA, https://www.voanews.com/a/boko-haram-some-abducted-chibok-girls-killed-in-air-strikes/3463613.html, CC-BYSA-2.0 (Public Domain).

Source: “Boko Haram propaganda: 14 Chibok girls vow not
to return,” vanguardngr.com, 15 January 2018. https://www.
vanguardngr.com/2018/01/boko-haram-propaganda-14-chibokgirls-vow-not-return/
‘Boko Haram released a new video purporting to show at least
14 of the schoolgirls abducted from the northeast Nigerian town
of Chibok in April 2014. At least three of the group were seen
carrying babies. One of the students said: “We are the Chibok
girls… . By the grace of Allah, we will not return to you.” It
was not clear when or where the latest message was recorded
or whether those who appeared on camera were under duress.
But the woman speaking, her face covered by a veil, said they
had all been married by Boko Haram factional leader Abubakar
Shekau. The Chibok abductees are among thousands of women,
girls and boys kidnapped during the conflict, which began in
2009 and has killed at least 20,000 people and displaced more
than 2.6 million.

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections and
commentary from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | March 2018

11

AFRICA
Conflict, Cash, and Cholera
OE Watch Commentary: Cholera, an infection of the small intestine, is largely preventable
through public health measures such as ensuring the water and food supply are not contaminated
with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. However, as the accompanying article relates, the disease is
still stubbornly prevalent in several parts of Africa, mostly due to two big factors: conflict and cashstrapped governments. Not surprisingly with regards to conflict, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (DRC), which has been wracked by violence from the failure of President Kabila to step down
at the end of his term, as well as ongoing fighting among various groups over the country’s vast
mineral riches, has been struck particularly hard by cholera. Médecins Sans Frontières reported 55,000
cases, including 1,190 deaths last year. Besides the difficulties in providing needed sanitation programs
in conflict areas to prevent the disease, the country’s instability has also precluded significant tax
revenue being raised to adequately fund public health programs. Compounding the problem is that
a significant portion of the tax revenue that is raised is diverted to attempts to quell the unrest, as
opposed to being used in disease prevention efforts. Thus, the DRC is a prime example of both conflict
and a lack of funding resulting in cholera outbreaks.
The war-torn countries of Somalia and South Sudan have also been hit hard by the disease, with
approximately 78,000 cases for Somalia and 17,000 for South Sudan reported in 2017. As conflict
in both of those countries has continued into 2018, it is expected that cholera will continue to be a
problem. Interestingly, much like the DRC, both countries have natural resources – large oil deposits
in South Sudan and a stunning coastline in Somalia that many years ago sprouted numerous resorts –
but due to conflict are unable to be fully developed and provide the needed financing for public health
programs.
Some African countries are not in the midst of large-scale fighting, but due to mismanagement
and/or corruption, lack the funds to combat cholera. Such is the case for Zimbabwe, which under
Robert Mugabe has gone, as some describe it, “from Africa’s breadbasket to a basket case.” Mugabe
was forced to resign in November 2017, but the damage to the economy and the public health
system cannot be immediately reversed. The result is outbreaks of cholera and typhoid, from, as the
accompanying article describes, an “appalling” sanitation system.
Zimbabwe is hardly the only country in the eastern and southern regions of Africa described in
this article that lacks appropriate infrastructure for public health. In the twelve countries constituting
that area, only 53 percent of the people have access to potable water and just 30 percent to basic
sanitation. 21 percent still practice open defecation. For those who do contract cholera, the health care
infrastructure, such as the quality and quantity of hospitals, is often equally weak, greatly reducing the
chances they will survive. All of this is preventable, but not when the two factors mentioned earlier cash-strapped governments and conflict - are present. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Source: Tonderayi Mukeredzi,
“Africa’s all too preventable cholera
crisis,” IRIN (Zimbabwe contributor),
1 February 2018. http://www.
irinnews.org/news/2018/02/01/africas-all-too-preventable-cholera-crisis
Southern and East African countries
are facing a severe cholera outbreak
that is exposing the failure in
public sanitation and the impact of
government neglect.
Portia Manangazira, the director of
Epidemiology and Disease Control in
Zimbabwe’s Ministry of Health and
Child Care, acknowledged that the
public health and sanitation situation
in the country was “appalling”, and
the nation could do much better to
stop “creating” avoidable health
crises.
The [Zambian] government and the
WHO blame poor waste management
and inadequate personal hygiene for
the contamination of water and food
in the townships, which has driven
the epidemic.
Zimbabwe’s cash-strapped
government has struggled to make
those investments in sewerage
infrastructure and water management
systems, with cholera outbreaks
becoming more frequent since the
early 1990s when the economy first
stalled.

“Southern and East African countries are facing a severe cholera

outbreak that is exposing the failure in public sanitation and the impact of
government neglect.”

Boko Haram’s presence in northeast Nigeria has resulted in a lack of potable water, leading to cholera outbreaks. Clean water stations, such as the one pictured here,
serve some of the people displaced by the fighting.
Source: European Commission DG Echo/Solidarites International, https://www.flickr.com/photos/eu_echo/37745611354/, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

12

AFRICA
Namibia: Hangry Soldiers
OE Watch Commentary: If truly “an army marches on its stomach,”
an expression attributed to both Napoleon and Frederick the Great,
then Namibia’s military is in trouble. According to the accompanying
excerpted article, the southern African nation is forcing thousands of its
troops – the Namibian government did not provide the exact number,
citing confidentiality – to take leave as it can no longer afford to feed
them. With a military just 15,500 strong, even if the number placed on
leave is only 1000, such an action leaves the country with a significantly
smaller force. To make matters worse, it is not just that the government
cannot feed the soldiers; it also is struggling to pay the military’s electric
and water bills. Meanwhile, the army owes municipalities millions of
dollars.
Although funding for defense shrank this year compared to last
year’s expenditures, the military actually receives the third largest chunk
of the national budget. Much of that is used to purchase new equipment.
Despite that hefty appropriation, last year the armed forces overspent in
four different departments. Additionally, there was a large unexplained
sum spent on subsistence and travel allowances. This year’s military
budget was smaller and apparently insufficient, at least in the way it was
allocated, to meet the basic needs of its troops.
While the accompanying article does not detail the reason for
Namibia’s economic difficulties that have led to its military needing to
scale back spending, a late 2017 World Bank report does offer insight
into the primary causes. Even though the country is rich in minerals and
politically stable, it is not immune from global forces. Thus, the 2016
worldwide economic slowdown that caused the country’s mineral prices
to drop spilled over into other sectors, such as external trade and public
sector finance. A drought the same year placed additional strains on the
economy. Government budgetary issues from these past difficulties,
along with continuing economic weakness in some sectors, have
contributed to the defense department’s present day financial problems.
Fortunately, Namibia’s surrounding neighbors are friendly,
making any need for immediate military action to defend its territory
from invasion by a foreign nation unlikely. Meanwhile, the troops on
extended leave will continue to be paid, but apparently not fed and
housed at government expense. Additionally, the economic forecast is
for a recovery, albeit slow at first, although the article makes no mention
of when or what percentage of those troops sent home will be recalled
to their bases, should defense spending begin to return to its previous
funding levels. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Thousands of army personnel staying at the seven
bases around the country will be forced to take leave
with effect from next month.”

A Namibian soldier sets up an electric firing system during an exercise with the
Namibian Defense Forces EOD and Police Explosive Control Unit back when
military budgets and morale were fairly robust. Recent austerity measures have
decreased both.
Source: US Air Force photo by Master Sgt. Dawn Price, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:US_Navy_110426-F-XM360-533_Armed_
Forces_Namibia_Defense_Forces_Warrant_Officer_Mashatu_Jonas,_center,_sets_up_an_electric_firing_system_during_the.jpg, Public
Domain

Source: Ndapewoshali Shapwanale, “Defense Sends 1000’s on
Leave,” The Namibian, 31 January 2018. https://www.namibian.
com.na/63861/read/Defence-sends-1000s-on-leave
Thousands of army personnel staying at the seven bases around
the country will be forced to take leave with effect from next month.
Those who are already on leave have been asked not to report for
duty since the army can no longer afford to feed them as well as
food [sic] the water and electricity bills.
The defence ministry was allocated N$5,6 billion of the national
budget for the 2017/2018 financial year. This was less than the
N$5,9 billion they had received in the 2016/2017 financial year.

OE Watch | March 2018

13

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey Eyes Police/Military Cooperation with
Azerbaijan and Kyrgyzstan
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying passages
from Turkish sources discuss, the Turkish Gendarmerie General
Command (which is part of the Turkish Interior Ministry) is aiming
to re-activate the ‘Organization of Eurasian Law Enforcement
Agencies with Military Status.’ The group, which goes by the
acronym TAKM per its founders Turkey, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan
and Mongolia, was initially set up in 2013 with the goal of
strengthening cooperation and experience-sharing among the four
countries’ law-enforcement personnel, but did not become active at
that time.
As the first passage from the Turkish-language daily newspaper
Milliyet discusses, “The organization was initially established
in 2013 but then it was put on hold due to Mongolia’s decision to
terminate the military formation.” The passage also points out
that the Turkish Gendarmerie is leading the effort, with the goal
to strengthen relationships between law enforcement agencies
with a military status in Eurasia, and to share information and
experience as well as how gendarmerie personnel from Turkey will
train other countries’ law enforcement personnel. The symbol for
the organization will include the figure of a horse, which has an
important meaning in each of these countries’ cultures. On top
will also be four stars to represent the four countries. The second
passage comes from Stratejik Ortak, a Turkish news website on
defense issues, and it notes how the organization also hopes to fight
organized crime and other crimes that fall under the responsibility
of law enforcement, such as terrorism and smuggling. The
organization is “not against a particular enemy, country or
organization.”
The third passage from Al-Monitor, a news website with analysts
from Turkey, also notes that the organization’s charter allows any
Eurasian country with gendarmerie law enforcement units to apply
for membership, and that Kazakhstan has expressed a firm intention
to join. Russia is reportedly also closely following the re-activation
efforts.
The Turkish gendarmerie is quite unique compared to many
others, because it has conventional combat experience. It was
active in Turkey’s Euphrates Shield Operation in Syria, which was
launched in August 2016. As the third accompanying passage
notes, it is active in combating terror and border security with
its attack helicopters, heavy armored vehicles, armed drones and
combat-proven special operation teams and looks more like “an
army with serious conventional military capabilities instead of a
rural police force.” This effort appears to be part of a larger effort
by the Turkish gendarmerie to expand its coordination with foreign
forces. As the final passage notes, the gendarmerie command
is already in close cooperation with Italy and France in training
and joint exercises. It also executes train-and-equip programs in
Macedonia, Gambia and Somalia. End OE Watch Commentary
(Kaya)

“The force will consist of Turkey, Azerbaijan,
Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, and will be named
‘Organization of Eurasian Law Enforcement
Agencies with Military Status.’”

Source: “Türk dünyası ortak ordusunu kuruyor (The Turkic world is
establishing its joint army),” Milliyet.com.tr, 13 December 2017. http://
www.milliyet.com.tr/turk-dunyasi-ortak-ordusunu-kuruyorgundem-2571475/
The Turkic world is establishing a ‘Eurasian Military Force’...
Initially, the force will consist of Turkey, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan
and Mongolia, and will be named “Organization of Eurasian Law
Enforcement Agencies with Military Status.” Its symbol will be a horse
and four stars. Turkey will be represented by its Gendarmerie General
Command in the force, which will officially become operational
in 2018 and work only for peace. The organization was initially
established in 2013 but then it was put on hold due to Mongolia’s
decision to terminate the military formation that was to join the
Eurasia Military Force; now the joint military is being re-activated.
The Organization of the Eurasian Law Enforcement Agencies with
Military Status will aim to strengthen relationships between law
enforcement agencies with military status in Eurasia, and to share
information and experience...
Turkey will be represented by its Gendarmerie Command... The
gendarmerie personnel from Turkey will also train other countries’
law enforcement personnel. Turkey is leading the effort in this force...
The symbol for the organization will include the figure of a horse,
which has an important meaning in each of these countries’ cultures.
On top will also be four stars to represent the four countries.
Source: “Ortak Türk Ordusu Kuruldu (TAKM) (Joint Turkic Army
(TAKM)” is Established),” StratejikOrtak.com, 16 December 2017.
https://www.stratejikortak.com/2017/12/ortak-turk-ordusu-kuruldu.html
A new and useful structure has been formed in Eurasia, to fight
against organized crime, and other crimes that fall under the
responsibility of law enforcement, such as anti-terror and smuggling.
It is not against a particular enemy, country or organization. It has
come together to fight international crimes. ... It will also ensure the
security or the region’s energy routes...
Source: Metin Gürcan, “Turkey’s ‘war machine’ goes global,” Al
Monitor, 28 December 2017. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2017/12/turkey-eurasianism-is-rising-among-gendarmerieranks.html
...[T]he gendarmerie command — which is active in combating
terror and border security with its attack helicopters, heavy armored
vehicles, armed drones and combat-proven special operations teams
at its disposal — appears more like an army with serious conventional
military capabilities instead of a rural police force...
The gendarmerie command, which has been in close cooperation with
Italy and France in training and joint exercises, also executes its own
train-and-equip programs in Macedonia, Gambia and Somalia. Now
it is eyeing Eurasia for 2018...
According to TAKM’s charter, any Eurasian country with
gendarmerie law enforcement units could apply for membership,
and Kazakhstan has expressed a firm intention to join. Russia is also
closely following the reactivation efforts.
OE Watch | March 2018

14

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt-Turkey Friction Over Political Order in the
“Levant Basin”
OE Watch Commentary: In 2014, the leaders
of Egypt and Cyprus ratified a bilateral agreement
signed the year before, which delimited the two
countries’ Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs)
in the Mediterranean Sea. The agreement was
largely motivated by Egypt’s desire to exploit the
massive offshore natural gas deposits within its
EEZ in the “Levant Basin,” the eastern corner of the
Mediterranean Sea. The first accompanying article,
from the Qatari daily al-Araby al-Jadid, explains how
before Abdel Fattah Sisi gained power in 2013, the
Egyptian government had preferred to avoid delimiting
the EEZs for various reasons. Sisi, in contrast, has put
securing these resources atop his list of priorities, “[and
ex-president Hosni] Mubarak’s complex calculus visa-vis Turkey and Israel were not part of his calculus;
he treated the first as a regional adversary after 2013
and has had no issues collaborating with the second in
various matters of politics, strategy and security.”

Source:
‫املناطق االقتصادية في املتوسط تجدد التوتر املصري التركي‬
“Economic Zones in the Mediterranean Renew Egypt-Turkey Tensions,” al-Araby
al-Jadid, 8 February 2018. https://goo.gl/gDHgGU

Sisi has overseen a major expansion of Egyptian
military power over the past few years, particularly
its naval capabilities. According to the second
accompanying passage, from the influential
Saudi daily al-Hayat, this military expansion and
modernization is tailored to protect Egyptian economic
interests in the Mediterranean.

Source:
‫تحديث منظومة الجيش سمح للقاهرة بتأمني مصالحها في املتوسط‬
Ahmed Rahim. “Modernized Military Systems Allow Cairo to Secure its Interests in
the Mediterranean,” al-Hayat, 10 February 2018. http://www.alhayat.com/
Articles/27258876

Recently, Turkey began challenging the political order
Egypt seeks to create in the Levant Basin. Turkey does
not recognize the Nicosia-based Cypriot government
and therefore does not recognize the EEZs established
in the Cyprus-Egypt agreement. In February 2017,
Turkey’s foreign minister stated that his country would
begin exploring for offshore gas in areas claimed by
Cyprus. The Egyptian Foreign Ministry responded
with oblique warnings against attempts to infringe
on Egypt’s sovereign rights. On 13 February, Turkish
warships prevented a commercial drill ship from
entering a maritime zone licensed by the Cypriot
government.
This is all taking place as the Egyptian military
carries out Operation Sinai 2018, a massive nationwide
military campaign showcasing many of the new
weapons systems purchased during the Sisi era. The
operation included the mobilization of Egypt’s two
Mistral-class helicopter carriers and other naval assets,
and according to a retired Egyptian officer cited in
the third accompanying article, the mobilizations “are
tantamount to a message to anyone seeking to challenge
Egyptian investments and economic interests in the
Mediterranean, in particular Turkey.” The article, from
the Saudi daily al-Sharq al-Awsat, also highlights
Turkish unease with the recent “Medusa 5” naval-aerial
military exercises carried out by Egypt and Greece last
year. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

[An Egyptian diplomatic source] explained that Turkey knows well that Cairo
is more committed than ever to end the maritime border problems to draw more
investments in the oil and natural gas sectors, given that it is the only sector that
will allow Egypt major economic gains without having to wait tens of years. This
makes Egypt lay aside the caution that was in place during the rule of ex-president
Hosni Mubarak, before the 2011 revolution. For Mubarak, resolving the issue
of borders and dividing the Mediterranean Sea’s resources could wait until the
resolution of the Turkey-Greece conflict on the one hand, and to not be forced to
recognized Israel’s purported maritime boundary on the other hand. The Supreme
Council for the Armed Forces (SCAF), of which Sisi was a member, wanted to
keep the status quo until a government was elected, despite pressure from some
neighboring countries to resolve it. Therefore, this issue was at the forefront of
Sisi’s priorities, whether in terms of the Red Sea or the Mediterranean. Mubarak’s
complex calculus vis-a-vis Turkey and Israel were not part of his calculus;
he treated the first as a regional adversary after 2013 and has had no issues
collaborating with the second in various matters of politics, strategy and security.”

In 2015 and 2016, many Egyptians asked themselves about the push to modernize
the military’s various weapons systems, leading to enormous cost in an already
strained budget and amidst economic conditions in which all, the rich included,
were suffering. Many questions were raised at the time, including why the
country sought to own two naval carriers and submarines while at the same
time negotiations loans of billions of dollars from the IMF and other financial
institutions. The answer to this question would come later, as Egypt would have
been unable to secure economic interests being monitored by the authorities in the
near-term without modernizing the military, in particular the navy…
A reliable Egyptian source told al-Hayat that the military “committed to securing
the economic zone along the Mediterranean coastline after the forces experienced
and responded to a ‘provocation’ there.” Last month, President Abdel Fattah Sisi
said that “the military is securing gas fields in the Mediterranean.” He asked:
“Would someone come to provoke us if we did not have the power to confront
them?” He then answered: “Has anyone tried to provoked us?… Yes, but we were
ready with our full force.”
The source told al-Hayat that the development of the naval forces was necessary
before announcing that gas had been discovered in the Mediterranean, adding:
“No international drilling company would come before being assured that the finds
would be secured so that their investments would not be lost.” In the final months
of last year, Egypt finished modernizing the Alexandria Naval Base and carried
out the “Battle of the Masts” naval exercises, which foreign media was allowed to
witness and which included exercises to “secure a vital naval target and shooting
artillery at a surface target”…
The source added that “ for the naval forces to reach 200 kilometers from the coast
these weapons and equipment were necessary and a fundamental development
of naval infrastructure. This made it possible to quickly reach the gas fields in
the Economic Zone, especially in light of regional interactions.” Late last year,
Egypt opened its first comprehensive military base in Marsa Matrouh, on the
Mediterranean coast. It includes units from all the main and secondary branches
of the armed forces. The developments in the navy are primarily focused on the
Northern Fleet, which points to the prioritization of securing economic interests in
the Mediterranean.”
OE Watch | March 2018

15

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Egypt-Turkey Friction Over Political
Order in the “Levant Basin”
Source:
‫مصر تُنفذ تدريب ًا بحري ًا بالصواريخ ملواجهة تهديدات في املتوسط‬
Mohammed Nabil Hilmi. “Egypt Conducts Naval Exercises with Missiles to Confront ‘Threats’ in the Mediterranean,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 14
February 2018. https://goo.gl/ghmPXx
While Egypt began its first movements following Turkey’s confronting a gas drilling ship in Cypriot waters last Sunday, Egyptian armed
forces yesterday carried out a number of training activities in the Mediterranean operations theater, by launching four ground-sea and seaskimming missiles. Yesterday, the Egyptian military stated that these movements are in the context of training to “deal with all threats and
aggressions in its regional waters”… The Turkish Foreign Ministry has objected to Egypt-Cyprus relations, particularly military relations.
Last November Turkey stated its rejection of “ joint military maneuvers between Egypt and Greece on the Greek island of Rhodes.” The
Egyptian navy and air force nonetheless conducted the exercises, which were called “Medusa 5” and included the Mistral-class helicopter
carrier (Anwar al-Sadat), the FREMM-class frigate (Tahya Misr), the S41 submarine, and a number of Greek naval vessels, in addition to a
formation of F-16 fighter jets. [Retired] General Samir Farraj, former head of morale in the Egyptian Armed Forces, told al-Sharq al-Awsat
that “the naval exercises are tantamount to a message to anyone seeking to challenge Egyptian investments and economic interests in the
Mediterranean, in particular Turkey.”

“… a message to anyone seeking to challenge Egyptian investments and economic interests in the
Mediterranean, in particular Turkey…”

Image from the “Medusa 5” Egypt-Greek Exercise, November 2017.

Source: Egyptian Army Spokesperson Facebook Page, https://www.facebook.com/EgyArmySpox/photos/pcb.1170803216383992/1170801969717450/?type=3&theater, Public Domain.

OE Watch | March 2018

16

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Warship Sinks after Mishap
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2007, the Iranian leadership has redoubled
emphasis on Iran’s navy in order to project power beyond the Persian Gulf.
Simultaneously, Iran’s government has prioritized its own indigenous military
industries so as to become less reliant on foreign suppliers. A recent incident
raises questions about how effectively the Iranian military has done both.
While the Iranian navy’s activities in the Persian Gulf, Red Sea, and
sometimes Eastern Mediterranean make international headlines, it has also
deployed ships in the Caspian Sea to defend Iran’s interests over maritime
disputes in the oil rich waters and to counter smuggling and poaching in
offshore fisheries. It was in the Caspian that, according to the semi-official
Young Journalists Club in an article excerpted here, on 10 January 2018, the
Iranian frigate “Damavand” struck a breakwater while attempting to dock in
the Iranian port of Bandar Anzali and sank. Even if seas were stormy, such
an incident raises questions about the quality of Iran’s indigenous military
platforms and the competence of its naval personnel.
Initially, the Iranian military denied that the Damavand had sunk. However,
in the video accompanying the Young Journalists Club report, it is clear
that the Damavand did sink, even if waters were shallow. That the Iranian
military would deny the incident and that a semi-official outlet would not
only ignore this but photograph the aftermath and openly contradict the
official line indicates that at least some portions of the Iranian press are no
longer willing to cover up the regime’s mistakes and errors. Whether such
willingness to contradict authorities is the new normal or simply a temporary
extension of the resistance accompanying the recent mass protests remains to
be seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Jamaran frigate in Velayat-90 Naval Exercise.

Source: Mohammad Sadegh Heydari, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AIranian_Velayat-90_Naval_Exercise_by_
IRIN_(6).jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: “Navshakan-e Damavand Gharegh Shod”
(“Damavand Destroyer Has Sunk”), Young Journalists Club,
28 January 2018. https://goo.gl/p3xaaB
On January 10, 2018, as the destroyer Damavand arrived in
port, it hit the breakwater due to the increase in wind speed
and storm in the Caspian Sea. Unfortunately, two of the
Damavand crew also disappeared in the incident. After 16
days, the bodies of the two martyrs were found. According to
the public relations department of the 4th regular navy corps,
the damage is negligible and will be repairs in a short time,
but the destroyer has now sunk.

“As the destroyer Damavand arrived in port, it hit the breakwater.”

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:
30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES
OE Watch | March 2018

17

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Telegram Giving Data to US and Israel
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps’ Passive Defense Organization was the first unit
within Iran’s security structure to address cyber defense in a
systematic way, and it remains an influential, if not paramount,
voice in setting Iran’s cyber policies. In the excerpted article
from Tasnim News Agency, a news agency close to the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), Passive Defense
Organization head Gholamreza Jalali accuses Telegram,
one of the most popular social media apps in Iran, of active
engagement in espionage.

Source: “Etela’at-e Karbaran-e Irani Tawsat Madiriyat-e Telegram beh
Amrika va Israil Farukhteh Shod” (“Telegram Management Sold the
Information of Iranian users to the United States and Israel”), Tasnim News
Agency, 30 January 2018. https://goo.gl/CYKvjh

While it has been noted that Jalali embraces a xenophobic and
conspiratorial outlook common among senior IRGC officers,
such accusations, even when false, signal a forthcoming
crackdown on foreign social media applications. The Passive
Defense Organization, Iranian cyber police, and the Basij
(paramilitary volunteers) may soon arrest Iranians who have
Telegram for engaging in espionage. While such prohibitions
on social media signal a lack of Iranian regime confidence
in the loyalty of the population especially in the wake of
the December 2017-January 2018 unrest, Jalali’s efforts
to delegitimize Telegram and other Western social media
companies likely signal renewed efforts inside Iran to create
a distinctly Iranian intranet that the Iranian government both
sees as safe and which conforms to the revolutionary values
espoused by the Islamic Republic’s leadership. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

In reference to the recent protests and riots in the country, he said, “This
is a modern-type of security incident, and its dimensions must be identified
and plots thrown out. The agents behind this incident were a triangular:
The first side was in cyberspace, the second side rested on economic
problems, and the last side was the threats of enemies. All three issues must
be checked….”

“There is no doubt that our information stored
in Telegram has certain customers, like the
United States, the Zionist regime…”

Brigadier-General Chief Gholamreza Jalali, head of Passive Defense
Organization, in a speech to a gathering of the provincial directors of
Passive Defense Office in the Martyr [Hassan] Abshenasan hall and
the ten-day Fajr commemoration [marking anniversary of Ayatollah
Khomeini’s 1979 return to Iran], emphasized the magnificence of these
days.

“Telegram CEO Pavel Durov is recognized as an agitator in his own
country. He left Russia as he incited unrest there like our riots and engaged
people in uprisings against authorities. Telegram is a network that collects
16 categories of personal information of its users, such as their phone
numbers, place of work, photos, place of residence, calendars, and more.
This data is stored in its servers which are not located in Iran, and datamining occurs, and after processing, it assembled ‘big data’ which later can
be easily used for assessing information of every community,” Jalali said.
He continued, “Pavel Durov, does not charge Iran for its services. He
sells the personal information of Iranian users to those who are interested
in analysing our country. There is no doubt that our information stored in
Telegram has certain customers, like the United States, the Zionist regime,
the Monafeqin [Mojahedin-e Khalq Organization] and all other groups who
want to use operational forces against us. The clear example of this are the
incidents occurred on 31 December,” Jalali said.

Iran Develops UAS with “Smart Bomb” Capability
OE Watch Commentary: On 3 February 2018 Iranian state news announced
the development of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) equipped with so-called
“smart bombs.” According to the accompanying excerpt of an article from Kayhan
News, an Iranian newspaper, Iran is expected to mass produce a series of its
existing Mohajer-6 drones. Iran’s Minister of Defense Brigadier General Amir
Hatami and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Ground Force Commander,
Brigadier General Mohammad Pakpour, jointly announced this military-technical
development as one of the most important in the Islamic Republic’s almost 40-year
history.

Source: “Eftetahe kaht toleed amboo pahbad Mohajer-6
mosala be bomb ha-ya hooshmand ghaem (The
Mohajer-6 drone is in development with smart-bomb
capability),” Kayhan News, 4 February 2018. https://
goo.gl/bDcAc4

According to the article, the Mohajer-6 is a tactical drone that is also capable
of intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR)
missions. It can reportedly send information in real time and can remain in the air
for a prolonged period. Additionally, the Mohajer-6 is shown in a test flight in the
accompanying video stills from Fars News, another Iranian news media source, as
a reporter explains its logistical capabilities. According to the video correspondent,
the equipped “smart bomb” can identify its target from 12 kilometers away and
take photos from as far as eight kilometers away. End OE Watch Commentary
(Keshavarz and Bunker)

Source: “Pahbad Mohajer-6 ba bomb hooshmand
nokhtezan ghaem (The Mohajer-6 drone with smartbomb),” Fars News (3:14 Minute Video), 5 February
2018. http://www.farsnews.com/MediaDisplay.
aspx?nn=13961116001241

Yesterday, the Defense Minister unveiled a series of
Mohajer-6 drones equipped with smart-bombs that will
be led by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps…

…The drone can identify its target from 12 kilometers
away…

OE Watch | March 2018

18

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: US Sponsoring Islamic State in Afghanistan
OE Watch Commentary: Iranian Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei has in his public speeches
repeatedly embraced and amplified the conspiracy
theory that the United States created the Islamic
State. Prior to the defeat of the Islamic State in
Iraq, Khamenei and other Iranian officials used
both the presence of the Islamic State and supposed
American complicity to justify sponsorship and
control of militias and the presence of Iranian
advisors.

“The United States aims to transfer Islamic State terrorists to
Afghanistan.”

In the excerpted speech posted on Khamenei’s
website, Khamenei accuses the United States both
of transferring the Islamic State to Afghanistan
and being responsible for a rash of major terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. While such accusations
are false, they could both signal Iranian intentions
to augment their own presence or that of their
proxy militias inside Afghanistan and also a desire
in Tehran to foment anti-Americanism among
the Persian (Dari) speaking-population inside
Afghanistan.
Iran has been engaged in Afghanistan since the
fall of the Taliban regime and participated in the
Bonn conference which determined the shape
of the post-2001 Afghan government. It has
also dominated the western Afghan provinces
of Farah, Herat, and Nimruz economically,
culturally, and increasingly politically. In
addition, Iran has long sought to preserve and
increase its influence in both Kabul and the
Pushtun-dominated eastern provinces where
Pakistani influence remains significant.
Should the Islamic Republic of Iran decide to
engage more militarily inside Afghanistan, it
has greater capacity to do so than at any time
since the early 1980s: In recent years, the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps has helped create
the Liwa Fatemiyoun, an Afghan Shi’ite militia
which has also gained battlefield experience
in Syria. While the Islamic State does pose a
threat inside Afghanistan, an augmentation of
Liwa Fatemiyoun and Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps activity might further destabilize
Afghanistan. End OE Watch Commentary
(Rubin)

Supreme Leader Khamenei meets with families of martyrs.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://farsi.khamenei.ir/photo-album?id=38794, Public Domain.

Source: “Biyanat-e Rahbar-e Enghelab dar khasus Koshtar-e Mardam dar Havades-e
Terrorirsti Afghanistan” (“Statement by the Leader of the Revolution on the Killing of
People in the Terrorist Attacks in Afghanistan”), Khamenei.ir, 30 January 2018. farsi.
khamenei.ir/news-content?id=38809
His Excellency, Ayatollah Khamenei, leader of the Islamic Revolution, this morning
at the beginning of a lesson on jurisprudence, expressed deep regret at the killing of
innocent people in the recent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, and said, “The United
States aims to transfer Islamic State terrorists to Afghanistan in order to justify its
continued presence in the region and to establish security for the Zionist regime.”
His Excellency Ayatollah Khamenei with reference to the murder of hundreds of people
in recent months in Afghanistan, added, “The same hands that created the Islamic
State and used it as a means of brutality against the people in Syria and Iraq are today,
following its defeat in those areas, trying to relocate the Islamic State to Afghanistan, and
the recent killings are actually the beginning of this plan.”
The Leader of the Islamic Revolution added, “For U.S.-backed terrorists, there is no
difference between Sunnis and Shi’ites; both Sunni and Shi’ite civilians are their targets.”
He considered the occupation of the regional nations to be the first objective of the United
States, and said, “The United States seeks to ensure that this region will not experience
a good life and the governments and peoples of the region will be so busy with their own
problems that they will not think of confronting the evil factor of arrogance, that is to say,
Zionism.”

OE Watch | March 2018

19

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Winning Hearts and Minds in Deir Ezzor
OE Watch Commentary: Deir Ezzor is a tribal Sunni province of Syria located on the Euphrates River, along the border with Iraq. Its
physical and socio-cultural environments resemble those of Iraq’s Anbar Province, and it was an ISIS stronghold for several years. Late last
year, the provincial capital and surrounding areas were retaken by loyalist forces, with Iranian-backed militias leading the charge. Although it
is not a natural social environment for deep-rooted Iranian influence to take hold, some of the Iran-backed militias may be there to stay. The
foundations for Iran’s ability to assert control over this traditionally Sunni area are partially explained in the accompanying passage, published
last November in the Syrian opposition news website alsouria.net.
According to the article, soft-power measures from as early as 1988 have paved the way for Iran’s new foothold in Deir Ezzor. That year,
the article claims, Iranian envoys began enticing poor villagers from the Baqqara (Baggara) tribe to adopt religious practices associated with
Shi’i Iran. Through mechanisms such as the Imam al-Murtaza Foundation, Iran extended its influence by providing these neglected areas with
material assistance and a new ideological edifice, based on Iranian Revolutionary ideals and centered around newly built Shi’i houses of worship
(Husseiniyat). Iran’s close relations with the Assad government also allowed its envoys and allies to provide government functions in some areas,
according to the article.
The loyalist retaking of Deir Ezzor in late 2017 received crucial support from Nawaf al-Bashir, a prominent member of the Baqqara in Syria.
Al-Bashir had been an early defector to the side of the opposition in 2011, but last summer he publicly declared his renewed support for the
Syrian government on Iran’s Arabic-language news channel al-Alam. The article explains how Iran has leveraged ancestral lineage between
al-Bashir’s clan and Muhammad al-Baqir, the fifth Imam for mainstream Shi’i Islam but a relatively inconsequential figure for Sunni history,
in order to draw him and his followers in the Baqqara tribe back into the loyalist camp. The Baqqara militia, which also played a role in the
Battle of Aleppo, is tellingly called the “Al-Baqir Brigade” in reference to Muhammad al-Baqir. According to the article, the militia received
initial training from Iran but is now trained by Iraqi militias from the Popular Mobilization Forces (for more see: “Shia Symbolism: Iran-Backed
Militias Resurgent in Syria,” OE Watch October 2016 and “Chechen Military Police in East Aleppo,” OE Watch March 2017).
Iran’s persistent efforts in the “gray zone,” at times conducted in conjunction with military operations, have yielded a diffuse yet strongly
rooted presence in Syria. What is occurring in Deir Ezzor is not unique: gaining local allies, spreading ideology, providing material assistance,
and helping set up local militias have all been part of Iran’s modus operandi throughout the Syria conflict. These efforts have borne fruits in part
due to measures begun decades ago, and their cumulative effects are likely to continue for many years. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Saida Zeinab mosque (Damascus).

Source: By Odilia (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saida_Zeinab_mosque_SYRIE_004.jpg, CC 3.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

(continued)
20

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran: Winning Hearts and Minds in
Deir Ezzor
“…a history of Iranian Shi’i proselytism in Deir Ezzor which dates to 1988…”
Source:
‫ وهذه وسائلها لتطبيق أهم مشاريعها بسوريا‬..‫إيران تمضي بنشر التشيع في دير الزور‬
“Iran Continues to Spread Shi’i Ideology in Deir Ezzor… These are the Tools it Uses to Conduct its Most Important Projects in Syria,”
alsouria.net, 29 November 2017. https://goo.gl/xg1axM
Through its militias and proxies in Syria, Iran continues its ongoing project of spreading Shi’ism in Deir Ezzor, after expelling ISIS from
there recently. Ammar Shihab, a resident of Deir Ezzor who is well informed on the project of spreading Shi’i thought, pointed out while
speaking to alsouria.net that part of Iran’s operations consisted in spreading the Shi’i doctrine among Sunni tribal members, using a variety
of methods, most notably providing material goods and managing the affairs of people officially through state agencies and authorities, taking
advantage of the major influence of Iranian officials in state institutions under the rule of the Assad family.
Shihab explained that Iran relied on specific leaders and prominent personalities from Deir Ezzor’s tribes to carry out its agenda, most
notably Nawaf al-Bashir, a sheikh from the Baqqara (Bagara) tribe who announced his allegiance to Tehran. He claimed that al-Bashir plays
a role in carrying out the Iranian agenda by exploiting the financial needs and influence of his tribes, given his role as one of the tribe’s
prominent personalities able to draw its members together. The Anatolia news agency recently reported that al-Bashir oversees an Arab tribal
militia trained and financed by Iran, with the training continued by leaders from the Iranian-backed Iraqi PMF…
Shihab said that Iran took advantage of the siege placed by ISIS on the regime-held Deir Ezzor neighborhoods (al-Jura and al-Qusura) by
using its allies to gain the allegiance of area residents and bring them into the Shi’a sect. The source alleges that Haydar al-Arifi, an official
in the Iranian Chancellery, played a major role in influencing residents of these neighborhoods, particularly since a portion of them were
considered regime loyalists, making things easier for the Iranian officials.
Fragments circulated by activists in Deir Ezzor show sectarian flags alongside Iranian flags and PMF flags in areas that were entered by
Iranian militias in Albu Kamal and al-Mayadin, following the recent withdrawal by ISIS. The activists claim that militia members raised the
flags on the mosques of Albu Kamal, playing sectarian hymns. Iran sent food assistance after its militias took a broad swath of Deir Ezzor
to support the needs of the people, which activists from the province said was a means of gaining popular support, particularly given the
deteriorated economic conditions there.
Shihab alluded to a history of Iranian Shi’i proselytism in Deir Ezzor which dates to 1988, when Tehran began implementing its plans by
focusing on specific villages and geographical areas linked administratively to the city of Deir Ezzor, most notably the towns of Hatla and
Marrat, where the Imam al-Murtaza Foundation, headed by Jamil al-Asad the brother of former regime head Hafez al-Assad, played a major
role. The source added that the foundation focused on people’s material needs in these villages and their fear of the security services and
authorities, as many residents of Hatla and Marrat converted to Shi’ism and built Husseiniyat (Shi’a worship site) there.
Following the year 2000, the number of Shi’i adherents increased and three other Husseiniyat were built, two of them with support from
Kuwaiti Shi’i and the other from the Iranian Chancellery in Damascus. The first was in the town of al-Saawa and the other in Hawayij
Bumsaa, in the northeast countryside of Deir Ezzor, both of which are inhabited by members of the Baqqara tribe. The projects took
advantage of the residents’ poor economic conditions, given that these are among the poorest towns in Deir Ezzor…
They also played on ancestry in some cases, by focusing on the tribes themselves, such as the Baqqara, arguing that they were descendants
of Mohammed al-Baqir (the fifth Imam for Imami Shi’i), in addition to being a tribe which extends to Iraq and many of whose members are
Shi’i. Tehran has also worked to spread Shi’i ideas in parts of Homs and Hama, as well as Damascus and its countryside including Saida
Zaynab neighborhood and parts of Darayya, using similar methods to those used in Deir Ezzor.

AVAILABLE AT:

http://online.fliphtml5.com/tqvn/mcja/#p=32

by LUCAS WINTER, FMSO
OE Watch | March 2018

21

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Raqqa’s Minefields
OE Watch Commentary: The US-backed, Kurdish-led
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), have been nominally in
control of the city of Raqqa and its surrounding countryside
since November 2017. This state of affairs is opposed by both
the Syrian government (backed by Iran and Russia) and by the
official Syrian opposition (backed by Qatar and Turkey). Syrian
loyalist and opposition groups may therefore seek to undermine
the current status quo by working in the so-called “gray zone”
to improve their strategic position in Raqqa. They have plenty of
material to work with, as the three accompanying articles suggest.

Source:
‫الرقة الصورة الكاملة‬
“Raqqa: The Full Picture,” Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently, 31
January 2018. http://www.raqqa-sl.com/?p=5073

Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently (RBSS) is a civilian
organization established in 2014 to document ISIS atrocities from
within Raqqa. The group is sympathetic to the official opposition
and some its members have received refuge in Turkey during the
conflict. Since the expulsion of ISIS from the city in November
2017, the group has continued to document conditions on the
ground. Their diagnosis of present-day Raqqa is not good, as
illustrated by the accompanying excerpt from an article titled
“Raqqa: The Full Picture,” published on the group’s website in
late January 2018. The article bemoans the “extremely slow
rate” at which mines, rubble and corpses are being cleared
from the city, claiming that media friendly to the US-backed
SDF “have sought to portray an image that differs from reality
regarding the destroyed city.” Much of Raqqa remains a physical
minefield, with hundreds of returnees having been killed and
maimed by landmines and explosives. Harsh conditions in refugee
camps, along with fears of dispossession and a desire to return
home, have led many to nonetheless return. Meanwhile, the article
notes, “[governing] councils are busy holding parties and making
pronouncements praising [the Turkish PKK leader]” while at
the same time, “SDF militias are busy setting up ambushes and
arresting young men for forced military conscription, while the
people of Raqqa remain stuck in displacement camps, without
water or medicine.”

Today, after months of the SDF controlling the destroyed city, there
are no true signs of the commissions created to bring about tangible
change in the city’s situation. The efforts to clear mines and rubble or
even remove corpses from beneath the rubble are proceeding at an
extremely slow rate, while these councils are busy holding parties and
making pronouncements praising the terrorist Abdullah Ocalan. The
SDF militias are busy setting up ambushes and arresting young men to
train as part of forcible military conscription, while the people of Raqqa
remain stuck in displacement camps, without water or medicine.

The second accompanying article, authored by a prominent
member of the official opposition from Raqqa, lists additional
complications plaguing the city. In particular, he highlights the
“social and political landmines” of displacement and forced
disappearances, which “will without a doubt create internecine
conflict for which there does not appear to be a solution on the
horizon.” The author is critical of the view that these “social and
political landmines” can only be resolved as part of a broader
settlement and once physical reconstruction begins, seeing in this
line of argument a political ruse designed to indefinitely maintain
the status quo.
The third accompanying article, from the pro-Syrian government
Lebanese daily al-Akhbar, echoes the frustration of Raqqa’s
residents who view the SDF as outside interlopers with political
goals and interests that are at odds with their own. Citing a member
of the “Raqqa Council,” a political body composed of local figures
that are opposed to SDF control over the city, the article hints that
the people of Raqqa may opt for armed resistance “if the Kurds
continue to rule over Raqqa and its people under the pretense of
having liberated it from ISIS.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Winter)

A number of civilian testimonies from within Raqqa attest to the massive
extent of destruction, affecting as much as 80% of the city’s buildings and
infrastructure. Media friendly to the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF)
militia and some foreign media have sought to portray an image that
differs from reality regarding the destroyed city. These groups focus on
photographing the returnees and those fleeing the degradation of refugee
camps lacking in basic human necessities…

ُّ ‫الرقة من‬
Source:
‫يحل ملفات ما بعد داعش؟‬
Khalil al-Hajj Salih. “Raqqa: Who Will Resolve Post-ISIS Issues?”
al-Modon, 16 December 2017. https://goo.gl/riZmsC
The sidelining of Raqqa’s people from any effective role in what happens
to them and their land is met with weakness and hesitation by the official
opposition and regional countries with interests in Syria, as well as the
complete absence thus far of the Syrian regime…
The issue of those kidnapped and forcibly disappeared on the one hand,
and refugees and the displaced on the other hand, are not separate
from issues of rule of law and rights left behind by [ISIS], described
as political and social landmines. [ISIS] issued deeds and papers for
thousands of kidnapped and refugees and sold them or gave them to
its fighters and supporters. This will without a doubt create internecine
conflict for which there does not appear to be a solution on the horizon
and the results of which will be mitigated by local society…
Estimates based on eyewitness testimonies regarding the damage to
Raqqa’s infrastructure, housing and private property estimates that
90-100% of it was destroyed. Some, using impeccable logic, believe that
dealing with the previously mentioned issues must be part of a broader
context that encompasses rebuilding, which in turn must be launched
with or at the end of a comprehensive political process. Therefore, the
rebuilding of Raqqa, which begins from ground zero, is what will make
it possible to deal with the issues of the kidnapped and missing, as well
as the victims of landmines and of looting, and the return of refugees
and the displaced. Yet no one explains how this will happen, unless the
intention were to barter physical reconstruction for some or most of these
issues.
The current political indications are bad regarding the situation in Syria
or in the Syrian Jazira to be specific. This area is currently controlled
by the “international coalition” and the Kurdish militias. There are
no indications of any plans to rebuild by any measure or from any
angle. Most likely its future will remain linked to American wishes - the
strongest force in the “international coalition” - and its policies which
are inscrutable in the long term, in this stage of rapid developments and
changes.
OE Watch | March 2018

22

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Raqqa’s Minefields
“…The military option is not out of the question if the Kurds continue to rule over Raqqa and its people
under the pretense of having liberated it from ISIS…”
Source:
‫الوجود األميركي املُقنّع بـقوات سوريا الديموقراطية الرقة تحت االحتالل‬
Firas al-Hikar. “American Presence Disguised as ‘Syrian Democratic Forces’: Raqqa Under Occupation,” al-Akhbar, 20 January 2018. http://
www.al-akhbar.com/node/289563
A Source in the “Raqqa Council” told al-Akhbar that “the SDF and the PYD are occupation forces and thus sitting with them merely to
negotiate would entail recognizing them, which is why we will not go”… “The military option is not out of the question if the Kurds continue to
rule over Raqqa and its people under the pretense of having liberated it from ISIS, which is supported by their US ally”… The Americans will
not leave Raqqa, at least for the foreseeable future, which is confirmed by American and Kurdish statements. Will the American occupation
represent a reason for civilians to resist? Or will the plan to completely destroy the city succeed and keep Raqqa’s people busy for the next
several years searching for ways to rebuild their homes? Until then, Raqqa will be in the hands of the United States of America.

SDF fighters in Raqqa’s downtown, July 2017.

Source: Mahmoud Bali (VOA), https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:SDF_fighters_in_Raqqa_downtown.png, Public Domain.

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a
marketplace of ideas about the future of
our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and
community of action that continually explores the future through collaborative
partnerships and continuous dialogue with
academia and industry.
OE Watch | March 2018

23

LATIN AMERICA
Military Training Key to Panama’s Success in Counter
Drug Operations
OE Watch Commentary: When the Panamanian Minister of Public Security
Alexis Bethancourt took office in May 2016, he promised to make Panama “the
most secure country in the Americas.” Many factors can be considered when
determining if Bethancourt has kept his word, but some in Panama believe there
is one area he has excelled at and that is in attacking drug trafficking head on.
This idea is demonstrated by the fact that Panamanian authorities seized 84.6
metric tons of drugs (primarily cocaine) in 2017, surpassing the record amount of
72 metric tons seized in 2016 as reported in the excerpted article from La Patilla.
The Ministry of Public Security, the National Aeronaval Service (SENAN), the
National Border Service (SENAFRONT) and the National Police unveiled this
figure at a recent press conference, citing international cooperation as the key to
seizing drugs and combatting criminal organizations. Apart from drugs, Deputy
Police Director Alonso Vega discussed other feats made by the Panamanians
during 2017 to include cash, weapon and boat seizures as well as the confiscation
of drug production equipment.
Panama’s drug seizures are even more impressive when compared to those of
neighboring countries. For example, Costa Rica is also working hard to thwart
drug trafficking and in recent years, has made strides but the numbers do not
compare. For example, Costa Rica seized 12.14 metric tons of cocaine in 2012,
15.1 in 2015, 25 in 2016, and 29.8 in 2017 according to the country’s Ministry
of Public Security. Drug seizures in Costa Rica are significantly less than those
in Panama, but it is important to take into account that Costa Rica is 1 of 22
countries in the world that does not have a military. Because of this, they must
fight their internal drug issues with limited resources such as the Coast Guard, the
National Police Force and the National Drug Police.
Excessive drug passage through Panama and Costa Rica is a direct result of the
fact that they are both transit countries for the largest drug producers in South
America to include Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia. The excerpted article from
Univision notes that Colombian authorities made the largest cocaine bust in the
country’s history when they seized 12 metric tons on 8 November 2017. This
seizure occurred in a banana-growing region of the northwest Antioquia Province,
near Colombia’s border with Panama.
Some in Panama believe the success in seizing record amounts of cocaine can
be attributed to extensive training provided to both SENAN and SENAFRONT
members by partner nations, including the United States and Colombia. Local
security forces also conduct tactical and weapons training with neighboring
Colombia and Guatemala, as well as with other countries, all with the end goal
of achieving enhanced success in counter-drug operations. Panama is also
proactive in enhancing regional interoperability and in 2016, hosted UNITAS, an
exercise that focused on maritime exercises and in-port training as discussed in
the excerpted article from La Estrella de Panamá. What is certain is that Central
America is a key transit region for cocaine from South America, but countries
such as Panama are taking a proactive approach in seeking out training and
working with their neighbors to thwart this issue as best they can. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fiegel)

“During 2017, Panamanian authorities
seized a record breaking 84.6 metric tons of
cocaine.”
Source: “Panama rompe récord de incautación de droga
en lo que va del 2017 (Panama Breaks Record of Drug
Bust in 2017)”, La Patilla, 27 December 2017. https://
www.lapatilla.com/site/2017/12/27/panama-romperecord-de-incautacion-de-droga-en-lo-que-va-del-2017/
During 2017, Panamanian authorities seized a record
breaking 84.6 metric tons of cocaine surpassing the
72 metric tons seized in 2017. In addition to drugs,
authorities also seized more than $6,000,000 million
dollars, 113 weapons, 56 boats, 253 vehicles and 1,000
glass tanks that were used to manufacture crystal meth.
In addition, 147 people were arrested on drug smuggling
charges.
Source: “12 toneladas de cocaína: la mayor incautación
de drogas en la historia de Colombia (12 Tons of Cocaine
Seized in Biggest Drug Bust in Colombia’s History)”,
Univision, 09 November 2017. https://www.univision.
com/noticias/narcotrafico/12-toneladas-de-cocaina-lamayor-incautacion-de-drogas-en-la-historia-de-colombia
President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia announced
the seizure of 12 metric tons of cocaine; the largest
amount to ever be seized in the country. This shipment
allegedly belonged to the Clan del Golfo and had a
reported market value of $360 million. It was found
buried underneath four farms in a banana-growing
region located in the Antioquia province, near Colombia’s
border with Panama.
Source: “Panamá, sede de la operación Unitas 2016
(Panama Hosts Unitas 2016)”, La Estrella de Panamá,
19 September 2017. http://laestrella.com.pa/panama/
nacional/panama-sede-operacion-unitas-2016/23961676
Naval forces from 13 countries in Central, South
American and the Caribbean participated in Panama
Unitas 2016 to include Panama, the United States,
Honduras, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, El Salvador
and Peru. Five others joined as observers to include
Guatemala, Costa Rica, the United Kingdom, Belize
and the Dominican Republic. This exercise focused
on training military forces to counter drug trafficking,
human trafficking and illegal fishing.

OE Watch | March 2018

24

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela Continues to Disappear
OE Watch Commentary: Reports of Venezuela’s continuing
economic decline are now constant and ubiquitous. The
accompanying references highlighted here offer a potentially useful
metric -- where people voluntarily go and do not. During Carnaval,
the festive run-up to Lent, Venezuelans would normally be found
reveling, especially at the beach. They apparently stayed away
from the coast in droves this year. Meanwhile, tens of thousands
were leaving the country daily, mostly going to or through
Colombia. If accelerating, the net refugee outflow is not new, as the
accompanying image attests. This commenter cautions readers not to
suppose that the emigration phenomenon means that a political crisis
is brewing. While it might seem reasonable to conclude that such a
rapid economic down-spiral would at some point spark a change of
government, there is as yet little in the reportage to suggest that the
Cuban Communist Party (PCC) and the Venezuelan United Socialist
Party (PSUV) are losing any of their control over the country. Not
to be found in recent reporting is evidence of any actual threat to the
Bolivarian regime. [As to the second accompanying reference, the
original Clarín article could not be readily accessed, so the provided
URLs are to re-publications.] End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“…hyperinflation and insecurity have done their
bidding…”
“…Almost 35, 000 people cross the border daily
for almost a month.”

Source: “¡Desiertas! Así lucieron playas venezolanas en el fin de
semana de Carnaval (Deserted! This is how the Venezuelan beaches
look in the final week of Carnaval),” El Cooperante, 11 February
2018. https://elcooperante.com/desiertas-asi-lucieron-playasvenezolanas-en-el-fin-de-semana-de-carnaval-fotos/
“The panorama that toasted the last week of Carnaval was one
of half-full hotels, stations and beaches almost empty, obtaining to
Carnaval break in states such as Anzoátegui y Falcón that, normally,
would be highly visited….The Venezuelan is by nature a ‘beach bum’
and the coasts of these regions are the most visited. Nevertheless,
hyperinflation and insecurity have done their bidding to such a degree
that they have turned the first holiday break of the year into what seems
a normal week.”
Source: ““LA HUIDA DESESPERADA DE VENEZUELA EN
RUINAS (The Desperate Flight from Venezuela In Ruins),”
DolarToday, 12 February 2018. https://dolartoday.com/la-huidadesesperada-de-venezuela-en-ruinas-con-bolsos-ninos-en-brazos-ycasi-nada-mas/; “Clarín: La huida desesperada de Venezuela en ruinas
(Clarín: The desperate flight from Venezuela in ruins),” El Nacional,
12 February 2018. http://www.el-nacional.com/noticias/latinoamerica/
clarin-huida-desesperada-venezuela-ruinas_222785
“The Argentinean daily Clarín featured on its online page the
desperate attempt by dozens of persons who are escaping hour upon
hour from Venezuela, where economic crisis and shortages are
affecting the population.…Almost 35, 000 people cross the border daily
for almost a month, according to data from the Colombian migration
office obtained by the daily Tiempo of Bogota. The great majority stay
in the neighboring country or use it as a trampoline to continue North
of the continent or to the South -- to Brazil, Chile, Peru or Argentina.”

Venezuelan Migrants in Colombia (2015).

Source: InterAmerican Human Rights Commission, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CIDH_Venezuela-Colombia_migrant_crisis.jpg, CC 2.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

25

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela’s PDVSA on the Verge of Collapse, Deepening
the Country’s Economic Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: Oil production in Venezuela
has historically accounted for half of the country’s revenue
and there are reports that oil facilities are in Venezuela are
crumbling and production is plummeting. The excerpted
article from Página Siete discusses how Venezuela’s
state-owned oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela, better
known by its Spanish acronym PDVSA, teeters on the
brink of collapse amid severe mismanagement and lack of
transparency. Venezuela’s oil crisis could potentially further
destabilize a nation and government facing dire recession,
soaring inflation and unbridled crime, as well as gas, food
and medicine shortages.
When energy prices started to collapse several years
ago, Venezuela and other oil-dependent nations suffered in
tandem. The difference now is that oil prices are rising and
others in the oil business are on the mend. However, this is
not the case in Venezuela despite the fact it has the largest
proven oil reserves in Latin America and, possibly, in the
world. This idea is further reiterated by the fact that at the
end of 2017, PDVSA was operating at 20 percent capacity
with only 76 of its 84 plants operational.
Worse still is that the company nearly defaulted on loans
in November 2017, leading to the analysis that Venezuela is
at the cusp of an imminent financial collapse despite having
the oil resources to at least provide the nation with some
sort of salvation. The situation is so grave that people in
Venezuela are looking at any and all ways to simply survive,
including selling subsidized Venezuelan gas to Colombians
along the border, as discussed in the excerpted article
from El Vistazo, but even this is no longer an option as the
government is actively cracking down on this practice.
The article from Crónica Uno notes while operational,
PDVSA profits supported Venezuela’s social programs
and helped to provide its citizens with basic necessities
such as food, medicine and gas. However, that is no longer
the case as essential medicines such as antibiotics have
disappeared from pharmacy shelves and citizens are forced
to wait in line for gas and food for hours. With a potential
financial collapse looming, Venezuela is doing all it can to
salvage what is left. As noted in the article from Infobae,
the government recently signed a 10-year restructuring loan
with Russia and is also working with China to deal with
credit issues, but these measures will only keep the country
afloat in the short term leaving Venezuela’s oil imperium
to be scooped up by Russian and Chinese backers ready to
exploit the crisis. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...it is not only fuel that is lacking…there are also shortages
of diesel, petroleum and kerosene, among others.”
Source: “Crítica situación de PDVSA en Venezuela (Critical Situation of
PDVSA in Venezuela)”, Página Siete, 07 May 2017. http://www.paginasiete.
bo/inversion/2017/5/7/critica-situacion-pdvsa-venezuela-136811.html
During recent decades, a large number of governments to include Venezuela
have used state-owned oil and gas (NOCs) enterprises for their own personal
gain. In the case of Venezuela, extreme politicization has created a precarious
future for the oil industry even though the country has the largest proven oil
reserves in Latin America and maybe in the world. However, PDVSA is not
run transparently and provides little to no information on financials making it
hard to analyze. What is known is that production is at extreme lows and that
Venezuela has been forced to import natural gas from Colombia in recent years
due to lack of investment in the countries’ own resources and infrastructure.
Source: “Limitan venta de gasolina en seis estados de Venezuela (The
Government Set Ceilings for the Sale of Gasoline in Six States in Venezuela)”,
El Vistazo, 26 December 2017. http://diarioelvistazo.com/limitan-ventagasolina-seis-estados-venezuela/
The Venezuelan government set ceilings for the sale of gasoline in the west
of the country to prevent smuggling, which they attributed to the recent
fuel shortage. A communication from the Ministry of Petroleum ordered
distributors to sell a maximum of 30 liters to cars, and up to 35 liters to trucks
and some freight vehicles.
Source: “Problemas financieros de PDVSA dejan a Caracas sin combustible
(PDVSA’s Financial Problems Leava Caracas Without Fuel)”, Crónica Uno,
20 September 2017. http://cronica.uno/problemas-financieros-pdvsa-dejancaracas-sin-combustible/
It is very common in cities across the country to see long lines of cars waiting
at gas stations with the hope of getting something to put in their tanks as
many have closed due to lack of fuel. And it is not only fuel that is lacking…
there are also shortages of diesel, petroleum and kerosene, among others.
This situation affects both the public and private sector as it makes travel
impossible. It also signifies large spread outages of electricity coupled with
shortages of other basic necessities such as food and medicine.
Source: “La peligrosa influencia de China y Rusia en una Venezuela envuelta
en la crisis (China and Russia’s Dangerous Involvement in Dealing with
Venezuela’s Crisis)”, Infobae, 17 August 2017. https://www.infobae.com/
america/venezuela/2017/09/09/la-peligrosa-influencia-de-china-y-rusia-en-unavenezuela-envuelta-en-la-crisis/
The government signed a 10-year restructuring deal with Russia in November
2017 for a little over $3 billion in official debt, but observers say that will at
best this will help resolve some payments in the short-term. Caracas has only
$9.7 billion in foreign reserves and needs to pay back at least $1.47 billion in
interest on various bonds by the end of the year, and another $8 billion in 2018.
Russia and China are the two main creditors and allies of Venezuela, which
owes them an estimated $8 billion and $28 billion, respectively.

OE Watch | March 2018

26

LATIN AMERICA
Colombian Urban What-Is-Wrong List
OE Watch Commentary: The author of
the accompanying reference is a well-known
Colombian opponent of the FARC-Santos power
sharing agreement. Here he outlines what
many Colombians apparently see as the major
grievances or maladies affecting the country and
the abbreviated version here is a bill of particulars.
Still, it seems to be a pretty good summary of what
we can expect as the general argument that the
candidate of the opposition coalition Democratic
Center (not yet determined) will make during the
campaign for the coming May elections. Notable
on the list of maladies is an assertion that a million
items of military weaponry have been spirited
from Venezuelan military stores to the ELN and
FARC remnants. The author addresses the article
to urban dwellers, or more likely to urban voters,
given that, as the article notes, most Colombians
by far are city dwellers. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…a million pieces of armament
from thirty frontier garrisons have
gone missing…”

Source: José Félix Lafaurie, “Inseguridad urbana: Suma de todos los males (Urban
insecurity: Sum of all maladies),” Periodismo Sin Fronteras, 6 February 2018. http://
www.periodismosinfronteras.org/inseguridad-urbana-suma-de-todos-los-males.html
“…The cynical violence of the ELN and the ‘dissidents’ of the FARC in charge of their
illicit businesses, and criminal bands, now including Mexican cartels, all brothers in the
drug trade, are not phenomena only of the countryside, but of the cities as well….More
than 70% of Colombians live in cities with more than 100 thousand inhabitants, and only
five concentrate 16 million…
1. Micro-trafficking. …increase in drug consumption at increasingly earlier ages …
2. Narcoterrorism. …from 46 thousand hectares passing 200 thousand we returned to
first place in world production of cocaine…
3. Venezuelan migration. …thousands of repatriated Colombians and Venezuelans cross
the border daily without significant control. It is not about stigmatizing them or closing
the doors to them, but the phenomenon is part of the diagnosis of insecurity in Cucuta and
other cities….
4. Arms trafficking. …the Venezuela foundation Redes established that a million pieces of
armament from thirty frontier garrisons have gone missing, that they end up with the ELN
and FARC dissidences, with the blessing of the Maduro high command….
5. Campesino migration. …with the signature of the Accord, terrorism, extortion,
dispossession, illegal mining and drug trafficking continue dominating the rural scene,
with the consequence of displacement toward the cities…
6. Justice. …the prison system collapsed and in-home detection is a farce…”

La Picota Prison in Bogota (2017).

Source: EEIM , https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carcel_La_Picota_de_Bogot%C3%A1,_Cund_-_Colombia_(2).jpg, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

27

LATIN AMERICA
What Did FARC Leaders Expect?
OE Watch Commentary: The new FARC
political party in Colombia has been allowed and
sponsored by the Colombian government to mount
a political campaign for this spring’s legislative
and presidential elections. So far, it has not gone
well for the FARC in the sense that the first public
appearances of its major candidates have had a
lot of eggs, tomatoes, rocks and insults thrown at
them. Apparently from what is being reported, to
say that the FARC candidates have not attracted
large crowds of supporters would be worse than an
understatement. They have attracted flamboyant
physical intolerance. In late 2016, a majority of
the active Colombian electorate voted to reject
the Santos-FARC power sharing agreement that
was supposed to end the country’s internal armed
conflict. President Santos went ahead with the
agreement anyway. Now it appears that the same
electoral majority is not inclined to give campaign
space to the FARC candidates. The FARC leaders
are complaining about it and claiming victimhood.
The first accompanying reference is an editorial
opinion from a Medellín newspaper known to
be anti-FARC, but the writer’s opinion may be
generally representative of a dominate current of
public mood displayed at the FARC’s attempted
rallies. The second accompanying reference is from
a highly regarded historian and journalist, Eduardo
Mackenzie, also anti-FARC. His piece addresses
headline events that took place this past month
at one of the FARC’s attempted rallies, in a place
called Yumbo, near Cali in southwestern Colombia.
The town itself has historical significance in the long
insurgency. Mackenzie notes that a number of major
Colombian news organizations are sympathetic
and apologetic toward the FARC, that those outlets
suggest the egg-throwing is organized violence
against a democratic right to campaign. Mackenzie
places far more blame on the FARC, outlining
their penchant and modus operandi for creating
confrontation and then denying responsibility. He
stresses the broad underlying frustration in the
population at even seeing the FARC leaders enjoy
impunity. It is hard to say how all this will actually
translate come Election Day, or what it bodes for the
future of the conflict, but it may be that the internal
war in Colombia is nowhere near over. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…But here we have them, in full
presidential electoral campaign,
enjoying absolute impunity…”

Location of the Municipality of Yumbo, Valle del Cauca (Colombia).

Source: By Shadowxfox (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Colombia_-_Valle_del_Cauca_-_Yumbo.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

Source: María Clara Ospina, “¿Acaso esperaban que les lanzaran rosas? (Or did they
expect they would toss them roses?),” El Colombiano, 11 February 2018. http://www.
elcolombiano.com/opinion/columnistas/acaso-esperaban-que-les-lanzaran-rosasDN8186410
“But maybe they expected that they would be received with roses and hurrahs? Or did
they think the people did not remember their atrocities, the pain they inflicted on the
disarmed population, the destruction they caused? I would like to ask these celebrities,
How many political candidates, communal leaders, council members did you murder,
kidnap disappear or threaten during the more than 50 years you terrorized and
bloodied Colombia?... …But here we have them, in full presidential electoral campaign,
enjoying absolute impunity, each one protected by I don’t know how many bodyguards,
running around in luxury super-SUVs, paid for by the government…”
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Yumbo: lecciones de la resistencia popular anti-Farc),”
Periodico Debate, 9 February 2018. https://twishort.com/YVPmc
“What to make of all this? … The arrival of Timochenko in whatever locale transforms
that place into a site of verbal and physical confrontation, into a battlefield, into
shocking provocation, into suffering for the population. …Certain media outlets are
contributing to that disorder. Semana, El Espectador and the portal Las 2 Orillas
dedicate themselves to disfiguring events. They say that the demonstrations are not
spontaneous, that Timochenko [the FARC presidential candidate] and his band are
the victims of ‘politicians of the CD [Democratic Center party], military officers,
businessmen, journalists’ and a mysterious ‘closed group’…it is an aspect of the FARC
strategy to contain the massive opposition that the terrorist chiefs’ fraudulent tour has
awakened in the whole country.”

OE Watch | March 2018

28

LATIN AMERICA
Peruvian Cocaine Production Associated with
Possible Shining Path Resurgence?
OE Watch Commentary: Peruvian authorities were
shocked when Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso in Spanish)
snipers attacked a police convoy, leaving three officers dead
on 18 March 2017. The excerpted article from Deutsche Welle
reports how the convoy was carrying Special Anti-Drug
Operations Division (División de Operaciones Especiales
Antidrogas) agents from their headquarters in the Apurímac,
Ene and Mantaro River Valley. This region is better known
by its acronym VRAEM and is the country’s largest cocaproducing area. The assassination of the three policemen in
the VRAEM is a sign that the Shining Path still maintains
presence in Peru’s largest coca-growing region despite the fact
that a quarter century has passed since the terrorist group’s
leader, Abimael Guzmán, and some of his top associates were
arrested in September 1992. It is also a known fact that the
Shining Path has maintained an active relationship with drug
trafficking organizations since 1984, because without these
relationships, the organization would have never survived.

Source: “Después de 25 años ¿qué queda de Sendero Luminoso? (After 25
Years, What’s Left of the Shining Path?)”, Deutsche Welle, 12 September
2017. http://www.dw.com/es/despu%C3%A9s-de-25-a%C3%B1osqu%C3%A9-queda-de-sendero-luminoso/a-40476915

The excerpted article from Diálogo discusses that with
evidence in place that the Shining Path is still active and does
in fact provide services to drug trafficking organizations, the
Peruvian Special Intelligence Group (GEIN) is strongly urging
President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski to strengthen intelligence
services and to track former Shining Path terrorists after they
are released from prison. The purpose of this is to thwart any
chance for the group to gain power in the VRAEM. GEIN
also recommends that alternative development opportunities
be established in remote zones of the country to fight against
poverty and inequality, as this issue has only exacerbated
criminal activity in the VRAEM for the past 25 years. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Source: “Ministro de Defensa del Perú orgulloso de actuación de Fuerzas
Armadas (Peruvian Minister of Defense is Proud of Armed Forces’
Actions)”, Diálogo, 25 September 2017. https://dialogo-americas.com/en/
articles/peruvian-minister-defense-proud-armed-forces-actions-during-elnino-costero

According to Abimael Guzmán, former leader of the Shining Path, “One
can fall, but that does not mean the group ceases to exist.” And according
to Peruvian authorities, this may be correct as the group appears to have
been involved in the murder of 3 anti-narcotics officers in 2017 despite the
fact it was supposedly dismantled more than 25 years ago. There are also
rumors that the group continues to play a role in drug operations in the
VRAEM...
According to the Peruvian Special Intelligence Group GEIN, the Shining
Path could have never lasted without having ties to DTOs in the VRAEM.
The GEIN further asserts that the Shining Path sells military services
to traffickers to provide security to shipments leaving the zone along
roadways. They are also said to play other unspecified roles within the
ranks of DTOs operating in the VRAEM.

The VRAEM is a very complex region because of geographic constraints
and non-existent infrastructure. These factors will always make it
difficult to combat drug trafficking and the resurgence of groups such
as the Shining Path that have a desire to get back into the drug business.
Because of this, it is hard to judge if the Shining Path will ever completely
disappear, but some ideas to at least thwart its resurgence are alternative
development opportunities for peasants and indigenous peoples living in
the region.

“...it is hard to judge if the Shining Path will ever completely disappear...”

Valle de los Ríos Apurímac, Ene y Mantaro (VRAEM).

Source: By Galeria del Ministerio de Defensa de Perú, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMINISTRO_DE_DEFENSA_SUPERVIS%C3%93_BASES_CONTRATERRORISTAS_DEL_VRAEM_(14240930775).jpg, [CC BY 2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons..

OE Watch | March 2018

29

LATIN AMERICA
Cuba to Build Massive Windfarms with Chinese
Assistance
OE Watch Commentary: Since the creation of the
Comprehensive Cooperation Agreement signed between
Cuba and Venezuela in 2000, Cuba has had the benefit
of importing cheap oil from Venezuela. However, due
to reduced oil shipments and political instability in the
Maduro regime, Cuba is increasingly exploring alternate
approaches to support its energy needs, and China is
helping with this search.
As the first excerpt from the official Chinese news site,
Xinhua, points out, the Chinese are helping to construct “a
vast complex consisting of two windfarms, La Herradura 1
and La Herradura 2, located in the province of Las Tunas,
some 600 km east of Havana.” Chinese technology will
be supporting the plans, with “Goldwind Science and
Technology Co., a global provider of wind turbines over
the last three years, and Dongfang Electric Corporation”
being the two Chinese companies to complete the project.
The excerpt states that the complexes “will generate around
101 Megawatts (MW) of energy that will be fed into the
National Electric System,” making Cuba “69th worldwide
in wind energy.”
The second excerpt (also from Xinhua) points out that
this new project is part of a national strategy to “increase
the participation of renewable energy sources up 24
percent in the country’s electricity generation by 2030.”
Considering China’s recent replacement of Venezuela as
Cuba’s leading trading partner, renewable energy projects
such as this could further strengthen Cuba-Sino trade
relations. End OE Watch Commentary (Kelsay)

“To reach that goal, Cuba plans to produce
around 24 percent of its total energy needs
from different renewable sources by 2030.”

Source: “Chinese Technology Helps Cuba Build Largest Wind Farm,” Xinhua, 22
January 2018. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-01/22/c_136914462.htm
…To reach that goal, Cuba plans to produce around 24 percent of its total
energy needs from different renewable sources by 2030. It is an ambitious target
given that as of 2006, the island nation generated only 4.3 percent of its energy
from renewable sources. One of the key projects currently under construction is
a vast complex consisting of two wind farms, La Herradura 1 and La Herradura
2, located in the province of Las Tunas, some 600 km east of Havana. They
will generate around 101 Megawatts (MW) of energy that will be fed into the
National Electric System….
Behind the complex is Chinese technology, according to Adela Alvarez, an
official at Cuba’s Integrated Wind Energy Management company…. Cuban
officials chose two Chinese companies to supply the project -- Goldwind Science
and Technology Co., a global provider of wind turbines over the last three years,
and Dongfang Electric Corporation, a firm specializing in renewable energies
and high technology.
La Herradura 1 will be equipped with 34 Goldwind wind turbines measuring
65 meters in height with three 37-meter blades, generating 1.5 MW of power
distributed in five circuits.
La Herradura 2 will feature 20 Dongfang wind turbines of 2.5 MW each,
which will contribute a total of 50 MW to Cuba’s electric grid…. Total installed
capacity currently stands at 11.7 MW, which means the Caribbean nation ranks
69th worldwide in wind energy.
Source: “Spotlight: Cuba Pushes Development of Renewable Energies,” Xinhua,
31 January 2018. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-01/31/c_136938452.htm
At the opening of the “Cuba 2018 Renewable Energies” business forum, Lopez
pointed out that the Caribbean island state has a long-term policy for the
development of green energies and environmental sustainability. “To fulfill this
program we must increase the participation of renewable energy sources up
to 24 percent in the country’s electricity generation by 2030, an ambitious but
necessary goal for our country,” said the minister.

La Herradura region of Cuba.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:La_Herradura.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | March 2018

30

LATIN AMERICA
Mexican Army Seizes Claymore Mines, Rifles, and
Drugs in Tamaulipas
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 February 2018 members of the Mexican Army deployed
to the vicinity of the Bravo River in Reynosa, Tamaulipas, and found claymore mines
among other weapons following a search for criminal activity in the area. According to the
accompanying article from El Heraldo de México, a news outlet based in Mexico, members
from the 8th Military Zone (Octava Zona Militar) found a storage space hidden near dry
brush and garbage.
According to the article, military personnel seized seventeen assault rifles, two .50 caliber
Barrett rifles, and two claymore mines. They also found a grenade launcher, a 38-caliber
pistol special, two bullet proof vests, and an abundance of ammunition. An article from El
Mañana, also a state news source, showed images from the seizure, including the hideout. A
white powdery substance, which authorities stated resembled cocaine, was also discovered,
as were a radio communication device and over 5,500 gallons of hydrocarbon (fuel). Three
people were arrested in connection with the discovery. End OE Watch Commentary
(Keshavarz and Bunker)

US M18A1 claymore mine parts.

Source: US Air Force, www.af.mil/news/airman/ 0105/defense5b.shtml, Public Domain.

“Two claymore mines, along with other arms and drugs were seized by Mexican Army personnel.”
Source: ““Decomisan dos minas antipersonales en Tamaulipas (Two claymore mines seized in Tamaulipas),” El Heraldo de México, 7 February
2018. https://heraldodemexico.com.mx/estados/tamaulipas-decomisan-dos-minas-antipersonales/
Two claymore mines, along with other arms and drugs were seized by Mexican Army personnel. This action was after a number of
`deployments in Reynosa, Tamaulipas. In this case, three people were arrested.
Source: “Asegura Ejército armas, droga y 21 mil litros de huachicol (Army seizes drugs and 21,000 liters of hydrocarbon),” El Mañana, 7
February 2018. https://www.elmanana.com/asegura-ejercito-armas-droga-21-mil-litros-huachicol-reynosa-armas-aseguradas-droga-huachicolmilitares/4306481
The patrol intensified during the last 48 hours as they found signs of criminal activity. Mexican Army personnel discovered a hiding place in
between a small gap around dry brush and garbage. Three suspects were arrested

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest raises new and overlooked
concepts related to modern conflict in a
provocative manner designed to stir up
debate and critical thinking. As Geoff
Demarest puts it: “I hope that some of the
ideas in it will be contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | March 2018

31

ASIA-PACIFIC
MILF Leaders Seek Lessons Learned from Indonesia
OE Watch Commentary: In recent years Indonesia has battled not only terrorist
groups such as Jemaa Islamiya but also separatist insurgents in disparate regions of the
country, such as Aceh and West Papua. On 1 February, the Indonesian-language website
beritasatu.com, featured the excerpted article about how a delegation of leaders from
the separatist insurgent Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) based in the Philippines
visited Indonesia along with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to
learn about Indonesia’s experience in peacemaking. According to the article, MILF
specifically sought out Jusuf Kalla, who is currently Indonesia’s vice president and
formerly negotiated a peace deal in Aceh.
Kalla noted that Indonesia has been involved in efforts to attain peace in the southern
Philippines since as early as 1996. It was that year when the Moro National Liberation
Front (MNLF) and the Philippine government signed a peace deal in Jakarta that later
proved unable to be implemented and fell apart. According to Kalla, the factionalization
of the insurgency between MNLF and MILF, the latter of which rejected the 1996 peace
deal because of concerns that it granted the insurgents insufficient regional autonomy, had
always made it difficult to achieve lasting peace.
Kalla drew similarities between the conflict in the southern Philippines and in Aceh
and West Papua. In particular, the conflicts in southern Philippines and in Aceh were
both Islamist insurgencies that have required granting some autonomy for the insurgents
and allowing a level of sharia law in the insurgents’ region in order to achieve peace.
According to the chairman of MILF, who led the delegation, the conflict in Aceh was
basically the same as the one in the southern Philippines.
According to Kalla there are two key components to a peace mission: mutual respect
and compromise. The leadership of Kalla and Indonesia’s prior experience in engaging
in peace talks in Aceh and West Papua as well as countering terrorist groups, provides
an opportunity to extend advice to other countries in Southeast Asia undergoing political
violence and attempts at peace and reconciliation. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Tokoh Front Pembebasan Islam Moro
Minta Nasihat JK (Moro Islamic Liberation
Front Leader Asks JK Advice)”, beritasatu.com,
1 February 2018. http://www.beritasatu.com/
nasional/476403-tokoh-front-pembebasan-islammoro-minta-nasihat-jk.html
Vice President Jusuf Kalla (JK) received 11
leaders of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
(MILF) of the Philippines at the Vice Presidential
Office in Central Jakarta. The MILF delegation
led by MILF Chairman Murad Ebrahim
accompanied by United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) asked Jusuf Kalla (JK)
for advice because he was a mediator of peace
during the Aceh conflict. According to JK, peace
efforts in the south of the Philippines actually
have been made for a long time. But because
there were many groups or factions in the circle
of the rebellion, the peace plan was ultimately
difficult to achieve. JK said, “Yes, of course, our
experience is that every peace mission needs
first, mutual respect, and second, the remust be
a compromise.” Murad Ibrahim stated that JK’s
experience is very valuable because, “We came
to Indonesia to learn from the experience of the
Indonesian government, especially in dealing with
the conflict in Aceh, which is experiencing the
same situation.”

“We came to Indonesia to learn from the experience of the Indonesian government, especially in dealing
with the conflict in Aceh, which is experiencing the same situation.”

Moro soldier outside USAID GEM 700x500.

Source: Mark Navales, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Moro_soldier_outside_USAID_GEM_700x500.jpg (CC-by-2.0).

OE Watch | March 2018

32

ASIA-PACIFIC
Indonesia, Malaysia Have Right of Hot Pursuit in
Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: After a several month battle with pro-Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) fighters in Marawi, Philippines in 2017, the Philippines is now
strengthening cooperation with neighbors Indonesia and Malaysia on counter-terrorism.
An article in the excerpted Philippine publication, The Star, on 31 January reports that
Philippine president Duterte has stated that Indonesia and Malaysia may now cross into
Philippine territory to pursue terrorists. Duterte said that it was only necessary that they
inform the Philippines before entering its territory. He also said that Philippine forces
could join Indonesian or Malaysian forces on such missions.
At the same time the article shows that the arrangement may not yet be fully
articulated yet. Duterte, who is known for making bold remarks, also gave advice to
Indonesia and Malaysia to just blow up the terrorists. Duterte added that he had run out
of patience with Abu Sayyaf, which is the jihadist group that is based in the southern
Philippines and that has frequently crossed the maritime borders between the three
countries.
Duterte’s statements may need time to be formalized, but they represent a growing
trend of regional cooperation in counter-terrorism in Southeast Asia. This is likely one
reason why the region has seen relative success in counter-terrorism. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Indonesian and M’sian troops can
enter Philippines to catch terrorists” thestar.
com, 31 January 2018. https://www.thestar.com.
my/news/regional/2018/01/31/indonesian-andmsian-troops-can-enter-philippines-to-catchterrorists/#KgOW4ICtCSbHwdxI.99
President Duterte said Indonesian and Malaysian
troops can enter the Philippines in pursuit of
terrorists. “I will allow troops of Indonesia and
Malaysia to come in if they are pursuing a lead and
they think that they are able to defeat terrorists.
Just inform the Armed Forces about it,” he said.
Duterte said the Philippines was even willing to
join the foreign troops. He said he had run out of
patience, especially regarding the activities of the
Abu Sayyaf, a militant-extremist group based in
the southern Philippines which has been snatching
victims from as far as the Malaysian or Indonesian
territories.

“I will allow troops of Indonesia and Malaysia to come in if they are pursuing a lead and they think that
they are able to defeat terrorists.”

Marawi Lake.

Source: Hansme333, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marawi_lake.jpg, (CC BY 3.0).

OE Watch | March 2018

33

ASIA-PACIFIC
Papua New Guinea Balances Between China and
Australia
OE Watch Commentary: On 23 January, the excepted article on
Australia’s abc.net.au discussed whether Australia should be concerned
about China’s growing engagement in Papua New Guinea (PNG).
According to the article, PNG has asserted to Australia that it is depending
on China for infrastructure development and that it is not a security related
relationship. This is notwithstanding that at the end of 2017 China donated
62 military vehicles to the PNG.
PNG explained to Australia that it has historically received aid from
Australia and that the country has learned much about how to assess and
manage aid from Australia. However, PNG also said that it needs to look
out for its own interests and that it seeks to benefit from the contributions
that China is making around the world. PNG businesses also find the
Chinese to be more adaptive and flexible and willing to take risks than
Australians and that the Chinese are cheaper to hire for projects than
Australians.
The article also mentions how Australia has expressed concern that
Chinese infrastructure development has often led to waste. One example
was the $390 million expansion at Papua New Guinea’s biggest port that
the Chinese state-owned China Harbour Engineering Company built. The
project ultimately was deemed to be less than successful and failed tests
for effectivity.
In other theaters around the world, such as Africa, Chinese investment
has led to growing political and military clout. Thus far, PNG’s turn to
China has been primarily economic. But the possibility remains that
China’s donation of some military vehicles to PNG last year and increased
economic activity this year may similarly lead to greater Chinese political
and military influence in PNG, which was historically in Australia’s sphere
of influence. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“China is making contributions around the
world and Papua New Guinea is no exception.”
Source: “Australia should not fear Chinese influence in Papua
New Guinea, Government says,” abc.net.au, 23 January 2018.
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-01-23/australia-should-notfear-chinese-influence-in-png/9349140
...The Australian Government is becoming increasingly alarmed
about Chinese investment and aid to developing countries on
its doorstep. But Papua New Guinea’s Foreign Affairs Minister,
Rimbink Pato, has moved to reassure Australia that Papua
New Guinea can manage its relationship with both countries.
Mr Pato said Papua New Guinea would continue looking for
aid and loans from nations like China, particularly to develop
infrastructure. “China is making contributions around the world
and PNG is no exception,” he said…
One example is the Lae Tidal Basin, a $390 million expansion
at Papua New Guinea’s biggest port built by the Chinese stateowned China Harbour Engineering Company. The cost of the
project, financed primarily through concessional loans from the
Asian Development Bank — blew out by $170 million because of
engineering problems. The ADB’s assessment found the project
failed tests of efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability and
its overall report declared the project “less than successful”…
Australian investment in Papua New Guinea has stagnated in
recent years as the country’s economy struggled, while Chinese
investment has been rising...

Tau Geno-Hoire and Mona Balram from AusAID’s law and justice team talking to people in Koki village (Port Moresby) about safety concerns.

Source: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tau_Geno-Hoire_and_Mona_Balram_from_AusAID%27s_law_and_justice_team_talking_to_people_in_Koki_village_(Port_Moresby)_about_safety_concerns._(10728202146).jpg, (CC-by-2.0).

OE Watch | March 2018

34

ASIA-PACIFIC
Maldives: Troubled Waters in the Indian Ocean and
Growing Relations with China
OE Watch Commentary: The Maldives, an archipelago
of some 1,200 islands, located about 745 miles from India’s
mainland and 435 miles from India’s Lakshadweep island
chain, are locked in a political tug-of-war between India
and China. The root of the concern is centered on the
Maldives’ shift in loyalty from longtime-ally India to
China, beginning in 2012, when former president Mohamed
Nasheed, who is pro-India, resigned following weeks of
opposition-led protests.
Sudha Ramachandran, an independent journalist and
researcher based in India, explains in the first accompanying
article from The Diplomat, that India had strong relations
with the Maldives from 1965 until Nasheed’s “forced”
resignation. She explains that while India had “played a
critical role in building the Maldives’ economy and ensuring
political stability there,” after Abdulla Yameen, who is proChina, took over the presidency in 2012, the Maldives began
shifting toward China for support on massive infrastructure
projects. More recently, both countries have entered into a
Free Trade Agreement (FTA), in which there are zero tariffs
over 95 percent of the goods traded, and an opening up to
the world’s largest consumer market (China) would result
in bigger financial gains for the Maldives – a seemingly
irresistible proposition.
The second article, from the South China Morning Post,
explains some of the political turmoil taking place in the
archipelago. In addition, Nasheed, who may be seeking
re-election, has been urging India to become more engaged
with the Maldives. He also went on record accusing China
of “land-looting,” as noted in the last article from Xinhua,
an accusation that China vehemently denies.
The potential implications, some of which have been well
documented in the first article, are clear. As the Maldives,
whose primary source of revenue is derived from tourism,
accepts more and more aid and business from China, it
could become financially beholden to the Asian giant. The
Maldives, while a popular tourist destination, is strategically
located in the Indian Ocean, situated in “proximity to
international sea lanes through which two-thirds of the
world’s oil and half of its container shipments pass.” It is
also ideally located to play a key role in China’s Belt and
Road Initiative.
Also worth highlighting is China’s timing in offering
support to the Maldives. According to the South China
Morning Post article, China’s offer of support came just as
Nasheed, “who was expected to stand for election under
the opposition party later this year – called for military
intervention from India.” India has joined the United States
and Britain in calling for Yameen to abide by a court ruling
that gives Nasheed the power to run again. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“China now already has 17 islands in the Maldives and
this is a looting…”
Source: Sudha Ramachandran, “The China-Maldives Connection,” The
Diplomat, 25 January 2018. https://thediplomat.com/2018/01/the-chinamaldives-connection
Relations between India and Maldives go back several centuries. This
relationship grew in the decades following Maldives’ independence from British
colonial rule in 1965 and strengthened in the 1980s and 1990s. India played
a critical role in building Maldives’ economy and ensuring political stability
there. It supported the authoritarian rule of Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, a halfbrother of the current president, and enabled him to remain in power for three
decades. It even dispatched troops to Maldives to avert a coup attempt to oust
Gayoom in 1988.
India’s influence over Maldives began fraying after former President Mohamed
Nasheed, who was perceived as India-friendly, was forced to resign in February
2012…
Until 2011, Maldives was not a priority in China’s foreign policy; Beijing did
not even have an embassy in Male. However, Sino-Maldivian relations have
grown remarkably since Chinese President Xi Jinping visited the archipelago
in September 2014. China’s presence, especially in Maldives’ tourism sector
and infrastructure building, has expanded. It has replaced Europe as Maldives’
largest source of tourists. China is funding and building mega infrastructure
projects, including the Friendship Bridge linking Male to Hulhule Island and
a 1,000-apartment housing project on Hulhumale, a suburb built on reclaimed
land.
Source: Kinling Lo, “China Seeks Healthy Ties with Troubled Maldives Amid
India Rivalry,” South China Morning Post, 9 February 2018. http://www.scmp.
com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2132757/china-seeks-healthy-tiestroubled-maldives-amid-india
…Maldives President Abdulla Yameen announced a 15-day state of emergency
in the luxury tourist hotspot on Monday, triggered by a Supreme Court ruling
last week to free political prisoners and opposition politicians. Yameen rejected
the ruling and detained two judges.
The Maldives sent envoys to China, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to brief them
on the political crisis, but no envoy went to India because the dates were not
“suitable”, according to the Maldivian embassy in India.
The bid for support from Beijing came as the Maldives’ exiled former president
Mohamed Nasheed – who was expected to stand for election under the
opposition party later this year – called for military intervention from India,
which has joined the United States and Britain in calling for Yameen to abide by
the court ruling.
Since Abdulla Yameen became president of the Maldives in 2013, economic
ties with China are the closest they have ever been. Through its belt and road
strategy, Beijing is trying to revive old trading routes on land and sea, linking
China across Asia to Africa and Europe. Chinese funding has gone towards an
airport upgrade, land reclamation projects, resorts, roads and housing in the
Maldives as part of the ambitious trade and infrastructure initiative.

OE Watch | March 2018

35

ASIA-PACIFIC
Maldives: Troubled Waters in the Indian Ocean and
Growing Relations with China
Source: Zhu Ruiqing and Tang Lu, “抹黑中马合作不负责任 (Irresponsible to Discredit China-Maldives Cooperation),” Xinhua, 14 February
2018. http://www.xinhuanet.com/world/2018-02/14/c_1122419142.htm
Former Maldivian President Mohamed Nasheed recently said when interviewed by an Indian news medium, “China now already has 17
islands in the Maldives” and this is a “looting” of the Maldives’s land. Nasheed’s remark, which was a malicious fabrication of facts to
discredit China-Maldives cooperation, met with strongly worded refutations from local people with breadth of vision and the Chinese embassy
in the Maldives.

Asia Map with Maldives Circled.

Source: By TUBS, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Maldives_in_Asia.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

36

ASIA-PACIFIC
Xinjiang Ethnic Harmonization by Quartering and
Relocation
OE Watch Commentary: In 2016, the government of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR) launched a “family home-stay”
program, wherein Han Chinese government cadres stayed with minority families (mostly ethnic Uyghurs) in an effort to promote unity. The
program recently finished another iteration, which saw the deployment of over one million cadres and government employees. Following this
campaign, the government announced a new commissioning of 76,000 officials to be sent out and monitor rural areas throughout Xinjiang.
The first excerpt from the official Chinese site, Global Times, points out that throughout the last-half of December, the unity week campaign
was “aimed at promoting the spirit of the 19th National Congress of the CPC” embracing “ethnic unity.” This was sought to be accomplished
through an “exchange”—placing cadres in minority community homes and vice versa. It was additionally reported that the exchange lasted for
approximately six days for each family and their new “relative.”
The second excerpt, also from Global Times, reports that, following the unity week practices, and falling into line with broader concerns
over unity and homogeneity, the XUAR government has decided to dispatch 76,000 officials to rural and economically marginalized villages
across the province. As reported, an official from the Urumuqi National Cadre College said the mission of the new official dispatch would
be “mainly…implementing regional policies. Their close involvement with ethnic residents would erase estrangement, which would benefit
regional stability in the long run.” However, as noted in the piece, this was not the first attempt at increasing unity though dispatching cadres to
villages—with 53,400 officials and 9,500 working teams dispatched in 2017. End OE Watch Commentary (Shanks)
Source: “Xinjiang unity week practices spirit of 19th CPC National
Congress.” Global Times. 3 January 2018. http://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/1083107.shtml

Source: “Xinjiang assigns 76,000 officials to poor villages.”
Global Times. 1 February 2018. http://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/1087820.shtml

About a million cadres and employees in Xinjiang participated in
the week in which they spent time living, working and studying with
people from different ethnic groups, the Xinjiang Daily reported on
Sunday. The campaign is aimed at promoting the spirit of the 19th
National Congress of CPC to thousands of families in the autonomous
region, the Urumqi-based paper reported. Han ethnic majority
cadres and employees must take an ethnic minority “relative,”
mostly a member of the Uyghur ethnic minority, said Liu Chenyu, a
kindergarten teacher living in Qitai county of Changji, a county-level
city about 40 kilometers west of Urumqi, the Xinjiang capital. Ethnic
minority cadres must also have a Han villager as a “relative,” Liu
told the Global Times on Wednesday.

“In an effort to enhance work in extremely poor villages and to
alleviate poverty, the Communist Party of China (CPC) Committee
in Xinjiang has assigned 76,000 officials and 12,000 working
groups to cover every village in the region, the Xinjiang Morning
Post reported on Thursday. Those officials started to work in
villages on Monday. Among the 76,000 officials, 2,578 officials
selected from universities in Xinjiang will be assigned to each
extremely poor village. “The officials are mainly responsible for
implementing regional policies. Their close involvement with ethnic
residents would erase estrangement, which would benefit regional
stability in the long run,” Dong Yong, a professor from Urumqi
National Cadre College, told the Global Times on Thursday.

“Han ethnic majority cadres and

employees must take an ethnic
minority ‘relative,’ mostly a member
of the Uyghur ethnic minority.”

Uyghur daily life at Kashi Sunday market.
Source: By Fidel Kazsip (https://goo.gl/DqMrGf) (CC0 1.0).

OE Watch | March 2018

37

ASIA-PACIFIC
Is China’s Afghanistan Strategy Modeled on Russia
in Syria?
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 January, the excerpted Chineselanguage article on sina.com discussed Russian analyses of recent
reports that China is constructing a military base in northeastern
Afghanistan’s Badakhshan province, which borders China. The
purpose of the base is reportedly to prevent terrorists in Afghanistan
from infiltrating China through the mountainous border between the
two countries.
According to the article, Russian military experts see the
construction of the base as representative of China’s increasing
activity in regional affairs. According to a quoted expert, China’s
operations in Afghanistan also follow the example of Russia’s
operations in Syria. This means China will rely “on cooperation
with the national government and maintain friendly relations with
the locals” in order to achieve its objectives. The article, however,
notes that Russian experts see the situation in Afghanistan as
different than Syria because the civil wars in Afghanistan have been
ongoing for several decades whereas the war in Syria only began in
2011. Nevertheless, Russian experts state that China can still learn
from Russia’s experience in Syria supporting Bashar al-Assad’s
regime.
The article also states that China has not officially recognized
that it is constructing a base in Badakhshan. China has only said
it is engaging in counter-terrorism cooperation with Afghanistan
out of mutual respect. A Russian analyst, according to the article,
nevertheless interprets this as a clear sign that China will maintain a
presence in Afghanistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “俄媒分析中国帮阿富汗在两国边境建基地用于反
恐 (Russian media analysis of China’s help to Afghanistan border
construction sites for anti-terrorism),” sina.com, 22 January 2018.
http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/2018-01-22/doc-ifyquixe5821219.shtml
Russian media analysis says that China is building a military base
in the Badakhshan province of northeastern Afghanistan bordering
China, due to fears that terrorists will infiltrate the country through
the borders with China. Reportedly, a special committee of military
experts from China and Afghanistan came to Badakhshan province to
locate the site and assess the workload. A military expert at the Russian
Higher Institute of Economics, said, “building a new military base for
the Afghan army is an aspect of China’s active participation in regional
affairs. If this trend continues, then China’s future is likely to follow
Russia’s military presence in Syria: relying on cooperation with the
national government and maintain friendly relations with the locals.”
Russia dispatched troops in Syria to intervene in the local situation
when the civil war had transpired for only a few years. The move was
mainly aimed at helping the Bashar al-Assad regime, which has friendly
relations with Russia. The conflict in Afghanistan has been decades.
If China wants to help the situation in the region, it may learn from
Russia’s experience in Syria.
As for whether China will help Afghanistan build a base, a spokesman
for the Chinese Foreign Ministry said at a press conference recently
that it did not know what the media has been saying but that China
always supports carrying out international anti-terrorism cooperation
on the basis of mutual respect.

“Building a new military base for the Afghan army is
an aspect of China’s active participation in regional
affairs.”

Fayzabad in Badakhshan Province of Afghanistan.

Source: Julian G. Albert, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fayzabad_in_Badakhshan_Province_of_Afghanistan.jpg, (CC-by-2.0).

OE Watch | March 2018

38

ASIA-PACIFIC
China’s Evolving Nuclear Strategy: Will China Drop “No
First Use?”
by Nan Li
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 1, dated 12 January 2018, Edited for OE Watch. For
the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-evolving-nuclear-strategy-will-china-drop-no-first-use/

OE Watch Commentary: The PLA Rocket Force is continuing to upgrade its missile forces and
shift its emphasis from a posture of immobile and vulnerable positions hidden deep in mountains
to a highly mobile and more survivable mode. A new CCTV documentary also reveals that China’s
multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicle (MIRV)-capable intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) DF-41 will begin active service in 2018.

“The DF-41 has a range

of 12,000 kilometers and a
deviation of some one hundred
meters. It can carry six to
10 multiple maneuverable
warheads.”

While China’s strategic nuclear capabilities are changing, there is still a high level of uncertainty
among analysts about the specifics of China’s nuclear strategy. Though China vigorously censors
information about its missile forces, examination of a body of relatively authoritative military texts
provides useful context to help understand China’s nuclear strategy beyond the more visible
Source: “Wenyu, Sun “China’s latest
changes in equipment. Importantly, it is evident that as China modernizes its nuclear forces, it is
intercontinental ballistic missile expected
also debating a shift in strategy, including the abandonment of its No First Use (NFU) policy.
to be deployed next year,” People’s Daily
According to Chinese nuclear strategists, two major concepts best describe the evolution
Online, 28 November 2017. http://en.people.cn/
of China’s nuclear strategy. The first, overarching drive for China’s development of a nuclear
n3/2017/1128/c90000-9297997.html
weapon was to “curb and stop nuclear blackmail,” and secondly to maintain “effective counterChina’s intercontinental ballistic missile
nuclear attack deterrence.” China’s first nuclear strategy, adopted during the 1960s and 70s, is
DF-41 is expected to be deployed in early
based on the premise that a country must possess nuclear weapons in order to prevent nations
2018, said military expert Yang Chengjun on
with nuclear weapons from “blackmailing” those without them. China’s lack of nuclear weapons
a TV program broadcasted on China Central
during the Korean War and the Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958 motivated Chinese leadership to
Television (CCTV) on Nov. 26…
accelerate research and development of nuclear weapons, resulting in China’s first nuclear test in
Public data shows that DF-41 is a rival of
1964. But because this strategy has “no clear requirements for the quantity and quality of nuclear
the 6th-generation missiles of some developed
weapons” due to technological and financial constraints, it could only meet the “minimum goal”
countries…The Chinese missile even has an
of symbolic possession to prevent nuclear blackmail.
edge with regard to some technologies. The
The second concept, which is understood as China’s nuclear strategy from the 1980s up to
DF-41 has a range of 12,000 kilometers and
present, is “effective counter-nuclear attack deterrence.” This strategy requires China to possess
a deviation of some one hundred meters. It
nuclear counter-attack capabilities that can survive the first nuclear attack and launch retaliatory
can carry six to 10 multiple maneuverable
nuclear strikes. These requirements may account for China’s efforts in recent years to develop its
warheads…It can be launched from roadown missile defense system and counter-missile defense capabilities, develop and deploy more
and rail-mobile launcher platforms, as well
solid-fuel, road and rail-mobile strategic missiles and nuclear ballistic missile submarines, and
as silo-based launchers…
test MIRV-capable ICBMs and hypersonic glide vehicles.
China’s nuclear policy can be understood as following the principle of No First Use, which is
consistent with its second strike-based nuclear strategy of “effective counter-nuclear attack deterrence.” But there appears to have been increasing
discontent with this policy from within China’s analytical community on nuclear policy and strategy in recent years. This discontent has been
reflected in several critical views of NFU.
One view is that NFU may impose certain limitations on the strategic use of China’s Rocket Force, implying reduced crisis response flexibility
due to the highly centralized decision-making in employing nuclear weapons. Moreover, some believe that NFU reduces the credibility of China’s
already small nuclear forces, and that abandoning NFU may enhance China’s nuclear deterrent.
Chinese analysts have also suggested that China abandon NFU in a number of threatening scenarios:
-

China’s conventional forces are unable to defend against a “large-scale foreign invasion”

-

If “the enemy attacks our nuclear bases with conventional arms, posing enormous threat to our strategic nuclear forces”

PLA’s operational objectives face an “enormous threat” by a “large-scale foreign military intervention” in a “war of safeguarding national
unity”—referring to a Taiwan conflict scenario
-

Escalation indicating an opponent’s “intention” to cross the nuclear threshold

Attacks with conventional arms against nuclear bases and targets of life-and-death value like the Three-Gorges Dam causing destruction
comparable to or larger than a nuclear attack” (continued).

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

39

ASIA-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s Evolving Nuclear Strategy: Will China
Drop “No First Use?”
by Nan Li
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 1, dated 12 January 2018, Edited for OE Watch. For
the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-evolving-nuclear-strategy-will-china-drop-no-first-use/

Supporters of NFU offer a number of rebuttals. Rather than hampering crisis response flexibility, they argue, the decision to employ nuclear
weapons has always been “controlled in the hands of the state’s top leadership.” Supporters of NFU also argue that a “large-scale foreign
invasion” of China is unlikely due to the rapid increase in the destructiveness of modern warfare, which has forced major powers to pursue
limited objectives with limited wars.
While No First Use is likely to remain China’s official nuclear policy in the near future, in the meantime, the dynamic evolution of China’s
nuclear policy, strategy, and capabilities requires careful analysis. Such analysis is particularly necessary if the anti-NFU view begins to have
great popular support within the PLA, if China develops a more grim view of its regional security environment, or if China believes that its
economy is sufficient to support a more robust nuclear capability along the lines of Russia or the United States. End OE Watch Commentary
(Li)

DF-31A intercontinental ballistic missile at military parade in Beijing commemorating 70 years since the end of World War II (September 2015).
Source: By IceUnshattered (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e7/Dongfeng-31A.JPG, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

40

ASIA-PACIFIC
China Promotes Increased Maritime Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: Three Chinese academics
and military theorists have written articles in the official
People’s Daily newspaper arguing in favor of increasing
the country’s maritime capabilities. The articles appeared
in the 11 February edition of the paper, under the title
“Now is the Time to Build a Strong Maritime Nation.”
The authors represented a cross-section of military and
civilian think tanks: He Guangshun is the director of the
National Marine Data & Information Service. Liu Jixian
is a former deputy president of the Chinese Academy of
Military Sciences. Zhang Haiwen is the Party Secretary
of the Maritime Development Strategy Research
Institute under the State Oceanic Administration.
Zhang Haiwen links China’s economic development to
its maritime development, pointing out that the Southern
and Eastern coastal provinces that grew the fastest after
the “Reform and Opening” of the 1970s. He argued
that a renewed focus on using maritime resources and
developing trade would be the key to continuing Chinese
economic development through the “two centenaries”—
major milestones for development that China has set for
itself in 2021 and 2049.
He Guangshun highlighted recent Chinese scientific
achievements in the maritime realm, including
advancements in harnessing tidal energy, maritime
monitoring satellites and accessing the natural gas
hydrates found in the South China Sea that could
potentially revolutionize China’s energy security.
While the majority of his discussion focused on civilian
achievements, he highlighted civil-military cooperation’s
foundational role in building a strong maritime nation.
Liu Jixian argues that building a strong maritime
nation necessitates recognizing that a traditional navy is
simply one part of strong maritime force. Not only has
the navy expanded to include new services, branches and
technologies, but maritime law enforcement and civilian
organizations (including maritime militia and science
vessels) are necessary. Greater coordination, planning
and promotion of civil-military integration, he argues,
will help strengthen China’s ability to build maritime
power.
The Chinese government is making a concerted effort
across its military and civilian organizations to promote
maritime power. This was reflected in the 2015 Defense
White Paper, “China’s Military Strategy” which stated
that “The traditional mentality that ‘land outweighs
sea’ must be abandoned, and great importance has
to be attached to managing the seas and oceans and
protecting maritime rights and interests.” The fact that
the People’s Daily has devoted a whole page to the topic
should be taken as further evidence that this campaign is
continuing and has high-level support. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

“In addition to [traditional ] naval forces, the modern navy is
composed of naval aviation capable of attacking targets on the
sea, the conventional missile force, and the strategic support
force. Other services and branches maritime capabilities
supplement the naval joint combat force system...”
Source: “以强海梦托起中国梦 (Use the Strong Maritime Nation
Dream to Support the China Dream),” Zhang Haiwen, People’s Daily,
11 February 2018. http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2018-02/11/
nw.D110000renmrb_20180211_3-05.htm
The ocean is an important arena for nations to increase “Comprehensive National
Power,” international influence, and competitiveness. Speeding up the construction
of a strong maritime power is an important measure that will preserve and fulfill
our national security development requirements, protect our maritime rights and
interests, and expand our national strategic interests.
Source: “建设海洋强国是实现中国梦的必然选择, (Building a Strong Maritime
Nation is the Natural Choice to Realize the China Dream),” He Guangshun,
People’s Daily, 11 February 2018. http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/201802/11/nw.D110000renmrb_20180211_2-05.htm
Deepen implementation of the strategy of innovation and breakthroughs in
maritime science and technology. Strive to make breakthroughs in the key areas
of advanced security, green, and deep-water technologies. Resolve the issue of our
maritime development being fast but not good. Thoroughly implement the concept
of coordinated development, and promote the comprehensive, coordinated and
sustainable development of marine undertakings.
Source: “大力推进新时代海上力量建设 (Forcefully Advance Maritime Forcebuilding in the New Era),” Liu Jixian, People’s Daily, 11 February 2018. http://paper.
people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2018-02/11/nw.D110000renmrb_20180211_4-05.htm
The formation of a modern maritime force is evolving in a comprehensive and
diversified direction. No single force can adapt to and meet the strategic needs of
safeguarding territorial sovereignty and the maritime rights and interests of the
country.
Accompanying the changes in the shape of warfare and the speed at which new
platforms and weapons have expanded, the trend toward joint naval combat is
becoming more apparent and the composition of maritime forces is expanding.
In addition to [traditional ] naval forces, the modern navy is composed of naval
aviation capable of attacking targets on the sea, the conventional missile force,
and the strategic support force. Other services and branches maritime capabilities
supplement the naval joint combat force system…
Maritime administrative law enforcement has unique advantages in maritime
rights protection in peacetime. It can not only exercise the power of law
enforcement on behalf of the government, but also effectively avoid direct
military confrontation. In recent years as seen in “rights protection activities”
in the Diaoyu Islands and South China Seas, the maritime administrative law
enforcement force has become the backbone for safeguarding China’s sovereignty
and maritime rights and interests…
Marine social forces are mainly composed of the scientific research fleet,
merchant fleet, militia fishing vessels, etc. Strong maritime non-governmental
actors are one of the important symbols of maritime power… Modern transport
fleets can take on the important task of providing logistical support to maritime
military operations. Militia fishing vessels have a unique role to play in advancing
[China’s] maritime interests and are an integral part of civilian maritime forces
and national mobilization systems.
OE Watch | March 2018

41

ASIA-PACIFIC
Photos Paint a Point of No Return over the Disputed
South China Sea
OE Watch Commentary: The Philippines has
lost a lot of ground in its claims to the Spratly
Islands. The following article excerpts highlight
some of the political, military, and economic issues
surrounding the situation. The Spratly Islands are
among the most heavily disputed territories in the
world, with China moving in and taking physical
control over many of them through “unrestrained”
construction of military facilities. According to
the article, much of China’s military construction
appears to be complete or nearly complete and the
country has placed various military ships, including
new generation frigates, coast guard, replenishment,
and large cargo vessels among them.
One of the more salient points in the article is
how Panganiban (Mischief Reef) lies within the
Philippines’ exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the
South China Sea and was recognized in 2016 by the
UN-backed permanent Court of Arbitration in The
Hague as belonging to the Philippines. However,
this has not stopped China from building a runway,
hangars, control tower and radomes, claiming the
island for itself. Nor has a 2002 trade agreement
between China and ASEAN, which stipulated
that in any issues involving the South China Sea,
concerned parties must follow restraint and not
introduce any activity that could complicate the
issue.
The article also points out that North Korea’s
missile and atomic weapons tests over the past
year had helped to draw international attention
away from China’s activities in the South
China Sea. Despite this, the author stresses that
“the Philippines was not exactly unaware of
the Chinese military buildup in the Spratlys.”
Harry Roque, a presidential spokesperson in
the Philippines, voiced little to no concern over
China’s military buildup on the reefs. This should
come as no surprise since, as the article points
out, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, who
had formed a strategic relationship with China and
who had come to power two weeks prior to the
2016 ruling, refused to take measures to protect
Manila’s claims, “wooing China instead for loans
and investments.”
According to the article, some of the
implications for the Philippines, should it not
be able to assert its claim, include the fear that
China will never return the territory it grabbed.
The country could also lose 80 percent of its EEZ
in the South China Sea, which would jeopardize
its energy security and source of food. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“If the Philippines does not assert its legal victory, it stands

to lose 80 percent of its EEZ in the South China Sea, covering
381,000 square kilometers of maritime space….”

President Rodrigo Duterte and President Xi Jinping shake hands prior to their bilateral meetings at the Great
Hall of the People in Beijing.
Source: Philippine Government, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3APresident_Duterte_handshake_with_President_Xi.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Frances Mangosing, “New Photos Show China is Nearly Done with its
Militarization of South China Sea,” Inquirer.net, 5 February, 2018. http://www.inquirer.
net/specials/exclusive-china-militarization-south-china-sea
The extent of development on the reefs show that China has gone ahead with building
military outposts in the Spratlys despite a 2002 agreement with the 10-member
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) not to change any features in the sea.
At the same time, China has softened the impact of its military buildup with pledges of
investments to the Philippines and talk of a framework for negotiating with Asean a code
of conduct for the management of rival claims in the strategic waterway.
North Korea’s missile and atomic weapon tests also helped draw international attention
away from China’s construction activities on the reefs, although recent pronouncements
from Malacañang indicated the Philippines was not exactly unaware of the Chinese
military buildup in the Spratlys.
“And the area we will lose is huge, as big as the land area of the Philippines, about
300,000 square kilometers,” Carpio said.
China will never return the territory it grabs... “We cannot go to the (International
Court of Justice) because China has to agree and China will never agree to submit to
arbitration.”
China has ignored The Hague tribunal’s July 2016 ruling that invalidated Beijing’s
sweeping claim to the South China Sea and declared it violated Manila’s sovereign
right to fish and explore for resources in its own EEZ. But President Duterte, who came
to power two weeks before the ruling came down, has refused to assert the Philippine
victory, wooing China instead for loans and investments.
If the Philippines does not assert its legal victory, it stands to lose 80 percent of its EEZ
in the South China Sea, covering 381,000 square kilometers of maritime space, including
the entire Recto Bank, or Reed Bank, and part of the Malampaya gas field off Palawan,
as well as all of the fishery, oil and gas and mineral resources there…”
OE Watch | March 2018

42

ASIA-PACIFIC
Chinese Su-35s Fly Patrols in the South China Sea
for the First Time
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 February the Chinese PLA Air Force
announced that five Su-35 fighter jets had participated in a joint combat
patrol in the South China Sea. This is the first time that the jets, newly
acquired from Russia and assigned to the Southern Theater Command,
have participated in patrols over the South China Sea. Previously posted
photos of the fighters appear to indicate they currently are based at Suixi
Air Base, northwest of Zhanjiang in Guangdong province. Video released
by the PLA Air Force also showed the aircraft training for low-level flying
over the ocean and firing unguided rockets at ground targets.
China finalized a deal for 24 Su-35s in November 2015 after years of
negotiation. The first four aircraft were delivered in December 2016. Ten
more arrived in China in December 2017. China already possess the J-11B,
a derivative of the less-capable Su-27, which has been deployed to Woody
Island in the Parcel archipelago southeast of Hainan province. The Su35’s larger internal fuel tanks give it advantages in range, loiter time and
performance over the J-11. China has used similar flights to demonstrate
sovereignty over its territorial claims. In July 2017 China flew H-6K
bombers near Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea.
In an interview with the Xinhua state news agency, a military expert and
professor at the Air Force Command College, Wang Mingzhi, emphasized
that the flight represented the PLA Air Forces’ increased focus on realism
in training and that they increased the Air Force’s long-distance and far
seas combat capability. Wang’s comments suggest that China’s objective in
acquiring the Su-35 or other long-range aircraft is not purely about combat
capability, but also has to do with the ability to conduct long-range patrols
and show Chinese ability to project power over the entirety of the South
China Sea. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “苏-35战巡南海与歼-20列装作战部队的时代含义
(The Significance of Su-35 Combat Patrols in the South China
Sea and J-20 Being Commissioned into Service),” www.81.
cn, 10 February, 2018. http://www.81.cn/zggcdsjd/2018-02/10/
content_7941486.htm
In recent years, the Air Force has routinely conducted far-seas
training based on the strategic requirements of “integrating airspace capabilities capable of offensive and defensive operations,”
and safeguarding state sovereignty and maritime rights and
interests.
The Air Force will carry out realistic combat patrol operations
in the direction of the South China Sea, which will improve
Air Force maritime combat capabilities, and also realize the
requirements of safeguarding national sovereignty and maritime
rights and interests.
From now on, the Air Force will not only continue to carry out
combat patrols but will frequently conduct patrols, making them
a new norm in the South China Sea.

“The Air Force will carry out realistic combat
patrol operations in the direction of the South
China Sea, which will improve Air Force
maritime combat capabilities, and also realize the
requirements of safeguarding national sovereignty
and maritime rights and interests.”

MAKS Airshow 2015 , (Russian) Su-35S in Flight.

Source: By Dmitry Terekhov from Odintsovo, Russian Federation (IMG_8624), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MAKS_Airshow_2015_(20615630784).jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

43

ASIA-PACIFIC
Chinese Aviation Academies Introduce Free Air
Combat Training
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2011, the PLA Air Force has begun to
place a greater emphasis on un-scripted air combat exercises, introducing
unexpected elements, flying to unfamiliar areas and using tougher grading.
However, the fact that what the Chinese are calling “free air combat” has
only begun to be introduced at China’s top flight academy indicates how
slow reforms are being implemented.
Following dramatic changes in China’s military command structure
initiated in late 2015, China is currently in the midst significant reforms
at the unit-level. This has involved major shakeups in unit composition,
including aircraft types in the PLA Air Force. Additional reforms are
targeted at consolidating and improving the rigor of technical and practical
training throughout the PLA’s educational system. The rapid introduction
of new equipment and China’s aspiration to link sensors, air defenses
and pilots in a networked “system of systems” has created a gap between
current capabilities and the necessary technical skills.
The introduction of free air combat training is another step in the
PLA’s gradual adoption of more realistic, practical training. This has
been a slow process and even combat units have not regularly held these
types of exercises. For example, in August 2014, the PLA Air Force and
PLA Naval Aviation Force held their first free air confrontation exercise.
Chinese participation in international exercises such as Aviadarts with
Russia and Shaheen with Pakistan can help introduce Chinese pilots to
different scenarios and help become accustomed to encountering different
types of aircraft, but the lack of unscripted training in the early stages
of pilot training has erected barriers to building a more effective combat
force. There are some assessments that in order for the PLA Air Force as
a whole to affect the cultural changes needed to create a more effective,
professional force capable of fighting in real combat scenarios, there
will have to be the much broader adoption of unscripted training beyond
Harbin Flight Academy. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The Harbin Flight College is the pioneer among
the flight academies of the PLA Air Force to
include the free air combat training in its syllabus
of air combat tactics.”
Source: “Free air combat training course included in air force
flight academy syllabus,” China Military Online, 6 February,
2018. http://eng.mod.gov.cn/news/2018-02/06/content_4804292.
htm
Pilot cadets of the PLA Air Force Harbin Flight Academy
received their first free air combat training…on January 30.
This is the first time that the PLA Air Force has introduced
free combat training in pilot cadets’ training programs of flight
academies, conveying a signal of further advancement of the real
battle training in flight academies.
The Harbin Flight College is the pioneer among the flight
academies of the PLA Air Force to include the free air combat
training in its syllabus of air combat tactics.
The contents of the free air battle training course include the
air combats with offensive position advantage, defensive position
disadvantage and balanced positions, as well as other tactics
the air force pilots will take in the real air battle. The fourthyear pilot cadets will be engaged in the free air combat training
throughout the whole training session before their graduation.
After completing the free air combat training, they will have the
basic qualifications of an air force pilot.

Guizhou jl-9 trainer.

Source: By Czip (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AGuizhou_jl9.jpg, Public domain.

OE Watch | March 2018

44

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Is the Chinese Air Force Ramping up for Further Action
Following the 2017 Doklam Standoff?
OE Watch Commentary: The 2017 Doklam standoff between
Chinese and Indian troops, according to the follow extracts, seems
to have sparked a series of upgrades and increased activity for the
Chinese Air Force in Tibet. As the author explains in this opinion
piece from India, “This is part of a pattern of China stepping up
its military presence in the region in the aftermath of the bitter
standoff with India in the tri-junction area near Bhutan.”
There are several big changes, noted in the article, since the
Doklam standoff, which took place between June and the end
of August 2017. For example, there was a notable jump in air
traffic from October through January. Also, flights that reached
the periphery of Tibet in October and December are now
extended further, with new flights to Lhasa. There have also
been observations of early warning aircraft, unmanned aerial
vehicles, and new testing facilities for China’s most modern and
stealth aircraft at certain air facilities, as well as newly extended
airport runways and facilities and other upgrades. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Source: Vinayak Bhat, “Tibet Sees Sharp Jump in Chinese Air Force
Activity After Doklam Standoff with India,” The Print Online, 14
February 2018. https://theprint.in/2018/02/14/tibet-sees-jump-in-chineseair-force-activity-after-doklam-standoff
The analysis of data of the last one year shows three big changes. First,
that in the months of October and December 2017 as well as January
2018 there has been a sudden jump in air traffic. Second, a new flight
has been scheduled from Lhasa to Ngari (Shiquanhe) in January.
And finally, flights that reached the periphery of Tibet have now been
extended up to Lhasa in October and December 2017.
One factor could be that tourism has been subsidized in Tibet and
that more cargo is arriving on a daily basis. However, given the
modernization and upgradation of the dual-use airports as well as the
creation of new heliports by the PLA, there are strong indications of a
military preparation that can’t be called a routine affair.
China, which has five operational airports in Tibet, upgraded four
of them last year. Two of these are now being used for testing its most
modern and stealth aircraft.

“…given the modernization and upgradation of the dual-use airports as well as the creation of new

heliports by the PLA, there are strong indications of a military preparation that can’t be called a routine
affair.”
KJ-500: According to the article, at least two KJ-500 AEW aircraft have been observed permanently deployed at the Lhasa Gonggar Airport, the largest airport in Tibet.
Source: By Alert5 - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=52895157, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

45

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Another Potential Hit to China-Pakistan Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Significant Chinese investments
in Pakistan as part of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor
(CPEC) since 2013 appear to have helped relations between
the two sides become even closer, but disputes related to
CPEC projects over the past couple of months have caused
major issues, including suspension of funding for some
projects. The excerpted article from Dawn reports on the
murder of a Chinese businessman and while he was not
involved in a CPEC project, it could have an impact on an
already strained China-Pakistan relationship.
The article from Dawn, a widely read English-language
newspaper in Pakistan, reports on the shooting in Karachi on
5 February which targeted two Chinese businessmen, killing
one. The article notes how Pakistani authorities reported that
the attack was carried out by “an unidentified lone assailant”
and that the shipping firm where the two men worked is “not
part of any CPEC-related project.” They did report, however,
that “the two Chinese nationals worked for Cosco Shipping.”
The China Ocean Shipping Company (Cosco) is one of the
largest maritime shipping companies in the world and the
Chinese man killed was reportedly its executive in Pakistan.
Pakistan created the Special Security Division a few years
ago to protect CPEC projects and workers and the article
mentions how the “Chinese nationals were provided with
three personnel from the police’s foreigners’ security cell,”
but that on the day of the attack “they did not take with them
the head constable on duty” and that this was “against the
security standard operating procedures.” As the investigation
into the shooting continues, it will be worth watching what
impact it could have on China-Pakistan relations. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

Source: Ali, Imtiaz. “Chinese man shot dead in Karachi attack,” Dawn, 6
February 2018. https://www.dawn.com/news/1387501/chinese-man-shotdead-in-karachi-attack
A Chinese national, working for a local shipping firm in a senior position, was
gunned down in what police described as a targeted attack carried out by an
unidentified lone assailant on Monday…Officials emphasised that the firm was
not part of any CPEC-related project as it had been working in Pakistan since
the early 1990s.
Karachi’s South-Zone Deputy Inspector General Azad Khan told Dawn that
the two Chinese nationals worked for Cosco Shipping the office of which was
located in the city’s Lalazar area…They lived in the same locality.
The officials said the two Chinese nationals — 45-year-old Chen Zhu and Ye
Fan — after having lunch at a restaurant in Clifton were returning to their
office when at around 2.15pm they stopped their car near Zamzama Park…one
of them had sat in the car and the other was still outside it when an attacker
came in a vehicle and opened fire on the Chinese national sitting on the driving
seat. The officials said as soon as the attacker opened fire the other Chinese
national — a young trainee of the company — started running to save his life.
The attacker fired shots also at him but he remained unhurt…The deceased
sustained two bullets in the head.
…According to a police spokesperson, Sindh police chief A.D. Khowaja has
directed Raja Umar Khattab of the police’s counterterrorism department to
investigate the incident…Mr Khattab said surveillance cameras installed in
the vicinity were out of order. DIG Azad Khan told a press conference that the
firm, Cosco Shipping Lines Pak (Pvt) Ltd, had no connection with the CPEC
project. It had been working in Pakistan since the early 1990s…
He said the Chinese nationals were provided with three personnel from
the police’s foreigners’ security cell…On Monday, they did not take with
them the head constable on duty, Noor Zaib, which is against the security
standard operating procedures…Mr Khattab, however, told Dawn that the
head constable had performed duty on Sunday because a delegation had
arrived. Therefore, the Chinese nationals had allowed him to take a day off on
Monday…

“On Monday, they did not take with them the head constable on duty, Noor Zaib, which is against the
security standard operating procedures.”

The new container ship COSCO SHIPPING HIMALAYA in port of Hamburg - rear view.
Source: Hummelhummel, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ACOSCO_SHIPPING_HIMALAYAS_-_rear_view.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

46

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
CPEC: “Iron Brothers,” Unequal Partners
by Sudha Ramachandran
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 1, dated 12 January 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/cpec-iron-brothers-unequal-partners/

OE Watch Commentary: Serious differences have come to the fore between
China and Pakistan over the $60-billion China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC).
At a Joint Working Group (JWG) meeting at Islamabad in November 2017, China
announced its decision to suspend funding for at least three road projects in Pakistan,
pending the release of “new guidelines.” Only a few days earlier, Pakistan rejected
Chinese funding for the $14-billion Diamer-Bhasha dam project and withdrew its
request for inclusion of this project in CPEC. Pakistan objected to Chinese conditions,
which included Chinese ownership of the project, operation and maintenance costs
and securitization of the project by pledging another operational dam.
China and Pakistan often hold up CPEC, a flagship venture of China’s Belt
and Road Initiative (BRI), as a symbol of their co-operative partnership. Recent
developments indicate serious differences between the two countries. Although
CPEC is widely seen primarily as a “connectivity corridor”, power plants and special
economic zones (SEZs) are also being developed. The project is envisioned as linking
China’s economically underdeveloped Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region with the
deep-sea port of Gwadar in Pakistan’s Baluchistan province through a network of
highways, railways, oil and gas pipelines and fiber optic cables.
However, little was known about its massive plans for Pakistani agriculture.
Original documents of CPEC’s long-term plan, whose details were disclosed by the
Pakistani English daily Dawn in May, reveal that Chinese enterprises will lease
thousands of acres of Pakistani agricultural land to set up ‘demonstration projects’
to introduce new seed varieties, pesticides and irrigation technologies. Facilities for
processing, storing and transporting, grains, fruits and vegetables are also being
set up, indicating that access to the full supply chain of Pakistan’s agriculture is
an important goal of CPEC. The number of Chinese nationals working and living
in Pakistan has also surged in recent years, transforming entire neighborhoods in
Pakistani towns into ‘Chinatowns’. Pakistan faces a “Sinicization” of its economy,
population and culture.
Pakistan’s former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has said that Baluchistan will
be CPEC’s “biggest beneficiary.” Baluchis, however, are not convinced. Baluch
opposition to the project is strong and has even been expressed violently. Baluch
militants have carried out several attacks on workers from outside the province,
including those from China.
Over the past year, a small but vocal group of analysts have begun expressing
unease over what CPEC will bring Pakistan. In particular, they are calling for
transparency on deals. In Dec 2017, the Pakistani government released a summary
of CPEC’s Long-Term Plan. But even this sheds no light on the terms and conditions
of agreements, project timelines or the exact nature of Chinese funding. Documents
disclosed by Dawn and information trickling out of official meetings point to troubles
ahead. The most important is the looming debt trap. Economists have highlighted the
estimated $90 billion in debt that Pakistan will have to repay China over 30 years.
The state-run China Overseas Port Holding Company, for example, which will
operate Gwadar port for a period of 40 years, is set to take 91 percent of gross revenue
collection from terminal and marine operations and 85 percent of gross operations
revenue from the Gwadar free zone. SEZs are being are being set up exclusively for
Chinese companies where they will be exempted from taxes. There is even little
clarity regarding who will run or supervise the elaborate electronic surveillance
system that China will install in Pakistani cities.

Source: Syed Irfan Raza. “Three CPEC projects hit
snags as China mulls new financing rules,” Dawn, 5
December 2017. https://www.dawn.com/news/1374532/
three-cpec-projects-hit-snags-as-china-mulls-newfinancing-rules
China has temporarily stopped funding of some
projects particularly those related to the road network
under the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC)
till further decision regarding ‘new guidelines’ to be
issued from Beijing…
The decision of Chinese government was conveyed
to Pakistan in the Joint Working Group meeting and
the existing procedure for release of funds had been
abolished…“In fact the Chinese authorities informed
us that the previous procedure of release of funds
was meant for early harvest projects only and new
guidelines will be issued for future projects of the
CPEC,” the official said…(the official) claimed that
Chinese side was quite disturbed with increasing
news reports being published in Pakistan regarding
corruption in CPEC projects and that was the reason
China has temporarily halted release of funds for the
corridor.
Source: “China not taking ownership, operation
of Diamer-Bhasha Dam: official,” Global Times,
7 December 2017. http://www.globaltimes.cn/
content/1079282.shtml
A Chinese official from the National Development
and Reform Commission (NDRC) on Thursday said
recent Pakistani media outlets have either falsified
information or merely represented a certain official’s
stance in reports on a China-Pakistan project.
The unnamed NDRC official said claims in media
reports that China “placed strict conditions, including
ownership of the project” is inaccurate and the two
sides have not even started talks of the development
plan, the Xinhua News Agency reported…
Pakistan news site tribune.com.pk reported on
November 15, citing Water and Power Development
Authority Chairman Muzammil Hussain that “Chinese
conditions were about taking ownership of the project,
operations and maintenance costs and securitization
of the Diamer-Bhasha project by pledging another
operational dam.”
The NDRC official on Thursday said that China and
Pakistan are staying in contact with each other on the
Diamer-Bhasha Dam project, and that the project is
not included in the list of energy projects under the
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor…

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

47

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Continued: CPEC: “Iron Brothers,” Unequal Partners
by Sudha Ramachandran
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 18, Issue 1, dated 12 January 2018, Edited for OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/cpec-iron-brothers-unequal-partners/

Although the Chinese government has avoided publicizing its concerns over political instability in Pakistan, there is apprehension in
China over the implications of unrest and insecurity for CPEC. The corridor links Xinjiang with Baluchistan, both turbulent regions, and
runs through the insurgency-wracked Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and disputed Gilgit-Baltistan territories. Bomb blasts and grenade attacks have
killed scores of Pakistani workers and Chinese nationals employed in CPEC projects.
Pakistan’s upcoming parliamentary elections are an additional cause for concern. While Pakistan’s main political parties are not opposed
to CPEC, there are differences in their priorities. The ruling Pakistan Muslim League—Nawaz (PML-N) prioritizes projects along CPEC’s
relatively calm eastern route, which runs through its stronghold, Punjab. However, should the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) form or be
part of the next government it can be expected to shift focus to the turbulent western route. A change in government could lead to a review
and or change in the deals.
China and Pakistan are likely to continue to differ on issues related to CPEC. However, these are unlikely to derail the initiative, given
their strong relationship, Pakistan’s deepening dependence on China and Beijing’s determination to make a success of the Chinese Belt and
Road Initiative’s (BRI) flagship venture. End OE Watch Commentary (Ramachandran)

“China has temporarily stopped funding of some projects particularly those related to the road network
under the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) till further decision regarding ‘new guidelines’ to
be issued from Beijing.”

China’s cyber policy has become partly visible to
foreign nations through observation, tracking,
and inference. The policy appears to have three
vectors. These three aspects—peace activist,
espionage activist, and attack planner—dominate
China’s cyber policy. Some are always hidden from
view while others are demonstrated daily. Three
Faces of the Cyber Dragon is divided into sections
that coincide with these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | March 2018

48

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
Mirziyoyev’s Reforms Reach the National
Security Service (SNB)
OE Watch Commentary: A lot of attention has been on reforms carried out by Uzbekistan’s
President Shavkat Mirziyoyev since he came to power in late 2016 following the death of Islam
Karimov. Excerpts from the accompanying articles report on Mirziyoyev’s recent decision to
remove Rustam Inoyatov as the head of the National Security Service (SNB) and they note a
couple of things that can help gauge the impact of this change.
The article from Fergana News, an independent Russian-language news website with
reporters based in Central Asia, reports on how immediately following Inoyatov’s removal, he
was “appointed to be a member of the Senate of the Oliy Majlis (upper house of parliament)”
by President Mirziyoyev and that with this position he “received the right of immunity.” The
article also notes why Inoyatov likely received immunity as he had been “one of the most
influential figures in the Uzbek establishment under President Islam Karimov” and that he
had probably been involved in the transition of power following Karimov’s death. There was
speculation following Karimov’s death that Mirziyoyev became president with Inoyatov’s
approval. Lastly, the article reports how Mirziyoyev is looking to reform the SNB by removing
“departments which are not engaged in their assigned tasks.”
The article from Uzmetronom, a Russian-language independent website with sources in
Shavkat Mirziyoyev.
Uzbekistan, reports that in addition to Inoyatov’s dismissal, “two of his deputies and 11 head
Source: Kremlin Press Service,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AShavkat_Mirziyoyev.png, CC BY-SA 4.0.
of regional directorates of the SNB were removed from their posts.” The article also points out
that in Uzbekistan there are predictions that the new head of the SNB, Ikhtiyor Abdullayev, will “finally clean out the ‘agency’ of supporters or
associates of the previous leadership” by “removing those who compromised themselves with bribery or were simply indebted with the former
agency head.”
Overall, Mirziyoyev’s removal of Inoyatov and a dozen other senior leaders of the SNB marks one of his most significant reforms to date.
Perhaps just as important, Mirziyoyev did not mention which SNB departments will be removed or if the tasks assigned to them will be
transferred to another ministry While that information may not come out for some time, if at all, it could have just as significant of an impact as
Inoyatov’s removal. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“According to Article 6 ‘On the Senate of the Oliy Majlis of the Republic of Uzbekistan,’ Inoyatov received
the right of immunity.”
Source: “Бывшему главе СНБ Узбекистана обеспечили неприкосновенность (The former
head of the SNB of Uzbekistan has been provided immunity),” Fergana News, 1 February
2018. http://www.fergananews.com/news/28166
The former head of the National Security Service (SNB) of Uzbekistan, Rustam Inoyatov, has
been appointed to be a member of the Senate of the Oliy Majlis (upper house of parliament)
by the decree of President Shavkat Mirziyoyev on 31 January…Earlier that day, Inoyatov was
removed from the post of head of the SNB…according to Article 6 “On the Senate of the Oliy
Majlis of the Republic of Uzbekistan,” Inoyatov received the right of immunity.
…(Inoyatov) was considered one of the most influential figures in the Uzbek establishment
under President Islam Karimov…Until recently, Inoyatov’s position had been thought to be
unshakable…the peaceful transfer of power from the latter (Karimov) to Mirziyoyev was
regarded by many observers to be a result of internal agreements…
After coming into power in the fall of 2016, Mirziyoyev practically changed all the ministers
of the government power structures…the head of the Interior Ministry has been changed twice
and as a result, in September 2017, Pulat Bobojonov was appointed Interior Minister, and
Abdusalom Azizov was appointed Defense Minister…the SNB’s main tasks are intelligence and
counterintelligence activities…However, as Shavkat Mirziyoyev admitted in December 2017,
the authority of this department were needlessly expanded…At a National Security Council
meeting, Mirziyoyev said that the SNB will be relieved of departments which are not engaged
in their assigned tasks…

Source: “Смещение совпало с
землетрясением (The removal coincided
with an earthquake),” Uzmetronom, 31
January 2018. http://www.uzmetronom.
com/2018/01/31/smeshhenie_sovpalo_s_
zemletrjaseniem.html
On January 31 the President of Uzbekistan
introduced the new head of the National
Security Service (SNB), Ikhtiyor Abdullayev…
Shortly before (Inoyatov’s dismissal), two
of his deputies and 11 head of regional
directorates of the SNB were removed from
their posts.
According to experts, Abdullayev’s task is to
finally clean out the “agency” of supporters
or associates of the previous leadership…he
performed this kind of work in the Prosecutor
General’s Office, removing those who
compromised themselves with bribery or were
simply indebted with the former agency head…

OE Watch | March 2018

49

CAUCASUS, CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIA
The Russian-South Ossetian Armed Forces
Agreement Takes Shape
OE Watch Commentary: When the Russian government announced that it had reached
an agreement last year to allow soldiers from Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia to
join the Russian Armed Forces, some South Ossetians questioned the impact this would have
on the capabilities of their armed forces. The accompanying excerpts from articles in South
Ossetian and Russian media show how the agreement is continuing to be discussed as the
Russian government recently ratified it and there are a few things worth noting.
Two articles come from Res, the South Ossetian news agency, and the first includes
statements from Viktor Fedorov, the “Chief of Staff” of the breakaway republic’s armed
forces. Fedorov stated that “if the South Ossetian service members cannot find a contract
position in the 4th (Russian) military base, they will retain their positions in the armed forces”
and this would happen if South Ossetian soldiers do “not meet their (Russian) requirements.”
Fedorov also notes that it is “expected that the agreement will provide better weapons and
equipment for the South Ossetian forces.” This is the first mention that the agreement would
pave the way for additional security assistance and is worth keeping an eye on.
Russian Military bases in Tskhinvali Region of Georgia

The second article from Res includes statements from Mariya Kotayeva, the head of
(2013-15 years data).
Source: Giorgi Balakhadze, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ARussian_Military_bases_in_
the “State Committee of Information and Press of South Ossetia,” in an effort to assuage
Tskhinvali_Region_of_Georgia.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0.
people in South Ossetia that the agreement will not liquidate the army. Her statement that
“the transfer of separate units to the 4th (Russian) Military Base means that our soldiers will go through the same military service in better
conditions” might be seen by some South Ossetians as a positive development, but it could also confirm one of the main concerns people had
with the agreement. Some in South Ossetia believe that the most capable units in their armed forces will be transferred into the Russian Armed
Forces, not just individual soldiers.
The article from Izvestiya, a Russian-language newspaper supportive of the government, reports on the ratification of the agreement and
while it does not offer an assessment, it does mention that the Russian government “supported the entry of military units of the armed forces of
South Ossetia into the Russian army.” It is possible that new units made up of South Ossetian soldiers will be formed, provided that they meet
requirements of the Russian Armed Forces, but statements from South Ossetian and Russian officials have not alleviated the concern South
Ossetians have with the agreement. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The transfer of separate units to the 4th (Russian) Military Base means that our soldiers will go through
the same military service in better conditions.”

Source: “Депутаты Госдумы ратифицировали военное соглашение с Южной Осетией (Deputies of the State Duma ratified the military
agreement with South Ossetia),” Res, 24 January 2018. http://cominf.org/node/1166514662
…(Chief of Staff of the South Ossetian Armed Forces) Fedorov noted that if the South Ossetian service members cannot find a contract
position in the 4th (Russian) military base, they will retain their positions in the armed forces…“In the event that he does not meet their
requirements, then he will serve in the Ministry of Defense of South Ossetia,” Fedorov said…It is also expected that the agreement will
provide better weapons and equipment for the South Ossetian forces.
Source: “Котаева: военное соглашение с РФ не предусматривает ликвидацию армии Южной Осетии (Kotayeva: the military agreement
with Russia will not result in the liquidation of the South Ossetian Army),” Res, 26 January 2018. http://cominf.org/node/1166514712
Mariya Kotayeva, the head of the State Committee of Information and Press of South Ossetia, discussed the advantages in a briefing of the
agreement between the defense ministries of Russia and South Ossetia, which provides for service members to service in the Russian Armed
Forces…
“The transfer of separate units to the 4th (Russian) Military Base means that our soldiers will go through the same military service in better
conditions…”…Kotayeva focused attention on another aspect of the agreement…“If, after the signing of the agreement, the improvement of
our equipment starts, then it will be a great incentive for the development of our army.”…
Source: “В Совфеде одобрили вхождение военных Южной Осетии в российскую армию (The Federal Council endorsed the entry
of South Ossetian soldiers into the Russian Army),” Izvestiya, 30 January 2018. https://iz.ru/702058/2018-01-30/v-sovfede-odobrilivkhozhdenie-voennykh-iuzhnoi-osetii-v-rossiiskuiu-armiiu
The Federation Council Committee on Defense and Security supported the entry of military units of the armed forces of South Ossetia into
the Russian army…In order to transfer into service in the Russian Armed Forces, the South Ossetian service member must leave service in the
Armed Forces of the Republic...
OE Watch | March 2018

50

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Considering Information War
OE Watch Commentary: As the Russian
General Staff studies the nature and role
of information war, their military science
discipline considers that information war may
be best understood as being outside the military
sphere and impacting the nature of war itself.
In the current volume of the Russian General
Staff Academy’s journal, Vestnik, the authors,
V.K. Novikov and C.B. Golubchikov, claim that
the “information age is changing the essence
and content of modern war.”
The article defines information war in this
way: “Information war is an extension of a
country’s politics that consists of purposeful,
comprehensive, and methodical informational
impacts against foreign information targets in
order to achieve political, economic, territorial,
national, religious and other goals with minimal
loss of life and physical damage and without
occupation of foreign soil while protecting
its own information sources.” In the Russian
military, definitions have a doctrinal quality
to guide operational developments. The article
goes on to say, “The main goal of information
wars is to gain control over the minds of
individuals and society as a whole and impose
upon them the will of the victorious side.”
Reiterated throughout the article is a
theme of US and Western contrivance and
dominance in information war. The article
also catalogs instances of information war that
occurred outside the Western bloc. China, for
instance, is noted as carrying out information
war in Thailand in 2014. Overall, the authors
calculate that information war events took
place in 39 countries since 1991 with an
81 percent success rate. While this sort of
analysis is consistent with the Academy’s
empirical rigor and feeds calculations for
correlation of forces, it is also significant that
analysis of Russian information war actions
is missing. Such data might be considered
classified, however.

“The information age is changing the essence and content of modern
war.”

Unidentified gunmen on patrol at Simferopol Airport in Ukraine’s Crimea peninsula, Feb. 28, 2014.

Source: Elizabeth Arrott / VOA - Voice of America website http://www.voanews.com/content/us-britain-no-zero-sum-game-for-ukraine/1859367.html > .jpg, Public Domain.

“Informational psychological aspects of war should not be regarded as
complementary to conventional weapons or cyberwar.”
Source: В.К. Новиков, С.В. Голубчиков, Вестник, “,” Вестник, 3 (60), 2017, стр. 10-16.
(V.K. Novikov and S.V. Golubchikov, “Color Revolutions in Russia: Possibility and Reality,”
Vestnik, 3 (60) 2017, pp. 10-16).
Today mankind is entering a new technological stage, an information stage, that is moving
from embryonic phase and actively entering its growth phase. This information stage is
changing the essence and content of modern war. In other words, humanity is entering the
phase of information war, which has already become a reality. This technological stage
stimulates the development of multiple forms of informational-psychological impact on
individual and social levels in order to direct the impetus in the needed direction.
Perceived Western domination in such areas as nano-, bio-, information telecommunications
technology-, communication-, energy engineering, and science in general, based on new
technological principles, results in US and Western superiority in all other aspects of human
activity and creates favorable conditions for various activities including information wars.

The article concludes that information war is an alternative to conventional war….“to impose reflexive governance…” The authors state
that “In the modern world, such military terms as ‘operation’, ‘battle’ and ‘combat’ often cannot be applied to describe processes occurring
to resolve conflicts, particularly political, economic, territorial, national, and religious. Those notions no longer fully correspond to today’s
realities and hinder the development of the armed forces’ capabilities and forms and methods of their application.” Elsewhere, the authors
argue that “Informational-psychological aspects of war should not be regarded as complementary to conventional weapons or cyberwar.”
The authors conclude by suggesting that, in the long term, the key to successful information war will be personnel training. In the short
term, they recommend a list of amendments to Russian federal regulations and policy as well as assessing secondary school education with a
view to the information war threat. Overall, this article shows that even as Russia is conducting information war, its military is still working
out its place in military science. End OE Watch Commentary (Wilhelm, Vainer)

OE Watch | March 2018

51

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
General Gerasimov on the Syrian Campaign
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted interview with General Valeriy Gerasimov, First Deputy Minister of Defense of
the Russian Federation and Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, and conducted by the prolific military journalist Viktor
Baranets for the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, describes Russia’s involvement in the Syrian campaign and how this experience is changing
the Russian Armed Forces. General Gerasimov starts by explaining how the Russian Armed Forces became involved in Syria, how the initial
deployment was conducted, and how the mission morphed from just providing air support, to later including ground operations.
Of particular interest is General Gerasimov’s description of President Putin’s ‘hands-on’ approach to commanding Russian Forces in Syria.
According to Gerasimov, Putin is briefed on all aspects of the campaign and is personally making decisions about how to respond. If this
description is accurate, it can be reasonably inferred that Putin is personally managing other high-profile problems, such as Russia’s ongoing
actions in Eastern Ukraine. This ‘hands-on’ approach to dealing with problems may be what is often described in the West as Russia’s ‘whole-ofgovernment’ approach. Since Putin is personally involved in planning, a slow “bottom-up” staffing process that requires buy-in and coordination
from the different branches of government is not required.
Also of interest in the interview is Gerasimov’s description of the importance of military advisors, the way in which advisors are fulfilling
their duties, and the benefits for the Russian Armed Forces after advisors return to their home duty stations. According to Gerasimov, Russian
military advisors have been a key factor in saving Assad’s regime from collapse and regaining control of the country. Interestingly, Russia has
chosen a military advisor model different from the US model. The US has recently formed a Security Force Assistance Brigade (SFAB), which
are designed on the US brigade combat team model and that consist of approximately 800 NCOs and officers that are experts in their respective
fields (infantry, armor artillery, logistics, etc.). These personnel then receive additional training to advise and train foreign (conventional)
security forces. The Russians are taking a different approach. Instead of establishing SFABs or similar specialized units, the Russians are taking
complete staffs from Russian division/regiments, brigades, and battalions, and putting these staff elements with their Syrian counterparts.
These complete staff elements are likely rotated back to their units in Russia intact, in order to give their respective units’ battle-tested staffs
that are accustomed to working together. General Gerasimov stated that over 48,000 Russian personnel have served in Syria, so it is likely that
many Ground Forces, Naval Infantry, and Airborne commanders and staff officers are getting much valued combat experience. Gerasimov also
discusses the value of equipment validation and ‘lessons learned’ from Syria. Russia has combat tested over 200 new pieces of equipment, with
some requiring modification after combat conditions made deficiencies apparent. Gerasimov mentions that the Syrian campaign has led to a
host of new training and doctrine products. The accompanying article from Krasnaya Zvezda discusses some of the tangible results of this new
training and doctrine, namely new training aids and manuals. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Sometimes the Supreme Commander in Chief
[Putin] himself comes to see me, sometimes the
defense minister and I go to him to report. The
president identifies the targets, the objectives,
he is up to speed on the entire dynamic of
the combat operations. And in each sector,
moreover. And, of course, he sets the objectives
for the future.”
-General of the Army Valeriy
Gerasimov, First Deputy Minister of
Defense of the Russian Federation and
Chief of the General Staff of Russia’s
Armed Forces

Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov before the meeting with Defence Ministry senior officials and defence industry representatives, Sochi, May 2017.
Source: Russian Presidency, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/transcripts/54503/photos/48378, CC 4.0.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

52

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: General Gerasimov on the Syrian Campaign
Source: Viktor Baranets, “Начальник Генштаба Вооруженных сил России генерал армии Валерий Герасимов: «Мы переломили хребет
ударным силам терроризма» [Chief of the General Staff, Valeriy Gerasimov: ‘We Have Broken the Back of the Shock Troops of Terrorism’]”
Komsomolskaya Pravda Online, 26 December 2017. https://www.kp.ru/daily/26775/3808693
The defeat of the terrorists’ armed formations in Syria has been one of the main military results of the outgoing year. And the Russian army
unquestionably played the decisive role in this.
I wanted above all to discuss this in detail with General of the Army Valeriy Gerasimov, First Deputy Minister of Defense of the Russian
Federation and Chief of the General Staff of Russia’s Armed Forces…
[Baranets] Valeriy Vasilyevich, how was it possible in the fall of 2015 to redeploy our major troop grouping to Syria so rapidly and
surreptitiously? I read in the American press at the time that the generals over there were almost in a panic. They were not expecting such
speed and agility from our army. And they even complained that their intelligence was late…
[Gerasimov] It was a meticulously planned operation, all the issues were taken into consideration, the requisite men and equipment were
identified. I have in mind both the combat component and the support component. But we had practically no experience of performing the
redeployment of troops and forces over such a distance, to the territory of a state that did not border on our country. There was only a single
example, Operation Anadyr in 1962, when the USSR deployed troops to Cuba. We also took that experience into account. The proficiency gained
by our subunits during the snap inspections also stood us in good stead. During these, we rehearsed redeployment over long distances, making
use of all forms of transport…air, rail, sea. The redeployment was conducted with the utmost secrecy, without attracting particular attention.
Fifty aircraft were concentrated at Humaymim airfield… All this took something like a month… The support component required more time. The
infrastructure had to be created, a system of comprehensive support, logistic support included.
[Baranets] Why, when planning the operation in Syria, did our General Staff not make provision from the outset for the employment of
ground subunits and units but instead place the main emphasis on air power? What was the story here?
[Gerasimov] We had assessed the status of the Syrian armed forces’ ground troops. Despite the fact that they had been engaged in combat
operations for quite some time and had sustained losses, individual units were nonetheless mission-capable. What was needed was to address
the issues primarily of target reconnaissance and effective engagement, and disruption of the enemy’s command and control system. These were
missions that could be performed by our aerospace component. But combat operations directly in the ground troops sectors were conducted by
Syrian subunits with the involvement of our military advisers. Other pro-government groups were also present, so the deployment of a ground
component was not initially envisaged…
[Baranets] And what consideration did our General Staff give to the specific features of the terrorists’ tactics? What was the main focus of
attention here?
[Gerasimov]…These armed groups were headed by commanders who had been specially trained by instructors from a whole range of Middle
Eastern states and Western countries. There were also former officers of the Iraqi army. During the period when combat operations were in
progress they had seized a large quantity of armament and equipment belonging to the Iraqi and Syrian armies. Their inventory included up to
1,500 tanks and armored vehicles alone. Plus something in the neighborhood of 1,200 guns and mortars. This was essentially a regular army…As
of 30 September 2015 there were something like 59,000 [insurgents] in…plus in the past two years they have been able to recruit another 10,000 or
so… according to our data, around 60,000 militants have been eliminated, with over 2,800 of these originally from the Russian Federation.
[Baranets] Have I understood it correctly that we are retaining these two bases of ours to continue providing assistance to the Syrian
government army, yes?
[Gerasimov] Yes, because the situation is still unstable. Some time is needed before full stability is achieved, so the bases are there for a good
reason, they are essential there. So as to prevent a repetition of the situation prior to September 2015… It shouldn’t be forgotten, on the other hand,
that Russia, too, has its own interests in the Middle East…
[Baranets] During the course of the operation in Syria how frequently did you yourself and the minister of defense need to discuss the
progress of the operation with the Supreme Commander in Chief. Was this done face to face in the Kremlin, at the General Staff, or over the
telephone?
[Gerasimov] It varies. I usually report to the minister of defense on a daily basis morning and evening on the state of affairs and the progress in
mission performance, and he reports to the president. Once or twice a week the minister reports to the president in person, presenting the requisite
documents, maps, and video materials. Sometimes the Supreme Commander in Chief himself comes to see me, sometimes the defense minister and
I go to him to report. The president identifies the targets, the objectives, he is up to speed on the entire dynamic of the combat operations. And in
each sector, moreover. And, of course, he sets the objectives for the future.
[Baranets] What has been the General Staff’s greatest difficulty when planning the military operation in Syria?

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

53

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: General Gerasimov on the Syrian Campaign
“The study and generalization of experience is an ongoing process…We have held several conferences
on sharing experiences. A whole range of training manuals that generalize this experience has been
published.”
-General of the Army Valeriy Gerasimov, First Deputy Minister of Defense of the Russian
Federation and Chief of the General Staff of Russia’s Armed Forces
Source: Viktor Baranets, “Начальник Генштаба Вооруженных сил России генерал армии Валерий Герасимов: «Мы переломили хребет
ударным силам терроризма» [Chief of the General Staff, Valeriy Gerasimov: ‘We Have Broken the Back of the Shock Troops of Terrorism’]”
Komsomolskaya Pravda Online, 26 December 2017. https://www.kp.ru/daily/26775/3808693
[Gerasimov] The most challenging element during preparations for the operation and in the initial period of its implementation was that of
organizing collaboration with the government troops, and the other pro-government forces…It was no easy matter setting up the collaboration of
all these detachments with our aerospace forces, organizing all manner of support. But we have already learned to do this. Everything has fitted
into place and is functioning normally. In Humaymim we have established a state-of-the-art command post that supports command and control of
our troop grouping in Syria... over 48,000 officers and men [have been involved]...
[Baranets] How do you assess the role of our military advisers who operated inside the Syrian army?
[Gerasimov] I rate their role highly. Within every subunit -- battalion, brigade, regiment, division -- there is a military adviser’s staff. It comprises
the essential officials. Namely, operations staff, intelligence officer, artilleryman, engineer, interpreters, and other officials. They essentially plan
the combat operations. They provide assistance in subunit command and control during combat mission performance. In all sectors actions are
linked by a common concept of operations, by a single plan, leadership is exercised from the grouping’s command post at Humaymim.
[Baranets] And the lessons of the Syrian campaign that the General Staff will need to learn?
[Gerasimov] The study and generalization of experience is an ongoing process. This work has been carried out from the first day of this
campaign… All the incidents that have occurred, the experience derived from the combat operations -- all of this has been carefully studied and
brought to the attention of all the subunits and the men that were just getting ready to head out there, so that all of this is taken into consideration.
We have held several conferences on sharing experiences. A whole range of training manuals that generalize this experience has been published.
[Baranets] We have tested a large quantity of armaments in Syria. What is the General Staff’s assessment of them?
[Gerasimov] We have tested over 200 models of armament and equipment there, modern pieces, those that had recently entered service, those
that were on the point of entering service, and those that were already in service. They had ostensibly come through all the state tests, and they are
performing normally in exercises… But during combat mission performance some problems arise that weren’t noticed before. There is something
that needs modifying...
[Baranets] As far as I am aware, the Russian army has never before employed the quantity of UAVs it has done in Syria. How do you assess
the significance of this type of equipment in light of the Syrian experience?
[Gerasimov] In Syria there are now on average around 60-70 UAVs airborne on any given day. They conduct reconnaissance, there are UAVs
that perform electronic countermeasures missions and resolve other tasks. In the space of five years we have taken a big step forward in the UAV
context. Previously all we had in service were the old Soviet type designated Reys. Now the conduct of combat operations is inconceivable without
a UAV. It is used by artillerymen, recon scouts, airmen -- everyone. UAVs are employed to create reconnaissance-strike and reconnaissance-fire
loops.
Source: Aleksandr Tikhonov, “Нас ждёт «Восток-2018»: Боевая подготовка была и остаётся основным содержанием повседневной
деятельности войск в мирное время [Vostok-2018 Awaits Us: Combat Training Has Been and Remains the Main Troop Activity],” Krasnaya
Zvezda Online, 1 December 2017. http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/item/35264-nas-zhdjot-vostok-2018
Lieutenant General Ivan Buvaltsev, Chief of Russian Federation Armed Forces Main Combat Training Directorate, tells about results of the
training year that has ended and about plans for the 2018 training year.
[KZ] How is the principle of “teaching troops what is necessary in war” being implemented today with consideration of the experience of
combat operations?
[Buvaltsev] The Main Combat Training Directorate developed 11 methods aids taking the experience of combat operations into account.
Among them is the Manual for Training Troops to Conduct Combat Operations on Mountainous and High-Mountain Terrain [«Руководство
по подготовке войск к ведению боевых действий в горной и высокогорной местности»]; a new textbook, Combined-Arms Training of the
Soldier (Seaman) [«Общевойсковая подготовка солдата (матроса)»]; the training aid “Urban Combat”[«Бой в населённом пункте»]; and a
number of others. These aids permitted developing uniform approaches to organizing combat training and departing from stereotypes in training
commanders, command and control entities, military units, and subunits.
OE Watch | March 2018

54

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Development of the Forpost UAV
OE Watch Commentary: Russian UAV development began in Soviet times and there have been assessments that the Soviet UAV program
stood on an equal footing as its Western counterparts. The financial turmoil after the collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in little or no Russian
UAV development throughout the 1990s and most of the 2000s. As a result, by the time of the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, the Russian Armed
Forces were still using systems initially developed in the 1970s and 1980s. The “Strizh” and “Reys” were built in the seventies by the Tupolev
Design Bureau, while the Stroy-P system with the “Pchela” UAV was created by the Kulon Scientific Research Institute and the Yakovlev Design
Bureau at the end of the 1980s. It became apparent that a serious upgrade of the Russian UAV program was required after gaps in Russian
capabilities were found during the 2008 Russo-Georgian War.
Russia’s first action to further this line of effort was to purchase a consignment of BirdEye 400 and Searcher Mk II UAVs from one of the
world’s leading UAV developers, the Israeli IAI company. Licensing agreements were then concluded so production could be done domestically
under the names Zastava and Forpost at the UZGA plant in Yekaterinburg. In parallel, the Russian Army began procuring purely domestic
systems including: the Orlan-10 developed by the STTs company in Saint Petersburg; the Eleron-3SV developed by the Eniks firm in Kazan; and
the Granat family of UAVs, produced by Izhmash Unmanned Systems. In addition, the Russian Defense Ministry is financing a series of R&D
projects aimed at creating the next generation of domestic UAVs. This includes: a tactical UAV project developed by the Luch Design Bureau
in Rybinsk; two different long-duration and medium-altitude UAV projects being developed by the Kronshtadt Company in Saint Petersburg; a
reconnaissance-strike UAV project being developed by the Simonov Design Bureau in Kazan; and a large UAV project being developed by the
aircraft manufacturer Sukhoi.
The accompanying articles discuss the most common UAV in the Russian Aerospace Forces (VKS), the Forpost. A typical Forpost UAV
system consists of a ground control station and three UAVs, costing an estimated $6 million per airframe. The Forpost UAV has a takeoff weight of 454 kg and can carry up to 100 kg payload. It is capable of conducting surveillance for up to 17.5 hours, at altitudes of up to
5,700 meters, and at a range of up to 250 km. Due to these characteristics, in Russian parlance, the Forpost is classified as a medium-sized
UAV. The Forpost is primarily an aerial reconnaissance platform that can be used for target acquisition and for artillery spotting. Currently,
reconnaissance duties are accomplished by video and infrared electro-optical sensors, but as the accompanying 25 January 2018 edition of
Izvestiya explains, Russia is now developing a radar capability for the Forpost. A radar capability would significantly improve the Forpost’s
ability to collect information in nighttime and poor weather conditions. As can be seen in the accompanying excerpted articles from the Ministry
of Defense of the Russian Federation and the 17 January 2018 edition of Izvestiya, the Forpost has performed well in Syria, and there are plans
for its further development. Russia has also decided to establish a special department in the Gagarin Air Force Academy to train pilots of
medium and large UAVs, in order to more fully exploit these platforms’ capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The decision to develop a radar for

the Forpost was made on the basis of
experience of using unmanned aviation
in combat in the Syria operation.”

“In Syria, the Forpost proved itself in the best
possible way. We are therefore making plans for using
these systems for the next decade. Naturally, they will
undergo modernization…”
-Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov
(continued)

Forpost UAV, Ministry of Defence Innovation Day 2013 .

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin Military Blog, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/InnovationDay2013/i-WJ3jP47, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

55

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Development of the Forpost UAV
Source: Sergey Valchenko and Aleksey Ramm: “Дрон-разведчик заглянет под облака: «Форпост» оснастят всевидящим
радаромReconnaissance [A Drone Will Peer Beneath the Clouds: The Forpost Will Get All-Seeing Radar],” Izvestiya Online, 25 January
2018. https://iz.ru/695715/sergei-valchenko-aleksei-ramm/dron-razvedchik-zaglianet-pod-oblaka
Russia’s reconnaissance drones are to receive the ability to operate day and night in any weather. Forpost UAVs will be fitted with miniature
precision radars, which experts say will greatly enhance their capabilities. Forposts currently carry powerful optoelectronic stations that
are not always effective in fog or sandstorms…The military are drawing up the tactical and technical requirements for a UAV radar station,
Izvestiya was told at the Defense Ministry. The decision to develop a radar for the Forpost was made on the basis of experience of using
unmanned aviation in combat in the Syria operation. The plan is that the radar will become part of the onboard equipment for existing
Forposts, with the prospect of it also being fitted to the upgraded Forpost-M.
According to Izvestiya’s information, the radar being created for the drone will to a large extent be similar to the radars fitted to “proper”
aircraft. Although it will differ by being smaller, because of the UAVs’ weight and dimensions. For ease of use the radar drone will be
contained in a small pod, which can be installed beneath the wing or fuselage…The Forpost tactical UAV is the main “workhorse” of the UAV
subunits in Russia’s Aerospace Forces and Navy. Active use has been made of drones during the operation in Syria.
Denis Fedutinov, chief editor of the Unmanned Aviation [UAV.ru] website, told Izvestiya that the decision to fit reconnaissance drones with
radar is entirely sound. “Installing a radar station on a UAV in addition to the traditionally used optoelectronic surveillance devices will
improve target detection and identification,” he explained…
Russian UAVs in Syria have flown 16,000 sorties, Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu reported earlier. Their total time in the air amounts to
96,000 hours. The intensity of reconnaissance drone use substantially increased in the course of the operation. UAVs flew about 400 sorties in
2015 but by late 2017 this was more than 1,000 sorties every month. As the Minister commented, UAVs ensure round-the-clock monitoring of
the situation on practically the entire territory of Syria. According to the military, using UAVs in this country significantly increased the ability
of aviation, missile forces, and artillery to destroy guerrilla targets.
Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm, “Командиры «пилотов беспилотников»
пополнят ВКС в 2018 году [Officers Commanding ‘Drone Pilots’ Will Replenish the
VKS in 2018],” Izvestiya Online, 17 January 2018. https://iz.ru/687961/nikolai-surkovaleksei-ramm/komandiry-pilotov-bespilotnikov-popolniat-vks-v-2018-godu
Izvestiya was told in the Aerospace Forces Main Command that as of 2018 drone
elements will be commanded by specially trained officers. They are very familiar
with the specifics of the employment of UAV and know how to organize with the
maximum efficiency the field operations of the squadrons, how many vehicles are
needed to monitor a designated area, how to establish interaction with headquarters,
and so forth. Officers for drone detachments will be trained by the 4th Department
of the N.Ye. Zhukovskiy and Yu.A. Gagarin Air Force Academy. Graduates of the
department are capable of operating modern systems for the collection and processing
of aerospace intelligence data as part of the integrated system of automated command
and control of the armed forces. They will serve in UAV detachments in officer billets.
There are several separate drone squadrons in the Aerospace Forces at this time.
One is permanently in Syria, where it is tackling reconnaissance assignments. In
addition, two UAV regiments have been organized in the Navy…Denis Fedutinov,
expert in the field of drone aircraft, told Izvestiya that the presence in the units of
trained UAV specialists will ensure the better-skilled maintenance of the systems
and raise the efficiency of their employment. “The decision to entrust drone systems
to specialist officers is very timely,” Denis Fedutinov observed. “They know all the
possibilities and technical features of the products in service, this is why they are
capable of supporting long operating timeframes. This is particularly pertinent at this
time, when the number of UAV in the field is growing by the year. It is hard to ensure
the proper level of use of the purchased systems without special know-how.”
The expert says that training is particularly pertinent in the use of medium and
heavy UAV…”portable systems that are intended for operation at the tactical level
may be controlled by relatively low-skilled users. In the case of heavier and costlier
vehicles, command and control must be exercised by specially trained officers,” Denis
Fedutinov added. The main UAV in service with these elements is the medium-range
(up to 250 km) Forpost vehicle...Forpost UAV operators are taught by the Russian
Defense Ministry State Unmanned Aviation Center near Kolomna. The training of
such a specialist takes approximately four months.

Source: ““Заместитель Министра обороны
Юрий Борисов посетил Уральский завод
гражданской авиации [Deputy Defense Minister
Yuriy Borisov Has Visited the Ural Civil Aviation
Plant in Yekaterinburg],” Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation Online, 25 December 2017.
https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.
htm?id=12156214@egNews
Deputy Defense Minister Yuriy Borisov has made
a working visit to the Ural Civil Aviation Plant in
Yekaterinburg. Speaking at a conference involving
the enterprise’s collective, he stated that the
Russian Defense Ministry was planning, from 2019,
further purchases of Forpost UAVs, which have
been improved taking combat experience in Syria
into account and assembled entirely from Russian
components…”In Syria, the Forpost proved itself
in the best possible way. We are therefore making
plans for using these systems for the next decade.
Naturally, they will undergo modernization,” Yuriy
Borisov explained.
He thanked the plant’s employees, who had been
constantly present at the Humaymim airbase
in Syria, where they had conducted the UAVs’
technical servicing…”The plant has delivered
around 30 Forpost systems to the troops, but they
had still been assembled from imported components.
By order of the Industry and Trade Ministry, the
plant has carried out import substitution work and
we are discussing plans for ordering a new contract
from 2019 with 100-percent local sourcing. Thus,
the Forpost will already be wholly Russian,” Yuriy
Borisov stressed.

OE Watch | March 2018

56

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Specialist Training for Russian UAV Pilots
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian military continues to
develop unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) technology, something
they consider a key component of asymmetric warfare. Integrating
these new technologies with traditional training proves a unique
challenge. According to the brief excerpt from the pro-Kremlin
daily, Izvestiya, Russian military leaders have initiated plans
to transfer command of drone elements to “specially trained
officers.” As the excerpt points out, the initiative “intends to bring
the organization of the field operations of elements equipped with
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) up to a new level” by training
all drone squadron commanders in a new four-month specialist
program.
According to the experts quoted in the article, the Russian military
began the initiative due to the increasingly large role drones play
in Syrian combat zones. According to the article, drones are “now
a key reconnaissance resource” in the military’s arsenal. This is
supported by “several separate drone squadrons in the Aerospace
forces,” including one permanently conducting reconnaissance
missions in Syria and another two regiments organized in the Navy.
The author stresses the reconnaissance uses of medium and
heavy drones while explaining the strategic advantage provided
by employing specialists to command UAV squadrons. The
commanders’ specialized knowledge will increase effectiveness
and maximize efficiency in the field. The officers are trained in “the
specifics of the employment of UAV and [the trained specialists]
know how to organize the field operations of the squadrons with the
maximum efficiency, how many vehicles are needed to monitor a
designated area, how to establish interaction with headquarters, and
so forth.”
While non-specialists can operate small drones, training is critical
to effectively operate medium and heavy UAV. The article remarks
on the timeliness of training drone specialist officers, contending
that this will ensure the maximum utilization of drones, which the
Russian military is increasingly deploying abroad. End OE Watch
Commentary (Johnson)

“The command of the Russian Aerospace
Forces (VKS) intends to bring up to a new
level the organization of the field operations
of elements equipped with unmanned aerial
vehicles.”

Source: [Nikolay Surkov, Aleksey Ramm, “Командиры «пилотов
беспилотников» пополнят ВКС в 2018 году,” [Officers Commanding
‘Drone Pilots’ Will Replenish the VKS in 2018] Izvestiya Online,
17 January 2018. https://iz.ru/687961/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm/
komandiry-pilotov-bespilotnikov-popolniat-vks-v-2018-godu
The command of the Russian Aerospace Forces (VKS) intends to bring
up to a new level the organization of the field operations of elements
equipped with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). As of 2018 they will
be directed by specially trained officers, who have been specifically
schooled in the intricacies of the accomplishment of reconnaissance
missions with drones. Experts believe that against the background
of the combat operations in Syria the number of UAV in the field has
grown and that they are now a key reconnaissance resource.
Izvestiya was told in the Aerospace Forces Main Command that
as of 2018 drone elements will be commanded by specially trained
officers. They are very familiar with the specifics of the employment of
UAV and know how to organize with the maximum efficiency the field
operations of the squadrons, how many vehicles are needed to monitor
a designated area, how to establish interaction with headquarters, and
so forth….
…There are several separate drone squadrons in the Aerospace
Forces at this time. One is permanently in Syria, where it is tackling
reconnaissance assignments. In addition, two UAV regiments have
been organized in the Navy.
Denis Fedutinov, expert in the field of drone aircraft, told Izvestiya
that the presence in the units of trained UAV specialists will ensure the
better-skilled maintenance of the systems and raise the efficiency of
their employment.
“The decision to entrust drone systems to specialist officers is very
timely,” Denis Fedutinov observed. “They know all the possibilities
and technical features of the products in service, this is why they are
capable of supporting long operating timeframes. This is particularly
pertinent at this time, when the number of UAV in the field is growing
by the year. It is hard to ensure the proper level of use of the purchased
systems without special know-how.”
The expert says that training is particularly pertinent in the use of
medium and heavy UAV.
“Army portable systems intended for operation at a tactical level may
be controlled by relatively low-skilled users. In the case of heavier and
costlier vehicles, command and control must be exercised by specially
trained officers,” Denis Fedutinov added….

OE Watch | March 2018

57

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russia Developing Top-Attack Tank Mine
OE Watch Commentary: In general, Russia still believes mines are a key capability for restricting maneuver and shaping the modern battlefield.
While other countries have for the most part have abandoned mine use, the Russians have made no such commitment. The accompanying excerpted
article from Izvestiya discusses Russian efforts to develop a top-attack tank mine. A top-attack tank mine has several advantages over its less
technologically advanced cousins. The primary advantage is that a top-attack tank mine can avoid the tanks thick side and frontal armor, instead
hitting the tank on its less armored top, thereby increasing the chances of a critical hit. Since the top-attack tank mine has a range of approximately
100m, far fewer top-attack tank mines are required to defend a given area versus the use of conventional proximity mines. Perhaps the most
insidious advantage of the mine is the difficulty in removing it. Mine plows and other such systems would be ineffective as the mines would likely
have to be found and removed by dismounted personnel, a time consuming activity in high-speed maneuver warfare.
The Russian Armed Forces not only use engineers to deploy mines, but they also have developed other, more novel approaches. Mines may be
deployed by conventional (tube) artillery, multiple rocket launch systems, or as the accompanying article from the Russian Federation Ministry of
Defense describes, by helicopter. These developments show that commanders and staffs still believe in the importance of mines to restrict enemy
maneuver, and make it clear that Russia will likely use mines in the event of any type of maneuver warfare. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“A mine like this controls a fairly large sector of ground to a radius of up to 100 meters, which means that

blanket minelaying is not necessary…A small group of servicemen with a couple of dozen of these mines can
rapidly cover a decent area of a front. Also, flails and plows do not work against a ‘smart’ minefield like this
because vehicles are hit from a distance…In future it will be possible to link Russian ‘smart’ mines into a
network run from a single control panel. The munitions’ sensors will transmit to the panel data about objects
detected -- type, number, speed, and direction of travel. The operator will be able to select which mines to
activate to destroy targets and which to keep in reserve.”
Source: Nikolay Surkov, Sergey Valchenko, and Aleksey Ramm, “«Противотанковый часовой» ударит
сверху: Для российской армии разработаны «умные» противокрышевые мины [The ‘Antitank
Sentry’ Will Strike From Above: ‘Smart’ Top Attack Mines Are Being Developed for the Russian Army]”
Izvestiya Online, 15 January 2018. https://iz.ru/677597/nikolai-surkov-sergei-valchenko-aleksei-ramm/
protivotankovyi-chasovoi-udarit-sverkhu
The Russian military are to receive an “antitank sentry” -- the PTKM-1R [ПТКМ-1Р], the first top
attack mine. Thanks to sensitive electronic sensors and “smart” innards, it can autonomously track a
hostile tank and destroy it by firing a special submunition from the least protected direction -- above.
In the expert’s opinion, these new engineering munitions will remove the need to densely sow mines
in a locality, and on armor approach routes will make it possible to quickly create minefields that are
impassable without specialized equipment.
Development of the first domestic top attack mine, the PTKM-1R, is nearing completion for the
military, Izvestiya was told at the Defense Ministry. Prototypes are already in testing. The design
concept is for a fundamentally new and high-tech engineering munition that will significantly
increase sapper subunits’ capabilities against tanks and other modern armor.
The PTKM-1R mine is a green cylinder the size of an ordinary fire extinguisher and weighs about
20 kg. After being planted and activated it opens up like a flower, its petals unfurling from the casing
to hold it in a vertical position. The mine is planted upright (it just needs to be taken from the back
of a vehicle and placed on the ground) and can remain armed for up to 10 days at temperatures
from minus 40 to plus 30 degrees Celsius. After that time it can self-destruct so as not to endanger
civilians. A combined sensor (seismic and thermal) can detect a target at a range of 150-250 meters.
When a tank or armored vehicle is detected the mine leans slightly in the required direction. When
the target is within the kill zone, the submunition is launched. It climbs to an altitude of a few dozen
meters, locates the target with a thermal imager (which reacts to heat from the engine), and shoots an
explosively formed slug of molten metal into the roof of the turret…
By creating top attack mines Russian developers are following global trends in advances in
weaponry, military expert Aleksey Leonkov told Izvestiya...”A mine like this controls a fairly large
sector of ground to a radius of up to 100 meters, which means that blanket minelaying is not
necessary,” he explained. “A small group of servicemen with a couple of dozen of these mines can
rapidly cover a decent area of a front. Also, flails and plows do not work against a ‘smart’ minefield
like this because vehicles are hit from a distance.”
In future it will be possible to link Russian “smart” mines into a network run from a single control
panel. The munitions’ sensors will transmit to the panel data about objects detected -- type, number,
speed, and direction of travel. The operator will be able to select which mines to activate to destroy
targets and which to keep in reserve.

Source: “Вертолётчики ЗВО на
учении в Ленинградской области
заминировали танкоопасные
направления с воздуха [Western
Military District Helicopter Crews
Mine Tank Approach Routes from the
Air in an Exercise in the Leningrad
Oblast],” Russian Federation Ministry
of Defense, 26 January 2018. https://
function.mil.ru/news_page/country/
more.htm?id=12159658@egNews
The crews of Mi-8 helicopters of a
separate transport mixed aviation
regiment of the Western Military
District carried out aerial mining
of tank approach routes during an
exercise in Leningradskaya Oblast…
Flying from Levashovo airfield, they
used VMR-2 Dozhd mine dispensers
installed in the Mi-8s’ fuselages, from
a minimum altitude of 10 meters.
During the process the aircraft held
a speed of not more than 20 kph as
they maintained the intervals for
sowing the antitank mines, which
were concealed in deep snow. The
pilots received coordinates from
reconnaissance groups on the
ground. The aerial mining made
it possible to halt the progress of
notional enemy armor. More than
10 square kilometers of terrain were
sown with several hundred antitank
mines. Twenty Mi-8 helicopter crews
took part in the exercise…

OE Watch | March 2018

58

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Expeditionary Capabilities, a Relatively Low
Priority
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Nezavisimaya Gazeta discusses the logistic issues regarding Russia’s
Syrian campaign. Russia relies upon Large Landing Craft (BDK) such as the Project 1171 “Alligator” and the Project 775 “Ropucha” class
ships to provide the vast majority of heavy lift for the Syrian campaign. The article reports that Russia is having difficulty providing logistical
support for the operation. The Russian Navy’s auxiliary fleet, as well as chartered vessels, are participating in logistic support operations, which
is often referred to as the ‘Syrian Express.’ On 30 December 2017, the Yamal, a 775 “Ropucha,” collided with a Sierra Leone flagged freighter
in the Aegean Sea. The Yamal received extensive damage, and will be unavailable for operations for the foreseeable future, resulting in some
scrambling to mitigate the loss. The temporary loss of the Yamal highlights how much difficulty an overtaxed Russian Navy is having in order to
support a relatively modest sized operation (in comparison to US operations).
The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses Russian efforts to obtain Universal Landing Ship (UDK) class ships. This
class of ship is much larger than a BDK and they are capable of transporting a full naval infantry battalion and act as a docking station for aircushioned vehicles and other landing craft. They can also function as a helicopter carrier for an aviation group. Aside from the obvious tactical
advantages of such a vessel, there was also a less obvious operational or strategic one. A UDK equipped with an assault force and aviation group
is an effective instrument of deterrence in remote theaters, making it possible to quickly, easily, and relatively cheaply deploy a complete air,
land, and sea force off a given coastline to intervene in local conflicts or possibly even prevent them by the force’s mere presence. The UDK
is likely perceived by Russia to also be a defensive asset. The Russian Federation has a vast coastline to defend with a relatively small coastal
defense infrastructure and personnel base, so Russian naval infantry exercises often involve forced-entry landings on Russian territory to
combat an enemy that has already landed on Russian soil. The Izvestiya article discusses the Russian UDK requirements, methods of attainment,
the amount of technical experience the Russian ship industry would gain from building such a ship as well as the often delayed timeline for
acquisition. The earliest a UDK could be delivered is 2024, but given the history ship production delays, 2024 seems unrealistic.
The accompanying excerpted article from RIA Novosti explains that Russia will deploy its first Project 11711 “Ivan Gren” class, Large
Amphibious Warfare Ships (AWS) this spring. The Ivan Gren is based upon the Project 1171 “Alligator” class, and was designed long before
Universal Landing Ship (UDK) class ships, such as the Mistral, had been considered. The AWS 11711 is capable of transporting 300 naval
infantry personnel, and 38 armored personnel carriers or 13 tanks. It is fitted with a Grad-M multiple rocket launcher system (the letter ‘M’
stands for maritime) with a range of up to 20 km; two AK-630M 30mm automatic six-barrel artillery systems capable of expending up to 1,000
rounds per minute; a AK-176 76.2mm gun; and facilities for a ship-based Ka-29 helicopter. Initially, Russia planned to build four Ivan Gren
class ships, but has recently decided to only build two. Undoubtedly, development of the UDK, a larger more capable platform, with similar
capabilities, has diminished interest in the Ivan Gren class, but there have also been many problems and delays with the project. The keel for the
first in the class was laid in December 2004, and it was lowered into the water in May 2012.
To summarize, these three articles demonstrate the lack of emphasis the Russian Navy is placing on expeditionary capabilities. In the near
term, Russia can only expect two Ivan Gren class ships and will have to wait till at least 2024 for the first UDKs to come online, at a time when
Russia is already having difficult sustaining ongoing operations. The Navy’s top priorities appear to be coastal defense, and precision munitions
and their associated platforms, not expeditionary support and warfare. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“…the Russian Navy is in dire need of large amphibious warfare ships. Even the decommissioning of one
of them is disrupting deliveries of weapons and hardware to Syria.”
Source: Andrey Riskin, ““Сирийский экспресс” живет лишь за счет стареньких десантных кораблей [Syrian Express Survives Only
Thanks to Very Old Amphibious Warfare Ships],” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 17 January 2018. http://www.ng.ru/armies/2018-01-17/100_
express170118.html
…As is known, large amphibious warfare ships and vessels of the Russian Navy’s auxiliary fleet, as well as chartered vessels, are
participating in the operation named Syrian Express to deliver freight for the Russian air group at Humaymim Airbase near Latakia, the
material and technical support center at Tartus, and the Syrian Government Army…the Russian Navy is in dire need of large amphibious
warfare ships. Even the decommissioning of one of them is disrupting deliveries of weapons and hardware to Syria. The Russian Navy’s
amphibious warfare fleet today consists of Project 1171 large amphibious warfare ships that were commissioned during the period from 1966
through 1975 and more “recent” Project 775 large amphibious warfare ships (1976-1991). Hopes were being pinned on the Ivan Gren, the first
of a new series of Project 1171 amphibious warfare ships that was laid down back in 2004! But, there is no way the Ivan Gren, which is being
built at the Yantar Baltic Shipyard, can be handed over to the fleet because of problems..
…A source at one of the Russian designer-enterprises robustly lambasted the seagoing qualities of the large amphibious warfare ship
Ivan Gren and cast doubt on the need for series building of ships of this project. He emphasized that the ship was being created to operate
in ‘river-sea’ zones for the transfer of a landing force from various theaters of military operations, and its dimensions were originally tied
to the parameters of the Volga-Don locks and the height of the bridges. Project 11711 was conceived as a replacement for the small, aging
Project 775 large amphibious warfare ships and was literally ‘pasted together.’ When the restriction for the ‘river-sea’ class fell away, the
superstructure of the large amphibious warfare ships was increased. As a result of this and other design changes, the ship’s stability worsened
significantly.”
(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

59

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Expeditionary Capabilities, a
Relatively Low Priority
“Navy requirements for such [amphibious assault] ships are estimated as six to eight optimally and four
minimally…Two ships unquestionably will not provide capabilities for a constant presence in necessary
areas, but will permit forming the nucleus of expeditionary forces, which will be able to perform missions
in remote Theaters of Military Operations (TVDs) as necessary…”
Source: Ilya Kramnik, “С опозданием на 10 лет: Какие вертолетоносцы получит ВМФ России [Ten Years Late: What Kind of
Amphibious Assault Ships Will the Russian Navy Get?],” Izvestiya Online, 15 January 2018. https://iz.ru/694802/ilia-kramnik/s-opozdaniemna-10-let
According to reports by TASS sources in the defense establishment, construction of the first domestic amphibious assault ship for the Russian
Navy should begin in Saint Petersburg in 2020…
You Bought the Wrong Thing and Too Few
Back in the 1980’s the domestic Navy leadership recognized the need to have Universal Landing Ship (UDK) in the Navy that are capable of
playing the role of a nucleus of expeditionary formations by landing assault forces at a great distance from friendly bases (including beyond
the radius of action of coastal aviation). Project 11780 UDK’s, which were given the facetious nickname “Ivan Tarava” for the similarity
to US Tarawa-Class general-purpose amphibious assault ships, were supposed to be the first Soviet ships of this type…In addition, the
characteristics and equipment of the Project 11780 permitted these UDK’s to be employed as headquarters ships as well as in hunter-killer
groups for antisubmarine operations.
The USSR’s disintegration made this project, construction of which was proposed to begin at the Black Sea Shipyard in Nikolayev, moot,
and for a long time the Russian Navy had to forget about a presence in remote ocean areas in principle. The situation began to change by the
mid-2000’s, when a growth of the economy permitted thinking again about getting the necessary political tools. Considering that domestic
industry was not in the best condition, it was decided to hold a tender with the involvement of foreign manufacturers…the political situation
ensured victory of the French Mistral-Class UDK project… The fate of this agreement is known: the Ukrainian crisis of 2014 caused France’s
refusal to fulfill the contract.
What Is Necessary
…As of today it is known that Russia is studying two concepts of an amphibious assault ship…Both concepts propose the possibility of
using the amphibious assault ships as headquarters ships, antisubmarine warfare ships, and floating bases in conducting humanitarian/
rescue operations and for a number of other missions. In the assessment of those in the military department interviewed by portal iz.ru, Navy
requirements for such ships are estimated as six to eight optimally and four minimally. For now, though, it is planned to limit the series to two
units. “Four ships in the Navy will permit keeping one amphibious assault ship constantly at sea, one other in immediate readiness, and a
third capable of going on combat duty in a few weeks, while the fourth will be undergoing lengthy repairs or modernization. Six to eight such
ships will permit rotating forces in a timely manner and building them up where this will be required,” …Two ships unquestionably will not
provide capabilities for a constant presence in necessary areas, but will permit forming the nucleus of expeditionary forces, which will be able
to perform missions in remote Theaters of Military Operations (TVDs) as necessary. The usefulness of amphibious assault ships as mobile
bases for prompt deployment of forces in local conflicts has been proven repeatedly…
What Amount Is Involved
…An amphibious assault ship designed above all for landing an assault force having armament limited to air defense and short-range
antisubmarine warfare weapons carries considerably less expensive systems. Depending on specifically which amphibious assault ship
project will be made the primary one -- the 14,000 ton DVKD or 24,000 ton UDK -- the cost of the lead ship should result in R30-50 billion.
Construction of the lead ship should begin in 2020 and her turnover to the Navy is planned for 2024. A second ship should be transferred
to the client in 2026. Of course, the cost of the air group should be counted separately. For a ship of this class it can be R20 billion, but
even in this case amphibious assault ships remain a rather economical means of projecting force. And the two ships planned to be built
for the Russian Navy can be provided with the necessary escort even without increasing the extent of construction of non-aircraft-carrying
combatants…with respect to the DVKD’s/UDK’s, their construction should provide industry with necessary experience, which in the future
permits shifting to the creation of larger ships, including aircraft carriers.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

60

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Russian Expeditionary Capabilities, a
Relatively Low Priority
Source: “ВМФ к концу весны получит большой десантный корабль “Иван Грен” [The Navy Will Receive the Large Amphibious Landing
Ship Ivan Gren by the End of Spring],” RIA Novosti Online, 9 February 2018. https://ria.ru/defense_safety/20180209/1514317277.html
The large amphibious warfare ship (AWS) Ivan Gren, Project 11711’s leading ship, will be handed over to the Russian Federation Navy by
the end of spring, Aleksey Rakhmanov, the United Shipbuilding Corporation (OSK) president…The Kaliningrad-based “Yantar” shipyard’s
newsletter published a report earlier, according to which the large AWS Ivan Gren was due to complete all the state tests by the end of
February. However, the Navy was due to receive this ship back at the end of last year.
The large AWS Ivan Gren is Project 11711’s leadship, which was developed by the Nevskoye Planning and Design Bureau. The keel was laid
at the shipyard in December 2004, and it was lowered into the water in May 2012. The state test program began 30 November 2017 in the
Baltic Sea. According to the RF Defense Ministry’s order, the “Yantar” shipyard is building one more ship of this project -- the large AWS
Petr Morgunov…A Project 11711 large AWS is a development of Project 1171 large amphibious warfare ships, which proved their worth over
decades of service in the Soviet Navy, and later also in the Russian Navy. A major proportion of the design has undergone serious changes.
Project 11711 large AWSs are intended for amphibious landing operations and transporting vehicles and equipment; they can convey and
land up to 300 naval infantry personnel, and 38 armored personnel carriers or 13 tanks. The ship is equipped with an assault transport
helicopter…The project is the only one in the world in which the idea of noncontact offloading of personnel and equipment from the ship onto
an austere beach by using pontoon equipment has been put into practice.

The Ivan Gren, a Project 11711 Ivan Gren-class Ship.

Source: Mil.ru, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1e/%C2%AB%D0%98%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD_%D0%93%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%BD%C2%BB.jpg, CC BY 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

61

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Engineer Troops Organizational Reforms
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted
article from Izvestiya discusses a major reform that is being
made in the engineer regiments found in Russian Army
Groups (a Combined Arms Army or Tank Army). According
to Izvestiya, this reform will involve the regiments receiving
augmented capabilities for obstacle/mine clearing and mine
laying. New sapper-assault companies, sapper-spetsnaz
units, UAV companies, and engineer robots will also now
be found in these new regiments. In exchange, the engineer
regiments will give up some road construction and pontoon
bridging assets. In general, this reform means that Russia is
increasing engineer maneuver support capabilities (in combat
conditions), while shedding some of the more mundane (and
less tactically relevant) maneuver support capabilities at the
Army Group level. Although not mentioned in the article,
it is likely that the Army Groups will maintain a few of its
pontoon bridging sets, but the majority of pontoon-bridging
and road construction assets will likely be managed at the
military district level. Placing the majority of these units at
the military district level may more easily facilitate the use
of assets that are seldom used, but are of high-value for the
military and civilian populace, as they are frequently used to
repair civilian infrastructure during times of natural disaster.
The accompanying article from Krasnaya Zvezda features
an interview with Lieutenant General Yuriy Stavitskiy, the
Chief of the Engineer Troops of the Russian Armed Forces.
Lieutenant General Stavitskiy discusses Russian demining
activities in Syria, engineer modernization (including
robotics), and the training of both Russian and foreign
mine-clearing specialists at the Russian Federation Armed
Forces International Antimine Center. Russian demining
and explosive ordinance removal specialists have reportedly
cleared 65 square kilometers of territory, 1,500 km of roads,
more than 17,000 buildings of mines and other explosive
devices and removed or destroyed a total of more than
100,000 explosive objects. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“…it is impossible to conduct successful
combat operations in cities without welltrained and well-equipped engineersapper units…They will be optimized to
accomplish assault and obstacle clearing
missions, mine-clearing of the forward
area, and clandestine mine-laying. Assault
companies, sapper-spetsnaz subunits,
and robot and unmanned aerial vehicle
companies will be in their composition.”

Source: Nikolay Surkov and Aleksey Ramm, “Саперы станут частью
ударного тарана: Минобороны наращивает численность и расширяет
функционал Инженерных войск [Sappers Will Become Part of the Shock
Battering-Ram: The Ministry of Defense Is Building up the Strength and
Expanding the Functionality of the Engineer Troops],” Izvestiya Online, 19
January 2018. https://iz.ru/683387/nikolai-surkov-aleksei-ramm/sapery-stanutchastiu-udarnogo-tarana
The Russian Military Department is conducting the large-scale reform of the
Engineer Troops. They will become a powerful strike force, which is designated
for the conduct of modern warfare. An engineer-sapper regiment, which can
perform standard missions and assault operations in cities, clandestine minelaying, and rapid clearing of terrain of enemy explosive devices, will appear
in each Army Group [a Combined Arms Army or Tank Army] in the next six
months. This is being done based upon the experience obtained in Syria. In
the experts’ opinion, it is impossible to conduct successful combat operations
in cities without well-trained and well-equipped engineer-sapper units…They
will be optimized to accomplish assault and obstacle clearing missions, mineclearing of the forward area, and clandestine mine-laying. Assault companies,
sapper-spetsnaz subunits, and robot and unmanned aerial vehicle companies
will be in their composition.
The first regiment of the new MTO&E will be formed in 2018 and will become
part of 8th Combined Arms Army. A total of a minimum of four of those army
units are being created. In the future, they plan to transition other Engineer
Troops regiments (at least six) to the new MTO&E. Right now, there are
battalions of sappers, road construction personnel, pontoon brigade personnel,
and specialists on engineer obstacles and signaling in the composition of
engineer-sapper regiments. During the course of the reform, the strength of
the road-bridge construction and pontoon subunits will be reduced, but then
again, assault personnel and sapper Spetsnaz personnel will appear.
The assault sappers, who are dressed in armor, will provide the clearing of
the path for the advancing infantry – to destroy obstacles and permanent fire
positions and to blow up buildings. The Spetsnaz will be involved with the
clandestine minelaying of facilities in the enemy rear and the organization
of mine ambushes. There will be more ordinary sappers in order to ensure
the effective clearing of the terrain from landmines, mines, and improvised
explosive devices that have been installed by the enemy.
Military Expert Oleg Zheltonozhko explained to Izvestiya that the increased
attention to the Engineer Troops is absolutely justified since well-trained and
well-equipped engineer-sapper units are very important in the conditions
of modern wars. “The combat operations in Syria demonstrated that the
sapper subunits are very much in demand in conditions of local wars,” Oleg
Zheltonozhko pointed out. “They must work directly in the forward area and
in close cooperation with the combined-arms units. This coordination plays an
especially important role in urban conditions”…
Izvestiya previously reported that, according to the Ministry of Defense
concept, sapper-assault personnel battalions will become part of the
composition of military district brigades and companies will augment army
regiments. It is assumed that the formation and combat shakedown of the new
assault subunits will take several years. They only began to train “engineerspetsnaz” officers at Tyumen Higher Military Engineer School in 2014. And
special courses for sergeants and privates opened at the military district
training centers in 2015.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2018

62

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: Engineer Troops Organizational Reforms
“Based on the results of the fulfillment of special tasks by the Engineering
Troops in Syria, the development of future engineering armament means has
been organized – a multifunctional robot-engineering system for clearing
antitank mines (MRTK-RT), a condenser explosive instrument (TPVK-43), an
induction mine detector (IMP-3), individual and group sources of electricity, and
other means that enhance our potential and broaden the arsenal.”
-Russian Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief, Colonel General Oleg Salyukov

Lieutenant General Yuri Stavitsky

Source: Mil.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Yuriy_
Stavitskiy_1.jpg, CC BY 4.0.

Source: Viktor Khudoleyev, “У военных инженеров не бывает условностей: У военных инженеров не бывает условностей [Military
Engineers Have No Conventionalities: Experience of Combat Use of Engineering Subunits Is Constantly Analyzed and Generalized],”
Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 19 January 2018. http://redstar.ru/index.php/newspaper/item/35731-u-voennykh-inzhenerov-ne-byvaet-uslovnostej
January 21 is Engineering Troops Day. On the threshold of the professional holiday Lieutenant General Yuriy Stavitskiy, Chief of the
Engineer Troops of the Russian Armed Forces, answered Krasnaya Zvezda’s questions…
[Khudoleyev] Yuriy Mikhaylovich, tell us about the specific nature of the fulfillment of combat tasks in Syria by servicemen of the
Engineering Troops, including specialists of the Russian Federation Armed Forces International Antimine Center.
[Stavitskiy] The special features of the mine clearance that was carried out in Syria under conditions of combat operations – under complex
climatic conditions, moreover, that we are not accustomed to – consisted in the high density of mines and the presence of a multitude
of improvised explosive devices of various modifications and yields between three and 120 kg, radio- and wire-controlled, as well as a
considerable number of devices designed to be nonremovable and surprise mines. In 2017 detachments of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces International Antimine Center cleared mines from the cities of Aleppo, Palmyra, and Dayr az Zawr in Syria. In the course of those
humanitarian operations more than 6,500 hectares of territory, 1,500 km of roads, and more than 17,000 buildings were cleared of mines, and
more than 100,000 dangerously explosive objects were neutralized and destroyed. The work was both hard and dangerous.
[Khudoleyev] Was the experience acquired there of value? Were lessons drawn for the future?
[Stavitskiy] I can speak with confidence about the increased level of training of both Russian and foreign sappers at the Russian Federation
Armed Forces International Antimine Center. This was founded, on the one hand, on the celebrated school of Russian military engineering
science. On the other, on the experience that accrued, inter alia, in Syria. Our sappers had to encounter a great diversity of mines and
dangerously explosive objects. Here there is still a great deal to be analyzed, generalized, and conveyed to the specialists…Extensive work
was carried out in 2017 to make changes to the officer training programs, taking account of the Syrian experience. We will continue this work
in 2018…One of the main tasks that the Engineering Troops fulfilled in Syria was, I will stress, to clear mines from terrain and facilities. In the
course of this, approval was given to the Uran-6 multifunctional robot-engineering mine clearance system, the Skarabey guided inspection
robot-engineering system, and the Sfera guided inspection robot-engineering system. Their adoption for supply is scheduled for 2018. This is
reliable hardware.
Based on the results of the fulfillment of special tasks by the Engineering Troops in Syria, the development of future engineering armament
means has been organized – a multifunctional robot-engineering system for clearing antitank mines (MRTK-RT), a condenser explosive
instrument (TPVK-43), an induction mine detector (IMP-3), individual and group sources of electricity, and other means that enhance our
potential and broaden the arsenal.
[Khudoleyev] What is the system for training future officers for the Engineering Troops like today, as well as young specialists of
engineering subunits?
[Stavitskiy] Engineering Troops specialists are trained by two military educational institutions and four training centers. We train officers
with higher operational-tactical training – I will name it officially – at the Military Institute (of Engineering Troops) of the “Russian
Federation Armed Forces Combined-Arms Academy” Ground Forces Military Scientific Training Center. We train specialists with full military
special training at Tyumen’ Higher Military Engineering Command School. We train junior specialists of the Engineering Troops at the 187th
and 210th Interbranch Regional Training Centers. The 66th Interdepartmental Methods Training Center functions to train specialists in the
sphere of mine clearance for the Armed Forces and other Russian Federation security structures. It is entrusted with the tasks of training and
retraining specialists to clear terrain of dangerously explosive objects and for the mine detecting service. The Russian Federation Armed
Forces International Antimine Center engages in training foreign specialists to look for, neutralize, and destroy improvised explosive devices
and to clear mines from terrain and facilities during peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. When training troops, we introduce new
forms and methods of conducting lessons, everything most progressive, interesting, and productive. We revive competitiveness by holding
competitions regularly. We are doing everything to ensure that every brigade and regiment has one shock subunit by the end of the year.
OE Watch | March 2018

63

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Promised Pay Raise for Military
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past decade, the Kremlin leadership has invested heavily
in restoring both the combat power and prestige of military service. While not lavish, today’s
military salaries are competitive with other government workers and some civilian careers. The
accompanying excerpt from the official government newspaper, Rossiyskaya Gazeta, describes the
details of the recently promised (January 2018) military pay raise.
The article asserts that pay raises have been budgeted for the next three years, first reminding
readers that the military has not seen a pay increase since 2012 (an increase undertaken during
the last presidential election). The excerpt provides an example of the “monthly pay of a battalion
commander in the rank of lieutenant colonel” who in January 2018 receives R88,759 (approx.
$1,560). This constitutes the officer’s base pay and does not include additional payments for
“proficiency rating, for special conditions of service, for work with classified information, and so
on,” which can amount to “up to half of the soldier’s cumulative pay.”
The article cites Deputy Defense Minister Tatyana Shevtsova, who states that the four percent
annual increases are budgeted through until 2020, which includes pay hikes for both contract
soldiers and officers. This pay increase will also affect retired military, and the excerpt provides pay
data for “a former battalion commander who retired in the rank of lieutenant colonel.” As of January
2018, this retiree will receive R24,610 per month ($432) which is planned to increase to $467 by
2020. The article concludes with a comparison between what a new Russian officer receives today
compared to those who served in the tsarist army before the 1917 revolution, suggesting that today’s
officer enjoys greater purchasing power.
Deputy Minister of Defense Tatyana Shevtsova.
If all goes according to plan, Vladimir Putin will be re-elected as Russian president on 18 March Source:
www.kremlin.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tatiana_Shevtsova.
jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.
(which happens to coincide with the anniversary of his most notable achievement during his latest
term of office: the annexation of Crimea). Besides reminding the electorate of his many achievements, President Putin has also made generous
campaign promises to win over the loyalty of those wearing the Russian military uniform. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“In contrast to soldiers, the wallets of military retirees grew heavier back at the end of December, when
the January pension that had already been increased accrued for former officers and warrant officers.”

Source: Yuriy Gavrilov, “Про довольствие: Жалованье военнослужащих и выплаты отставникам выросли с января,” [About Allowances:
Servicemen’s Pay and Retiree Payments Increased Since January] Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 17 January 2018. https://www.rg.ru/2018/01/17/
denezhnoe-dovolstvie-voennosluzhashchih-i-vyplaty-otstavnikam-vyrosli.html
Regular military personnel will receive increased pay beginning in January, and their pay and allowances will continue to grow for the next
two years….
…Army pay has not increased for the last five years. On the other hand, it now will grow annually right up to 2021. According to Deputy
Defense Minister Tatyana Shevtsova, indexation will be four percent per year. They put R18 billion in this year’s defense budget for these
purposes and the raise itself will take place from January….
…Shevtsova explained how all this will look in practice in the example of monthly pay of a battalion commander in the rank of lieutenant
colonel. Together with various additional payments, he now will receive R85,345 per month. Counting the January raise, his pay and
allowances will increase to R88,759. Thus, the increment will be R3,414. After another year it will increase almost to 7,000, and in 2020 it
will be R95,239….
…It is known that in addition to money for military rank and position, regular military personnel also receive various payments and
increments comprising up to half of the soldier’s cumulative pay. Money is added for a proficiency rating, for special conditions of service,
for work with classified information, and so on. Certain amounts accrue monthly and others once a year or from time to time. There is a
total of up to 15 additional payments of all kinds in the Army….
…In contrast to soldiers, the wallets of military retirees grew heavier back at the end of December, when the January pension that had
already been increased accrued for former officers and warrant officers…. For this the amount of the previous pension must be multiplied by
4 percent. That was the figure named by Deputy Defense Minister Tatyana Shevtsova, and this same figure also is in plans for revising retired
payments not only for 2018, but also for the subsequent two years…. For example, a former battalion commander who retired in the rank of
lieutenant colonel receives R24,610 per month from January instead of the previous “averaged” R23,633. Counting other raises, R25,595
already will begin to accrue for this retiree from October 2019, and 26,619 a year later….
…Before the Revolution the pay of a podporuchik (lieutenant) together with “additional” money was around R80. Today’s lieutenant receives
R66,000 per month. With this money a lieutenant could buy 170 kg of meat; 230 kg of sugar; 66 kg of butter; 100 kg of Tula honey cakes; 115
kg of “Rossiyskiy” cheese; and 200 bottles (0.61 L) of government-issue vodka.
Today’s lieutenant: 260 kg of meat; 1,600 kg of sugar; 110 kg of butter; 120 kg of Tula honey cakes; 130 kg of “Rossiyskiy” cheese; and 260
(0.5 L) of consumer-grade vodka.
OE Watch | March 2018

64

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Sacrificing Beans for Bullets
OE Watch Commentary: From the Kremlin’s
perspective, Russia is well on its way to regaining
its status as a superpower. A key component of this
status is a modern, well-equipped, and combatready military to defend perceived Russian interests,
whether in Ukraine, Syria, or the Arctic. However,
given the size and structural weaknesses of the
Russian economy, combined with continued Western
sanctions, there are increasing doubts regarding
the Kremlin’s future ability to produce both “beans
and bullets.” The accompanying excerpt from the
semi-independent news site, Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
examines the “new National Arms Program for 20182027 (GPV-2027)” and suggests that this plan “will be
attended by certain problems,” which “will not best
impact Russia’s socioeconomic indicators.”
The author begins by describing the projected
defense outlays (“approximately R20 trillion” [or
$360bn]) over the next ten years, which roughly
amounts to $36bn per year “on arms and military
equipment,” asserting that this level of funding
indicates “that there is no question of any sequester
of military spending.” He goes on to list the various
promises of the president and senior defense officials
regarding providing the military with the latest
equipment, concluding that “Russia thus not only
aspires not to trail the modern armies of the world
but also aims to possess one of the world’s highest
military potentials.” The author questions, however,
whether today’s Russia possesses the economic base
to support such aspirations.
The author goes on to examine the related Kremlin
directive which mandated that the enterprises of
the defense industrial complex be required to “raise
by 2025 the share of commercial output to 30
percent of total defense industrial complex output,
and to 50 percent by 2030.” Theoretically, the
revenues generated by state defense firms producing
commercial goods could be reinvested for research
and development for both military and civilian goods.
Unfortunately, for these defense firms to compete
successfully in the civilian market will require
significant capital investment, and as the author points
out, “the state does not have the money for this.” The
author ends the article with a brief examination of this
year’s military budget compared to major expenses,
concluding that to pay for more “bullets,” the Kremlin
will likely cut back on civilian “beans.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Russia thus not only aspires not to trail the modern armies
of the world but also aims to possess one of the world’s highest
military potentials.”
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Москва не выходит из гонки вооружений:
Диверсификацию в ОПК решили стимулировать директивными методами,”
[Moscow will not Leave the Arms Race: It Has Been Decided to Stimulate Defense
Industry Diversification by Directive Methods] Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 26
January 2018. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2018-01-26/1_7159_moscow.html
Russia has adopted the new National Arms Program for 2018-2027 (GPV-2027). This
was announced by President Vladimir Putin in Ufa during exchanges with the engine
builders. He allayed the misgivings that the state would be reducing spending on arms
manufacturing. And he assured them that all enterprises of the defense industrial
complex would in the coming years be provided “steadily, rhythmically” with a
government contract.
…Whereas experts put the cost of GPV-2010 at approximately R20.7 trillion (R19.4
trillion of which for the needs of the Defense Ministry), Tatyana Shevtsova, deputy
head of the Russian Federation Defense Ministry, says that approximately R20 trillion
are planned for supplies of arms and military equipment and plant of the military
infrastructure. That is, it is planned to spend R2 trillion annually on average, as in
previous years, on arms and military equipment. This means that there is no question
of any sequester of military spending.
Second, the Kremlin, government, and Defense Ministry have already identified
ambitious tasks for the re-equipment of the Russian army. Vladimir Putin said at the
final meeting of the Defense Ministry Board at the end of the last year that special
emphasis in GPV-2027 would be put on provision of the troops with air-, ground-,
and sea-launched precision weapons and unmanned strike systems and also with the
servicemen’s personal gear and equipment and the latest intelligence, communications,
and electronic-warfare systems. Deputy Premier Dmitriy Rogozin said recently that
the priorities of the new National Arms Program include the attainment by 2020 of
provision of the army and navy with modern arms and equipment to the level of 70
percent and development of the nuclear deterrence forces and aerospace defense
resources…. Russia thus not only aspires not to trail the modern armies of the world
but also aims to possess one of the world’s highest military potentials. This cannot be
called anything other than an arms race.
Third, the RF leadership evidently understands that an arms race cannot last forever.
And following the program of saturation of the army and navy with new types of arms
and military equipment, enterprises of the defense industrial complex will sooner
or later, evidently, have to switch to the manufacture of peaceful products…. Putin
set a specific task: “Raise by 2025 the share of commercial output to 30 percent of
total defense industrial complex output, and to 50 percent by 2030.” Since there are
directive instructions, centralized funds for their execution have to be allocated also,
consequently, since almost all military industry in the country is state-owned….
…He tasked their resolution, for a search for “mechanisms of special investment
contracts” included, but said nothing material about plans for state investments in
the diversification of enterprises of the defense industrial complex…. But no one in
industry is as yet in any hurry to finance these projects. And the reason is plain – the
state does not have the money for this.
The 2018 Budget Act has already set the spending on national defense for the coming
three years. And it will amount on average to R2.8 trillion…. It may thus be expected
that execution of GPV-2027 will be attended by certain problems. And these problems
will not best impact Russia’s socioeconomic indicators.

OE Watch | March 2018

65

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Strengthening Civil Defense
OE Watch Commentary: Alongside its electoral mandate,
a key component of the Kremlin’s legitimacy rests upon its
perceived ability to protect the Russian people from external
threats. Defending against these ever-present dangers is a major
theme in the Kremlin-sponsored media, with maintaining a
robust civil defense (CD) program as a natural response to this
besieged-fortress mentality. The accompanying excerpt from
the Russian government news source, Rossiyskaya Gazeta,
describes a recent interview with “Aleksey Chirikov, head of the
Russian Emergencies Ministry Institute for Problems of Civil
Defense and Emergencies.”
The article begins by talking about how the specific nature of
the risks facing Russia have changed since the Cold War ended,
and that therefore CD officials “are developing and rehearsing
options to protect against new threats.” As the excerpt
elaborates, the modern strategy of civil defense approved by
the President remains “an integral part of defense building,”
focusing upon three major areas: social (“ensuring the protection
and life of the population”), defense (“preserving human
mobilization resources and the country’s military-economic
potential”), and economic (“preserving facilities essential for
sustainable functioning of the economy, the survival of the
population, and protection of material and cultural values”).
The most revealing part of the interview deals with how
the CD chief perceives the new threats confronting Russia.
Since nuclear parity has been preserved, Russia’s “potential
geopolitical adversaries” … “are developing new strategies.”
According to this Russian official, “Western political strategists
have learned with the use of neurolinguistics and psychological
training, ideological brainwashing, even hypnotic suggestion,
how to make these rear sectors themselves go and sweep away
their governments, as well as those who are on the front line
of defense.” He goes on to point out that “gas masks” and
“bunkers” will provide little defense against these new dangers,
and that therefore, the 1.2 million involved in Russian CD “are
preparing for and calculating all the [new] threats.” The Kremlin
leadership wants to ensure that the Russian population knows
where to look for and defend against foreign threats. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Western political strategists have
learned with the use of neurolinguistics
and psychological training, ideological
brainwashing, even hypnotic suggestion, how
to make these rear sectors themselves go and
sweep away their governments, as well as
those who are on the front line of defense.”

Source: Timofey Borisov, “Защита выходит из бункера: Гражданская
оборона меняется вслед за возникающими вызовами,” [Protection Is
Leaving the Bunker; Civil Defense Is Changing in Wake of Emerging
Challenges] Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 4 October 2017. https://
rg.ru/2017/10/03/kak-grazhdanskaia-oborona-meniaetsia-vsled-zavoznikaiushchimi-vyzovami.html
Gas masks are no longer relevant, and also nuclear shelters? This question
set the stage for a conversation between your “RG” correspondent and
Aleksey Chirikov, head of the Russian Emergencies Ministry Institute for
Problems of Civil Defense and Emergencies….
[Question] On 20 December 2016 the Russian president approved the
Principles of State Policy in Civil Defense for the Period up to 2030 that
regulate the conceptual provisions of the shape of the country’s civil
defense today. Out of habit, many people expected that bomb shelters
would be refurbished, that the population would be reminded about
flashes from left and right, and would purchase new gasmasks. But the
path to the nuclear bunker was not newly built that way. So, does it mean
that things are different and protection from nuclear attack is no longer
relevant?
Aleksey Chirikov: It is thought that generals always prepare for past wars.
Fortunately, that is not the case with us, although until nuclear weapons in
the world disappear, today’s civil defense is obliged to take this factor into
account. But recently other threats have emerged and continue to emerge….
In a changing world nothing is static, and we are developing and rehearsing
options to protect against new threats….
[Question] What does the new concept of civil defense say?
Aleksey Chirikov: The principles of state policy define strategic directions.
Civil defense as an integral part of defense building and ensuring of state
security performs three essential functions: social, defense, and economic.
First, ensuring the protection and life of the population, rescue, and
rendering assistance to victims. Second, preserving human mobilization
resources and the country’s military-economic potential. And, third,
preserving facilities essential for sustainable functioning of the economy, the
survival of the population, and protection of material and cultural values….
… [Question] But this is about natural threats, but let us take manmade
one, so to speak. Is there no protection against sanctions?
Aleksey Chirikov: Clearly, the danger of nuclear attack now is not as great
as during the cold war years. Nuclear parity is preserved. And our potential
geopolitical adversaries know this, which is why they are developing new
strategies.
Whereas decades ago our enemies faced the challenge of destroying the
rear to weaken resistance, now none of that is required. There is no need
to launch missiles. Western political strategists have learned with the use
of neurolinguistics and psychological training, ideological brainwashing,
even hypnotic suggestion, how to make these rear sectors themselves go and
sweep away their governments, as well as those who are on the front line
of defense. The whole world sees this in the scripts of the so-called color
revolutions in different countries. And you cannot protect yourself against
them with a gasmask or hide from them in a bunker….
We in the Russian Emergencies Ministry are preparing for them at a
modern level. The forces of civil defense today comprise trained specialists,
modern equipment and appliances, a significant aviation segment, and units
that work on water, under water, on land, and in the air. The total grouping
of civil defense forces today comprises more than 1.2 million people…. And
we are preparing for and calculating all the threats.
OE Watch | March 2018

66

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Pros and Cons of Legalizing Private Military Companies
OE Watch Commentary: While not legally
authorized, the Kremlin nevertheless has made use
of Russian Private Military Companies (PMC) to
conduct operations both in Ukraine and Syria. The
accompanying excerpt from the pro-business daily,
Vedomosti Online, discusses possible future legislation
which might authorize and regulate the activities of
Russian PMCs. The article includes a comment made
by Russian Foreign Affairs Minister Sergey Lavrov
who was recently asked “about the fate of the Russians
executed by gunmen in Syria.” Earlier reports “had
described them as employees of PMC Vagner.” Since,
however, Russia has yet to authorize PMCs, these
individuals lacked any state or legal protection.
The article revisits previous unsuccessful attempts
to introduce legislation dealing with PMCs over
the past several years, suggesting that “the special
services disapprove of the very idea of a law that
would effectively legalize private armies as they do
not want to deal with professionally trained and armed
people operating outside the state’s control.” Since
creating a PMC is still illegal in Russia, the author
doesn’t mention how PMCs are currently being funded
nor which agency is responsible for their overall
coordination.
The author quotes one expert who believes that the
time “is ripe for bringing Russian PMCs out of the
shadows,” and that provided the legislation is wellwritten, PMCs would be prohibited “from acting
against Russia and on Russian territory.” Another
expert posits that by developing “the legal base for the
activities of PMCs,” such legislation might actually
reduce Kremlin aggression, since it would “make
it more difficult to use them for unofficial military
operations against foreign states.” However, these legal
sentiments are not shared by all. One reader comment
points out that “if PMCs are legalized, then it will
be more difficult to use their most useful feature –
plausible deniability on the use of force.” The current
Kremlin leadership remains intent upon restoring
Russia as a great power, and will use all the tools
in their arsenal, to include PMCs, whether they are
supported by the appropriate legislation or not. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: Pavel Aptekar, “Стоит ли легализовывать ЧВК? Частным армиям пора
выйти из тени,” [Should Private Military Companies be Legalized? It is Time for
Private Armiest to Step Out of Shadow] Vedomosti Online, 18 January 2018. https://
www.vedomosti.ru/opinion/articles/2018/01/18/748171-legalizovivat-chvk
The protracted conflicts in Syria and the Donets Basin are reviving the topic
of legal regulation of the activities of private military companies (PMCs): the
gray underside of many armed confrontations and civil wars. The PMCs are a
shadow today: Russian legislation does not define their status in any way, while
mercenary activities -- recruitment, training, financing, and use of mercenaries
-- are prohibited in Russia. On the one hand, the illegal status of the PMCs makes
it possible, while retaining formal neutrality, to covertly use such forces for various
types of dirty political work in the conflicts where the country is not formally
involved or is involved but does not want to risk its military. On the other hand,
when Russian fighters from a PMC are killed or taken prisoner on foreign territory,
the authorities cannot avoid the responsibility for their fate as Russian citizens,
which means that the question of legal regulation of the activities of PMCs must be
resolved sooner or later in one way or another.
Russian Foreign Affairs Minister Sergey Lavrov noted Monday, answering a
question about the fate of the Russians executed by gunmen in Syria (the media had
described them as employees of PMC Vagner), that “it is necessary to create a clear
legislative base in order for those people to also have legal protection.” Mikhail
Yemelyanov, State Duma deputy from A Just Russia, announced Wednesday that
he is planning to submit a draft law on Russian PMCs to the parliament in the near
future. If this does happen… Yemelyanov’s draft will be a third document of this kind
proposed for consideration in the State Duma. Draft laws on PMCs were submitted
to the State Duma on two occasions in 2012. In 2014, Frants Klintsevich, who is
currently a senator and was deputy chairman of the Defense Committee at the time,
prepared a draft law on the same subject but did not submit it to the parliament.
According to one theory, the special services disapprove of the very idea of a law
that would effectively legalize private armies as they do not want to deal with
professionally trained and armed people operating outside the state’s control….
…International relations expert Vladimir Frolov believes that the situation is
ripe for bringing Russian PMCs out of the shadows: It is important to define the
situations where they can be used, while also prohibiting them from acting against
Russia and on Russian territory, in order to exclude the possibility of violation of
the state monopoly on legal use of force and prevent them from becoming a parallel
army or police. On the other hand, in the current circumstances, the legalizing of
PMCs will also mean legalizing the activities of those who were involved in the
east of Ukraine in subversive work that is against the Montreux document. Andrey
Kortunov, general director of the Russian Council on Foreign Affairs, believes,
however, that future development of the legal base for the activities of PMCs should,
on the contrary, make it more difficult to use them for unofficial military operations
against foreign states. If only for this reason, legalizing is better than keeping these
formations in a gray area.
Reader Comment (Kosmik)
…if PMCs are legalized, then it will be more difficult to use their most useful
feature – plausible deniability on the use of force …

“…if PMCs are legalized, then it will be more difficult to use their most useful feature – plausible
deniability on the use of force …”

OE Watch | March 2018

67

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Russian Narrative of US Biological Weapons Research
in the CIS
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpted articles discuss Russian conspiracy
theories about foreign funded human genome and
pathogen research in the former Soviet Union.
These theories are not just being discussed in the
blogosphere, but appearing in the mainstream
news sources. President Vladimir Putin has even
mentioned the issue: “Do you know that biological
material is being collected all over the country, from
different ethnic groups and people living in different
geographical regions of the Russian Federation? The
question is – why is it being done? It’s being done
purposefully and professionally…”
In general, most concerns relate to the activities
of The International Science and Technology
Center (ISTC), an organization established by
an international agreement in 1992 to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). The treaty was signed during the economic
chaos resulting from the collapse of the Soviet
Union. The intent of the treaty was to ensure that
WMD scientists from former Soviet republics
did not proliferate WMD technologies by finding
employment with other nations or terrorist groups.
In order to prevent this proliferation, certain ‘donor’
states would fund programs for ‘recipient’ states in
the former Soviet Union. WMD scientists from the
former Soviet Union would work foreign sponsored
projects, such as basic and applied research. The
ISTC donors are: Canada, the United States, the
European Union, Japan, Norway and South Korea,
while the ISTC recipients are: Russia, Armenia,
Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic
and Tajikistan.
The accompanying articles from Krasnaya
Zvezda and Nezavisimaya Gazeta lay out a Russian
(conspiratorial) view of the ISTC activities in the
former Soviet Union. There are several accusations
made regarding research on the human genome and
dangerous pathogens. The first is that dangerous
pathogens are being studied so they could possibly
be weaponized at some point in the future. In a
similar vein of thinking, a theory is also promoted
that the US wants dangerous pathogen development
to be conducted on foreign shores to lessen risk to
the US population. Perhaps the most interesting
theory is discussed in the article from RT. It suggests
that the US may be attempting to create a genetic
weapon to target ethnic Russians, based upon a
US Air Force contract tender. Although even these
Russian sources make it clear that the creation of
such a weapon is far-fetched, the Russians are still
quite skeptical about the intent of the research. End
OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Oleg Vladykin, “Бактериологические мины заложены во всех
странах СНГ: Дядя Сэм знает, какой «вершок» или «корешок» полезнее
ему [Bacteriological Mines Are Being Planted in the CIS Countries],” Krasnaya
Zvezda Online, 26 January 2018. http://redstar.ru/index.php/syria/item/35868bakteriologicheskie-miny-zalozheny-vo-vsekh-stranakh-sng
A system of American biological espionage is operating in the post-Soviet space.
The head office of an intergovernmental organization with which Russia terminated
its collaboration some years back in view of the manifest threat to our national
security moved out of Moscow relatively recently. It is now relocating in Astana,
Kazakhstan. This is a reference to the International Scientific and Technical Center
(ISTC) established in 1994 ostensibly to monitor the WMD nonproliferation regime.
But as has become clear over time, this center may make the entire population of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) into guinea pigs for the testing of new
types of American bacteriological weapons. In the early 1990s, taking advantage of
the “chaos in the heads” of the Russian elites, as well as the support of pro-Western
politicians, the United States was able to impose on Russian colleagues its own
perception of the problem of the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
To this end the US State Department mounted an information attack aimed both at
“brainwashing” the post-Soviet public and intimidating the average Westerner…
The interest of the ISTC’s employees -- or, more precisely, State Department
staffers -- extends to the following research projects being conducted with their
oversight: environmental security issues; the creation of new vaccines, medicines,
and pharmaceutical products; fundamental research on the given topic, infectious
pathology, and so forth. And of course, the classic genre is that of combating
bioterrorism, projects on which are included in the scientific research plans of all the
recipient countries among the former USSR republics without exception. In essence,
the program to combat bioterrorism being implemented within the ISTC framework
embraces an extensive range of diverse research studies…
…The support for scientific projects in the former union republics on the part of the
aforesaid organization, behind which lurks the United States, is doubly significant
in the strategic perspective. First, this is a unique kind of political instrument for
the introduction of American influence in the post-Soviet space via the formation of
“Uncle Sam”-dependent scientific centers in the republics of the former USSR. With
the aid of partial funding and assistance in technically reequipping the scientific
institutions and finding internships for their employees in the United States and
its satellite countries. Second, this enables the donor countries to evaluate the
“breakthrough” quality of any given scientific field from the standpoint of prospective
feasibility, and this will allow them to substantially relieve the expenditure side of the
budget being allocated to the needs of their own science…
There is yet another facet to the ISTC’s activity that is unseen at first glance. The
implementation of an entire range of programs, primarily in the context of combating
bioterrorism, requires the performance of microbiological research involving the
pathogens of particularly dangerous infectious diseases…by shifting the performance
of research involving dangerous microorganisms onto someone else’s shoulders
(outside the United States), the Americans are reducing their own risks on this score
to a minimum. But this is not all, either. The investigations in question have a dual
subtext, as it were. On the one hand, a study is being made by experimental means
of the particularly dangerous causative agents of epidemics with the aim of their
effective neutralization; on the other hand, efforts are being made for the subsequent
identification by the laboratory method of particular cultures of microorganisms with
unusual biological properties that would be entirely suitable for the development of
a new generation of bacteriological weapons… the pinpointed regional peculiarities
give Washington and its allies the capability as and when necessary to conduct an
act of biological sabotage, disguising it as the activation of natural seats of “local”
infections.

(continued)

OE Watch | March 2018

68

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Continued: The Russian Narrative of US Biological Weapons
Research in the CIS
“Do you know that biological material is being collected all over the country, from different ethnic
groups and people living in different geographical regions of the Russian Federation? The question is –
why is it being done? It’s being done purposefully and professionally…”
-Russian President Vladimir Putin
Source: Andrey Vaganov, “За Родину, за русский геном! Версия
для печати: Биоматериалы из России вряд ли используются
для создания этнического оружия, но четкий контроль в этой
сфере необходим, [For the Motherland, For The Russian Genome:
Biomaterials from Russia Are Unlikely To Be Used To Create
Ethnic Weapons, But Strict Control in This Sphere Is Essential],”
Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 1 November 2017. http://www.ng.ru/
kartblansh/2017-11-01/100_7108_kart.html
…in 1989 the USSR joined the world Human Genome program…
Several Russian military experts have long been asserting that
the Human Genome program is only the tip of what is in fact a
military iceberg. And they claim that this program is aimed not so
much at decoding the genome as at collecting biological material,
including various pathogens and other unusual biological
specimens. However, access to the banks of collected biodata is
strictly restricted. Specialized laboratories have been created
with the Americans’ aid in virtually all countries surrounding
Russia: Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Armenia, Azerbaijan…
Once again it is no accident that on 1 November Sergey Ryabov,
Russian Federation deputy foreign minister, stated that “the
threat of the use of biological weapons by state and nonstate
entities cannot be discounted. Especially since this use could
be disguised as natural outbreaks of infectious diseases among
people, animals, or plants.” And all this ties in with Vladimir
Putin’s statement.
…in addition there is also a commercial component to this whole
story to do with the export of biomaterials from the Russian
Federation. The point is that organizations outside Russian
Federation territory which export biological specimens abroad
are outside the Russian taxation system and do not pay taxes
in Russia, unlike Russian laboratories. The majority of serious
experts who have had time to comment on Vladimir Putin’s
statement are inclined to believe that “it is scarcely likely that
these specimens are being used in some additional way. Although,
following the specimens’ export, foreign companies do not come
under Russian legislation and it is impossible to effect any
control over the use of specimens and of the data that has been
obtained.” Still, though: Can the data from, for instance, the
Human Genome project be used or not to create genetic weapons
which selectively destroy representatives of a particular race or
ethnicity?...

Source: “Russian biological samples ‘collected for research’ – US Air
Force,” RT Online, 1 November 2017. https://www.rt.com/news/408416russians-biological-samples-research/
The choice of the Russian population for genetic material was not
intentional, and is related to research on the musculoskeletal system,
the US Air Education and Training Command (AETC) spokesman said.
Eyebrows were first raised in July when the AETC issued a tender
seeking to acquire samples of ribonucleic acid (RNA) and synovial fluid
from Russians. It announced that all samples…“shall be collected from
Russia and must be Caucasian.” The Air Force noted that it would not
consider tissue samples from Ukraine, for reasons not explained…
According to AETC spokesman…the 59th medical group’s molecular
research center is currently conducting “locomotor studies to identify
various biomarkers associated with trauma.”
Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Monday that Russian genetic
material is being harvested all over the country. “Do you know that
biological material is being collected all over the country, from different
ethnic groups and people living in different geographical regions of the
Russian Federation? The question is – why is it being done? It’s being
done purposefully and professionally. We are a kind of object of great
interest,” Putin told Russia’s Human Rights Council, without specifying
who might be behind the activities involving Russians’ biological
samples. “Let them do what they want, and we must do what we must,”
he said. The fact that Russian tissue samples specifically are on the
wanted list made some wonder whether the Pentagon is working on a
biological weapon to target Russians…
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov confirmed on Tuesday that
Russian special services are in possession of intelligence suggesting
that NGOs are collecting genetic material from the population. “Some
emissaries are really carrying out such activities, representatives of
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and other bodies. Such cases
were registered, and security services, the president naturally have this
information,” he said.
This is not the first attempt to collect samples of Russian genetic
material by foreign agencies in Russia, Igor Nikulin, a former member
of the UN biological weapons commission, told RT. “Such attempts
were made back in the 90s, when there was a Human Genome program,
then there were various programs in the 2000s too… under different
pretexts, including the most noble, but for some reason all this happens
in the interests of the US military department, and this raises suspicion,”
Nikulin said…

OE Watch | March 2018

69

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Ukrainian Perception of Javelin
OE Watch Commentary: March 2018 will
mark the 4th anniversary of Russia’s annexation
of Crimea, followed the next month by hostilities
between pro-Russian separatists and progovernment forces in Southeastern Ukraine. Since
then, the Kremlin has strengthened its military
position in Crimea and along the border with
Ukraine, while continuing to provide the separatist
cause in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions with
economic, diplomatic, and military support. More
than 10,000 have been killed, many more injured,
with the infrastructure in the region badly damaged.
Negotiations to resolve the political status of the
separatist regions have stalled and sporadic fighting
continues. The accompanying excerpt comes from
an interview with a Ukrainian military expert in the
independent Ukrainian news site, Apostrof, where
he offers his near-term assessment on the conflict.

“But the transfer of Javelins has created conditions for Ukraine
changing its status from a partner to an ally.”
Source: Ekatarina Shumilo, “Путинская Россия завершила цикл подготовки к
большой войне - военный эксперт,” [Putin’s Russia has Completed Preparations for
a Major War-Military Expert] Apostrof, 1 February 2018. https://apostrophe.ua/article/
society/accidents/2018-02-01/putinskaya-rossiya-zavershila-tsikl-podgotovki-k-bolshoyvoyne---voennyiy-ekspert/16654
A video of the full interview with Ukrainian military expert, Valentyn Badrak: https://
youtu.be/w6LMM-NJtkk
The head of the Centre for Studies of the Army, Conversion and Disarmament, military
expert Valentyn Badrak, has spoken about the rearmament of the Ukrainian army,
Vladimir Putin’s main goal in Ukraine and the importance of US Javelins for the
country’s military potential.
[Question] The National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine [NSDC] has
approved the main indicators of the state defense order for 2018-20. How does it meet
the Ukrainian army’s demands?

The article begins by reviewing developments in
Ukrainian arms manufacturing, pointing out that
while the country is on the verge of producing a
“high-precision multiple launch rocket system,”
the Ukrainian “army remains low-tech and
solves its main tasks at the expense of lives.” The
most interesting part of the interview deals with
Ukraine’s relations with Russia and the expert
posits that “nothing strategic will happen” between
the two countries until after summer. He goes on
to suggest that by then “Putin’s Russia” will have
“de facto completed the cycle of preparations for a
big, large-scale war to capture new territories.” He
supports this assertion by claiming “the Russian
public is prepared for it and ready to approve such
steps - due to the performance of the propaganda
machine, total lies and fakes.”

[Badrak] …Now we expect an upsurge in rearmament. The Vilkha serious missiles
are in the pipeline which may herald the emergence of a high-precision multiple launch
rocket system…. as before, our army remains low-tech and solves its main tasks at the
expense of lives…

The interview concludes on a problematic note,
describing how many Ukrainians perceive the
recent American decision to provide the Ukrainian
military with the Javelin anti-armor system. The
expert claims that the “Javelins are psychological
aid. This is a signal that Americans decided to
defend Ukraine,” claiming that such a transfer
“has created conditions for Ukraine changing its
status from a partner to an ally.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

[Question] How can US Javelins help the Ukrainian army and what military aid
should we expect this year?

…[Question] Should we expect the Kremlin’s troops’ new attempts to create a land
corridor to the occupied peninsula?
[Badrak] Nothing will happen until the presidential election in Russia is over. Even
after it, regardless of who will win, although we already presume the outcome, in my
opinion, till the summer we will have a period of time when nothing strategic will
happen…. But one should realize that Putin’s Russia has de facto completed the cycle of
preparations for a big, large-scale war to capture new territories. Moreover, one of the
negative signs is that the Russian public is prepared for it and ready to approve such
steps - due to the performance of the propaganda machine, total lies and fakes….
[Question] You say that Putin is almost ready for war. What new territories may he
be interested in capturing?
[Badrak] There is no doubt that Putin’s global goal is to destroy the very fundament of
Ukraine as an independent state….

[Badrak] In fact, Javelins are psychological aid. This is a signal that Americans
decided to defend Ukraine - in some possible ways, not by force, but to turn Ukraine
into a buffer between the West and Russia which is a bit stronger than it used to be….
For example, we should try to get US technologies for our companies that would jointly
manufacture weapons…. If we look further ahead, it would be right for Ukraine in this
situation to ensure that an American base is set up on our territory, like the one in
Poland, which would be defended by US Patriot systems. If it happens, it will be very
serious. But, of course, this is not the task for this year but for many years to come. But
the transfer of Javelins has created conditions for Ukraine changing its status from a
partner to an ally.

OE Watch | March 2018

70

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The Eastern Military District and Pacific Fleet Control the
Eastern Entrance to the Russian Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The Eastern Military District and
Pacific Fleet continue to control the Eastern entrance to the
Russian Arctic. The straight line distance from Khabarovsk
to Wrangel Island is 3408 kilometers (2117 miles) and as the
accompanying news brief from the Russian Ministry of Defense
reports, a helicopter unit from Khabarovsk is supplying remote
military garrisons on Wrangel Island and Cape Schmidt. The
article does not state where the helicopter unit is operating from,
but the harbor town of Anadyr is a good bet. The original Anadyr
airfield was built during World War II for use in ferrying Lend
Lease aircraft from Alaska for eventual service against Germany.
The straight line distance from Anadyr to Wrangel Island is 731
kilometers (454 miles). It is still a long haul and rugged flying.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Eastern Military District Press Service, “Airmen of an Eastern
Military District Army Aviation Formation based in Khabarovskiy Kray
Take up Duty in Arctic Zone of Responsibility” Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation, 29 January 2018. http://www.mil.ru
The flight routes go through a number of major mountain passes
with difficult climatic conditions, which require the ultimate skills and
experience on the part of the flight personnel.
The crews of Mi-26 transport helicopters delivered more than 70 tons
of various cargo during their duty last year, to remote Eastern Military
District garrisons stationed on Wrangel Island and Cape Schmidt.
In addition, the district’s army aviation crews delivered two hydraulic
presses weighing a total of about 15 tons to Wrangel Island to support the
work of an Eastern Military District ecological subunit.

“The crews will be transporting personnel during troop rotation at military units in the Arctic zone and

also various types of cargo for remote garrisons, using Mi-8AMTSh helicopters. In addition, they will
deliver provisions to Arctic operating bases. The flight personnel have arrived in the Arctic zone as part of
a routine rotation.”

Anadyr

Map showing the Chukchi Sea, north of the Bering Strait and Sea, between Russia and the United States. Location of Anadyr has been added.
Source: Norman Einstein, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chukchi_Sea_map.png, CC BY-SA 3.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

71

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Arctic S-400 reaches operational status
OE Watch Commentary: The S-400
air defense system has apparently achieved
operational status according to the accompanying
article from The Independent Barents Observer.
It is worth noting that Severodvinsk is located on
the White Sea next to Archangel and as the article
notes, Northern Fleet chemical defense units
were also involved in masking the city by laying
particulate smoke screens. Lastly, Su-24 close air
support aircraft, apparently from Severomorsk-3
airbase, provided the “attacking enemy” for the
exercise. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“No real missile launch was
conducted. But electronic
launching was carried out and all
enemy aircraft were successfully
eliminated, according to a Northern
Fleet press release. The Northern
Fleet’s Belomorskaya base is
located in Severodvinsk and played
a key role in the drills.”

Source: “Northern fleet trains shooting with missile complex S-400 over Severodvinsk”,
The Independent Barents Observer, 9 February 2018. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en
Locals in Severodvinsk were told not to worry as the exercise unfolded on 8 February.
The training could include release of artificial smoke in the city center, according to the
local newspaper Severnaya Nedelya. But there was more than smoke in the air.
As part of the training, Su-24 jet fighters were airborne and played a role as enemy
aircraft. On the ground, units of the Northern Fleet’s missile forces were told to defend
the strategically important city. The city of Severodvinsk hosts two of Russia’s leading
military shipyards. All new nuclear-powered submarines are built at Sevmash, while a
lion’s share of upgrades and service is conducted at the neighboring Zvezdochka.
According to the Northern Fleet, its air defense units in 2017 conducted a total of 20
missile launches. They all successfully hit their targets in the Ashuluk shooting range in
south Russia.
The S-400 is Russia’s new mobile surface-to-air missile complex. It has been in service
for the Russian Armed Forces since 2007 and been deployed in the Northern Fleet
presumably since 2015. In the 9th May parade in Murmansk, 2015, the missiles were on
display in the Russian north for the first time.
With the new system, the missile forces of the region add range and powers to its already
well-equipped weapon arsenal. The S-400 can simultaneously hit up to 36 targets with a
total of 72 missiles. It can neutralize enemy aircrafts at up to 240 kilometers distance and
enemy missiles at 60 kilometers distance.
The S-400, an upgrade of the S-300 family, is the new generation Russian anti-aircraft
weapon system developed by the Almaz Central Design Bureau. Russia currently has
a total of 16 battalions with S-400 systems, based in six different regions. Each of the
battalions have eight S-400 systems….

С-400 «Триумф» (S-400 “Triumph).

Source: Соколрус, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3A%D0%A1-400_%C2%AB%D0%A2%D1%80%D0%B8%D1%83%D0%BC%D1%84%C2%BB.JPG, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2018

72

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Birthrate Soars Among Service Families in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: One of the consequences
of the increase of contract service personnel in the
Russian Armed Forces is the increase in the number of
service families and the accompanying excerpted article
from Red Star takes a look at this. Russian garrison
communities are not known for an overabundance of
family-friendly facilities and this holds true particularly
in the Arctic. Admiral Yevmenov, who commands the
Northern Operational Strategic Command, has ground
A parade of ships of the Northern Fleet 9 May 2010 .
Source: Alexey Pavlov, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AParad_korabley.JPG, CC BY-SA 3.0.
forces, aerospace forces (air force, air defense and space),
Spetsnaz as well as a naval fleet. This is a lot of personnel, equipment and territory to worry about. The Admiral is also worried about living
conditions for the families of personnel and interaction with the Arctic communities. As the article notes, the Admiral has been looking into
kindergartens, schools, day care, jobs for wives, shopping centers, leisure and recreation facilities, roads, public transportation and medical care,
and he is involving the local authorities as partners in the planning and solutions. One of the problem areas not discussed in the article is family
housing-which is a problem since the military provides barracks and family housing-and is in short supply in much of the Arctic. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“Admiral Nikolai Yevmenov, commander of the Northern Fleet, held a conference call on social support

for servicemen and their families at the fleet’s bases. Urgent problems were discussed in the fleet staff with
the participation of the governor and ministers of Murmansk Oblast. Formation commanders, task force
commanders, and the leaders of municipalities reported on their situations through video-conferencing.”
Source: Olga Vorobyeva, “Seeking the proper approach with Local Authorities: The Creation of Comfortable living Conditions for
Northerners Is a Priority Concern of the Fleet Command”, Красная Звезда {Red Star], 25 January 2018. http://www.redstar.ru
The format of the meeting immediately brought the conversation round to a consideration of the problems in each specific garrison. The
participation of Marina Kovtun, governor of Murmanskaya Oblast’, Sergey Dubovoy, chairman of the Murmanskaya Oblast’ Duma, Andrey
Sysoyev, head of the administration of Murmansk, and a number of ministers of the governments of Murmanskaya and Arkhangel’skaya oblast’s
and also of the leadership of closed administrative and territorial formations and municipalities permitted submission of proposals for change on
the spot.
Admiral Nikolay Yevmenov noted that many social issues of significance for the servicemen and their families are being resolved positively
thanks to joint efforts with the local governments… The problem of provision of the servicemen’s children with kindergartens has been completely
resolved in Arkhangel’sk, Severodvinsk, Nar’yan-Mar, Murmansk, Zaozersk, Monchegorsk, Olenegorsk, Vidyayevo, and Severomorsk-3…The
Admiral noted that “The commanding officer is responsible not only for the servicemen but also for the conditions under which their families live,
to the extent which the children are provided with schools and kindergartens, employment of the wives, medical treatment of family members, and
much else.” Our professional duty is not only to fulfill our missions but also to resolve the social problems which the men encounter.”
The remote garrisons of Alakurtti, Pechenga, and Sputnik [garrisons of the 80th Arctic Motorized Rifle Brigade, 66th Naval Infantry Brigade,
and 200th Coastal Defense Motorized Rifle Brigade] are in need of greater-than-usual attention….
“I would like to live here, and now, what is more, not postpone this until tomorrow,” the fleet commander expressed his principled position.
“Every effort to provide people with comfortable conditions needs to be made, therefore.”
Garrisons differ, but the problems are similar…. An increase in day-care centers is needed, the cultural and leisure institutions need updating.
There are difficulties with public transport…. Admiral Nikolay Yevmenov emphasized that no money should be spared in improving the lives of the
citizens of our country, and servicemen are citizens. Residents of the “outback” also complain about the lack of chain stores with a wide selection
and affordable prices…. The shortage of doctors is a problem of many northern regions. The twice annual “Health Train” for all localities
of Murmanskaya Oblast’ was a big help. As far as regular doctors are concerned, there is still a problem. Specialists are reluctant to go to the
peripheral regions since there are no financial incentives. The latest data show that Murmanskaya Oblast’ needs 638 doctors, Arkhangel’skaya,
890. An Arctic Doctor proposal is being considered….
Pothole repair does not resolve the problem of the roads and….restoration of the entire road bed to the remote Severomorsk-3 airmen’s garrison
is required.
Among the problems requiring a joint solution with the local leaders …is the instruction of children in schools in a single shift, provision of
places in kindergarten, particularly in day-care centers, and the construction of playgrounds and sports fields.... A kindergarten opened at the
end of last year in the Sputnik naval infantry garrison and a school is nearing completion in Severomorsk-3... Considering that the birthrate in the
six garrisons has risen noticeably, the need for children’s preschool institutions is entirely justified.
The commander tasked the garrison’s senior officers with immersing themselves in social issues in depth. And he set a deadline to submit joint
proposal with the municipal authorities for the development of the garrisons and base compounds by 1 February. Considering all the wishes, the
“road map” will have been put together in full by mid-March.
OE Watch | March 2018

73

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Career Appeal of KGB
OE Watch Commentary: This past December, Russia
marked the 100th anniversary of the creation of the Soviet
secret police. The first excerpt from the popular daily,
Komsomolskaya Pravda, commemorated this date by
describing in glowing terms a visit to one of the major
secret police buildings in St. Petersburg. The article makes
no mention of the awful repression or arbitrary punishment
during the Soviet period by the predecessors of today’s
secret police (FSB-Federal Security Service), but rather
highlights the heroes who worked for this agency (to
include Vladimir Putin).
This positive change in public attitudes toward Russia’s
secret security agencies stands in stark contrast to those
of the 1990s. Then, the Russian media was filled with
reports at how the Cheka/NKVD/KGB had used terror and
coercion to keep the Soviet system alive. Over the past two
decades, however, the media’s portrayal of these security
agencies has been more positive. Not surprisingly, as the
second excerpt from the pro-business site, Vedomosti,
points out, today, many young Russians aspire to a career
with the security services.
The article provides polling data which reflects this
“increase in the popularity of the special services,”
asserting that this change coincides “almost exactly with
Vladimir Putin’s time in power.” One of the experts quoted
in the article suggests that “the rising prestige of the special
services stems from the growing confrontation with the
West,” and that this “besieged fortress syndrome… has
been created, first and foremost, by television.” Moreover,
today, “many people consider it [career in the special
services] an effective social ladder.” This sentiment is
echoed by another expert cited in the article who asserts
that “people can see that security officers, not businessmen
or officials, are the real masters of the situation in the
country and they want similar success in life for their
family members.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“People can see that security officers,
not businessmen or officials, are the real
masters of the situation in the country…”

Source: Elena Molchanova, “100-лет ВЧК-КГБ-ФСБ: экскурсия по альмаматер петербургских чекистов,” [100th anniversary of the Cheka-KGB-FSB:
an excursion to the alma mater of the St. Petersburg Chekists] Komsomolskaya
Pravda, 20 December 2017. https://www.spb.kp.ru/daily/26769/3805599/
This year, 20 December, marks the 100th anniversary of the All-Russian
Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution and Sabotage (the
Cheka) - the State Security Committee (KGB) - now the Federal Security Service
(FSB). On the anniversary “Komsomolskaya Pravda” visited the main building
of the FSB in St. Petersburg and the Leningrad region and saw what lay behind
the thick walls of the building…
…If you climb up the spacious staircase to the floor above, visitors will be
shown a stained-glass window with a distinctive control symbol and a plaque
with the names of the St. Petersburg heroes who fell on the fighting post…. By the
way, in one of them - under number 643 - in 1998 the future president of Russia
worked, Vladimir Putin.
Source: Pavel Aptekar, “Как спецслужбы стали престижными. Почти
половина россиян хотели бы видеть своих детей чекистами,” [How Special
Services Became Prestigious. Almost Half of Russians Would Like Their
Children to Become Intelligence Officers] Vedomosti Online, 6 February 2018.
https://www.vedomosti.ru/opinion/articles/2018/02/06/750030-spetssluzhbiprestizhnimi
The key role of the special services (first and foremost, probably of the FSB
[Russian acronym for the Federal Security Service]) in the implicit hierarchy of
the law enforcement structures and their PR activeness against the background
of deteriorating relations with the West have rendered the profession of a
security officer more prestigious: Nearly half of the Russians would like their
children and grandchildren to serve in the security bodies.
A survey by the Public Opinion Foundation has revealed an increase in the
popularity of the special services over a period of time which coincided almost
exactly with Vladimir Putin’s time in power. In 2001, almost the same number of
people assessed the special services’ work positively and negatively (35 and 34
percent respectively), but the number of those who assess their work positively
almost doubled to 66 percent by January 2018, while the number of those
who assess it negatively dropped by a factor of three to 12 percent. Over the
same period of time, the number of Russians who consider service in the FSB
attractive grew from 42 to 69 percent…
…Grigoriy Kertman, head of a division at the Public Opinion Foundation,
noted that the rising prestige of the special services stems from the growing
confrontation with the West: The besieged fortress syndrome which has been
created, first and foremost, by television…The backgrounds of Putin and many
of his cohorts who have worked in special services also matter: Many people
consider it an effective social ladder.
…Political analyst Nikolay Petrov believes that it has become a universal
controller overseeing both the law enforcement structures and the state
apparatus. People can see that security officers, not businessmen or officials, are
the real masters of the situation in the country and they want similar success in
life for their family members.

OE Watch | March 2018

74

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
“Russia’s Patriot Act”: New Law Empowers FSB
OE Watch Commentary: This interview with IT-multimillionaire Igor
Ashmanov, one of the most highly placed and conservative technology experts in
President Putin’s administration, and spouse to Natalya Kasperskaya of Kasperskiy
Anti-Virus fame, helps us understand Russia’s desire for digital sovereignty. Clearly
not a fan of the US or its level of digital sovereignty, Ashmanov advocates for
Russian communications to be more strictly monitored and is in favor of data
collection on all Russian Internet users. The Yarovaya laws, which Ashmanov
equates with the US Patriot Act, were adopted in 2016 and call for extensive
recording of Internet and cell phone traffic.
Ashmanov calls the Internet in Russia the freest in the world, because
smartphones don’t “spy for the FSB” but he says, “The Yarovaya laws will fix that.”
According to the author, some Russian experts assume the law was passed not to
protect freedom of speech but to make money for its main beneficiaries, including
Ashmanov and his wife, but Ashmanov denies this, saying the law had been put
forward by some behind-the-scenes player, probably the FSB.

“That’s why our authorities have a
decision to make: we need…information
control.”
Source: Besedovala, I. “Закон Яровой спасёт нас от
ЦРУ” (The Yarovaya Law Will Save us From the FBI),
Fontanka.ru, 22 October, 2016. http://www.fontanka.
ru/2016/10/22/061/
“It’s possible to make a “page certificate” that would
decrypt information along the way and then re-encrypt it
and give it to Facebook.

According to Ashmanov, the FSB does not have access to communications
between Russian citizens, and says the Yarovaya laws will provide that, ostensibly
to help the government catch terrorists. Each time the interviewer presses him
about why the FSB needs Internet users’ data, Ashmanov returns to the need for
the laws as a tool to fight terrorism.

It would have to be something already in the operating
system and browser, not an opt-in button. But this is
a political or social issue, not a technical one. The
government could arrange with Microsoft to put it in
the next version of Windows or they could arrange with
a browser maker. Antivirus programs often put their
own certificates on the computer – they could put a
government one on and you wouldn’t know it was there.

When asked about the need to gain digital sovereignty, which he defines as,
“the right of the government to independently determine what is happening in
their digital sphere, and make its own decisions,” he suggests Russia is growing
its sovereignty, as is China. Although Russia has passed several Internet laws in
the last few years, Ashmanov suggests it lags behind the West in communications
regulation and oversight.

You’ll recall that the very same law [as the Yarovaya
laws], only in a much harsher form, was passed in the US
in 2001, right after the terrorist act [9/11]. It was called
the Patriot Act. And it obligated all providers to turn in
their data.

As part of the president’s working group to establish an Internet road map,
Ashmanov supports the idea of Russia using domestic technology. He says Russia
has its own operating systems and more than two thousand domestically produced
computer programs registered, with hundreds more being added each month.
Ashmanov suggests Russia has its own version of practically everything, but when
asked why the rest of the world does not use Russian software, he simply responds,
“We’re not the ones who print the world currency.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Hall)

Russia’s mission is to stop those striving for world
domination. We defeated the [Golden] Horde, the
Swedes, Napoleon, Hitler, and now we see all this digital
horror: all the information in the world goes to the
Americans. That’s why our authorities have a decision
to make: we need to do the same thing…Information
control.”

…

…

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | March 2018

75

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
His Holiness Patriarch Cyril Tells Parliament What Keeps
Him Up at Night
OE Watch Commentary: The Patriarch of the Russian
Orthodox Church (ROC), Patriarch Cyril, has accompanied
President Putin side by side in the latter’s long residence
in power. Cyril’s presence has been widely noted in both
the Russian press and in the West, firmly indicating the
President’s preference for the ROC. While stopping short
of declaring it a state religion, the President’s “silent”
endorsement for the ROC, was on display again as he
participated in the annual ROC ice-hole plunge celebrating
Christ’s baptism, shown live on television.

“For now, government legislation retains its fundamental
loyalty to traditional morals and its serves to limit evil. But
if the moral dimension gets exiled from legislation, the law
will turn into a dangerous weapon for dehumanizing the
society.”

In his 25 January 2018 address to the upper house of
Russian Parliament, at the opening of the Sixth Annual
Christmas Parliamentary Meetings, Patriarch Cyril lauded
the event as an opportunity for lawmakers and Russian
Orthodox Church leaders to exchange ideas. He also took
the opportunity to remind the audience he had spoken at
the Inter-Parliamentary Assembly (an international body
made up of members of the Commonwealth of Independent
States) earlier in the year. His primary message at both
events was that the law is based in morals and a proper
spiritual mindset.
It is difficult to know who his actual intended audience
is, given his emphasis on the connection between the
lawmaking process and lawmakers’ faith. Perhaps in an
attempt to inspire lawmakers, he says lawmaking is not
just about finding compromise and legalizing the existing
norms, rather, lawmakers are obligated to make laws that
create conditions for people to have the best life possible.
He also bemoans the state of “freedom” as a value,
saying it has been stripped of the other side of the coin,
responsibility, and is now left a more hedonistic value that
one belonging to a moral society.
In addition to contravening the conventional wisdom
that morality cannot be legislated, Patriarch Cyril echoes
President Putin in imploring his audience to remember,
“We are one people”. He hews to a more commonly heard
concern in noting that technological progress, especially
electronic means, are both useful and potentially harmful.
Leaving no doubt which side he comes down on, he states
unequivocally, “A side effect of new technologies is a
complex dehumanization of social relationships.” This,
ostensibly, paves the way for the government to sell how
“safe” its new monitoring and information collection
technologies are – keeping its citizens safe from terrorism
and preventing crime by making financial transactions
(forcibly) transparent.
Cyril concludes by declaring lawmakers can only be
guided by one thing: their conscience. His words will
serve as a backdrop for lawmakers’ actions to come. End
OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

Vladimir Putin and Patriarch Cyril.

Source: By Kremlin.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=5390236, CC BY 4.0.

Source: “Доклад Святейшего Патриарха Кирилла на VI Рождественских
парлаентских встречах” (His Holiness Patriarch Cyril’s speech at the Sixth
Annual Christmas Parliamentary Meetings), www.patriarch.ru, January 25,
2018. http://www.patriarchia.ru/db/text/5136914.html
“For now, government legislation retains its fundamental loyalty to traditional
morals and its serves to limit evil. But if the moral dimension gets exiled from
legislation, the law will turn into a dangerous weapon for dehumanizing the
society.”
…
A new conceptualization of freedom, as a value that exists separately from
responsibility and obligation, is squeezing out morality…Guided by this
understanding of freedom, people do not gain new opportunities for selfrealization, just the opposite – they move into a shameful condition of being
slaves to their desires.
…
I am compelled to talk about a phenomenon that not just worries a lot of
people, it has also caused many to suffer. Recently, the world has seen the
spread of co-called cryptocurrencies, including Bitcoin…The Church sees
its task as teaching people not to be slaves to their desires and to strive to do
righteous work, which will be justly rewarded. But the government, too, is
called upon to protect people from extreme risk and even straight-out lies,
including by means of legal regulation.

OE Watch | March 2018

76

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
The “Electronic Concentration Camp” of
National Cryptocurrencies
OE Watch Commentary: The current
Russian-language Internet universe has been
described surprisingly still very much in
“Wild West mode” as far as netizens’ ability to
speak freely and imagine the worst. Russianlanguage web participants on a wide variety of
websites have teased out the idea of a national
cryptocurrency to its potential dystopian end:
total state control of Russian citizens via the
country’s financial system.
As the idea of a blockchain-based
government takes hold, tech-forward web users
have started writing about how the proposed
cryptoruble and blockchain-based banking
will make it possible to trace and check every
money transaction of every citizen. According
to the author of the first excerpted article,
state control over money flows is likely to
grow exponentially. The author anticipates
the government will sell the idea by claiming
blockchain will help intensify its fight against
corruption, against syphoning money off from
the government budget, and against tax evasion
and money laundering. As one user concludes
in the comments to this article, “for sure
whatever awaits cryptoruble users, it’s nothing
good,” echoing widespread negative comments
about the cryptoruble found on the Russianlanguage internet.
In the second article, the author speculates
about the long-term effects of introducing a
cryptoruble. In the Orwellian future described,
the state would be able to completely control
individuals’ behavior with the threat of
excluding them from the financial system
altogether. The author makes the case for
readers to resist moving to a cashless society,
because they would be giving up their
independence, allowing themselves to rely
completely on – and be at the mercy of – the
central banking system.
Calling e-government a “fashionable
trend”, the author practically begs people not
to let themselves become “bio-objects” the
government would be able to manipulate. With
full access to all financial transactions for
every individual, the government could put
people on state-authored social black lists for
bad credit or missed payments (as reportedly
practiced in China recently), or even cut them
off from the economy entirely by eliminating
their access to bank accounts, and thus,
their ability to earn money. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hall)

“The only thing left will be to declare a dictatorship for a made-up
reason, like, ‘this is all for your safety’…after which they’ll be able to
manipulate people as they wish.”

Blockchain Illustration.

Source: By Davidstankiewicz (Own work), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/22/Blockchain_Illustration_4.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: mr-kryply59. “CryplyNews. Крипторубль и криптоюань, сразу два убийцы
биткойна” (Cryplynews: The Cryptoruble and Cryptoyuan – Two Bitcoin Killers at Once),
Golos.io, October 16, 2017. https://golos.io/ru--bitkoin/@mr-kryply/cryplynews-kriptorubli-kriptoyuan-srazu-dva-ubiicy-bitkoina
I suggest simply calling the cryptoruble and cryptoyuan electronic blockchain-based
currencies – that’s the real idea behind the creation of these cryptofrankensteins.
I assume it will be mandated that all non-cash payments for business and the government
be replaced [with the cryptoruble]. The non-cash ruble will be squeezed out and completely
replaced by the cryptoruble in the near future…
Bitcoin itself gave authorities the technologies for complete inventory and control of money
operations. And it would be dumb to think the authorities would pass up such a fantastic
opportunity.
Source: nalivaiko43. “Электронный концлагерь получится. (It’s Going to End up Being
an Electronic Concentration Camp), Golos.io, October 16, 2017. https://golos.io/ru-konclagerx/@nalivaiko/elektronnyji-konclager-nacionalnykh-kriptovalyut
In the long-term we’re going to have an electronic concentration camp. If cryptocurrencies
mean anonymity in all financial operations, then in the case of national digital money,
it immediately becomes clear: all financial and physical movements are under control.
Everything is recorded and copied from miners.
The only thing left is to declare a dictatorship for a made-up reason, like, “this is all
for your safety”, “we’re fighting against corruption, terrorism, extremism, and money
laundering”, after which they’ll be able to manipulate people as they wish.
And if anyone starts to voice any liberal, free-speech values, like, it’s unacceptable to get
into our private lives and record everyone and everything, those anarchists can immediately
be excluded from all sources of income – by that time they’ll all be digits in the blockchain.

OE Watch | March 2018

77

RUSSIA, UKRAINE
Russian Speculation about the Cryptoyuan
OE Watch Commentary: The EKD project started off as a
social media interest group on VKontakte, the Russian version
of Facebook and which is widely reported to toe the party line
in the content it publishes. EKD quickly developed into its own
website, aimed at setting the record straight in Russian media
reporting on China. On their website, they claim China is one
of Russia’s main trading partners, and that there is not enough
reporting on China for Russians to understand their relationship.

“We can only guess what the Chinese digital currency
will look like.”

According to this particular article, this spring, the Chinese
Central Bank established the Institute for the Study of Digital
Currencies. In October, its director said China needed to have
its own digital currency to further develop online payments and
electronic commerce, and that blockchain technology had good
prospects. Later the director put out an announcement saying
there was no need for China to create a national digital currency
that would be specifically blockchain-based.
This reflects the wavering seen in statements by finance
officials in a number of countries, who have struggled both with
categorizing independent cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin,
as well as determining their legality. Despite their intense
reluctance to embrace a financial instrument ostensibly aimed at
disrupting their sovereign currency system, officials must walk a
fine line, damning Bitcoin et al. without damning the blockchain
technology on which they are built.
As the author suggests, China could create a non-blockchainbased digital currency. There are already precedents for that
such as the cryptocurrency Ripple, which is still based on
distributed ledger technology, but which is somewhat different
from blockchain. Or they could still use blockchain technology,
while assigning the state to control emissions, thus avoiding
mining and miners as a source of disruption. While Russia
could learn from watching China’s experiment and determining
what works well for the government and what pitfalls to avoid,
the prospect of a Chinese cryptocurrency being issued before
Russia issues one threatens Russia with the potential for China
to displace the US dollar as a reference currency or at least as
a viable multinational trading currency. Although that may
have economic benefits for Russia, the specter of one hegemon
replacing another is unpalatable for the current Russian
administration.
China is where cryptocurrency mining is currently most
concentrated, thanks in part to access to cheap electricity. This
may help create a built-in demand for the cryptoyuan, unlike the
cryptoruble, the demand for which will likely have to be forced
to appear at all. Both pseudo-crypto-currencies (they would
actually be digital currencies, not cryptocurrencies per se) share
the dubious distinction of being highly suspect as to their real
capacity to add value. End OE Watch Commentary (Hall)

A modern ‘money tree’ observed in Yunnan, China, 2015.

Source:By Pratyeka (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Modern_money_tree.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0.

Source: Каким будет государственный криптоюань?” (What Will the
State Cryptoyuan Be Like?), EKD, November 25, 2017. http://ekd.
me/2017/11/kakim-budet-gosudarstvennyj-kriptoyuan/
“For more than three years, rumors have been swirling about the creation
of a state cryptocurrency. At the beginning of 2014 the Chinese National
Bank announced it would study digital currencies. That’s when people
started talking about the possibility of creating a cryptoyuan – a Chinese
national cryptocurrency. Nevertheless, the Central Bank did not issue any
official clarification on that account until this year. Everything changed
somewhat this year, but the situation did not become any clearer.”
…
“After a flurry of activity by Chinese regulators in the decentralized
cryptocurrency market, the Chinese National Bank established the Institute
for the Study of Digital Currencies. In one interview, the Director, Yo
Tsyan, said China needed its own digital currency…and said blockchain had
good prospects. Later, however, Yo Tsyan put out another announcement,
saying there was no need to create a national digital currency based on
blockchain per se. We can only guess what the Chinese digital currency will
look like.”

OE Watch | March 2018

78

