community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 9
Issue #3
March 2019

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Military District Reform Rumored
Private Security and the Russian National Guard
Bolstering the Russian Ground Forces, the Cossack Way
Russian Anti-Satellite Technologies as a Response to the US
Ballistic Missile Defense System
Importance of Space-Based Intelligence, Reconnaissance,
and Surveillance
Revelations of a Russian Mercenary in Syria
Controlling the Kremlin’s Narrative
Reassessment Needed of Soviet-Afghan War
Arctic Tank Modernization Continues
Have Power, Will Travel
A New Turn in Armenian-Russian Relations?
Campaign Sparks Division Between Ethnic Russians and
Estonians
Anti-Chinese Sentiment in Kyrgyzstan

INDO-PACIFIC
17
18
20
21

Chinese Views on How Artificial Intelligence Will Change
Ways to Win Wars
PLA Stratagems for Establishing Wartime Electromagnetic
Dominance: An Analysis of “The Winning Mechanisms of
Electronic Countermeasures”
China Accelerates Chip Design to Overcome Strategic
Vulnerability
Russia May Begin Purchase of Chinese-made Drones,
Engines

AFRICA
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

China Reacts to South China Sea Report
PLA Army Air Defense Brigades Now Able to Share
Information with Air Force
Report Indicates China Moving Toward Sixth-Generation
Fighter
Dedicated OPFOR Unit Helps PLAAF Improve Skills
India’s Ongoing Problems with Fighter Aircraft
Indonesia and the Philippines Investigate Jolo Cathedral
Bombing
Singapore Reports Positively on Counter-Piracy

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
29
30
32
34
35
36
37
38
39
41
42
43
45

Iranian Army Shifts from Defensive to Offensive Posture
Iran Builds Up Syrian Proxies on the Western Banks of the
Euphrates
Moscow Disapproves of Erdogan’s Plans in Syria
Iran’s Strategic Shift to China and Russia
Houthi “Re-Engineering” of Yemeni Society
Turkey’s Position on Venezuela
The UAV Threat to Turkish Security
The Latest “Houthi Drone”
Ukraine to Buy Combat Drones from Turkey
Iranian Forces Test Night Vision Cameras
IRGC Air Force Unveils New Ballistic Missile
Eastern Mediterranean Gas Forum Threatens Turkey
Privatization of Turkish Military Factory Draws Different
Reactions

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55

Russia Makes Strategic Inroads into Africa
With Russian Help, A Fragile Peace Agreement in the Central
African Republic
Is Boko Haram “in Charge” of Baga, Borno State?
Kenya’s Homegrown Terrorists
Operation Targets Purported “Katiba Serma” in Mali
Mali Releases Militant Reintegration Policy
South Africa Looks to Increase UAV Exports
As Economy Sinks, Military Discontent Rises in Zimbabwe
Kidnapping in Nigeria: An Underreported, Multifaceted,
Criminal Enterprise

LATIN AMERICA
56
56
57
58
59
60
62
63
64
65

Convoy of Armed CJNG Survey Neighborhoods in Zacatecas
The Gulf Cartel’s Armored Vehicles
Salvadorans Elect Nayib Bukele
Focus on Cuba
Germans in Bolivia
Brazil’s Migrant Problem
Paraguay Announces Plan to Reinforce Security along its
Border with Brazil
Changing Brazilian-Chinese Trade Relations?
Will Haiti Break Ties with Taiwan in 2019 and Opt for China?
Police Dismantle Largest Cocaine Processing Laboratories Ever
Discovered in Spain

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 9 | Issue 3

March | 2019

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Matti Dimmick
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Matthew Stein

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood
Zi Yang

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Ihsan Gunduz
Karen Kaya
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Bunker

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Alma Keshavarz
Catalina Wedman
		

ON THE COVER:
Foreground:
Iranian micro UAV, unidentified model, at an Armed Forces
presentation (9/2018).

Source: Mehr News Agency [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)],
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Iranian_micro_UAV.jpg.

Background:
Iranian Flag over Archaeological Site - Bishapur - Southwestern Iran.

Source: Adam Jones Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/adam_jones/7424861282, CC
2.0. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/.

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Military District Reform Rumored
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpted article from Svobodnaya Pressa
discusses recent rumors that the Russian
Federation is considering creating more military
districts. The original intent of combining
military districts after the collapse of the Soviet
Union and during the 2008 New Look reforms
was to reduce the size of the Russian military
bureaucracy. Any creation of new military
districts would obviously require a large staff
increase. Russia’s most recent addition to
the military district system was the creation
of the Northern Joint Strategic Command
(OSK) in 2014. Even in this case, Russia did
not choose to set up a fully manned military
district headquarters to provide command and
control, but instead simply chose to augment the
Military districts of Russia since 2016.
Source: By AlexWelens - Министерство обороны Российской Федерации Военные округа, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=50166964.
Northern Fleet for this purpose. If new military
districts are added in the future, the borders of these new districts would likely align with the borders of the eight National Guard regions, as
currently the National Guard and military district borders do not overlap. These spatial relationships are almost certainly maintained to facilitate
command and control during times of crisis; National Guard formations and units would be subordinated to the Ministry of Defense during
large-scale warfare, while Ministry of Defense formations and units would be subordinated to the National Guard during domestic insurgencies
(like the Chechen conflict). End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Rumors have circulated throughout the country about the latest change of the model of the militaryadministrative division of Russia’s territory…”
Source: Sergey Ishchenko, “Тень Сердюкова: Хождение по военному округу (Serdyukov’s Shadow: Wandering Through a Military
District),” Svobodnaya Pressa, 9 February 2019. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/224083/
Rumors have circulated throughout the country about the latest change of the model of the military-administrative division of Russia’s
territory…As far as one can judge from the information, which has already been made public by the mass media, the marked aggravation
of the military-political situation along the entire perimeter of our borders simply compels Moscow to return to the already Soviet military
district structure…It was thought that no serious invasion whatsoever threatens precisely Russia from any strategic axis in the foreseeable
future. We, even if we were not embracing NATO and the US by that time, but we had still found a common language on the main global
security issues. Exercises, if they were conducted, then under the guise of armed combat only with international terrorists. And isn’t it true
that the fronts, into which the military districts had to be restructured with the initiation of a war, are not needed to repel terrorists?
But Shoygu will not resolve the matter with the simple signing of the latest directive. Because now simply mind-boggling expenditures are
required for the recreation of at least some of the long since destroyed military districts. Really each new military administrative unit of the
Armed Forces of that type requires not only a headquarters with hundreds of experienced and trained officers-managers. From where do
we also need to take dozens of additional formations and military units of a military district set – engineer, signals, command and control,
radiological, chemical, and biological defense, missile, air defense missile, and others. And therefore – much will have to be reformed from
the ground up and some will have to be redeployed hundreds and thousands of versts from other cities and villages…
Already this year, they claim that a “retrograde” reorganization awaits three of the four military districts that have remained in Russia. They
will obviously once again divide Western Military District into Leningrad and Moscow military districts. They will exclude nearly everything,
which is located beyond the Urals, from the composition of Central Military District – and precisely – from Omsk Oblast to Baykal. It has
not yet been determined what they will call what is being formed in the enormous space in this variant. But, logically, - “the ill-forgotten”
Siberian Military District that was disbanded under Serdyukov.
If that is so, only Southern Military District, the most combat capable today, which stands against furious Ukraine and the NATO Bloc, which
is emerging behind its back, will greet 2020 intact…

OE Watch | March 2019

3

EURASIA
Private Security and the Russian National Guard
OE Watch Commentary: When Russia’s National Guard force was created three years
ago, one of its assigned missions was to oversee the country’s massive private security
market, which provides domestic security functions for private Russian business (e.g. access
control, bodyguard protection, physical security of facilities, escort services, etc…). This
industry blossomed during the 1990s as Russia transformed its economy and remains a robust
market today, where many Russian businesses rely upon these companies for various aspects
of security. However, as the accompanying excerpt from the pro-business daily, Kommersant
points out, it now appears that the National Guard is trying to expand its market share within
the realm of private security, particularly within the energy industry.
The article begins by claiming that Russian “oil companies fear monopolization of the
market by the security services of the Russian National Guard, which has acquired authority
for revocation of the licenses of private security companies at facilities of the fuel and
energy complex.” It is important to note that the National Guard, even though it is a state
body, possesses its own commercial security service. Since the National Guard controls the
licensing procedure for private security companies, energy executives fear the National Guard
will “effectually deprive them of the right to choose their security.” Given the proximity of
the Kremlin to major Russian energy companies, it was not surprising that these “companies
have declined official comment.” Nevertheless, Kommersant sources “explain that the Russian
National Guard wants to expand its influence in the field of protection of the fuel and energy
complex.”
Commander of the Russian National Guard, Viktor Zolotov.

Source: kremlin.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.
The article concludes with an observation from a legal expert who points out that because
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Viktor_Zolotov.jpg.
the National Guard “is simultaneously both an inspection entity and a business…a conflict
of interests cannot be ruled out.” Three years ago, when the National Guard was formed, there were concerns that this new force would be
employed to guarantee and solidify the current Kremlin administration’s political control. Having fully accomplished that mission, the National
Guard now appears to be branching into the economic sector. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Oil companies fear monopolization of the market by the security services of the Russian National
Guard…”

Source: Dmitriy Kozlov, “Добыча полезных охраняемых. ЧОПам нефтяных компаний мешает Росгвардия (The booty from guarding the
spoils. The Russian National Guard Is Hampering Oil Companies’ Private Security Companies),” Kommersant, 18 January 2019. https://www.
kommersant.ru/doc/3855859
Oil companies fear monopolization of the market by the security services of the Russian National Guard, which has acquired authority for
revocation of the licenses of private security companies at facilities of the fuel and energy complex…. The leaders of Lukoil, Gazprom Neft,
the petrochemical Sibur, and Tatneft -- Vagit Alekperov, Aleksandr Dyukov, Dmitriy Konov, and Nail Maganov -- complain about the growth
of the number of Russian National Guard orders addressed to the private security companies protecting facilities of the fuel and energy
complex. The Russian National Guard, the oilmen write, are effectually depriving them of the right to choose their security.
The Russian National Guard, which is led by Viktor Zolotov, ex-director of the RF president’s security service (a subdivision of the Federal
Protective Service), acquired the moment it was formed in 2016 MVD authority for control over private security activity and also FGUP
[Federal State Unitary Enterprise] Okhrana (2017 earnings, according to RSBU [Russian Accounting Standards], R20.7 billion, profit, R1.7
billion). In 2018 the Russian National Guard planned to check on 2,800 facilities of the fuel and energy complex (2,500 in 2017). The FGUP
website pointed out that Gazprom and Lukoil are its clients also.
The companies have declined official comment. But Kommersant sources among the oilmen and in the uniformed agencies explain that the
Russian National Guard wants to expand its influence in the field of protection of the fuel and energy complex…. “The risks are quite obvious
– monopolization of the protection services and corresponding price rises,” a Kommersant source in a major oil company says.
The companies are speaking of a legal conflict: the federal law on the security of facilities of the fuel and energy complex permits the
enlistment for their security of private security companies, but clause 21 of Appendix 1 to Government Decree 587 prohibits this….
The biggest state-owned companies – Rosneft, Gazprom, Rosatom, Transneft, and others – also have their own security. The earnings of
FGUP Atom-Okhrana in the past year were over R5 billion, profit, almost R181 million. The struggle for the security services market between
the companies and government entities in the fuel and energy complex took a turn for the worse back in 2013. The MVD-owned FGUP
Okhrana and FGUP Vedomstvennaya Okhrana of the Energy Ministry wanted to acquire the authority for the protection of all facilities of the
high- and medium-hazard category, but such amendments did not carry.
Lawyers do not consider the legal conflict unduly complicated…. The lawyer believes that the oilmen’s current problems with the Russian
National Guard look to be a consequence of “incompetence or malfeasance”. A conflict of interests cannot be ruled out either, he adds, since
the service is simultaneously both an inspection entity and a business….
OE Watch | March 2019

4

EURASIA
Bolstering the Russian Ground Forces, the Cossack Way
OE Watch Commentary: Since the Russian Federation has always been a continental power, almost all of its wars and conflicts have been
primarily fought on the ground. Therefore, the Russian Ground Forces have long been considered the most important branch of the Armed
Forces, though proponents of the strategic nuclear forces and aerospace defense may differ with this assessment. The accompanying excerpted
article from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer lays out the case for augmenting the Russian Ground Forces with Cossack formations. According
to the article, the Russian Ground Forces currently have approximately 280,000 personnel, but in the event of an armed conflict, 200,000 to
350,000 servicemen would be required in each military district adjacent to the front. Although Russia does possess other militarized forces,
such as the National Guard and FSB Border Troops, these forces are an insufficient number to support a major conflict. Russia is tinkering with
an operational reserve system, but it appears at this time that it has little functionality at best. Since greatly increasing the size of the Russian
Ground Forces seems unlikely, the author proffers the solution of augmenting the Ground Forces with Cossack formations, much as the Cossacks
augmented the imperial army in Tsarist times. These forces would provide an economical alternative to a large standing army and would also be
valuable for securing the rear, an important point considering the General Staff’s view that war does not occur just at the front, but throughout
the breadth of the defense. Due to the changing character of war, Cossack bands may be called upon to defeat enemy special operations forces
operating behind enemy lines, or to suppress domestic dissent fomented by enemy propaganda and social media. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“Rumors have circulated throughout the country about the latest change of the model of the militaryadministrative division of Russia’s territory…”

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH
community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #11
November 2018

Foreign news & PersPectives oF the oPerational environment

1RL257E Krasukha-4
Electronic Warfare System
EURASIA
3
5
6
8
9
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
21
22
23

Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan Electronic Warfare
Battalions
Russian MoD Considers a “Pocket” Iskander
The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile Defense System Is
Coming!
More Muscle for the Northern Fleet
Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
Why Russians Fight in Syria
Increased Economic Strains for Russian Military Personnel
Military Benefits of the Caspian Sea Convention for Russia’s
Power Projection Capabilities
The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border
Gauging Armenian and Azerbaijani Military Exercises
Moscow Pushes Own Approaches to Cyber Security on Rest
of CSTO
Russian De-dollarization: Economic Counter-Attack?
Polish Perspective on Russian Disinformation Campaigns
Social Media Restrictions for Russian Security
NATO Arctic Exercise Draws Russian Response
French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route
Russian Coast Guard Expanding in the Arctic
India and the Arctic?
Bulgarian Fighter Aircraft Acquisition

INDO-PACIFIC
24
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Made-in-China 2025
A Look at the PLA’s Youth Aviation Programs
Recruit Training Extended for New PLA Recruits to Increase
Readiness
The Growing Face of China’s Civil-Military Integration
Initiative
Poor Training and Insufficient Personnel Hamper Chinese
Maritime Militia Development
Chinese-Nepalese Anti-Terror Training Causing Concern in
India
India Upgrades Its MiG-29s
Singapore Unites Southeast Asia to Counter Terrorism
Is It Too Late for the Maldives to Lift Itself Out From Under
China’s Hold?
Vietnam Begins Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
43
44
45
46
48

Iranian Government Details Ahvaz Terrorist Incident
Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Confirms Use of Armed
Drones in Syria
Iran to Build New Missile System?
Turkey Tests Anti-torpedo Torpedo
Turkish Naval Special Forces
The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the Middle East
Russia and China Help Egypt’s Space Industry Move
Forward
Supreme Leader’s Advisor: United States Common Enemy
of Iran and China
Turkish and Iranian Cooperation to Fight Terrorism
Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s Drilling Plan
The “Soft War” on Hezbollah

AFRICA
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Yemen’s Civil War Fails to Discourage Horn of Africa Refugees
Cameroon Prison Break Signals Rising Anglophone Insurgency
South Sudan’s Civil War Death Toll Reaches 400,000
Nigeria’s Chukwu on Cross-Border, Counter-Boko Haram
Operations
Environmental Crimes Reportedly Leading Funding Source for
Terrorists
Military Intervention for Ebola Outbreak in DRC
With Tight Budgets, South Africa’s Military Strains to Meet
Mandates
Partisanship Alleged in Promotion of Malian Generals
Will Corruption in South Sudan Torpedo Peace Plan?

LATIN AMERICA
58
59
60
60
61
62
63
64
65

A Bolsonaro Brazil and the FSP
Mexican President-Elect Plans to Extend Federal Security
Presence
Worse to Come in Venezuela
Overton Window Shift on Venezuela
Chinese Medical Aid to Venezuela
ELN and FARC Seek Sanctuary
Colombia May Return to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields
Protests Disturb Peace Commonly Associated with Costa Rica
Student Marches as a Form of Struggle

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

5

EURASIA
Continued: Bolstering the Russian Ground Forces, the
Cossack Way
Source: Konstantin Sivkov, “Нагайка в помощь «Армате» (A Whip to Help the Armata),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 5 February 2019.
https://vpk-news.ru/articles/48094
Through Defense Ministry efforts the impression has formed that our Ground Forces conform to all requirements; however, a comparison
of their current composition with figures of previous periods forces a person to ponder…Thus, our Ground Forces had 670,000 to 780,000
persons during 1994-1995, while according to Internet data, they have 280,000 today. At that time there were around 70 divisions; today there
are 8 plus 27 tank and motorized rifle brigades, which corresponds approximately to 25 estimated divisions…
In Russia’s Military Doctrine and the list of missions facing the Armed Forces, we will single out those in which a key role is set aside for
the Ground Forces. Hence it follows that for defense of the country, the Ground Forces above all must be capable of supporting RF Armed
Forces strategic deployment, territorial defense, and a crushing defeat of the enemy in likely wars and armed conflicts.
In these conflicts and wars the Ground Forces’ proportion of the overall numerical strength of the grouping involved can be from 40-50 to
70-80 percent depending on the area of outbreak and nature of the enemy. Accordingly, our Ground Forces must field a grouping that is from
regimental to divisional in scale in 1-5 days for resolving border incidents. In the course of a week or two they must send a corps- or armylevel grouping to the armed conflict area. In 1-3 months they must form a grouping equivalent to one or two Great Patriotic War fronts…it
turns out that the numerical strength of our Ground Forces should be 450,000-550,000. These very rough estimates give an idea of the order
of magnitude.
The Rear as the Front
The primary territorial defense missions are to combat sabotage teams, destroy terrorist groupings and bandit forces, and secure and defend
facilities of great political, economic, and spiritual importance to the state. The district zone of responsibility may have several thousand very
important facilities (from 1,500-2,000 to 3,000-3,500)…the necessary personnel for resolving territorial defense missions will average from
200,000 to 350,000 servicemen, and this is within just one district adjacent to the front…
Naturally, other security structures will be involved in territorial defense missions, but only Rosgvardiya, The Ministry of Internal Affairs
(MVD), and Federal Security Service (FSB) do not have the requisite armed force elements. According to open-source data, Rosgvardiya has
around 340,000 persons. There are no valid data as to strictly how much of a military component there is -- operational units and formations
(particularly a special-purpose division and brigades), special rapid-response detachments (SOBRs), and special-purpose militia detachments
(OMONs).
By analogy with the Ground Forces and excluding militarized security, it can be assumed that their overall strength is a maximum of
150,000-200,000 and the forces are distributed to eight districts. Each district accounts for an average of 20,000-25,000 servicemen. The
Rosgvardiya grouping will be built up through maneuver in the region adjacent to the front, but all the same it is a matter of doubling these
forces at the maximum -- no one will relieve Rosgvardiya of the performance of missions in other areas of the country.
With the outbreak of a border or armed conflict, the RF Armed Forces Ground Forces together with Rosgvardiya in the zone adjacent to the
front still can create the necessary grouping for territorial defense, and this is on condition of performing partial mobilization as a minimum.
But even in this case capabilities for missions in the interior of the country no longer will remain. But in a local war in the border zone, even
with full mobilization, all the main forces of the Armed Forces Ground Forces will be used in the zone of combat operations, the Rosgvardiya
personnel and servicemen of rear-service units of the Armed Forces are insufficient for territorial defense.
From Farmsteads to Military Settlements
There are only two solutions: either increase the RF Armed Forces Ground Forces by approximately 70-80 percent or establish territorial
military-industrial settlements. Their composition and structure have been substantiated... I will note only that from an administrative aspect
the territorial military-industrial settlements (TVPPs) will have to be subordinate to the heads of rayons and towns, and from an operational
aspect to local territorial defense command and control entities, and be under the control of FSB military counterintelligence.
It can be figured that up to 30 percent of settlement personnel will join formation in full mobilization, i.e., a little more than a half-million
persons must live in such settlements within one district to form a grouping of 150,000-200,000. Settlement personnel themselves will
maintain the authorized arms and combat equipment through tax and other benefits. In combination with high morale and proficiency of
personnel who mastered military affairs from an early age, this appears to be a sufficiently powerful and effective tool for ensuring national
security in a territory. We essentially are talking about revival of the Cossacks, but on a new basis…in order to solve the problem of defense
of such an enormous territory as ours, the reestablishment of the Cossacks on a new conceptual and technological basis probably is the only
solution.

OE Watch | March 2019

6

EURASIA
Russian Anti-Satellite Technologies as a Response to the
US Ballistic Missile Defense System
OE Watch Commentary: The US withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic
It has been branded a killer not only of satellites
Missile Treaty (ABM Treaty) in 2001, recent withdrawal from the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF Treaty), and release of
but of intercontinental missiles.
the Ballistic Missile Defense Review (BMDR) have aroused Russian
fears about the US developing capabilities to eventually overcome Russia’s nuclear deterrent. A key fear, as described in the accompanying
excerpted article from Moskovsky Komsomolets, is that the US will eventually field a directed energy (laser) weapon capable of targeting a
ballistic missile. Although the Russians believe there is little they can do to prevent the fielding of such a system, they are intending to do the
next best thing, blind or destroy the space-based sensors required to attain the targeting data necessary to hit an intercontinental ballistic missile.
These space-based sensors and their associated communications are deemed to be the weak link in any ballistic missile defense system. The
accompanying excerpted article from Svobodnaya Pressa discusses the testing of a missile of Russia’s forthcoming A-235 Nudol ballistic missile
defense system for the protection of Moscow and surrounding areas. Although the A-235 is primarily designed to destroy incoming ballistic
missiles, the characteristics required to do so also provide the A-235 an offensive capability to target satellites. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“

”

Source: Sergey Valchenko, “Ракета-«убийца спутников» станет ответом
на американскую ПРО (A ‘Satellite-Killer’ Missile Will Be the Response
to American Missile Defenses),” Moskovsky Komsomolets, 3 February 2019.
https://www.mk.ru/politics/2019/02/03/raketaubiyca-sputnikov-stanet-otvetomna-amerikanskuyu-pro.html

Source: Viktor Sokirko, “Разведка доложила поздно:
США «засекли» убийцу своих спутников спустя 3 года
(Late Intelligence: US ‘Pinpoints’ Killer of Its Satellites
Three Years After the Event),” Svobodnaya Pressa, 20
January 2019. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/222182/

On 2 February President Vladimir Putin articulated a number of militarytechnical actions which are to be a fitting response to Washington’s torpedoing
the INF Treaty and also plans to put combat systems into space…The threat
from space is perfectly real. The Pentagon recently announced the possibility
of the deployment of strike arms in space in its 108-page Ballistic Missile
Defense Review. Specifically, it notes that the American military will estimate
the timeframe and cost of the potential building of a satellite fleet for the
destruction of missiles in their launch phase.

Information has been disclosed…on the development
by Russia of a variety of directed-energy and groundbased antisatellite technologies…Russia is conducting
experimental launches of satellites that perform complex
operations in orbit to enhance their antisatellite potential…
This most likely relates to the Nudol missile defense
system, which is intended to repulse a nuclear strike at
the distant approaches and is being deployed not only
on the ground but also in space. It has been branded
a killer not only of satellites but of intercontinental
missiles… Its testing is close to completion, and it will be
incorporated in Moscow’s air and missile defense system
in the foreseeable future, and subsequently also in the
air and missile defense of other strategic objectives on
Russian territory. A system which “lay dormant” for a
considerable length of time has acquired a real profile and
will be ready for use very soon.

The danger of the deployment of combat satellites in space is clear. The
United States hopes with these to destroy Russian strategic retaliatory-strike
or launch-on-warning missiles. Having acquired a “space sword” of laser or
particle-beam weapons, the United States could come to believe in impunity.
In this case it could be tempted to deliver a first strike with nuclear missiles
or defend itself against our retaliatory strike. This would lessen the role of the
nuclear-deterrence factor.
`Of course, such preparations cannot be ignored…

Russian Transport and reloading vehicle on the chassis of the MAZ-547A for long-range intercept
missiles 51T6 as part of the Amur A-135 anti-missile defense complex.
Source: By Mil.ru, CC BY 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=66165418.

The A-235 system has a predecessor -- the A-135 Amur
missile defense system which even now forms part of
Moscow’s “air shield” and is designed to repulse a
limited nuclear strike on the Russian capital and the
central industrial region. Despite its capabilities it is to
some extent outdated, and it is partially backed up by the
S-300 surface-to-air missile system -- and now the S-400
SAM system, too -- so upgrading of the missile defense
system has long been overdue…the A-325 system covered
a distance of 3,500 kilometers in 17 minutes and reached
its target. The tests, that is to say, can be considered
successful. It is not known for certain exactly what missile
this was, but in terms of specifications and performance
characteristics in all probability it surpasses the 53T6
interceptor missile of the Amur system, which is capable of
intercepting ballistic missiles and their warheads traveling
at up to 6-7 kilometers per second at altitudes ranging
from 5 kilometers to the borders of near space…
OE Watch | March 2019

7

EURASIA
Importance of Space-Based Intelligence,
Reconnaissance, and Surveillance
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
the Russian Ministry of Defense states Russian Defense Minister,
General Sergey Shoygu’s comments about the growing importance of
space-based Intelligence, Reconnaissance, and Surveillance (ISR) for
Russian military operations. This same theme is also encountered in
the accompanying excerpted article from Nezavisimaya Gazeta, which
discusses how the new State Eye satellite that was put into orbit in
December is capable of not only monitoring ground targets, but also
objects (satellites) in space, and it can be used to support the targeting of
these objects. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)
Source: “Министр обороны провел селекторное совещание с
руководством Вооруженных Сил, (Russian Defense Minister Holds
Conference Call with Ranking Personnel of Armed Forces),” Russian
Ministry of Defense, 5 February 2019. https://function.mil.ru/news_
page/country/more.htm?id=12209596@egNews
A conference call with ranking personnel of the Armed Forces was
held today in the Russian Federation National Defense Management
Center under the direction of General of the Army Sergey Shoygu,
head of the defense department…
The listed part of the call began with a discussion of the building of
spacecraft.
The defense minister said that satellite reconnaissance and
navigation systems have been performing an ever bigger role in the
field of the country’s military security as of late.
The Syrian experience shows that for the effective employment
of precision weapons detailed reconnaissance and cartographic
information is essential. Such data may be obtained only with modern
satellites capable of the high-resolution filming of the Earth’s surface.
The Defense Ministry is vigorously pursuing the technological reequipment of the orbital fleet of military spacecraft, therefore…

“The Syrian experience shows that for the
effective employment of precision weapons detailed
reconnaissance and cartographic information is
essential. Such data may be obtained only with
modern satellites capable of the high-resolution
filming of the Earth’s surface.”
Source: Andrey Riskin, ““Государево око” для ракеты
Нудоль (The “State Eye” For Nudol Missiles),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 19 January 2019. http://www.ng.ru/armies/2019-0119/100_190119nudol.html
As reported by RIA Novosti…is affirming that on 23 December 2018
Russia successfully tested a new anti-satellite system. The report
concerns the PL-19 Nudol system. This was the seventh test of the
anti-satellite system…Interestingly, yesterday Dmitriy Rogozin, head
of Roskosmos, introduced a new project, the State Eye. “After a
successful launch from the Vostochnyy Space Center in December
we have strengthened the group of Earth remote sensing satellites,”
Rogozin noted. “We are introducing a project which is called ‘State
Eye’. We will be able to observe the dynamics of change of any of
the processes on Earth.” It is affirmed this system can be used by
employees of the Emergence Services Ministry (MChS), agricultural
workers, petroleum and gas company employees, and others. And,
of course, if it is taken into account that all space developments
can have a dual (that is, not only a civilian) use, this would include
military uses as well. It cannot be excluded that ‘State Eye’ will be
used to not only monitor military facilities of the United States and
other NATO countries, but to track space satellites of a probable
adversary as well…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a marketplace of ideas about the future of our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and community of action that continually explores the
future through collaborative partnerships and
continuous dialogue with academia and industry.

OE Watch | March 2019

8

EURASIA
Revelations of a Russian Mercenary in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: While still officially illegal,
over the past several years there have been credible reports
that Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs) have
been active in Ukraine, Syria, Africa, and possibly South
America. In the accompanying excerpt, the moderate
news source, Sobesednik, interviews a former member of a
Russian PMC who had been deployed to Syria. Some of his
remarks are revealing.
The article begins by explaining that the interview
was conducted anonymously by phone since the Russian
“Criminal Code article ‘On Mercenaries’ has not been
revoked,” and that the ex-officer “could even be arrested.”
Since PMCs are not legal on Russian territory, the
interviewee points out that his contract stated that the PMC
who hired him was “registered in the Virgin Islands.”
A former artillery officer in the Russian military, the
interviewee had military contacts who encouraged him to
join the PMC. Since he was prior service, he did not have
to go through training and was soon deployed for “the next
six months in the middle of Syria, north of Palmyra.”
The ex-mercenary describes the relatively high pay“200,000 rubles [about $3,000] a month,” pointing out that
this “unrealistically huge amount,” allowed him to pay
off his mortgage, “which is why I [he] went to Syria.” For
spending money while in Syria, the “main currency there
was ammunition. Sell 10 to 15 cartridges to a middleman,
get several packs of cigarettes, alcohol, or some gear.” He
paints a grim picture of logistic support, claiming that
the “food was the most dangerous factor of the entire
deployment. It is impossible to survive more than six
months on it.” He claims that the “equipment is usually
your own, brought from Russia.” Soldiers are prohibited
from owning phones, and if a soldier posted something on
social media, he “could easily get sent home without being
paid a single ruble.”
The interview concludes on a dark note, with the exmercenary claiming that even though he has been asked to
return to Syria, he “will not go,” describing the situation
there as “anarchy and lawlessness,” where Syria “after
the war is even worse than it was during the war.” Within
the state-sponsored media, Russia’s military operation in
Syria has been portrayed as an overwhelming success,
where Russian forces have helped their Syrian comrades
defeat terrorism and restore order. This interview, albeit
from a member of a Russian PMC, provides an alternative
assessment. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…The country after the war is even worse than it was
during the war….”
Source: Rimma Akhmirova, ““Бумажки не так важны, как доверие”. Бывший
боец ЧВК – о войне в Сирии (“Papers Are Not as Important as Trust;”
Former PMC Fighter on War in Syria),” Sobesednik, 23 January 2019. https://
sobesednik.ru/obshchestvo/20190122-ya-voeval-v-sirii
Sobesednik is launching a new section: “Confession of an Anonym.” Its heroes
will tell us about things they cannot make public under their real names. The
truth may cost them money, reputation, freedom, or even their lives. Our first
interlocutor is Aleksander, a private military company (PMC) fighter who
recently returned from deployment in Syria…
…Alexander never elaborates on his Syrian trip publicly; he can discuss the
details only among former military men like himself. The details may shock
people who aren’t prepared and cause condemnation, and if the current policy
changes, Aleksander could even be arrested -- the Criminal Code article “On
Mercenaries” has not been revoked.
“I am a former officer, an artilleryman; I have a lot of acquaintances in military
and near-military circles. One of these ‘acquaintances of my acquaintances,’
as it turned out, served in a PMC and just returned from deployment. He
answered my questions succinctly: ‘It is okay to go.’ Both of us had combat
experience, served in hot spots, and would not have taken a complete gamble.
The acquaintance got paid and said that I could survive there if I thought about
what I am doing. And I took the chance….”
“You sign a contract, but everyone understands that it is a worthless piece of
paper. Mine did not even have a seal, just signatures. An LLC something or other
-- a name I do not even remember because it is impossible to find if anything
happens -- is registered in the Virgin Islands…. I flew out in March and spent
the next six months in the middle of Syria, north of Palmyra, practically in the
desert.”
“My pay rate was R200,000 [about $3,000] a month. Maybe in Moscow people
get this kind of money working in offices, but for the majority of those who go
to ‘make war’ this is an unrealistically huge amount. Our main currency there
was ammunition. Sell 10 to 15 cartridges to a middleman, get several packs of
cigarettes, alcohol, or some gear richer….”
“There is no fierce fighting in Syria anymore. Officially, the military operation
is over. But skirmishes and shootouts are a common thing…. Food -- canned
food, rice, and pasta. They would drop off a few bags for a group for a month
and we gradually ate through them. Fighters laughed that this food was the most
dangerous factor of the entire deployment. It is impossible to survive more than
six months on it….”
“Equipment is usually your own, brought from Russia. There are no mobile
phones. You can, of course, get a phone locally, but after several scandals with
fighters taking pictures at secret locations and posting them on social media,
control became stricter, for disclosing information also. You could easily get sent
home without being paid a single ruble.”
“I fulfilled my personal task -- I returned alive. I did not participate in the
obvious dirt that follows you in nightmares for the rest of your life. I paid off
the mortgage, which is why I went to Syria and remained in good standing with
the commanders. They are calling me back. But I will not go. I had enough; it is
anarchy and lawlessness there. The country after the war is even worse than it
was during the war.”

OE Watch | March 2019

9

EURASIA
Controlling the Kremlin’s Narrative
OE Watch Commentary: Directing the country’s
information narrative remains a top Kremlin
priority. Having seized the controlling heights
of the information realm (primarily TV), the
Kremlin leadership can ensure that its perspective
is disseminated throughout Russian society. As the
first accompanying excerpt from the pro-business
daily, Kommersant points out, television remains the
primary “source of information for the Russians.”
According to the article, while the internet has
“overtaken the radio and newspapers…television
continues to be the most popular means of obtaining
information.”

“…Television still occupies top position as a source of
information for the Russians…”

There are growing concerns, however, that many
Russians, particularly the young, are turning to the
internet for information. Over the past several years,
the Kremlin has been implementing measures to
better regulate internet traffic. The second excerpt,
also from Kommersant, describes proposed legislation
which calls for “protective measures to be introduced
‘to ensure the long-term and stable operation’ of the
Meeting with heads of Russian print media and news agencies.
Source: http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56639/photos/52069, CC 4.0.
internet in Russia.” While the article fails to describe
the exact details of this proposed legislation, it does
refer to Russia’s desire to obtain “internet sovereignty,” which would allegedly “make the Russian internet ‘stable in the face of external threats.’”
As an apt example as to how the Kremlin directs the country’s information narrative, the third excerpt, from the official news agency TASS,
describes how Russian officials plan to introduce “the Pobeda [Victory] TV channel” later this spring, which will be dedicated to broadcasting
movies and other programs dealing with the Great Patriotic War (WW II). The Soviet victory over Nazi Germany has become the centerpiece
of the current Kremlin ideology. Though it has been nearly 75 years since the end of the Great Patriotic War, this costly achievement serves as
the martial prism through which the Kremlin information machine often portrays the West. Just as in 1941, fascists tried to destroy the USSR,
so today, according to much of the Kremlin-directed media, dangerous forces in the West (e.g. Ukraine, NATO, US) are again preparing to
attack. To defend the motherland against these “threats,” the Kremlin will direct and use all the information tools in its arsenal. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)
Source: Yekaterina Grobman, “Россияне
поверили в интернет и неформальные
медиа: Но телевидение пока остается
главным каналом информации
(Russians Have Placed Faith in Internet
and Informal Media. But Television
Remains Main Channel of Information
at Present),” Kommersant, 24 January
2019. https://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/3861488

Source: Dmitriy Shestoperov, Natalya Korchenkova,
“Суверенный рунет набирает скорость Sovereign Russian
Internet is Gathering Speed),” Kommersant, 18 January 2019.
https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3855920

Television still occupies top position
as a source of information for the
Russians…. At the same time, the
internet as a main source of information
has taken second place, overtaking the
radio and newspapers…. Television
continues to be the most popular means
of obtaining information: Three-fourths
(76%) of respondents watch television
broadcasts.

…As Kommersant has reported earlier, the authors of the
draft law, which was submitted on 14 December, are insisting
on the need for protective measures to be introduced “to
ensure the long-term and stable operation” of the internet in
Russia….

The Ministry of Communications and Mass Media is
proposing not postponing the draft law on a “sovereign
Russian internet,”, which has been criticized by market
participants, the Expert Council under the government, and
ANO Tsifrovaya Ekonomika. The reform may be costly for the
state, business representatives think…

Denis Davydov, a board member at the Safe Internet League,
stated that the opponents of the draft law “are actually
implementing” points in the US cyber-strategy, which state
Washington’s intention to prevent other countries from
acquiring internet sovereignty….

Source: “Новый телеканал
“Победа” запустят в России
весной 2019 года (New
“Victory” channel will launch in
Russia in the spring of 2019),”
TASS, 29 January 2019. https://
tass.ru/ekonomika/6053961
Created for the 75th
anniversary of the Victory in
the Great Patriotic War, which
will be celebrated in 2020, the
Pobeda TV channel will appear
on Russian air in the spring of
2019.
“…In modern Russian
society, the memory of the
Great Patriotic War and the
celebration of Victory Day
remain the most important factor
uniting people…

OE Watch | March 2019

10

EURASIA
Reassessment Needed of Soviet-Afghan War
OE Watch Commentary: Russia commemorated the 30th
Anniversary of the end of the Afghan War (1979-1989) this past month
and the country’s media provided a number of retrospective assessments
of this conflict. The military weekly, Voenno-Promyshlenniy Kyrier,
published a detailed, sobering analysis which reveals how Russian
society (and some within the military) now regard this conflict.

Source: Oleg Falichev, “Афганский излом: В обществе назрела
необходимость дать событиям афганской войны новую
политическую оценку (Afghan Fracture: In society, there is
a need to give the events of the Afghan war a new political
assessment),” Voenno-Promyshlenniy Kyrier, 22 January 2019.
https://vpk-news.ru/articles/47777

The article begins with describing when, in 1989, the country’s
leadership “gave a negative assessment of the participation of the
Soviet Union in the Afghan war,” and how “the ‘undeclared’ war in
Afghanistan became the forerunner of the collapse of the Soviet Union.”
Soviet military losses were significant: over 15,000 KIA and more than
50,000 with serious injuries. The article asserts that those who fought
in Afghanistan and the family members of those who were killed “did
not receive substantial social and material support from the state.”
According to the article, many are still waiting for assistance.

“I did not send you to Afghanistan.” Many people remember
how cynically this phrase sounded from the mouth of the
officials responsible for the social security of the internationalist
soldiers in the 90s. It struck point-blank like automatic fire,
not just humiliating, but destroying people in uniform. Mikhail
Gorbachev and the 1989 Congress of People’s Deputies of the
USSR gave a negative assessment of the participation of the
Soviet Union in the Afghan war. The warriors who returned
and the families of the victims did not receive substantial social
and material support from the state. Alas, the situation has not
improved much. What is the reason and how should we evaluate
those events today, 30 years after the withdrawal of our troops
from Afghanistan?

The article goes on to describe the major factors which hampered the
Soviet war effort in Afghanistan. According to the author, the first and
“most important strategic mistake of our leadership,” was the failure to
realize that “Soviet troops were embroiled in a civil war.” “The second
mistake was an attempt to hide from the people, whose sons were
fighting, the very fact of what was happening” in Afghanistan. And the
third mistake stemmed from the first, in that “the political and military
leadership clearly did not calculate the amount of forces and means
necessary to carry out the operation.”
The article describes the traumatic toll this conflict left “in the public
consciousness and the fate of several generations,” pointing out that
620,000 Soviet soldiers fought in Afghanistan and “a significant part
of them experienced the so-called Afghan syndrome, post-traumatic
stress disorders.” Unfortunately, psychological help was often lacking
for these veterans. Returning vets were scarcely acknowledged, and as
the article points out, for those who were killed, in an attempt to hide
the cost of the war, “until 1987, it was forbidden to make corresponding
inscriptions on tombstones.”
The article includes some of the challenges which Russian veterans of
the Afghan war face today, pointing out that over 19,000 Afghan vets
are still waiting for housing, and that the “material condition of medical
institutions for these war veterans is extremely unsatisfactory.” The
article attributes some of this neglect to an incorrect understanding of
this conflict, and as the title of the article suggests, “there is a need to
give the events of the Afghan war a new political assessment.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…Afghanistan has left an ambiguous, traumatic
trail in the public consciousness and the fate of
several generations...”

…The whole country then received the deepest moral trauma,
and the “undeclared” war in Afghanistan became the forerunner
of the collapse of the Soviet Union. For the period from
December 25, 1979 to February 15, 1989, KIA losses of the
Armed Forces, border and internal troops amounted to 15,051
people…, WIA-53,753…
…Soviet troops were embroiled in an internecine war, which
was the first and most important strategic mistake of our
leadership… The second mistake was an attempt to hide from
the people, whose sons were taken to the war, the very fact of
what was happening…. The third error follows from the first.
The political and military leadership clearly did not calculate
the amount of forces and means necessary to carry out the
operation… In the end, it became obvious to the Soviet leadership
that it was impossible to solve the intra-Afghan problem by
military means…
We repeat: Afghanistan has left an ambiguous, traumatic trail
in the public consciousness and the fate of several generations.
The cost of the war exorbitant burden lay on the economy. The
USSR lost prestige in the international arena, and social tensions
arose within the country. 620 thousand military personnel passed
through Afghanistan…If not all, then a significant part of them
experienced the so-called Afghan syndrome, post-traumatic
stress disorders. After the return home, 35–40 percent of
combatants were in dire need of professional psychologists’ help
and treatment. But even the dead (as instructed from above) were
buried without the slightest publicity. Until 1987, it was forbidden
to make corresponding inscriptions on tombstones.
According to Natalya Antipina, State Secretary and Deputy
Minister of Construction and Housing of the Russian Federation,
the total number of “Afghans” who are not provided with housing
(registered before January 1, 2005) is 19,245…. Things are no
better in health care. According to the chief medical officer of the
Novosibirsk Regional Hospital “Novosibirsk Regional Hospital
No. 2 of War Veterans,” Lyudmila Kanunnikova, the material
condition of medical institutions for war veterans is extremely
unsatisfactory.
OE Watch | March 2019

11

EURASIA
Arctic Tank Modernization Continues
OE Watch Commentary: The 200th Separate Coastal Defense Motorized Rifle Brigade and
elements of the 80th Separate Arctic Motorized Rifle Brigade have been turning in their old T-72s
and replacing them with the new T-80BVM tank, which has been upgraded for Arctic conditions
as the accompanying excerpted article reports. Each brigade has a tank battalion with 31 tanks.
Both brigades are located on the Kola Peninsula and have a variety of firing ranges on which the
tankers can master their new equipment. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Russian military considers
the T-80BVM the tank best
suited for operations in the high
north.”

Source: Atle Staalsen, “New more powerful tank rolls into Northern Fleet garrisons,” The Barents Observer, 8 February 2019. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2019/02/new-more-powerful-tank-rolls-northern-fleet-garrisons
…The Russian military considers the T-80BVM the tank best suited for operations in the high north. It has a 125 mm smoothbore gun with a
range of up to 3,000 meters. Secondary armament consists of a coaxial 7.62 mm machine gun and roof-mounted 12.7 mm machine gun.
The T-80BVM is an upgraded version of the T-80BV main battle tank. It was first publicly displayed in 2017…

Servicemen of Northern Fleet learn to operate new T-80BVM tanks.

Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12179688@egNews, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2019

12

EURASIA
Have Power, Will Travel
OE Watch Commentary: Powering remote
sites can be an expensive proposition, particularly
in the Arctic. Russia has more northern cities
and villages in the Arctic than any other country.
Russia has designed and built a floating nuclear
energy power plant which will begin supplying
electrical energy to the remote Russian town
of Pevek this summer and there are now plans
to design and build floating liquefied natural
gas (LNG)-fueled power plants. It is a natural
extension based on the remarkable growth and
success of the Russian LNG industry on the Arctic
Yamal Peninsula. It will fit in well with Russian
LNG ice-class tankers transiting the Northern
Sea Route and has definite applications for nonRussian LNG customers. The Wärtsilä firm
mentioned in the accompanying excerpted article
is the Finnish corporation, Wärtsilä Oyj Abp,
which manufactures and maintains power plants
and other equipment for the maritime and energy
markets. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Russia launches call for tender for floating LNG power plant,”
The Barents Observer, 6 February 2019. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-andenergy/2019/02/russia-launches-tender-floating-lng-power-plant
While the Akademik Lomonosov is scheduled to be towed to the remote Arctic town of
Pevek this summer, [subsequent floating nuclear power stations] could face cheaper
competition from floating LNG power plants. According to the tender, a potential builder
would have to include both construction costs and long-term maintenance costs. The
tender stipulates a 45 million ruble price for the feasibility study, preliminary design and
possible deployment of such floating power plant, fueled with LNG...
Russia is not the first to build such floating power plant. Wärtsilä has already delivered
one such plant on a barge to the Dominican Republic. Placed on a barge, the power
plant can easily be relocated and is therefore an ideal solution for power production
on an interim basis. It can either provide power to a remote mining or petroleum field
like on the north coast of Siberia, or it can be connected to a local electricity grid as the
Akademik Lomonosov will be in Pevek on Russia’s Far Eastern northern coast.
With Yamal LNG, the coming Arctic LNG, and the reloading terminal on the Kola
Peninsula, Russia has several sources to provide fuel to such plants in northern waters.
Russia has large-scale plans for industrial development of the Arctic region, including
along the Northern Sea Route and the northern rivers of Ob, Yenisei and Lena.

“The tender stipulates a 45 million ruble price for the feasibility study, preliminary design and possible
deployment of such floating power plant, fueled with LNG.”

View of Pevek from the south.

Source: Btibbets [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:View_of_Pevek_from_the_south.jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

13

EURASIA
A New Turn in Armenian-Russian Relations?
OE Watch Commentary: The Armenian government’s relationship with
Russia has appeared at times to be strained since Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan
assumed office in May 2018, but as the accompanying excerpted articles
demonstrate, this relationship took a new step when a reported 83 Armenian
soldiers deployed to Syria in response to a request from the Russian government.
The article from News.am reports some information on the deployment, including
how the contingent of Armenians “arrived on 8 February in the Syrian city of
Aleppo” and that their mission is to provide “humanitarian and medical assistance”
in addition to “carrying out demining work.” The article also includes a statement
from Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu, who stated that Armenia was the
“first who responded to our call to provide help to the Syrian people.”
The article from First Armenian News provides another perspective of the
deployment, including how the Russian government had “regularly proposed”
bringing in contingents of Armenian soldiers, but that the previous administration
of “Serzh Sargsyan was not inclined to it.” The article notes how “Yerevan is
officially part of the Russian campaign in Syria,” and as such, is relying on
Russian logistical support during the deployment. Ultimately, it was thought that
Pashinyan’s administration would not have as good of relations with Russia as
Sargsyan had, but the deployment shows how the relationship is taking shape. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“They will provide humanitarian and medical assistance
to the population of Syria outside combat zones, as well as
carrying out demining work.”

The Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan (2019)

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Besuch_des_Ministerpr%C3%A4sidenten_von_Armenien,_Nikol_
Pashinyan,_im_K%C3%B6lner_Rathaus-2162.jpg, CC 4.0.

Source: “BШойгу поблагодарил Армению за гуманитарную помощь Сирии (Shoigu thanked Armenia for the humanitarian aid to Syria),”
News.am, 8 February 2019. https://news.am/rus/news/495299.html
Defense Minister of the Russian Federation, General of the Army Sergey Shoigu thanked the head of the Armenian Defense Ministry, David
Tonoyan, for taking part in providing humanitarian aid to Syria…“You were the first who responded to our call to provide help to the Syrian
people,” said Shoigu…
It was previously reported that a group of 83 Armenian specialists arrived on 8 February in the Syrian city of Aleppo. They will provide
humanitarian and medical assistance to the population of Syria outside combat zones, as well as carrying out demining work…
Source: Sargis Artsruni, “Сирийский блеф правительства Армении, или лесть Путину за счет армянского флага? (The Armenian
government’s Syria bluff or flattery to Putin at the expense of the Armenian flag?),” First Armenian News, 9 February 2019. https://ru.1in.
am/1252242.html
…Moscow regularly proposed such a program even to the previous Armenian government, but the team of Serzh Sargsyan was not inclined
to it.
There are no rational arguments from the political point of view in support of dispatching the humanitarian group to Syria. First, Yerevan is
officially part of the Russian campaign in Syria, which will definitely cause certain problems in the West…The weakest argument in support
of dispatching the humanitarian mission to Syria is that we are going there to defend our [Armenian] community. However, it is unclear, how
de-mining specialists and doctors are going to defend the Armenian community.
Second, the motives of the Syria campaign are unclear, particularly as this step by Nikol Pashinyan seems to be pursuing the objective of
pleasing Putin…
However, it is most alarming that the status of the Armenian mission is unclear…And in general, did the government have the right to
dispatch such a mission without parliament’s consent?...Previously, Serzh Sargsyan “passed by” this demand by Moscow, saying that Armenia
could participate in the Syria campaign only in the CSTO (Collective Security Treaty Organization) format…

OE Watch | March 2019

14

EURASIA
Campaign Sparks Division Between Ethnic Russians
and Estonians
OE Watch Commentary: As the
parliamentary elections in Estonia
draw near, a campaign ad for a
new party has drawn attention and
criticism for its reference to the
division between ethnic Russians
and Estonians. The poster appeared
at a tram station in Tallinn and
featured two sides, one which said
in Estonian “Only Estonians here”
and another in Russian that read
Logo for Estonia 200
“Only Russians here.” Underneath
reading “Estonia 200
these statements, a phone number
Long Plan for Estonia”
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/
was given with the invitation to call
wikipedia/commons/4/44/Eesti_200_
logo.png
if there were any questions. The
accompanying excerpted article
from Komsomolskaya Pravda gives the perspective of the
head of the party (Estonia 200) responsible for the poster,
who explains why they decided to stoke the already tense
relationship between Estonians and Russians, the latter of
which make up approximately 25 percent of the population.
The article quotes Kristina Kallas, the chairwoman of
Estonia 200, saying “what is the point in a poster showing
us the divisions in society? Estonian residents have put a
mirror up to society… Let’s once and for all stop living in
parallel worlds in a society with different opportunities.”
Kallas explains that the goal of the ad campaign was to point
out that the differences between Estonian and EstonianRussian societies are still very prominent, adding that “in
our society there is still a disparity between Estonian and
Estonian-Russian ‘rooms’ and this starts in kindergarten.”
The separation in schools by language creates and maintains
a divide between Estonians and Russians, a weakness that has
been exploited by Russia to incite protests and violence in the
past through fake news campaigns. Because of the persistent
issues in Estonia fueled by this separation, one of Estonia
200’s primary goals is to close the gap between these two
societies by working toward more integrated schools.
The posters did not go over very well with Russians or
Estonians and the party received a good deal of backlash over
the incident. Kallas addressed the outrage by stating, “we have
seen that this subject (the subject of integration and relations
between Russians and Estonians) is hard. Painful roots of this
problem run very deep. Russians feel this problem every day.
Of course these posters were hurtful to them.” Since then,
new posters have appeared with a message intended to better
promote unity, saying “Estonians and Russian together in one
school, Estonians and Russians together in one party.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Dimmick)

Share of ethnic Estonians by every populated place.

Source: H2ppyme [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Share_of_Estonians.png.

“…In our society there is still a disparity between
Estonian and Estonian-Russia ‘rooms’ and this starts in
kindergarten….”
Source: Maria Berk, “В Эстонии появились провокационные плакаты,
разделяющие русских и эстонцев на остановке,” [In Estonia there
appeared provocative posters differentiating Russians and Estonians at a
tram stop] Комсомольская Правда, 8 January 2019. https://www.perm.
kp.ru/daily/26927.3/3976850/
“What is the point in a poster showing us the divisions in society? Estonian
residents have put a mirror up to society… Let’s once and for all stop living
in parallel worlds in a society with different opportunities. We will create
one kindergarten and school for all children in Estonia,” stated the leader of
the party Kistina Kallas. In her words, the provocative billboard was needed
to bring attention to the problem of differences in opportunity between
Russians and Estonians….
“In our society there is still a disparity between Estonian and EstonianRussian “rooms” and this starts in kindergarten,” explained Kallas.
Now social media users have spread new posters, hung around the city for
the Estonia 200 party. On them is written the following: “Estonians and
Russians together in one school,” “Estonians and Russians together in one
party.” This party is trying to urge the government to create a single system
of education.
“We have seen that this subject (the subject of integration and relations
between Russia and Estonians) is hard. Painful roots of this problem run
very deep,” explained the head of the party Kristina Kallas. Russians feel
this problem every day. Of course these posters were hurtful to them. I
sincerely apologize to those whom we have caused harm yesterday. But it
is important because all of society flinched and thought: what is really our
most serious problem.”

OE Watch | March 2019

15

EURASIA
Anti-Chinese Sentiment in Kyrgyzstan
OE Watch Commentary: The group Kyrk Choro (Forty Knights,
sometimes called the Kyrgyz Choroloru, or Kyrgyz Knights) made headlines
in Kyrgyzstan in December 2014 when its members conducted a raid on
a nightclub in Bishkek and briefly detained several Chinese nationals for
allegedly soliciting prostitutes. While it initially appeared to be an act
of vigilantism, the raid turned out to have been sanctioned by Kyrgyz
authorities, who previously signed a memorandum of understanding with
the group to provide support to law enforcement. The government charged a
few members of Kyrk Choro for conducting the raid beyond the limit of the
memorandum, but the group continued to carry out similar raids targeting
companies with foreign employees (mostly Chinese) in what it stated was in
protection of the country. While the group has stayed out of the headlines
over the past few years, the accompanying excerpted article from Vecherniy
Bishkek reports on recent Kyrk Choro activities.

Source: Karypbai kyzy Tolgonai, ““Кырк чоро”, Госслужба
миграции и МВД “кошмарят” инвесторов? (Are “Kyrk
Choro,” the Federal Migration Service and the MVD “causing
nightmares” for investors?),” Vecherniy Bishkek, 29 January
2019. https://www.vb.kg/doc/376327_kyrk_choro_gosslyjba_
migracii_i_mvd_koshmariat_investorov.html

The article mentions how the group has recently “visited companies in
Chuy Region” alongside the Kyrgyz State Migration Service and the Interior
Ministry (MVD) and lists some of the companies they visited. While the
article does not mention it, these companies are reportedly Chinese owned
and employ an unknown number of Chinese nationals. The article also notes
how Kyrk Choro was “in charge of the recent rally held in protest against
‘Chinese expansion,’ which nearly grew into riots outside the White House.”
The article includes comments by a Kyrgyz economist and a member of
parliament, who both warn of the consequences for foreign investment in
the country and how China might react. Kyrgyz security forces broke up the
recent protest in Bishkek and arrested several of its organizers, though it was
not clear if those arrested were members of Kyrk Choro. While the Chinese
ambassador in Kyrgyzstan and media in China commented on the recent
incidents, the Chinese government has not taken any action in response. In
any case, Kyrk Choro appears to be working alongside the government in
the same capacity it did before and this will be important to watch if antiChinese sentiment in Kyrgyzstan continues to foment. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

It is noteworthy that Kyrgyz Choroloru, which the government
departments have chosen to monitor investment facilities, is
known for its sharp anti-Chinese remarks…The organization
was also in charge of the recent rally held in protest against
“Chinese expansion”, which nearly grew into riots outside the
White House. Now they have had access to foreign workers’
personal data as part of the inspection by the State Migration
Service and the Interior Ministry…

“It is noteworthy that Kyrgyz Choroloru, which the
government departments have chosen to monitor
investment facilities, is known for its sharp antiChinese remarks.”

The Kyrgyz State Migration Service, jointly with the Interior
Ministry and the NGO Kyrgyz Choroloru have visited
companies in Chuy Region…”They first visited the Tokmak
oil refinery and then the LLP Kant Pipe and Roofing Slate
Company. Earlier they made a similar tour to the Zhongda
oil refinery. The aim of the visits is to check whether (foreign)
workers stay legally in Kyrgyzstan,” the Migration Service
said.

“Domestic economists are sounding the alarm, as any checks
on businesses are a bad signal, even if they are conducted
by state bodies, not to speak of activists,” economist Azamat
Akeneyev has told Vecherniy Bishkek…The economist recalled
that a struggle for investors was increasing across the world.
“However, except for China, Russia, Kazakhstan and Turkey
which are our main partners, businesses from no foreign
countries are hurrying to come to Kyrgyzstan. On top of
this, there are checks involving the openly anti-Chinese Kyrk
Choro. By doing similar things we are showing that laws in
our country do not work and that one should not rely on any
government guarantees…
MP Kojobek Ryspayev is also outraged by the presence
of Kyrk Choro at investors’ business facilities. He said that
it was inadmissible for NGOs to interfere in the work of
businessmen…”This will impact on our country’s relations with
China, which is Kyrgyzstan’s main creditor and trade partner,
sooner or later…” MP Kojobek Ryspayev told Vecherniy
Bishkek.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | March 2019

16

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Views on How Artificial Intelligence
Will Change Ways to Win Wars
OE Watch Commentary: Since Chinese President Xi Jinping took office, the
Future AI warfare will be multicountry has been in a race for supremacy in artificial intelligence (AI). In July
2017, China released its first national artificial intelligence development plan,
dimensional, all-domain operations, with
titled the “New-General AI Development Plan,” and elevated AI development to
the space of war-fighting being extremely
the national strategic level. Today, Chinese officials and researchers within the
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) reflect a belief that AI will one day be critical
extended from the traditional domains to the
to military power and will fundamentally change the characteristics of warfare.
polar, deep sea, and outer space domains.
One such individual is Li Minghai, from China’s National Defense University.
According to Li in the accompanying excerpted article from Jiefangjun
Source: Li Minghai, “智能化战争的制胜机理变在哪
Bao, AI will “bring about some striking changes to the battle-winning
里 (Where Exists the War-Winning Mechanisms of AI
mechanisms.”
Warfare),” Jiefangjun Bao, 15 January 2019. http://www.81.
Li makes other salient points in the article, including how “algorithm
cn/jfjbmap/content/2019-01/15/content_225335.htm
superiority” is a key component to determining “one’s dominance in AI…artificial intelligence [AI] warfare in the future will
centric warfare.” Algorithms are described as the “centerpiece of war
bring about some striking changes to the battle-winning
efficiency enhancement” and they are a “series of clear commands for solving
mechanisms.
issues, representing the explicit steps for solving various types of issues
In future warfare, the force that enjoys algorithm superiority
according to certain rules.” Li goes on to explain that “in future warfare, the
will be able to rapidly and accurately predict the development
force that enjoys algorithm superiority will be able to rapidly and accurately
of the battlefield situation, thus coming up with the best
predict the development of the battlefield situation, thus coming up with the
combat-fighting methods, and achieving the war objective of
best combat-fighting methods.” Algorithm superiority will lead to “cognition
“prevailing before battle starts”.
superiority,” “speed superiority,” and “decision-making superiority.”
Algorithms are the key link that determines one’s dominance
Li also argues in the article that operational elements are shifting
in AI warfare. First, algorithm superiority leads to and
“information dominance” to “machine-led operations.” He sees AI technology
determines cognition superiority… Second, algorithm
permeating every element and process surrounding war-fighting. He points
superiority leads to and determines speed superiority…Third,
out that the Internet of Things, the Internet of Intelligence, and the Internet of
algorithm superiority leads to and determines decisionBrains will make up the foundation of warfighting. He also talks about how
making superiority.
battlefield decision-making, which is now conducted by humans, will one day
The Internet of Things, the Internet of Intelligence, and the
be conducted by machines and/or a combination of man and machine. The
Internet of Brains will become the foundation of war-fighting.
human brain is creative, flexible, and takes the initiative, making it ideal for

“

”

high-level decision making. The strengths of machines lie in rapid speed, high
precision, and endurance.
Li addresses future extreme operations that will be highly disruptive
in nature. He envisions an extreme expansion of the operational spaces
and domains. “Future AI warfare will be multi-dimensional, all-domain
operations, with the space of war-fighting being extremely extended from
the traditional domains to the polar, deep sea, and outer space domains.” The
boundaries of various operational domains will be blurred and will permeate
the cognitive and information domains. Operational progress will become
accelerated and actions and decision making will be so rapid that it will allow
for preemptive deployments and attacks.

Thanks to the AI decision-making support technology and
the appearance of “cloud brains”, “digital staff members”,
“virtual warehouses”, decision-making in war develops from
purely human decision-making to man-machine combined
decision-making, cloud brain AI decision-making, and neural
network decision-making.
Man-machine combined decision-making…The strengths of
human brains lie in creativity, flexibility, and initiative. The
strengths of machines lie in fast speed, high precision, and
great anti-fatigue endurance.
Future AI warfare will be multi-dimensional, all-domain
operations, with the space of war-fighting being extremely
extended from the traditional domains to the polar, deep sea,
and outer space domains. In particular, it will permeate into
the cognition domain, the information domain, and other
domains, and will further blur the boundaries of various
operational domains.

According to Li, Xi Jinping said, “If the battle-winning mechanisms in
contemporary warfare cannot be clearly understood, then one may never be
able to grasp the key link as if one is watching thaumatrope images.” While Li
offers insight into his vision of a successful outcome to artificial intelligence
on future battlefields, there is no indication that the PLA is following the steps
and methods outlined by him. However, the content of the article, as well as
myriad other academic papers that have been published, clearly point to the
depth at which Chinese researchers are digging to understand AI and how it will be used on future battlefields. End OE Watch Commentary
(Hurst)

OE Watch | March 2019

17

INDO-PACIFIC
PLA Stratagems for Establishing Wartime Electromagnetic
Dominance: An Analysis of “The Winning Mechanisms of
Electronic Countermeasures”
by Zi Yang

Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 19, Issue 3, dated 1 February 2019, edited for OE Watch. For the full article, see: https://
jamestown.org/program/pla-stratagems-for-establishing-wartime-electromagnetic-dominance-an-analysis-of-the-winning-mechanisms-of-electronic-countermeasures/

OE Watch Commentary: As Chinese companies assume an ever-more prominent international profile, recent controversies surrounding
Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei have rekindled discussions over information security. However, while public debates have mostly
focused on peacetime communications security and alleged incidents of espionage, it is also necessary to explore the designs and stratagems of
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) for dominating the information sphere in a time of war. This article provides analysis of the PLA’s latest
treatise for dominating the electromagnetic spectrum (电磁频谱), or EMS, a critical realm that serves as the main carrier of information for
modern military forces.
A number of titles exploring “winning mechanisms for informationized warfare” (信息化战争制胜机理) have been published since PLA
Commander-in-Chief Xi Jinping first proclaimed a personal interest in the subject. The Winning Mechanisms of Electronic Countermeasures (电
子对抗制胜机理) is one of the more prominent texts that have emerged during this rush to satisfy Xi’s concerns.
Most significantly, Winning Mechanisms is the only monograph since the initiation of the 2016 PLA reforms that systematically breaks down
thinking among PLA strategists in regards to achieving a superior position in the EMS. Whoever controls the EMS, and has the ability to
deny enemies from effectively utilizing this channel, will retain enormous advantages in securing victory. According to the text, “the winning
mechanism” of EMS contests is described as “the inherent basis and path to realizing electromagnetic dominance through electronic offense and
defense by way of electromagnetic energy, directed energy, sound energy, and other technical means.”
The PLA’s game plan is divided into four principles and stages: 1) “gather one’s strengths and advantages to achieve a superior starting
position” (聚优谋势); 2) pursue “multi-level integration” (多元集成); 3) employ “precise release of energy” (精确释能); and 4) demonstrate
“effects in multiple areas” (多域显效). The fourth and final stage is the most important one in securing victory, and it is the focus for the
majority of EMS stratagems.
Per Winning Mechanisms, careful preparation is needed before launching any attacks, and pre-war preparations allow one to achieve an
advantageous starting position. Bringing forward qualitatively and quantitatively superior forces is a must in any war preparations. While
quantity can make-up for inferior quality in some cases, the text underlines the importance of quality—not only in terms of hardware, but also in
terms of military personnel and their experience, training, and ability to quickly react to ever-changing battlefield conditions. After identifying
the forces needed, meticulous operational planning and force arrangement is needed to maximize strengths and minimize weaknesses.
Moreover, having accurate intelligence and a comprehensive understanding of enemy capabilities ahead of battle will enable prompt assessment
and decision-making. Such diligent planning will ensure that the PLA will always be ahead of the enemy in conducting sustained offensive
operations, and in keeping the enemy off-balance.
The multi-level integration stage focuses on supplying friendly forces with timely intelligence data. Platforms (平台), systems (系统), and
“systems of systems” (体系) must be integrated to make sure that friendly forces can effectively move and fight as one. Information and
intelligence tie these levels together, guiding the decisions of commanders and operators through the reconnaissance­­–target guidance–strike–
assessment loop. In this stage, battlefield intelligence is collected from platforms in land, sea, air, and space through satellites, radars, electrooptical sensors, and electronic intelligence equipment. Besides integrating friendly forces with intelligence, information support systems
encompassing reconnaissance, surveillance, communications, navigation, positioning, guidance, and control need to be strengthened in order to
protect them from enemy electronic attacks.
The third principle involves the precise release of energy, which is important for both tactical and political reasons. The authors of Winning
Mechanisms note that precise attacks avoid collateral damage against civilian electronic infrastructure, which could have negative legal and
public opinion ramifications. Instead of imprecise attacks, friendly forces must identify and strike at “critical nodes” (中枢节点) in the enemy’s
network, to be conducted at opportune moments prior to the launching of an all-out offensive. According to the authors’ calculations, destruction
of ten percent of critical nodes will collapse the enemy’s information network. In contrast, the network would still remain intact even after 40
percent of “ordinary nodes” (普通节点) are destroyed. Strikes must be therefore be performed in a systematic fashion, and assessments are
necessary in improving upcoming attacks. The attack methods employed—whether they be anti-radiation, directed energy, or electromagnetic
pulse weapons—must correspond to the target’s characteristics in order to achieve the most desired effects. Winning Mechanisms divides the
types of targets into five general categories: reconnaissance and early warning, wireless communication, guidance and fire control, navigation
and positioning, and friend-or-foe identification. (continued)

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

18

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: PLA Stratagems for Establishing Wartime
Electromagnetic Dominance: An Analysis of “The Winning
Mechanisms of Electronic Countermeasures”
Winning Mechanisms lays out three broad areas—electromagnetic deterrence, deception, and destruction—as the main areas in which
the PLA must confront the enemy. Notably, PLA strategists view winning with minimum use of force as the ideal scenario, and the first two
categories (EM deterrence and deception) both incorporate a strong psychological component. The text indicates that, given modern armies’
heavy reliance on electronic equipment, EM deterrence will play a crucial role in forcing the enemy to submit or withdraw. By demonstrating the
PLA’s sophisticated electromagnetic strike capability and willingness to employ such means without hesitation, EM deterrence will exploit the
enemy’s fear of losing expensive, critical electronic assets.
Per the text, increasing news reports and propaganda on PLA war games is one way of giving adversaries the impression that the PLA is adroit
in EW. Intentionally leaking snippets of information regarding the PLA’s advanced “assassin’s mace” (杀手锏) electromagnetic weaponry will
also intimidate adversaries. Furthermore, publishing works on EW theories and doctrine could show PLA know-how in striking vulnerable
nodes in the enemy information network—thus compelling the enemy to think twice about an EMS face-off with China.
Winning Mechanisms recommends employing suppressive jamming and firepower simultaneously in order to increase damage to critical
nodes in the early warning, communications, and “latent-potential warfare system” (战争潜力系统). Yet the argument here appears to runs
counter to the aforementioned notion of not striking civilian infrastructure—instead, it suggests that civilian infrastructure must also be a target.
The text recommends striking telecommunications systems in order to disrupt communications between enemy government and citizenry, foster
popular discontent through disrupting the electric power system, and degrade transportation systems that support enemy troop mobilization and
deployment.
The authors specifically point out the differences between “deterrence” (威慑), “deception” (欺骗), “threats” (威胁), and “shock and awe” (
震慑) tactics. Deterrence shows genuine military capability, and the resolve to use it. Deception presents fake information to the enemy with
an intention to mislead; deception may be employed both against enemy personnel and against “smart” weapons. Threats force the enemy into
courses of action that they never desired. Shock and awe employs one, or a small number, of precise strikes on high valued targets in order to
demonstrate PLA capabilities and stun the enemy into submission.
As explicated in Winning Mechanisms, deception has been used by armies throughout history, and remains an integral component of today’s
wars. Military deception can be further divided into two types: “confusion deception” (迷惑型欺骗) and “misleading deception” (误导型欺骗).
In the first instance, the target could become confused when confronted with a mixture of real and false information—such as the use of decoys
to create the illusion of a large incoming force on enemy radars—that will lead to “vacillating decisions or a dispersion of forces” (举棋不定或
是处处分兵).
Leading PLA EW theorists advocate seizing the offensive initiative with careful planning, intelligence-led force integration, and the use of
precision weapons, as well as deterrence and deception tactics to intimidate or confuse the enemy. This text, from an authoritative source, serves
as a window into the thinking of PLA EW experts on how a post-reform PLA could achieve victory in the EMS. While having its share of flaws,
Winning Mechanisms nevertheless offers the PLA and China-watching community a reference on how one of the world’s leading militaries
plans to conducts itself during a future EMS conflict. End OE Watch Commentary (Yang)

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | March 2019

19

INDO-PACIFIC
China Accelerates Chip Design to Overcome
Strategic Vulnerability
OE Watch Commentary: In the accompanying
excerpted article, Hu Xiao, an associate researcher
at the National University of Defense Technology
(directly subordinate to the Central Military
Commission, China’s highest military body),
notes the difficulty facing China in replacing
its reliance on foreign microchips. According to
Hu, microchips are a strategic commodity, and
Chinese demand makes up 33 percent of the
global market. Particularly as China attempts to
move its industries up the value-chain, dominate
in AI, and introduce Internet+ (internet of things)
technologies, demand will only rise. However,
reliance on imports of foreign chips introduces
strategic vulnerabilities, and Hu is explicit in
stating the dangers of lacking domestic chipbuilding capability.
China’s goals are to first reduce their reliance on
imported chips, and then eventually become an
exporter, upon whom the rest of the world is itself
reliant. A combination of licensing deals with chipmaking giants, domestic innovation and outright
copying are helping China slowly move toward
these goals. Progress has been made allowing
China to replace foreign-made chips in sensitive
applications such as Beidou navigation system
terminals and supercomputers.
However, Chinese scientists acknowledge that
chip architecture design is very difficult, and the
manufacturing itself has to be very precise. China’s
progress has been the result of a national effort.
A series of state-directed economic and scientific
development plans have made domestic chip design
and manufacture a leading priority for China.
Innovation is being encouraged through sponsoring
of research and competitions. The ongoing trade
war has led to tighter restrictions on technological
transfers to China. Ironically, emerging Chinese
dominance of IT sectors such 5G technology has
lead other countries to seek alternatives. End OE
Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Chips for use in China’s
indigenously-developed Beidou
navigation system have already
achieved large scale use.”

Tianhe-2 in National Supercomputer Center in Guangzhou.

Source: By O01326 - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=45399546.

Source: “国防科技大学专家为您讲述：芯片研发究竟有多难 (National Defense
Science University Expert Explains: How Hard is Microchip R&D,” China Military
Online, 21 December 2018. http://www.81.cn/jskj/2018-12/21/content_9384631.htm
Currently the global high-end chip market is almost occupied by advanced companies
such as the United States and Europe. However, accelerating the research and
development of domestically produced independent chips has always been the key
development direction of the government, enterprises and research institutes. In recent
years, China has made great progress in the field of integrated circuits, and percentage
of chips that are domestically produced has risen continuously. The situation in which
access to high-end chips are subject to others’ control is gradually being broken.
Chips for use in China’s indigenously -developed Beidou navigation system have
already achieved large scale use. In the field of supercomputers, the world’s number
one “Shenwei Taihu Light” [神威太湖之光] and “Tianhe No. 2” [天河二号] have all
adopted domestic high-performance processors. Consumer electronics such as domestic
mobile phones, Bluetooth speakers, and satellite receiver boxes have also begun to use a
large number of domestic chips.
On November 9th, the “2018 China Integrated Circuit Industry Promotion Conference”
was held in Chongqing. 102 enterprises participated, displaying 154 products. The
“Feiteng 2000+ High Performance General Purpose Microprocessor” and other
24 products were chosen as outstanding “China Microchip” [中国芯] (domestically
produced chip). Awarded products included digital switch chips, analog RF circuits,
artificial intelligence chips, fingerprint sensors, industrial controls and consumer
electronics.
This progress is the result of national support and investments. In 2006, the State
Council issued the “National Medium- and Long-Term Science and Technology
Development Plan (2006-2020)”. And in June 2014, the State Council approved the
implementation of the “National Integrated Circuit Industry Development Promotion
Outline”, all of which included requirements for the development of this field.
With the support of the country and the breakthrough of a series of key core
technologies, “China Microchip” is gradually reducing the distance with developed
countries. “Made in China” [中国创造] (national initiative) will eventually occupy the
commanding heights of information system technology and China will truly take the lead
in competition and development.
OE Watch | March 2019

20

INDO-PACIFIC
Russia May Begin Purchase of Chinese-made
Drones, Engines
OE Watch Commentary: There are reports that
Russia may soon begin to purchase a wider range
of equipment from China. Since the founding of the
Chinese Communist Party in the 1920s, China
has largely been the recipient of Soviet, and later
Russian technical aid and arms sales. Most of
China’s early aircraft and tanks were transferred
from the Soviet Union during the Chinese Civil
War and then the Korean War. Many industries
were essentially built from the ground up by
Soviet technical advisors. The breakup of the
Soviet Union however, meant that many important
production lines were located in independent
countries.
Rebuilding the engineering expertise or
relocating these lines (like the Ilyushin aircraft
production line in Uzbekistan) back to Russia
took its toll on the Russian military industry. The
outbreak of war in eastern Ukraine in 2014 and
subsequent annexation of Crimea meant that the
Ukrainian government was unwilling to sell a large
number of engines and parts needed to maintain
Russian equipment. The accompanying excerpted
article suggests that China may be stepping
in to fill some of these gaps. However, China
purchases large numbers of engines (especially
marine diesels) from Ukraine, which may give
the Ukrainians some leverage to limit the sale.
Another area where it might make sense for Russia
to purchase from China rather than develop its own
capability is UAVs.

“The diesel engines purchased from China have been installed in
some light surface ships of the Russian Navy.”
Source: “俄售华苏35做手脚 现想买中国无人机也被技术封锁 (Russia sells China
‘rigged’ Su-35s, Now Wants to Purchase Chinese Drones to Break Technological
Blockade),” Sina Military, 22 January 2018. http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/jssd/2018-0122/doc-ifyquptv8621003.shtml
A long time ago, China began exporting optical glass to Russia. After polishing
by Russian companies, this optical glass was installed in various Russian military
equipment. [This is due to the fact that] after the breakup of the Soviet Union the optical
industry acquired from Germany after the end of World War II has along since declined.
Now that Russia is importing more Chinese-made weapons and components, Hong
Kong media has published an article saying that Western and Ukrainian sanctions and
arms embargo against Russia forced Russia to turn to China for aircraft and missile
parts, even though in Russia there are doubts about the quality of alternatives made in
China.
The article said that Russia may lack other means to purchase weapons and
components, especially connectors, pumps and diesel engines. These parts were mainly
imported from Ukraine and European countries, but now due to sanctions, Russia has to
switch to China. Russian media has reported that these parts are technically backward
and there is neither the ability nor the need to invest large amounts of money to produce
these parts within Russia.
The diesel engines purchased from China have been installed in some light surface
ships of the Russian Navy. Russia’s surface warships and wheeled armored vehicles
are heavily dependent on imports. Foreign media believe that if Russia intends to
restart abandoned or canceled equipment plans, will import marine gas turbines and
automotive diesel engines from China. However, imports of Chinese-made marine gas
turbines is likely to be obstructed by the Ukrainian side. Chinese marine gas turbines
have a deep relationship with Ukraine.
In addition, there are reports that Russia may import Chinese-made drones. Chinesemade drones have been used in many countries and regions, and China has even
exported production lines. While their performance is considered to be inferior to U.S.
products, compared to Russian drones, Chinese drones are significantly more capable.
…Furthermore, exporting drones not only involves the aircraft and a simple control
system, but also a complex set of technological systems. If Russia imports Chinese
drones, observers believe that, there will be differences between export and foreign
trade variants like the S-400 and Su-35, and technical measures will be taken to avoid
being copied. Russia adopted this measure on the Su-35 to prevent propriety secrets of
its engine and avionics being cracked.

The article highlights the successes China has
had in dominating some niches of the global
arms market that would have otherwise likely
been dominated by Russia. Chinese companies
have offered a range of tactical reconnaissance,
attack, and long-endurance drones. Free from sales
restrictions that have prevented many customers
from purchasing more advanced drones from the
US, Chinese UAVs have been popular among
countries in the Middle East and Africa. Russia may begin purchases of these drones, though the authors suggest that just as Russia has used
various techniques to prevent China from reverse-engineering fighter jets and SAMs, China itself may find it necessary to incorporate such
techniques for drones it sells to Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

OE Watch | March 2019

21

INDO-PACIFIC
China Reacts to South China Sea Report
OE Watch Commentary: On 16 January, the accompanying excerpted
article from the Chinese language website sina.com provided a Chinese
perspective on a report by a South China Sea-focused American think
tank called the Asian Maritime Transparency Initiative (AMTI) about
Chinese interference in the territorial waters of the Philippines. According
to the article, the Philippines is acting in moderation regarding the
issues mentioned in the report. The article also calls the report’s claims
speculation and refers to previous statements by the President of the
Philippines, Rodrigo Dutarte, at the ASEAN Summit in which he stated
that the US should recognize that China already has a presence in the
South China Sea and should not do anything to cause friction.
In particular, the article objected to the report’s claims that China was
deploying fishing boats as a militia in the waters of the Philippines to
perform patrols, surveil, and resupply the People’s Liberation Army Navy
presence in the Spratly Islands. Since these fishing boats seemed not to
have commercial utility, the AMTI report concluded that their purpose
was military in nature. The article in response to this report, however, did
not provide evidence to refute or otherwise counter the report’s claims.
Rather, the article relied on the statements of officials in the Philippines
to demonstrate that because they are not concerned about these Chinese
fishing boats, the think tank must be overhyping the threat or stirring
tensions unnecessarily.

Spratly Islands.

Source: Public Domain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=552620.
There were also three policies noted in the article that attempts to
demonstrate that the Philippines need not be concerned about these fishing boats: first, China and the Philippines have agreed that their
relationships transcends the South China Sea and will not revolve around naval disputes; second, the two countries agreed to handle any
disputes in a peaceful manner; and third, the two countries agreed to work with ASEAN, which includes the Philippines, to resolve matters
in the South China Sea. China still considers the activities the report describes to not be unlawful or threatening to the Philippines. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The South China Sea is already in the hands of China, so why do you want to create friction?”
Source: “美智库称大量中国民兵现身南沙 菲律宾回应:纯属猜测 (A U.S. think tank reports that a large number of Chinese soldiers
appeared in the Spratly Islands and the Philippines responded: it is only speculation),” sina.com, 16 January 2019. https://mil.news.sina.com.
cn/china/2019-01-16/doc-ihqhqcis6557560.shtml
There were 76 incidents of piracy and armed robbery reported in Asia waters last year, the lowest in more than a decade. The number of
significant incidents - which usually involved armed perpetrators, leading to violence against ships’ crew in some cases - was 10 last year,
the lowest in 12 years. In the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, there was a slight decrease in armed robbery cases from nine in 2017 to eight
last year. The results were shared at the 10th Nautical Forum, which is ReCAAP’s annual dialogue with maritime, diplomatic and shipping
communities, attended by more than 150 representatives. “While the results do not tell us if the same patterns will continue in the future, what
happened in the past can be quite useful for the shipping industry - when they go to certain locations, what kind of measures they have to
take,” [Masafumi Kuruki] said.

OE Watch | March 2019

22

INDO-PACIFIC
PLA Army Air Defense Brigades Now Able to
Share Information with Air Force
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese reporters visiting a
PLA Army Air Defense brigade under the Central Theater
Command have announced a significant breakthrough
in the unit’s ability to share information with the PLA
Air Force. The PLA has faced problems with both
inter-branch (e.g. Army Air Defense and Armor) and
inter-service communication. Previous reporting in
2018 discussed OPFOR exercises meant to challenge
PLA air defense brigades and improve inter-service
communication. Army air defenses have undergone
significant modernization from their days as mostly
division-size units of Anti-Aircraft Artillery (AAA).
Images published in the accompanying excerpted
articles give a sense of their current equipment, which
includes what appear to be Type 99 35-mmm twinbarreled anti-aircraft guns, and HQ-16 Medium range air
defense systems. Other typical equipment of Army Air
Defense units include the HQ-7 SAM (borrowed from
the French Croatal system), an upgraded HQ-12 mediumrange SAM system, the HQ-17 SAM, and Type 95 SPAA,
as well as various short-ranged Qianwei (Vanguard)
MANPADs.
The articles note that the air defense brigade practices
interception of enemy aircraft performing ultra-lowaltitude penetration and using electromagnetic jamming.
Army air defense units play an important role in
China’s layered air defense, with particular attention
to the aforementioned roles. While these equipment
upgrades are important on their own, articles like the two
excerpted here are indicative of the PLA’s recognition that
organization and training issues themselves have a major
impact on combat effectiveness.
The Army Air Defense brigade credits the creation
of a the Joint Theater Command system with helping
streamline inter-service communications and get access
to PLA Air Force data. Previously, the units had set up
two ad hoc systems with temporary cables laid between
the two units. The PLA Air Force operates an extensive
network of static and mobile radars. While the unit
sharing the data is not specified, it is likely that the units
have more powerful radar units or permanent early
warning radar stations. The introduction of information
sharing between services, which in addition to the tactical
radars and strategic SAMs of its radar and air defense
branches, is a potent force multiplier. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

Source: “陆空信息壁垒被打破了 (The Army-Air Force Information Barrier
Has Been Broken),” Chinese Military Online, 24 January 2019. http://www.81.
cn/2018xczjyjzzzw/2019-01/24/content_9412631.htm
This reporter has interviewed Army Air Defense units many times, but for the
first time, he saw real-time air situation data from the (PLA) Air Force on display
in the Operations Duty Office of the Army Air Defense Brigade.
Brigade officers had a lot of opinions about being able to share information with
the Air Force.”
“We have been looking forward to this [air situation data sharing] for many
years,” said Zhang Feng [张峰], the brigades’ chief of staff. Zhang has
worked in the brigade for more than ten years. He told reporters that they
have conducted joint training with their neighboring military units on several
occasions. Both units typically apply for approval in advance, and although
they receive approval from their superiors, it has been difficult to completely
overcome the institutional barriers between services.
In the past, due to institutional mechanisms and the requirements of
confidentiality, information fusion channels were not smooth enough. They had
to lay temporary communication lines between each other. Alerts could only be
communicated by telephone, and data could not be shared directly.
Now, the duty staff can view the real-time position and distance of the airborne
objects in a certain range with just a click of the mouse.
Guo Hui [郭 徽], a member of the brigades’ training staff, told reporters that
before the (2015) military reforms, when the brigade requested an information
sharing system to connect them with neighboring Air Force units, they were
informed that it was technically feasible, but difficult to implement.
After the new round of national defense and military reforms, the establishment
of the joint theater commands changed this situation.
Source: “陆空联合防空 - 确认过眼神, 是并肩作战的人 (Army-Air Force
Joint Air Defense: Fighting Side by Side),” Ministry of Defense Online, 20
January 2019. http://www.mod.gov.cn/power/2019-01/20/content_4834911.htm
In the past few years, during joint training with other military units, the air
situation data [空情信息] was transmitted by phone or physical documents. This
not only limited the total data, but also introduced a time lag. On the battlefield,
reducing this time can improve combat effectiveness.
Air defense combat is fast-paced, and the Air Force radar has a long detection
range. Using the air situation data provided by the Air Force can greatly reduce
the time needed to identify targets, giving units more time to prepare. The
sharing of this data is not difficult to achieve technically, so institutional barriers
are the main issue. In the past each unit performed its own reconnaissance and
intelligence was difficult to share. Now under the joint theater commands [战
区], everything starts from actual combat needs, and the links of the intelligence
sharing of various arms and services become more and more smooth.
Battlefields that were been opaque in the past have become multidimensional
and transparent, and officers and enlisted are more comfortable with sharing
intelligence…The most prepared side will always be victor of a battle.

“Now under the joint theater commands [战区], everything starts from actual combat needs, and the
links of the intelligence sharing of various arms and services become more and more smooth.”
OE Watch | March 2019

23

INDO-PACIFIC
Report Indicates China Moving Toward
Sixth-Generation Fighter
OE Watch Commentary: Recent Chinese press reports
have been highlighting China’s push to build a worldclass air force over the next three decades. Part of that
effort appears to be the possible development of a sixthgeneration fighter jet. In November 2018, according to the
accompanying excerpted article published in Zhongguo
Qingnian Bao, Xu Anxiang, Deputy Commander of the
People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF), announced
that China was implementing a three-stage plan that
would transform his branch into a world-class air force.
The article notes that the first step is to “cross the basic
threshold for a strategic air force by 2020” by setting up a
PLAAF forces system, command system, battle system,
and support system with fourth-generation equipment as
a backbone, and third-generation equipment as the main
body. Step two is to establish basic strategic capabilities
and have a more “complete, scientific, and rational” force
system by 2035. Step three will see a PLAAF capable of
supporting “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese people
and realize the Chinese Dream and Strong Military
Dream” by 2050.
According to the same article, Xu introduced a flight
demonstration for the J-20, China’s fifth-generation stealth
fighter, during the 12th China International Aviation and
Aerospace Exhibition in Zhuhai. The J-20 is capable of
carrying new model mid- and long-range missiles and
short-range air-to-air missiles.
A more recent article, published by China’s Global
Times, announced that China was determined to keep
up in the global race toward sixth-generation fighter
jets, which it expects to have no later than 2035.
According to the article, a sixth-generation fighter jet
is expected to include the “ability to command drones,
artificial intelligence and even higher stealth capability
through aerodynamic design” and it could possess new
technologies like “laser, adaptive engines, hypersonic
weapons and swarm warfare” capabilities. The article
hints that China could already have started in its research
and development phase toward the next generation fighter
as “China’s tradition is to have one generation in service,
a new one in development, and a next-generation under
study,” an expert was quoted as saying. “Now that the
J-20 is already in service, the development for a new
aircraft is also underway,” he surmised. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“A generation gap means the sixth-generation warplanes
would easily top fifth-generation ones including the US’ F-22
and China’s J-20…”
Source: “歼-20战机已具备初步作战能力 (New J-20 Fighter Jet on Display
at Zhuhai Airshow),” Zhongguo Qingnian Bao, 13 November 2018. http://mil.
huanqiu.com/world/2018-11/13532521.html
Xu Anxiang (PLAAF Deputy Commander) pointed out that this J-20 fighter
demonstration had two primary features: First, the J-20 fighter was displayed
in formation at the exhibition, showing that the J-20 already possesses initial
operating capabilities. Second, the J-20 opened its weapons bay and conducted
its display while circling the sky above the airport, demonstrating that it is
capable of carrying new model mid- and long-range missiles, as well as shortdistance air-to-air missiles.
While answering questions of reporters, Xu Anxiang expressed that the Air
Force will progressively realize its goal of building a world-class air force
according to the “three steps to take” plan. The first step is to cross the basic
threshold for a strategic air force by 2020, and to set up a PLAAF forces
system, command system, battle system, and support system with 4th-generation
equipment as the backbone, and 3rd-generation equipment forming the main
body. The second step, from 2020 to 2035, is for the PLAAF to establish basic
strategic air force capabilities, and for the force system to be more complete,
scientific, and rational. The third step, from 2035 to the mid-century, is for the
general objectives of the PLAAF to be the same as the country and national
defense armed forces, to build a first-rate strategic air force, and thereby
support the great rejuvenation of the Chinese people and realize the Chinese
Dream and Strong Military Dream.
Source: “China Eyes Building Next Generation Fighter Jets by 2035,” Global
Times, 11 February 2019. http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1138454.shtml
China will not fall behind in the global race toward sixth-generation fighter
jets and is expected to build its own next-generation fighter jets by 2035, said a
leading Chinese fighter jet specialist.
Some new features of a sixth-generation fighter jet include the ability to
command drones, artificial intelligence and even higher stealth capability
through aerodynamic design, the periodical reported.
New technologies, such as laser, adaptive engines, hypersonic weapons and
swarm warfare, might also be part on the new aircraft, Wang said, noting that
China will choose some of these features and add others that best suit China’s
needs.
A generation gap means the sixth-generation warplanes would easily top fifthgeneration ones including the US’ F-22 and China’s J-20, analysts said.
“China’s tradition is to have one generation in service, a new one in
development and a next-generation under study. Now that the J-20 is already
in service, the development for a new aircraft is also underway,” the expert
forecast.

OE Watch | March 2019

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Dedicated OPFOR Unit Helps PLAAF Improve Skills
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article
profiles the PLA Air Forces’ (PLAAF) dedicated “Blue Force”
air brigade. In the Chinese military, the colors are the opposite
of NATO countries, with the “red team” being representing the
PLA, and “blue” a notional opponent. The PLAAF takes great
pride in this unit as representative of its transformation from
an inward focused force, to one that is able to effectively learn
from and emulate enemy tactics to become more effective. This
air brigade was only made public in 2015 during the annual
“Firepower” [火力] exercise. While the PLA ground force also
have a brigade size dedicated “blue team,” its profile is much
higher and it appears in media more frequently. Other services
have smaller teams that are even more camera-shy.

Source: “飞行蓝军的思考丨从研究队友到研究对手的转变 (Reflections
on the PLAAF Blue Force —Transforming from Learning from Your
Team to Learning From the Enemy),” PLA Daily, 8 January 2019. http://
www.81.cn/jmywyl/2019-01/08/content_9398616.htm
In the spring of 2018, after several years of training, the Blue Army
traveled west to Yangguan [阳关] (a remote desert area in western
China), and began a confrontation exercise with an unidentified Air Force
brigade.
The significance of this exercise is extraordinary. In the past, they
participated in opposition training as part of a larger group of different
units. This exercise marked the first time that the brigade individually held
an exercise with another PLAAF unit…
Transforming the past view of victory and defeat and achievement
is the hurdle that must be overcome when the new path of red vs blue
confrontation exercises is taken.

Based at the Flight Test and Training Center [飞行试验训练
基地] in Cangzhou, Hebei province, the PLAAF blue team falls
under the Central Theater Command. The article notes that the
“We need to need to focus on improving combat effectiveness as our only
OPFOR team is equipped with China’s most advanced fighter
goal” said Wang Long [王龙], the unit commissar. Before departing, he
aircraft. While unspecified, this likely includes the advanced
made two demands of pilots participating in the exercise. “First, you must
teach you colleagues in the brigade everything you learn from the exercise
variants of the J-10 interceptor, the J-20 stealth fighter aircraft,
without holding anything back; Second, we must make it clear that our
the Su-30 and its Chinese-produced copy the J-16, as well as
purpose is not to demonstrate our skill to other units, but to give them the
newly purchased Su-35 aircraft. In addition to training with air
full sense of fighting a real enemy.”
units cycled through Cangzhou and helping test new aircrafts
capabilities, the OPFOR unit also participates in annual largeFacts have proved that both sides of the exercise benefited a lot from this
attitude.
scale OPFOR exercises with other branches and services. This
includes both the “Red Sword” [红剑] and “Blue Shield” [蓝
盾] exercises. “Red Sword” is a comprehensive test of the PLAAF’s ability to conduct a campaign. “Blue Shield” tests the PLAAF’s Air Defense
brigades’ ability to successfully defend objectives.
The brigade also brings in outside experts on various topics to enhance the realism of their training. In one instance, when working to simulate
an “enemy air to air missile” the unit sought the input of the “chief designer of a certain aircraft.” From context, this is very likely Yang Wei,
lead designer of the J-20.
Over the course of the past three years Chinese media has been granted much greater access to PLA OPFOR units across the PLA Ground
Forces, Air Force, Navy and Rocket Force than in previous years. At the same time, the tempo of confrontation exercises and their attention
to realistic scenarios has been increasing. Instructed by senior Chinese Communist Party officials to rapidly improve the capabilities of the
PLA, these moves indicate a military-wide embrace of opposition force training as a way of enhancing the PLA’s readiness. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

“Transforming the past view of
victory and defeat and achievement
is the hurdle that must be overcome
when the new path of red vs blue
confrontation exercises is taken.”

J-20 fighter.

Source: by emperornie, CC BY-SA 2.0, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chengdu_J-20#/media/File:J-20_fighter_(44040541250)_(cropped).jpg..

OE Watch | March 2019

25

INDO-PACIFIC
India’s Ongoing Problems with Fighter Aircraft
OE Watch Commentary: As the government of India
continues to deal with issues in revamping its inventory
of fighter aircraft, a recent crash of an Indian Air Force
Mirage 2000 fighter highlighted problems with the
upgrades to current fighters and it comes at a time when
the Rafale controversy shows no signs of dissipating.
The accompanying excerpted article from Firstpost
reports on the crash, which resulted in the death of both
pilots, despite the fact that they ejected from the aircraft.
The article focuses on the problems with the ejection
system and notes how “the Mirage in question had just
been upgraded in an ongoing programme to improve
the performance envelope of what is now a 30 year old
aircraft.”

Source: Bikram Vohra, “Mirage 2000 crash puts HAL’s credibility under cloud;
further upgrades to ageing fleet pointless before thorough probe,” Firstpost,
3 February 2019. https://www.firstpost.com/india/mirage-2000-crash-putshals-credibility-under-cloud-further-upgrades-to-ageing-fleet-pointless-beforethorough-probe-6017131.html

The article does not mention what other upgrades took
place within the program, but states that it is “necessary
to ask Hindustan Aeronautical Limited (HAL) if this
exercise to complete the upgrade in record time, with the
kits obtained from Dassault, in France was an attempt
by the public sector aircraft manufacturer to offset the
scathing criticism by Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa that
the aviation company was miles behind in its schedules
for assembling not just the Mirage 2000 but also the
Jaguars.” Additionally, the article states that another “48
aircrafts (are) being fitted with similar upgrades.”

This becomes a point of concern because the Mirage in question had just been
upgraded in an ongoing programme to improve the performance envelope of what
is now a 30 year old aircraft…Whether these relatively old jets have the capability
for an upgrade and to what extent the refurbishing and upgrading of the plane had
an impact on the efficiency of the ejection system and the overall capability of the
jet.

While it will take some time for the investigation into
the crash to unfold, the article from The Print shows how
it comes at a time when the Rafale controversy continues
to be a problem. While the article rehashes some of the
same points that have come up in the past year, it notes
how “two more (fighter) squadrons are due to be phased
out by March, bringing the strength down to just 29 as
against the sanctioned strength of 42 squadrons” and
how the Indian Air Force believes it “will need at least 45
squadrons to fight a possible two-front war.” In reference
to the pending deal to acquire new fighters the article
notes that “while there is no fixed time table that needs
to be adhered to, it was hoped that the process would
be rushed through.” Regardless of the next steps that
the Indian government takes to deal with its issues with
fighter aircraft, it appears that there is increased pressure
to resolve it. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“This becomes a point of concern
because the Mirage in question had
just been upgraded in an ongoing
programme to improve the performance
envelope of what is now a 30 year old
aircraft.”

It is too early to tell why the pilots died after ejecting from an aborted Mirage
2000 in Bengaluru on Friday and were unable to do so safely as the ejection
system should have ensured. But certain questions are raised because of this
malfunction…
The Indian Mirage 2000s are fitted with the Martin Baker Mk 10 ejection system
which is highly reliable and has saved over 7,500 lives globally as of February
2018…The fact is that the ejection system which comprises several aspects has
to work perfectly and experts say the slightest error or even a small non-working
part can cause the system to fail in its activation.

…It is also necessary to ask Hindustan Aeronautical Limited if this exercise to
complete the upgrade in record time, with the kits obtained from Dassault, in
France was an attempt by the public sector aircraft manufacturer to offset the
scathing criticism by Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa that the aviation company was
miles behind in its schedules for assembling not just the Mirage 2000 but also the
Jaguars.
Just two months ago, Dhanoa had said, “In the Sukhoi delivery HAL is three
years behind, in the Jaguar we are six years behind, even the Mirage is two years
behind.”
…It is a valid contention and till an independent investigation confirms exactly
what went down in Bengaluru be it upgrade or maintenance there should be a
total scrutiny of the other 48 aircrafts being fitted with similar upgrades…
Source: Snehesh Alex Philip, “Despite Modi’s promise, one more year passes
without IAF getting its fighter jets,” The Print, 31 December 2018. https://theprint.
in/governance/rafale-row-slows-down-purchase-of-114-fighter-jets-iaf-badlyneeds/170270/
…The Rafale controversy has apparently slowed down the Indian Air Force’s
plan to procure 114 fighter jets, with the process of acquiring them yet to get the
necessary ‘Acceptance of Necessity’ from the defence ministry.
The IAF has been waiting for new fighter jets since 2000 and its hopes were
raised after Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced in April that India had
rolled out the process to procure them, with a ‘Request for Information’ issued. He
had promised to speed up the process and not “waste time like the UPA”.
However, eight months on, there has been little movement on the critical
purchase…The government, thankfully, went in for an emergency purchase of 36
Rafale fighter jets, but this will not meet the urgent need of the IAF…
The IAF has seen a steady decline in its fighter squadrons and at least two more
squadrons are due to be phased out by March, bringing the strength down to just
29 as against the sanctioned strength of 42 squadrons…The last time IAF had 42
squadrons was back in 2002. The IAF’s calculations say it will need at least 45
squadrons to fight a possible two-front war…
Seven fighter aircraft are in contention for the mega deal, valued to be worth over
$20 billion. While there is no fixed time table that needs to be adhered to, it was
hoped that the process would be rushed through…
OE Watch | March 2019

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia and the Philippines Investigate
Jolo Cathedral Bombing
OE Watch Commentary: On 27 January a major explosion ripped through a Roman
Catholic Cathedral in the city of Jolo (Sulu Province) in Mindanao, the Philippines.
Around 20 people were killed and over 100 others were injured. Although under
usual circumstances the investigation of the attack could involve only authorities from
the Philippines, the accompanying excerpted article from the Indonesian-language
Tribunnews.com reveals that Indonesia has also been asked to investigate. The reason
for this is that, according to the police in the Philippines, the bombers may have been
two Indonesians.
Although the article recognizes that there is still a lack of confirmation on the identity
of the bombers, authorities in the Philippines suspect at least one bomber, but possibly
both bombers, were Indonesian women whose purpose for committing the suicide
bombing was to urge Abu Sayyaf members to do the same. It was a form of shaming,
insofar as men would see women being more brave than them and then seek to carry
out suicide bombings themselves. There has historically been much less precedent for
suicide bombing in the Philippines than in Indonesia, and in 2018 an Indonesian family
even committed a suicide bombing when parents who had been in Syria detonated
explosives at a church in Surabaya. This may be why Indonesians were selected to
carry out the bombings in Jolo. At the same time, the article notes the authorities in
the Philippines still suspect Abu Sayyaf members guided the Indonesian women to
the specific target—the cathedral. This indicated Filipinos were closely involved in the
operation.
According to the article, the authorities in both countries intend to continue to collect
evidence and confirm the suspects. Nevertheless, if Indonesian women were involved in
the suicide bombings in Jolo as the article mentions, it would represent the possible start
of a new trend in Mindanao where suicide bombings, foreign fighters, and women will
more commonly be part of attacks. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Kepolisian Filipina Masih Cek
Kewarganegaraan Pelaku Pengeboman Jolo,”
tribunnews.com, 2 February 2019, http://www.
tribunnews.com/internasional/2019/02/02/kemluri-kepolisian-filipina-masih-cek-kewarganegaraanpelaku-pengeboman-jolo
The Indonesian Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated
that the Philippine police were still searching
for the truth of the identity and citizenship of the
bombers in Jolo, the Philippines. The Indonesian
Foreign Ministry spokesman, Armanantha Nasir,
said in a statement that Indonesia had not been
able to confirm the news about the possibility
of involvement of two Indonesian citizens in a
terrorist bombing in Jolo, Southern Philippines.
Philippine Interior Minister Eduardo Año said the
two perpetrators of suicide bomb attacks behind
the attack of the Catholic church on Jolo Island
came from Indonesia. The attack killed 22 people
and injured 100 people, including civilians and
soldiers. “The group responsible (in this attack)
was the Indonesian suicide bomber. But the Abu
Sayyaf group which guided them, studied the target,
conducted secret monitoring and brought the couple
to church,” Año said. “The aim of the Indonesian
couple was to set an example and influence
Philippine terrorists to carry out suicide bombings,”
he added.

“The aim of the Indonesian couple was to set an example and influence Philippine terrorists to carry out
suicide bombings.”

Aftermath of the Jolo Cathedral bombings.

Source: ALBERT ALCAIN/PRESIDENTIAL PHOTO [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aftermath_of_the_Jolo_Cathedral_bombings.jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Singapore Reports Positively on Counter-Piracy
OE Watch Commentary: While Southeast Asia witnessed
several terrorist attacks in 2018, including in Marawi, the
Philippines and in Surabaya, Indonesia, in addition to other
violent conflict in Rakhine State, Myanmar and southern
Thailand, one area where security has improved in the region
is in counter-piracy in the region’s waters. According to the
accompanying excerpted article from Singapore’s The Straits
Times, the 76 incidents of piracy and armed robbery reported
in Asian waters in 2018 was the lowest in more than decade.
Moreover, only 10 of those incidents involved violence against
the crew of a ship. The article noted that what was notable for
Singapore is that the 76 incidents in Asian waters included only
eight instances of armed robbery in the Straits of Malacca, which
is one of the world’s most important waterways. Therefore, the
vigilance and cooperation that has allowed for the provision of
this security is commended in the article.
The biggest concern in the article was that there were three
abductions of crews in Asian waters in 2018. However, despite
the article’s pessimism about that statistic, it was still four
fewer abductions than in 2017. The information the article came
from the 10th annual meeting of member states in the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed
Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) agreement. It has been
keeping these statistics since 2007 and therefore can now observe
trends over the last 12 years.
One of the key takeaways from the meeting was that looking
back on past data cannot predict future trends, but it certainly
can help people in the shipping industry know which locations
may require a heightened sense of vigilance or what kind of
measures are most suitable to deter and prevent piracy. For
example, 80 percent of incidents occur between 1900 and
0600. Therefore, it obviously makes sense for ships to heighten
their guard at night compared to day time. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“While the results do not tell us if the same
patterns will continue in the future, what
happened in the past can be quite useful for the
shipping industry.”

Straits of Malacca.

Source: CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1675464.

Source: “Lowest number of piracy and armed robbery cases in Asia
waters in more than a decade),” The Straits Times, 15 January 2019.
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/lowest-number-of-piracy-andarmed-robbery-cases-in-asia-waters-in-more-than-a-decade
There were 76 incidents of piracy and armed robbery reported in
Asia waters last year, the lowest in more than a decade. The number of
significant incidents - which usually involved armed perpetrators, leading
to violence against ships’ crew in some cases - was 10 last year, the lowest
in 12 years. In the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, there was a slight
decrease in armed robbery cases from nine in 2017 to eight last year.
The results were shared at the 10th Nautical Forum, which is ReCAAP’s
annual dialogue with maritime, diplomatic and shipping communities,
attended by more than 150 representatives. “While the results do not tell
us if the same patterns will continue in the future, what happened in the
past can be quite useful for the shipping industry - when they go to certain
locations, what kind of measures they have to take,” [Masafumi Kuruki]
said.

OE Watch | March 2019

28

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Army Shifts from Defensive to Offensive Posture
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian military has gone
through various strategic phases over its existence. The
1979 Islamic Revolution was, of course, a watershed event.
Revolutionary leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini
distrusted both Iran’s air force because of the high
proportion of royalists who populated its top ranks, as well
as flag officers who had risen to power in other military
branches under the shah. Only Iraq’s 1980 invasion of Iran
suspended the wholesale purges of top brass.

“…we have turned the Ground Forces into a mobile offensive
force….”

During the Iran-Iraq War, the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC) coalesced and became predominant.
Through sheer attrition and a quantitative military edge,
Iran was able to stalemate Iraqi forces, achieve naval
victory over Iraq, and capture the strategic peninsula, all
bolstering the confidence of Iranian leaders.
Their decision to confront US forces directly in April
1988 and the Iranian defeat in Operation Praying Mantis,
however, convinced Iranian leaders to embrace a more
asymmetric approach to confront the US and other military
powers. In the Persian Gulf, this meant an embrace of
speed boat swarming tactics against US shipping, while
Army Ground Forces Commander Kiomars Heydari.
Source: Fararu.com, https://fararu.com/files/fa/news/1397/11/7/467846_264.jpg
elsewhere, asymmetric tactics meant an embrace of
insurgency and terrorism. Fararu.com is a website close to the IRGC. The accompanying excerpt of senior leader speeches on the occasion of
the Strength-97 military exercises, however, hints that, more than 30 years after Operation Praying Mantis, a new change may be underway in
Iranian strategic doctrine.
If the embrace of asymmetry was the result of relative weakness, the Army Ground Forces’ embrace of more offensive doctrines and their
commanders’ explicit comments highlight a belief that Iran is now strong enough to confront enemies more directly. That Admiral Sayyari,
who until last year was commander of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s Navy, also embraced such sentiment suggests a broader consensus.
Driving this consensus may be recent Iranian successes in Syria—where President Bashar al-Assad increasingly appears to have won the civil
war—and in Iraq, where many Iraqis and Iranians assign disproportionate credit to Iranian rather than US assistance in victories against the
Islamic State.
Unclear, however, is what an offensive strategy may mean in the operational environment. While Iran has recently developed tanks (see:
“Iran: New Karrar Tank to be Unveiled Soon,” OE Watch, February 2017), it is unlikely that they could be used to launch a ground invasion of
any neighboring states. Rather, Heydari and Sayyari’s comments may reflect a greater willingness to supplement IRGC deployments abroad
with more a formal Iranian Army Ground Forces deployment. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Farmandeh-e Niru-ye Zamini Artesh: Ruyekard Tahajami dar Dastur Qarar Gerefteh Ast (Commander of the Army Ground Forces:
An Offensive Approach is in Place),” Fararu.com, 27 January 2019. https://fararu.com/fa/news/388236
The commander of the Army Ground Forces said that today nothing threatens us and emphasized, “Today, we have turned the Army
Ground Forces into a mobile offensive force, but we must not in the future become starry-eyed about our capabilities. We need to upgrade
our power to account for the science of the day in order to maintain the accountability of our operations.” According to the Tasnim [News
Agency], Admiral Habibullah Sayarri, the Coordinating Deputy of Islamic Republic of Iran Army, and Kioumars Heydari, commander of the
Army Ground Forces, participated in a special news conference to discuss the achievements of the Strength-97 military exercises, and the
latest steps to improve the military’s defensive capabilities. At the beginning of the program, Gen. Heydari, commander of the Army Ground
Forces, said the Strength-97 military exercises were tangibly different from previous iterations. In this exercise, we unveiled two important
approaches. The first approach was the unveiling of structural changes ordered by the Army Ground Forces commander-in-chief, and the
second was the general strategy communicated to the entire armed forces, which was an aggressive and proactive approach to the armed
forces…
Heydari said that using asymmetric tactics are not a strategy but rather tactics, and we have crossed this point today. We have reached a
level of deterrence that requires no unpleasant tactics and we can defend the country with a good offense.

OE Watch | March 2019

29

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Builds Up Syrian Proxies on the Western Banks
of the Euphrates
OE Watch Commentary: According to local media reports, Iranian forces have over the past year carried out a relatively effective proxybuilding campaign in areas between the towns of al-Mayadin and Abu Kamal, on the western banks of the Euphrates River in the Syrian
province of Deir ez-Zor (see: “Iran: Winning Hearts and Minds in Deir Ezzor,” OE Watch, March 2018 and “Shia Symbolism: Iran-Backed
Militias Resurgent in Syria,” OE Watch, October 2016). These former ISIS Middle Euphrates River Valley (MERV) strongholds, located near
and along the border with Iraq’s Anbar Province, are home to a conservative and predominantly Sunni population that is traditionally considered
skeptical, if not hostile, toward Iranian intentions. However, years of conflict have transformed parts of Deir ez-Zor into an inhospitable mix of
fear, destruction, indigence and resentment, and in the absence of alternatives, the security provided by Iranian-backed factions may be gaining
appeal with a growing number of local residents.
Iranian efforts, as described in the three accompanying passages, are multi-faceted. In the Russian-controlled city of Deir ez-Zor, the Iranian
cultural center offers a variety of free activities and services, from seminars and lectures on religion and politics to Farsi classes, humanitarian
work, and pay-per-view soccer games beamed on large screens in the center’s grounds. Near the town of al-Mayadin, a shrine has been built
to draw Shi’i tourism from Iraq and Iran, while local residents report an uptick on public “Shi’i practices” such as the way the call to prayer is
done. Iranian-sponsored facilities distribute food, clothing and other necessities to refugees and indigent families, while relatives of Iranianbacked foreign fighters have, according to one of the reports, recently been relocated to al-Mayadin and moved into homes previously occupied
by ISIS fighters. Over 1,000 Syrian men have been recruited into Iranian-backed militias, presumably as the kernel of an envisioned “local
army” which, according to one of the excerpts, would include 40,000 fighters and control the Syria-Iraq border. The primary lure for joining
the pro-Iran militias is reportedly the promise of a steady income, with family perks and protection from the harassment of Syrian government
agents an added bonus.
According to the second accompanying passage, Russia is Iran’s main competitor for control over the western banks of the Euphrates in Deir
ez-Zor. According to the article, Russia and its allies control key facilities in the provincial capital (Deir ez-Zor), while Iranian influence is
strongest further downstream. The article discusses how in January 2019, Iranian proxies expelled Syrian fighters in the Russian-affiliated 5th
Legion from the towns of al-Mayadin and Abu Kamal, south of Deir ez-Zor along the border with Iraq. On the outskirts of al-Mayadin, the third
source claims, is a base with “military forces who prevent the entry or exit of anyone that is not Iranian, whether civilian or fighter, amidst the
presence of strong security and the constant flight of drones overhead.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…the continuation of Iranian forces’ recruitment and their warming relations with local residents…”

Qalaat Rahbah on the outskirts of al-Mayadin.

Source: By Zoeperkoe / Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=38810366.

OE Watch | March 2019

(continued)
30

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran Builds Up Syrian Proxies on the
Western Banks of the Euphrates
Source:
‫ معقل «فاغرن» و «فاطميون» والحرس الثوري يف ديرالزور‬.. ‫  فيالت البلدية‬
“Villat al-Baladiya… Wagner, Fatimiyoun and IRGC strongholds in Deir ez-Zor,” Ayn al-Madina, 1 January 2019. https://goo.gl/ofjyyk
Behind the al-Fateh mosque, in the “Villat” neighborhood, the Iranian cultural center operates since opening last March. It hosts a variety
of events, including informational lectures on topics including Ashura and the “Corrective Movement,” Farsi language classes, humanitarian
work such as distributing food items to the families of killed and injured regime fighters, and entertainment such as setting up large TV
screens for the youth to watch pay-per-view soccer games for a symbolic cost.
Source:
‫  ما أسباب الرصاع اإليراين الرويس “الخفي” يف دير الزور؟‬
Musab al-Majbal. “What’s behind the “hidden” Iranian-Russian conflict in Deir ez-Zor,” Orient News, 13 February 2019, https://goo.gl/5B4zAk
Al-Nayif added that in early October 2018, Iranian militias pulled out of the city of al-Mayadin and the village of Mahkan and redeployed to
Abu Kamal, taking the place of Russian occupation forces. This created an internal conflict about influence. In early January 2019, Iranian
militias expelled a group from the 5th Legion from Abu Kamal on the border with Iraq and al-Mayadin in rural Deir ez-Zor, which are
considered key strongholds for Iranian militias.
The Russian forces did not object to the expulsion of the 5th Legion militias under their control, but rather in order to save face in some way
they deployed the 5th Legion militias to a remote area in the eastern desert of al-Mayadin, Deir ez-Zor Province, far from the Iranian militias.
According to local sources, Iranian militias are present in al-Mayadin, Abu Kamal, their surrounding areas, al-Sakria, and al-Hamdan,
where Iran seeks to establish a “local army” of around 40,000 fighters with the goal of controlling the border triangle with Iraq and
preventing any other militias from competing with them in the region, in particular the 5th Legion which includes fighters from the Free
Syrian Army who entered into a truce and whom do not follow the vision of the Iranian militias…
The eastern parts of Deir ez-Zor, particularly al-Mayadin and Abu Kamal on the border with Iraq, are thought to be under the control of
Iranian militias, while the Russians control the city of Deir ez-Zor, the surrounding countryside, the entries to the city, its military airport, and
its key government institutions.
Source:
‫حليفا النظام واملتحالفان مع عدوه يتصارعان عىل النفوذ يف سوريا‬..‫  روسيا وإيران‬
“Russia and Iran… Regime partners in alliance with its adversaries compete for influence in Syria,” Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, 28
January 2019. http://www.syriahr.com/?p=305431
The SOHR monitored the continuation of Iranian forces’ recruitment and their warming relations with local residents, their carrying out
of “Shi’ization” activities and bringing more residents into the Shi’i fold by paying money, providing assistance or helping resolve their
problems. The SOHR recently confirmed an increase in the number of Iranian forces and militia members to around 1,200 Syrian men of
different ages in the western Euphrates banks of rural Deir ez-Zor… Residents and volunteers are enticed with salaries that depend on
whether one goes to the fronts or remains in the training center in the western Euphrates banks, as well as immunity from being arrested by
regime forces…
They also distribute food, clothes, blankets, housing necessities and school materials (with books in Farsi). Iranian forces also expand by
curbing the excesses of regime forces and giving residents what they are owed, with people turning to the Iranian forces to reclaim their
possessions seized by fighters from Iranian militias, in order to win over residents and get them to join their ranks…
The SOHR had previously monitored Iranian concentrations in the al-Mayadin area, located west of Abu Kamal. This includes an
Afghan charity restaurant in which Iranian-supported Afghan militias prepare and distribute food to residents and refugees, as well as the
transformation of the secondary (Shari’a) school in al-Mayadin into a recruitment center for Iranian and Shi’i militias. It also includes
lectures and talks about Shi’ism. Iranian and Asian Shi’i forces are also concentrated in the Hawi area of al-Mayadin. Iranians have also
built a Hosseiniyya and shrine in Nabaa ‘Ain Ali, located between al-Mayadin and Mahkan, where the SOHR monitored the arrival of Iranian
passenger buses carrying “Shi’i tourists” from Iran, Syria and Iraq, who chanted sectarian chants in the region. There is also a strong
Iranian forces presence in the area between the Sheep Market and the Rahbah Castle (Qalaat Rahbah) in al-Mayadin. There are military
forces who prevent the entry or exit of anyone that is not Iranian, whether civilian or fighter, amidst the presence of strong security and the
constant flight of drones overhead…
In recent weeks the SOHR also published on Iranian forces doing the call to prayer in eastern rural Deir ez-Zor in accordance with Shi’i
practice… Around 50 Iranian and Afghan families arrived to al-Mayadin, located on the west of the Euphrates. They are the families of
fighters in the Iranian and Afghan militias.

OE Watch | March 2019

31

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Moscow Disapproves of Erdogan’s Plans in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
was in Moscow on 23 January 2019 to discuss a post-US Syria and
the establishing of a security zone in northern Syria with Russian
President Vladimir Putin. The meeting revealed more differences in
priorities in Syria than cooperation between the countries. While the first
accompanying excerpted article from Al-Monitor, a news website with
analysts from the Middle East, highlights the differences that emerged
at the Moscow meeting, the second article from Turkish daily Hurriyet
analyzes President Erdoğan’s meeting in two points.
The first article by Semih Idiz, a well-respected Turkish journalist,
states that Erdoğan hoped to achieve two objectives in Moscow. First,
the Turkish president aimed to “get a green light for a cross-border
Turkish operation east of the Euphrates against” the People’s Protection
Units (YPG), a Kurdish armed group that Turkey considers a terrorist
organization. The second objective was to “seek support for a Turkish
security zone in the region.” However, Moscow showed no sign of support
for either a Turkish military operation into Syria nor the security zone.
Putin’s priority was the situation in Idlib. Furthermore, the article quotes
Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman Hamdi Aksoy, who called the
deployment of Syrian forces to the outskirts of Manbij a “provocation.”
Idiz notes that deployment of Syrian forces was done with the approval of
Moscow as Russian forces were photographed near Manbij “conducting a
joint patrol with YPG.” The article states this development has frustrated
Turkish officials as it was indicated by spokesman Aksoy’s statement and
writings of pro-government commentators. Overall, the Moscow meeting
showed the Russian “disapproval of Turkey’s plan for northern Syria.”

Source: Semih Idiz, “Erdogan-Putin summit highlights
differences over Syria,” Al-Monitor, 25 January 2019.
https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2019/01/turkeyrussia-syria-moscow-summit-highlights-differences.html
…President Recep Tayyip Erdogan returned empty-handed
from his summit in Moscow this week with President Vladimir
Putin…
Erdogan hoped to not only get a green light for a cross-border
Turkish operation east of the Euphrates against the US-backed
People’s Protection Units (YPG) — which Ankara considers a
terrorist organization — but to also seek support for a Turkish
security zone in the region…
It was clear from the start… volatile situation in Idlib… would
be Putin’s priority…
Ankara also faces opposition from Moscow. The Erdogan-Putin
talks did not provide any indication that Moscow would support
a Turkish military incursion into northern Syria.
Complicating matters further for the Turkish side is the fact that
Russia is working to secure an agreement between the Kurds
in northern Syria and Damascus, in order to prevent a Turkish
operation…
“This region is currently in the hands of the Kurds,” Putin said.
“Damascus must talk to the representatives of the Kurds…
This is not music to Ankara’s ears… The remarks also indicate
that Moscow is seeking to accommodate the Kurds…

As the second passage states, the results of the Moscow meeting can be
A small indication of this was the recent deployment of Syrian
analyzed in two points, including the situation of Idlib and establishing
forces on the outskirts of Manbij, just west of the Euphrates
a security zone in northern Syria. First, the situation in Idlib has rapidly
River, which Turkey wants full control of after US forces leave.
deteriorated as Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), an al-Qaida linked terrorist
Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesman Hamdi Aksoy expressed
group in Syria, has seized control of almost all of Idlib, challenging the
Ankara’s annoyance over this development last week. He
Sochi agreement signed between Russia and Turkey to establish a deaccused the regime of “provocation in Manbij,”…
escalation zone in the northwest Idlib region. In September 2018, Turkey
Some prominent pro-government commentators have also
promised Russia to clear Idlib from HTS to avert a Russian backed Syrian
started to acknowledge that Ankara’s problem in Syria is not just
regime’s military operation against Idlib. However, Turkey has yet to
with Washington, but also with Moscow.
deliver on this promise. Both Erdogan and Putin acknowledged the strong
presence of HTS in Idlib and signaled a joint Russian-Turkish operation
in Idlib to implement the Sochi agreement. Second, when it comes to establishing a security zone in northern Syria, while Turkey insists upon
it (especially in the areas controlled by Kurds), President Putin did not bring up the possibility of establishing a security zone. The Russian
president also stated that there is no United Nations Security Council Resolution on establishing security in Syria. Putin further complicated the
situation for Erdoğan by suggesting a dialogue between the al-Assad regime and the Kurds in northern Syria, which is likely to prevent Turkish
cross-border military operation. Putin also called on Turkey to collaborate with the al-Assad regime, referencing the Adana Agreement of 1998
as a framework for cooperation between Turkey and Syria against terrorism. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

32

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Moscow Disapproves of Erdogan’s Plans
in Syria
“The Erdogan-Putin talks did not provide any indication that Moscow would support a Turkish military
incursion into northern Syria.”
Source: Sedat Ergin, “İki başlıkta Erdoğan’ın Moskova gezisinin dökümü (Analysis of Erdoğan’s Moscow visit in two points),” Hurriyet, 25
January 2019. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sedat-ergin/iki-baslikta-erdoganin-moskova-gezisinin-dokumu-41093889
We can evaluate the results of the Moscow meeting between Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Russian Leader Vladimir Putin under two headlines:
Idlib and an East of Euphrates-Safe Zone.
…The crisis in Idlib is particularly urgent. The reason is the implementation of the Sochi agreement in which Erdoğan and Putin decided to
establish a “de-escalation zone” in Idlib last September [2018]. All plans were turned upside down. Al-Qaida linked Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham
(HTS) expanded its dominance in the region by defeating the groups supported by Turkey…
When it comes to the safe-zone headline, there is no exact overlap in the statements of the two sides as in the Idlib heading.
The Russian leader wants to solve the issue of the east of the Euphrates primarily through a dialogue between Damascus and Kurdish
representatives; thus, [he] recognizes the main actors of this region as the Assad regime and Kurdish representatives. Putin also said
specifically regarding the “safe zone”… the “UN Security Council has no decision on this.”
Putin also emphasized the need to implement the “Adana Agreement that was signed between Turkey and Syria for cooperation to fight
against terrorism…

Vladimir Putin, Hassan Rouhani and Recep Tayyip Erdogan gave a joint news conference (2/19).
Source: President of Russia, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/59830, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2019

33

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran’s Strategic Shift to China and Russia
OE Watch Commentary: While many in the United
States perceive Iran’s 1979 Islamic Revolution as
fundamentally anti-American in character, revolutionary
leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s ideology was
equally antagonistic toward the Soviet Union. “Neither
East nor West but Islamic Republic,” became a popular
slogan as Iranian crowds thumbed their noses at both the
Soviet Union and the United States.
With the end of the Cold War, however, and a
heightened US presence in the region—especially after
the 1991 Operation Desert Storm and the 2003 Operation
Iraqi Freedom—the Iranian leadership has increasingly
sought greater strategic alignment with Russia (see: “IranRussia Relations,” OE Watch, July 2016) and, in recent
months, has questioned whether it is time to revise the
Khomeini-era slogan (see: “Will Iran Pivot to the East?”
OE Watch, September 2018).
The 28 January 2019 remarks by Major General
Yayha Rahim-Safavi, a former commander of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps and today Supreme Leader
Ali Khamenei’s top military advisor, appears to put any
debate to rest. In a speech excerpted here from coverage
in the semi-official Iranian Students’ News Agency,
he identifies the United States and Israel as the chief
enemies of the Islamic Republic and suggests that Iran
must respond by aligning itself more closely with Russia
and China, which he identifies as the United States’ top
competitors.

Yahya Rahim-Safavi, advisor to Supreme Leader Khamenei and former commander of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps.
Source: ISNA, https://cdn.isna.ir/d/2018/03/15/3/57654376.jpg.

“The model of the Iran is to support the resistance axis, and
the strategic development of strategic relations with America’s
global rivals like Russia and China, and these can be considered
as the main strategies of the defense architecture of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.”

While the Iranian public remains suspicious of Russia given Russia’s own imperial history in the region, Rahim-Safavi’s remarks appear
to mark the end of any debate about a shift into Russia’s orbit. Rahim-Safavi speaks not as an individual, but as a member of the Supreme
Leader’s inner circle. As for China, Iran’s outreach is likely motivated as much by the economy as geostrategy. Iran remains a rentier state
heavily dependent on oil sales, and China is thirsty for energy supplies. Whether China is willing to put all its eggs in the Iranian basket as
Rahim-Safavi hopes, though, is unclear as Beijing’s traditional approach is to maintain cordial relations with all energy suppliers, including
Iran’s rival Saudi Arabia. Nevertheless, so long as Tehran feels itself backed by major powers, it is unlikely to make concession or fear
retaliation in case it engages militarily in the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Dar Aghaz Penjmin Daheh Enghalab,Yek Janh Tarkibi ‘Aleyeh-e Rahandazi Shodeh Ast (At the beginning of the fifth decade of the
revolution, there is a hybrid war against Iran),” Iranian Students’ News Agency, 28 January 2019. https://www.isna.ir/news/97110804066
The secretary of the first national conference on the defense architecture of the Islamic Republic of Iran, presented strategic proposals
for the security architecture of the Islamic system, and said, “Promotion of dignity and geopolitical and geostrategic weight and the great
cultural power of the Islamic Republic of Iran is how to defeat the U.S. strategy in the region, including its Greater Middle East Plan,
toppling the Syrian government. The model of the Iran is to support the resistance axis, and the strategic development of strategic relations
with America’s global rivals like Russia and China, and these can be considered as the main strategies of the defense architecture of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

OE Watch | March 2019

34

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Houthi “Re-Engineering” of Yemeni Society
OE Watch Commentary: According to recent local
reports, Yemen’s Ansarallah Movement (“the Houthis”)
is transforming areas under its control in ways that are
likely to have an enduring impact on Yemeni politics,
culture and society. While the movement’s focus on
changing attitudes and perspectives is not surprising,
given its origins as a youth training and education camp,
the speed and extent to which its leaders have been able
to transform key socio-political structures, symbols and
institutions, has caught many by surprise.
The accompanying passage from the Qatari daily
al-Araby al-Jadid provides a detailed overview of
how the Houthis have “[taken] advantage of war,
chaos and the absence of a central authority” to
“enact fundamental changes in state institutions.”
According to the article, these changes extend to
religious affairs, where the Houthis have placed their
own preachers in mosques; real estate, where they
have redistributed property for political reasons;
public education, where they have changed the school
curriculum; and, civics, where they have pushed to
replace national symbols with their own slogan and
banner. The article highlights changes to the military
and security institutions, whose “fighting doctrine” has
been transformed through “educational sessions” taught
by “religious scholars trained in various countries,
particularly Iran.” Perhaps most importantly, the
Houthis have upended various centers of power to their
advantage, most notably relations within and among the
tribes. The article concludes by warning that by “reengineering” Yemeni society, the Houthis have ensured
that their influence will outlast the war and live on, even
if the group is defeated politically and/or militarily.
An example of the Houthis’ gradual, deliberate and
legalistic approach to transforming government
institutions can be found in the excerpted articles
from al-Jazeera and al-Mashhad al-Yemeni. The
articles describe changes at the University of
Sana’a, where after seizing control of the capital in
September 2014, the Houthis began installing allies
and supporters in key administrative positions. In
September 2016, 66 faculty members were dismissed,
followed by a December 2018 purge of 117 more.
Many of those let go claim they were dismissed
for criticizing the movement in public, though the
Houthi-controlled university leadership claims that
they were let go for not showing up to work. In a sign
of shifting academic priorities, in early February
the faculty syndicate launched a weekly discussion
series that will analyze the lectures of Houthi leader
Abd al-Malik al-Houthi. Attendance is not obligatory,
though presumably highly encouraged. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“…taking advantage of war,
chaos and the absence of a
central authority…”
A man holds up an image of Abd al-Malik al-Houthi during protests against the Saudi-led coalition.
Source: Henry Ridgwell (VOA) [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Houthis_protest_against_airstrikes_3.png.

ً‫  الحوثيون يعيدون هندسة اليمن اجتامعياً وثقافياً وتاريخياً وقبلياً واقتصاديا‬
Source:
Asaad Sliman. “Houthi Social, Cultural, Historical, Tribal and Economic ReEngineering of Yemen,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 30 January 2018. https://goo.gl/hqnWDM
The Houthis are taking steps to deepen their rule over areas under their control
in north and west Yemen, by establishing what they call “Our New Yemen,” whose
contours are defined by their political, cultural, social and sectarian project. They
have done so by taking advantage of war, chaos and the absence of a central
authority… The Houthis have been able to enact fundamental changes in state
institutions, led by the security and military institutions. They have enacted changes
in their fighting doctrine, by forcing many in the security and military institutions
they took over following the coup to attend intensive training sessions, which they
call educational sessions and are taught by religious scholars trained in various
countries, particularly Iran… The Houthis target students to implant their ideology
and recruit them into the ranks of Ansarallah, whether as fighters on the front or as
loyalist. Teachers are forced to undergo educational sessions… Many consider that
the Houthis are betting on the war to drag on and will frustrate or delay political
solutions, as the war gives them a chance to enact the greatest number of changes
possible to Yemen’s socio-cultural foundations. This ensures their remaining in
power in the future, even if they lose military or politically, or are forced to accept a
political solution. The changes the Houthis are making to the tribal foundations are
probably the most sensitive of all…
Source:
‫ أكادمييا من جامعة صنعاء‬117 ‫  الحوثيون يفصلون‬
“The Houthis let go of 117 faculty members from Sana’a University,” al-Jazeera, 12
December 2018. https://goo.gl/ivDxRT
Sources in the teacher’s syndicate of Sana’a University confirmed that university
president Ahmed Daghar, who was appointed by the Houthis, had let 117 professors
and academics go, all at once… According to academics at the university who spoke
to aljazeera.net by telephone, this is not the first time that members of teacher’s
syndicate are let go, as 66 of them have suffered this fate in the recent past.
Source:
‫  شاهد بالصورة إىل أين وصل التغلغل الحويث يف جامعة صنعاء‬
“See in pictures the degree to which the Houthis have penetrated Sana’a University,” 6
February 2019, al-Mashhad al-Yemeni, https://www.almashhad-alyemeni.com/126717
Student sources at the university published an invitation from the Higher Studies
and Scientific Research Syndicate calling on students to attend weekly lectures
hosted by the syndicate to analyze the speeches of Houthi militia leader Abdel Malik
al-Houthi… the Houthis previously forced some classes to attend militia gatherings
and listen to lectures by the group’s previous leader, Hussayn Badr al-Din al-Houthi.
The Houthis also replaced tens of academics and lecturers at the university with
those professing full support to the militia and its ideology.
OE Watch | March 2019

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Position on Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The Venezuelan
crisis has sparked a huge debate in Turkey. The
Turkish press and TV shows have devoted a
disproportionate amount of time and attention to
the issue, giving it expansive coverage. This may
seem odd, considering Turkey’s distance from
Latin America. Turkey’s unique interest in the
issue can be attributed to both their recent history
and their long history of coups, which entailed
elected governments being overthrown. As such, it
is no surprise that the discussion on Venezuela has
mainly focused on the crisis as “an attempted coup
against democracy and an elected government by
an external power” and thus, unacceptable. Turkish
officials have expressed their support for Nicolas
Maduro. The accompanying passages from the
Turkish press discuss Turkey’s position on the issue.
The first passage discusses a tweet by the Turkish
Presidential Spokesperson and Chief Advisor
Ibrahim Kalın. The tweet reads: “Our President has
called the Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro
and expressed Turkey’s support, telling him, ‘Stand
tall, we are with you.’ With our President Erdoğan’s
leadership, Turkey will preserve its principled stand
against all coup attempts.” The tweet ended with the
hashtag “#WeAreMADURO.”

“#WeAreMADURO”
Source: “Erdoğan’dan Maduro’ya: Dik dur kardeşim, yanındayız (From Erdoğan
to Maduro: Stand tall my brother, we are with you),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 24 January
2019. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/erdogandan-maduroya-dik-dur-kardesimyanindayiz-41092658
Presidential Spokesperson İbrahim Kalın shared a tweet regarding Venezuela’s
National Assembly Leader Juan Guaido’s declaration of himself as “temporary
president”:
“Our President has called the Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro and expressed
Turkey’s support, telling him, ‘Stand tall, we are with you.’ With our President
Erdogan’s leadership, Turkey will preserve its principled stand against all coup
attempts. #WeAreMADURO
Source: “Son dakika... Çavuşoğlu’ndan Venezuela tepkisi! (Breaking news...
Çavuşoğlu’s reponse to Venezuela!),” Milliyet.com.tr, 1 February 2019. http://www.
milliyet.com.tr/son-dakika-cavusoglu-ndan-dunya-2820851/
Foreign Minister [Secretary of State] Mevlut Çavuşoğlu reacted to the European
Parliament’s decision to recognize opposition leader Juan Guaido, who declared
himself “temporary president” in Venezuela. He said, “External interventions like
this are unhealthy .. They deepen the problem. They may even lead to a civil war
in Venezuela... Maduro was elected. So nobody should disrespect the will of the
Venezuelan people.”
Source: Sami Kohen, “Venezuela krizinin iki yüzü (The two faces of the Venezuela
crisis),” Milliyet.com.tr, 29 January 2019. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yazarlar/samikohen/venezuela-krizinin-iki-yuzu-2818915/

The second passage discusses comments by
the Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Çavuşoğlu,
who expresses his opposition to the European
Parliament’s decision to recognize Juan Guaido as
Venezuela’s temporary President. Çavuşoğlu notes
that “Maduro was elected. Nobody should disrespect
the will of the Venezuelan people.” Çavuşoğlu also
says that “external interventions” like these are
“unhealthy.”

At first glance, the situation in Venezuela may look like an attempt to overthrown an
elected president, with the manipulation of external powers. Taken from this angle, the
National Assembly Leader Juan Guaido’s declaration of himself as the President may
be evaluated as an attempted coup against the regime and against democracy. ...The
issue is not as simple as it looks and has two sides to it. So, it would be beneficial to
analyze it from a broader perspective.

The third passage, by Sami Kohen, a veteran
foreign policy columnist known for his balanced and
neutral analyses, offers a more nuanced approach.
He claims that the argument that “the national will
should be respected” is not quite accurate, given that
the elections in Venezuela were not held under free
and fair conditions. He points out that the turnout
was very low, given the opposition’s boycott of the
election; and the fact that many of the opposition
were prohibited from voting or arrested. On the
other hand, he notes that the current situation is
also unacceptable. He says that the developments
were a “political coup” which took place with the
“manipulation of the United States.” He also claims
that “the United States is doing everything it can
to overthrow its challenger Maduro, in Venezuela
which it considers ‘its backyard.’” End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

The first harbinger of the crisis was the fact that the opposition and the United States
declared his presidency illegitimate and asked for his resignation. Not long after
that, with the manipulation of the United States, a political coup was staged, and the
Assembly Leader Guaido appeared, and attempted to overthrow the socialist leader
and the regime.

Yes, Maduro had won controversial elections in Venezuela last year, and earned the
right to his second 6 year term, starting his term with a ceremony at the beginning of
January.

It is impossible to accept such a forced move. It is clear that Washington is behind
this, and that since the beginning, Washington has taken a stance against Maduro.
The US is doing everything it can to overthrow its challenger Maduro, in Venezuela
which it considers “its backyard.”
Those who are opposed to the developments in Venezuela are basing their arguments
on the “national will” and “national sovereignty.”
On the other hand, the “results from the ballot box” are controversial in Venezuela.
Of course it is imperative to respect the ballot box. But it is just as necessary for the
elections to be held under free and fair conditions. In Venezuela, the elections had
been boycotted by the opposition, and therefore, had a very low turnout. Most of the
opposition leaders were prohibited, and some were arrested. The judiciary has not
been functioning independently...”
OE Watch | March 2019

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The UAV Threat to Turkish Security
OE Watch Commentary: Non-state armed actors increasingly use
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or commercial off-the-shelf drones as
they become easier to build or acquire. The usage of UAVs by non-state
actors poses a challenge to the air superiority of conventional armies,
particularly their monopoly over airspace. The accompanying excerpted
article from The Centre for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies (EDAM),
an independent Turkish think tank, provides insights into the threats the
usage of UAVs by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) pose to the national
security of Turkey.
According to the article, the Syrian Civil War provided opportunities
for terrorist organizations to test new technologies, including UAVs, and
new concepts to wage warfare. As such, non-state actors employing new
technologies and concepts have transformed the traditional concept of war
and are challenging conventional armies. The article states that the PKK is
one of these terrorist organizations that has employed the use of UAVs as a
tactic. This poses a critical threat to Turkish national security. The report
further focuses on the types of the UAVs used by the PKK - quadcopter and
fixed wing - and provides examples of incidents reported by the Turkish
press. Compared to remotely controlled drones, the PKK has used the
drones that are deployed using GPS coordinates, which make it challenging
to intercept with jammers. The PKK staged coordinated attacks on 10
November 2018 on ceremonies commemorating the death of Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk, the founder of the Republic of Turkey, in multiple areas to increase
impact.
The report aims to inform policy makers about this threat so that
they work towards minimizing the damage through the development of
preventive measures. Finally, it concludes with anti-drone technology. It
shares its findings and makes recommendations for policy makers. Some
recommendations are as follows: first, to protect critical areas, facilities and
military units, a multi-faceted defense should be established; second, the
usage of UAVs by the terrorist groups must be dismantled before it poses a
greater danger to Turkish national security; third, a surprise factor of drone
attacks should be minimized through conducting exercises. Finally, the
article says that it is critical for states to not only counter the usage of drone
technology by terrorist groups at the tactical level, but also to target the
supply chains allowing terrorist groups to obtain drone-making hardware.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“…the changes in the usage of drones by
the PKK terrorist organization points at the
existence of a critical threat to Turkish national
security.”
Source: Dr. Can Kasapoğlu and Barış Kırdemir, “Terör
Tehdidinde Yeni Boyut: Drone Saldırıları ve Türkiye nin
Milli Güvenliğine İlişkin Gelişmeler (A New dimension in
Terrorism Threat: Drone Attacks and Developments Regarding
Turkey’s National Security,” EDAM, 3 February 2019. http://
edam.org.tr/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/EDAM_DroneSald%C4%B1r%C4%B1lar%C4%B1-ve-T%C3%BCrkiyeninMilli-G%C3%BCvenli%C4%9Fi.pdf
The Syrian Civil War has given many states the chance to test
their new weapon systems in war and has also provided this
same opportunity to terrorist organizations as they learn new
[warfighting] technologies, concepts and tactics. The current
hybrid warfare environment threatens the classical advantage
of conventional armed forces… Undoubtedly, one of the most
important [above] mentioned skills is the usage of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) by terrorist groups.
Recently, the changes in the usage of drones by the PKK
terrorist organization points at the existence of a critical threat
to Turkish national security. This study evaluates the issue
for the relevant decision makers and brings together modern
approaches within the scope of war studies and security
sciences.
The report begins with analyzing the evolution of the PKK’s
drone threats against Turkey. Then they present three case
studies to the show the situations in which the issue can evolve
into. Also, [to learn how to minimize the strategic surprise
factor… Subsequently, existing anti-drone technologies and
strategies in the world are analyzed. Finally, findings and
policy recommendations are listed.

Bayraktar TB2 UAVs (cropped).

Source: Bayhaluk [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bayraktar_TB2_UAVs.jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Latest “Houthi Drone”
OE Watch Commentary: Yemen’s Ansarallah
Movement (“the Houthis”) recently unveiled its latest
UAV, an anti-personnel “suicide drone” called the
“Qasef-2K.” The Qasef platform, based on the Iranian
Ababil-T drone, was introduced over a year ago and has
become a key component of the Houthis’ growing drone
arsenal (see: “Yemen: Increased UAV Employment by
Houthi-Led Coalition,” OE Watch, August 2018 and
“Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use,” OE Watch,
November 2018). The Qasef-2K was first deployed in midJanuary 2019, when it was used to target top leaders of
the Saudi-backed Yemeni military who were at the time
gathered for a ceremony in the sprawling al-Anad military
base, north of Aden. Footage from the event shows a
small drone exploding overhead, spraying the ground with
munitions that injured several high-ranking officers and
ultimately killed the head of military intelligence and the
military’s deputy chief of staff, along with a number of
soldiers. In response, aircraft from the Saudi-led coalition
targeted sites in Yemen allegedly used for the storage,
launching and command of UAVs.

“…[Colonel Turki al-Maliki] indicated that the [Houthi]
militias are in possession of Shahed-129 drones… ”
Source:
‫ سالح الحوثيني االسرتاتيجي‬.. ‫  اإلنتحار املسري‬
“Remote-Controlled Suicide… Houthi Strategic Weapons,” Abaad Studies &
Research Center, January 2019. http://www.abaadstudies.org/pdf-24.html
Unmanned weapons… have become strategic weapons for the Houthis, who
may develop them to become a greater threat to regional and international
security…
… this technology may be used in the future for political assassinations…
… the Houthis will seek to establish other sectarian organizations in the region
and provide them with unmanned weapons to achieve a quick balance of power
with the regimes that they challenge. It is expected that experts in Shi’i groups in
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait could obtain this type of technology.
Source:
‫ الحويث يحاول توسيع استخدام الدرون يف اليمن‬:‫  التحالف‬
“Coalition: The Houthis Seek to Expand their Use of Drones in Yemen,” alArabiya, 20 January 2019. https://goo.gl/CNf5CK
[Colonel Turki al-Maliki] indicated that the [Houthi] militias are in possession
of Shahed-129 drones.

Houthi UAV capabilities remain modest but have been steadily increasing and are likely to continue doing so, according to the accompanying
excerpted report published in January 2019 by the Abaad Studies Center, a Yemeni think tank. Focused on Houthi use of unmanned aerial and
naval weapons, the report envisions a future in which the means of domestically manufacturing UAVs are readily available to a large number of
state and non-state actors, including “Shi’i groups in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.” Drones like the Qasef-2K, the article surmises, “may be used in
the future for political assassinations.”
Discussions of growing Houthi UAV capabilities were punctuated slightly over a week after the attack, when Colonel Turki al-Maliki, the
spokesman for the Saudi-led coalition fighting in Yemen, claimed that the Houthis are in possession of Iranian Shahed-129 drones. If true, this
would represent a qualitative leap in Houthi UAV capabilities. Regardless, the Houthis will likely continue accumulating expertise and seeking
access to more advanced UAV components, thus allowing the group to cobble together increasingly lethal and effective drones. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

Qasef-1 recovered from Yemen.

Source: DoD photo by EJ Hersom) [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Qasef-1.jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Ukraine to Buy Combat Drones from Turkey
OE Watch Commentary: In mid-January, Ukrainian President
Petro Poroshenko announced over a tweet that his government
had signed a deal to purchase a dozen Turkish combat drones (the
Bayraktar TB2- a medium altitude and long-range tactical UAV
system) for $69 million. The drones are expected to be delivered
within a year, and will come with ground control stations and
equipment. Given Ukraine’s problems with Russia, and Turkey’s
status as the second largest army in NATO, the deal is significant
in many ways. The accompanying passages from the Turkish press
discuss its significance.
The first accompanying passage is by Burak Çalışkan, an expert
on the Black Sea region. Çalışkan discusses how with this deal,
Ukraine becomes the second country (after Qatar) to procure
the Turkish combat drones. The deal signals growing bilateral
defense cooperation between Turkey and Ukraine, and comes after
a previous purchase for Turkish communication systems for the
Ukrainian Army and National Police. The passage also notes that
the deal brings the Ukrainian military closer to NATO standards
in its drone technology. The passage discusses that Turkey-Ukraine
military cooperation took off after 2014, when the two countries
agreed to cooperate on warplanes, missile systems, UAVs, radar
production, armored tanks, and research in space. Since then,
cooperation in these areas has developed and culminated in
the July 2018 meeting of “Turkey-Ukraine Defense Industry
Cooperation” during which a number of important deals were
signed. This is the background upon which the current drone deal
is taking place.
The passage also highlights that the deal is a result of both
countries’ problems with Russia. It notes that Russia’s involvement
in the Syrian crisis as of 2015 led to problems in the Turkey-Russia
relationship. The author suggests that while the two countries are
now working together to bring a resolution to the Syrian crisis,
“the fact remains that the two countries have disagreements and
conflicts of interest in the Caucasus, Middle East and the Black
Sea. In this framework, considering that Turkey and Ukraine are
the south and north corners of the Black Sea, the geopolitical
importance of the Ankara-Kiev relationship becomes more clear.”
The author points out that Russia now has influence and presence
in Turkey’s southern border (due to its presence in Syria) and that
this poses a threat to Turkey. He argues that Turkey’s defense
cooperation with Ukraine has the potential to balance this threat
and reduce Russia’s ability to maneuver in the region.
The second and third passages discuss some of the technical
aspects of the drone system. They point out that the Bayraktar TB2
UAV operates as a platform for aerial intelligence, surveillance,
and target acquisition, with the ability to simultaneously deliver
information to operation centers. The second passage, which is
from the producer’s own website, notes that the Bayraktar TB2
has a flight control system that allows autonomous taxi, take-off,
navigation, landing and parking operations without assistance
from any external sensor, or reliance on GPS systems. This
is a particularly useful feature given the ongoing advances in
technologies that can jam GPS signals, such as Russian Electronic
Warfare (EW) systems. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: Burak Çalışkan, “Türkiye ve Ukrayna İlişkilerinde Savunma
Sanayii İşbirliği (Defense Industry Cooperation in Turkey-Ukraine
Relations),” Dunyabulteni.net, 15 January 2019. https://www.
dunyabulteni.net/analiz/turkiye-ve-ukrayna-iliskilerinde-savunmasanayii-isbirligi-burak-h436332.html
The rapidly developing relations between Ankara and Kiev in the last
few years, has become apparent in the defense industry too. In fact, in
the last few days, the Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko declared
over social media that Ukraine has signed a deal with Turkey to procure
the Bayraktar TB2 Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), produced by
Baykar.
Per the agreement, Baykar will produce 6 Bayraktar TB2 UAVs within
a year, and deliver them to the Ukrainian Army. In addition, they will
deliver three ground control station systems to Ukraine. It is being
reported that Ukraine has made this decision over a 3-year period,
becoming the second country (after Qatar), to prefer the Bayraktar TB2.
Ukrainian delegations that attended the test flights for Bayraktar TB2,
say they were impressed with its combat success and flight performance.
It is also noteworthy that Poroshenko noted that he came to the
agreement with Turkish President Erdogan, and that it is part of an
effort to equip the Ukrainian military with NATO-standard modern
equipment and weapons. Following the 2014 Russian invasion of
Crimea, Ukraine had stepped up efforts to strengthen its military against
its strong neighbor. At this point, Turkey-- with the second largest army
in NATO and as a littoral state to the Black Sea-- had come up as an
important actor.
Ankara and Kiev had agreed in 2014 to pursue a number of joint
projects in the defense industry. They signed agreements to co-produce
warplanes, missile systems, UAVs, radars, armored tanks, and work
together in navigation and space projects...
In July 2018, Turkey and Ukraine conducted the First TurkeyUkraine Defense Industry Cooperation meeting, to accelerate defense
cooperation. This resulted in a cooperation agreement between
Ukrainian Ukrobonoprom and Turkish Aselsan, whereby Aselsan would
provide the Ukrainian army with high tech wireless communication
systems...
It can be said that the development of Turkey-Ukraine relations are a
product of both countries’ problems with Russia. In particular, Russia’s
engagement into the Syrian crisis in 2015 and its initiatives which
concern Turkey, had been a problem for Turkey for a long time...
Despite the fact that Turkey and Russia are now in a normalization
phase and are working together in Syria, the fact remains that the two
countries have disagreements and conflicts of interest in the Caucasus,
Middle East and the Black Sea. In this framework, considering that
Turkey and Ukraine are the south and north corners of the Black Sea,
the geopolitical importance of the Ankara-Kiev relationship becomes
more clear. Regardless of how much Turkey and Russia have to
cooperate within certain areas in Syria, Russia’s influence in southern
Turkey (via its presence in Syria) can become a threat to Turkey for
many years to come. As such, a strategic partnership that Turkey will
develop with Ukraine, has the potential to break the threat that Russia
poses for Turkey (via its influence on Damascus) and reduce Russia’s
ability to maneuver in the region.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Ukraine to Buy Combat Drones from Turkey
“...Turkey-Ukraine relations are a product of both countries’ problems with Russia.

Despite the fact
that Turkey and Russia are now... working together in Syria, the fact remains that the two countries have
disagreements and conflicts of interest in the Caucasus, Middle East and the Black Sea. In this framework,
considering that Turkey and Ukraine are the south and north corners of the Black Sea, the geopolitical
importance of the Ankara-Kiev relationship becomes more clear.”
Source: “Bayraktar Tactical UAS,” Bayraktarmakina.com,
Undated. http://baykarmakina.com/en/sistemler-2/bayraktartaktik-iha/#1458637130929-195f09d3-ff5a
Bayraktar Tactical UAS is a Medium Altitude
Long Endurance class system developed for tactical
reconnaissance and surveillance missions. Prototype
Development Phase started within 2007 based on a
competition model. Bayraktar Tactical UAS, with its critical
all subsystems including Flight Control, INS-GPS, Automatic
Take Off-Landing systems [was] developed in house [and]
demonstrated fully automatic taxi, take off, landing and
parking phases in 2009...

Source: ““Son dakika: Anlaşma imzalandı! Ukrayna, Türkiye’den İHA
alacak (Breaking news: Deal signed! Ukraine will buy UAVs from Turkey),”
Hurriyet.com.tr, 12 January 2019. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/dunya/sondakika-anlasma-imzalandi-turkiye-ukraynaya-iha-satacak-41081039
The Bayraktar TB2 UAV system attracts attention as the world’s most
advanced UAV system in its class, with its electronic, software, aerodynamic,
design and systems. The Bayraktar TB2 can conduct aerial intelligence,
surveillance, target acquisition and intelligence flights, with the ability to
simultaneously deliver information to operation centers. It also has a the
capability to attack targets with its own equipment. The Bayraktar TB2 UAV
system can also conduct laser targeting for friendly war planes.

Bayraktar TB2 Runway.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bayraktar_TB2_Runway.jpg, by Bayhaluk [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2019

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Forces Test Night Vision Cameras
OE Watch Commentary: Iranian officials take great pride in the Islamic
Republic’s military industries. In the accompanying excerpted article from
Mashregh News, an outlet affiliated with the Islamic Revolution Guard Corps,
Army Air Force Commander Yusuf Ghorbani announces that the Army Air
Force successfully tested night vision cameras and scopes on helicopters. If
true, this expands Iranian nighttime operational capabilities, though there
have been noted discrepancies between the relatively sterile and controlled
scenarios undertaken during Iranian military exercises and real-life operational
environments.
While Ghorbani does not mention the process of developing night vision
technology, such technologies have long been on Iranian wish-lists presented
to the international community and partners seeking to engage in counternarcotics operations along Iran’s borders with Afghanistan and Pakistan. This
raises the possibility of leakage of transferred technologies.
Night vision technology may be standard for many militaries around the
globe, but if Iran has pressed such technology into service for its helicopters,
it raises the possibility that Iranian military behavior may soon change in
theaters like Syria. Whereas once many Iranian operations were daylight only,
the technology might allow other operations to become 24-hour affairs. An
even greater problem might be the potential proliferation of such technologies
to groups like Hezbollah or Hamas. Additionally, night vision cameras could
enhance Iranian surveillance capabilities, especially if cameras now mounted
on helicopters are transposed onto Iran’s growing unmanned aerial vehicle fleet.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The night vision cameras were successful.”
Source: “Jangandeh-haye NEZAJA beh Komak NEZAJA
Amand (Army Ground Force [NEZAJA] fighters come to
the aid of NEZAJA fighters),” Mashregh News, 26 January
2019. https://www.mashreghnews.ir/news/931654/
Air Force Commander Yusuf Ghorbani, with reference to
the missions of the [13]97 Army Ground Force “Strength”
Exercises, said, “One of the special missions, which is
the first time helicopters are being used in this military
exercise, is a reconnaissance operation at night. The
attack, transport, and reconnaissance helicopters are
equipped with night vision equipment to be able to carry out
operations, and the night vision cameras were successful.”
Referring to the fact that many of the missions are in line
with the threats of the day, he said, “The Army [Air Force]
helicopters used new tactics to identify targets at night as
well as conducted successful night combat operations, and
we were able to identify the enemy’s positions and hit fixed
and mobile targets using optimized missiles and artillery.”
He added: “In this military exercise, all fire support
operations, logistical support, and reconnaissance support
were carried out successfully by army air force helicopters,
and the Army Air Force personnel showed their readiness to
face various threats on the various battlefields.”

Iranian Army Ground Force military exercises.

Source: Mashregh News, https://cdn.mashreghnews.ir/d/2019/01/26/4/2438752.jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
IRGC Air Force Unveils New Ballistic Missile
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 February 2019, the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) Air Force held a ceremony to
unveil their new surface-to-surface ballistic missile. According to
Tasnim News Agency, an Iranian-based news outlet, IRGC Commander,
Major General Mohammad Ali Jafari stated at the unveiling that this
new production is a message to the West in response to “threats and
sanctions.” Jafari continued that Iran’s defensive capabilities act not
only as a deterrent, but also in the best interest of the country’s national
security. According to the article, the missile is named “Dezful,” after
the city where the ceremony took place, which is located in Iran’s
Khuzestan Province. The report states that the missile has a range of
1000 kilometers, which is 300 kilometers more than its predecessor, the
“Zolfaghar” missile.
According to Mashregh News, another Iranian-based news outlet,
Jafari stated at the ceremony that this is only one of many new
technologies as Iran will continue to upgrade existing missiles. Jafari
continued that the IRGC Air Force will focus its attention towards
producing missiles that are lightweight and faster. According to the
report, the IRGC’s Air Force research division will continue to develop
“technologically advanced missiles,” which will include “intelligent”
missiles, for the future. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and
Bunker)

“Iran will focus on lightweight, speed, and mass
production of missiles, according to Jafari, and
creating ‘intelligent’ missiles for the future.”

Source: “Namayesh karkhane zeerzameene toleed mooshakhaye
ballistic Sepah/roonemaye az mooshak ballistic hoshmand zameen
be zameen ‘Dezful’ (Unveiling of IRGC ballistic missile/display
of surface-to-surface ballistic missile ‘Dezful’),” Tasnim News
Agency, 7 February 2019. https://goo.gl/QUm1fi
IRGC Air Force Commander, Brigadier General Amir Ali
Hajizadeh said at the ceremony: ‘Despite the conspiracies and
threats of the enemy of the Islamic Republic’s, it is only natural
that we continue to move forward. The resistance of the people
of Khuzestan, especially the heroic and resilient people of
Dezful, unveiled the Dezful surface-to-surface missile, the latest
achievement and product of the IRGC Aerospace Force.’”
Source: “Namayesh karkhane zeerzameenee toleed mooshak
haye Sepah baraye avaleen bar/roonemaye az mooshak hosmand
‘Dezful’ ba bord 1000 kilometre + ax (Unveiling of IRGC missile
for the first time/display of ‘Dezful’ missile with range of 1000
kilometers + photos),” Mashreg News, 7 February 2019. https://
goo.gl/FQNFSn
“Jafari stated at the ceremony: ‘Today, Europeans want to limit
our defensive capabilities with sanctions, while they use their
offensive capabilities to attack innocent people all around the
world.’”
“Iran will focus on lightweight, speed, and mass production of
missiles, according to Jafari, and creating ‘intelligent’ missiles for
the future.”

New IRGC ballistic missile.

Source: Tasnim News, https://goo.gl/QUm1fi, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | March 2019

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Eastern Mediterranean Gas Forum Threatens Turkey
“

OE Watch Commentary: Some Eastern Mediterranean countries,
…despite efforts to exclude Turkey from
including Cyprus, Greece, Egypt, Italy, and Jordan, as well as the Palestinian
regional initiatives, Ankara will continue to be a
Authority recently reached a deal to create the Eastern Mediterranean Gas
Forum to cut infrastructure costs, create a regional market and lower prices.
major actor in the geo-strategic competition in the
Turkey perceived this deal as a threat to its national interests and the interests
Eastern Mediterranean.
of Turkish Cypriots. The accompanying excerpted articles, one from The
New Turkey, a non-profit digital platform launched by the pro-government
Source: İsmail Numan Telci, “Egypt’s Energy Activism
think thank Seta Foundation, and the other from state owned Anadolu
as a Threat to Security in the Eastern Mediterranean,” The
Ajansı, argue that excluding other coastal countries of the Eastern
New Turkey, 18 January 2019. https://thenewturkey.org/
Mediterranean (Turkey and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, the
egypts-energy-activism-as-a-threat-to-security-in-the-easternlatter of which is only recognized by Turkey as a sovereign entity) from
mediterranean
the deal will make this new forum irrelevant.
The Egyptian government has initiated the establishment of the
The article from The New Turkey argues that one of the objectives
Eastern Mediterranean Gas Forum…
of the forum is “to exclude Turkey from the Eastern Mediterranean
It was announced that the main aim of the forum was to
energy structure.” The actions of Egypt provide clues regarding this
increase cooperation and coordination among Eastern
objective as the Egyptian government has actively sought an alliance
Mediterranean countries…
with the littoral states of Greece, the Republic of Cyprus, and Israel
to curb Turkish ambitions in the Eastern Mediterranean to extract
It can be argued that apart from the officially stated goals, one
of the main motivations of this forum is to exclude Turkey from
natural gas and oil. Turkey is trying to find ways to decrease its energy
the Eastern Mediterranean energy structure…
dependence to other countries. As a result, Turkey deployed its survey
drilling ship accompanied by Turkish Naval warships to start oil and
In early 2018, Turkey’s Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu
gas exploration in the north of Cyprus in October 2018 and the Turkish
announced that Ankara would not allow other regional actors to
Petroleum Corporation (TPAO) started drilling in November 2018 (see:
exclude Turkey in Eastern Mediterranean affairs, particularly in
“Rising Tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean over Natural Gas,” OE
regards to energy reserves. An important step taken by Turkey in
Watch, December 2018). The article states that the exclusion of Turkey
this context has been the introduction of natural gas exploration
and other coastal countries will pose a challenge to the success of this
activities in the Eastern Mediterranean…
forum, because Turkey will continue to be a major player in the region
…Turkey will continue its activities in the Eastern
and it will continue to explore and extract natural gas or oil in the Eastern
Mediterranean despite all efforts by other regional actors,
Mediterranean.
particularly Egypt, Israel, Greece, and the Greek Cypriot

”

administration of South Cyprus …
The second article states that, with this forum, a power struggle over
hydrocarbon reserves has officially started in the Eastern Mediterranean.
…despite efforts to exclude Turkey from regional initiatives,
This article focuses on the reasons why Turkey was excluded from this
Ankara will continue to be a major actor in the geo-strategic
forum. The first reason is to preclude the possibility of a gas pipeline
competition in the Eastern Mediterranean. As Turkey heavily
going through Turkey to Europe. Instead, the natural gas will flow to
depends on external actors in terms of its energy needs, it is
Europe through the Eastern Mediterranean Natural Gas Pipeline. This
of great importance for the country to explore and extract
pipeline will be built between a partnership of Greece, Italy, Cyprus
natural gas or oil in every possible field. Therefore, the
Turkish government will continue its efforts to explore oil and
and Israel and it will carry Israeli natural gas to Europe. Second, Israel
gas in its territorial waters. For this reason, any initiative to
and Greece’s attitude towards Turkey played a role in excluding it. As
exclude Turkey from the Eastern Mediterranean will lack solid
the article states, this attitude towards Turkey indicates that the Eastern
foundations. This would also damage the friendly relations
Mediterranean issue is not only economic, but also political. Third,
among regional actors and further threaten the security
the tension between Turkey and the Republic of Cyprus and Egypt has
environment in the region.
led the latter two countries to sign an agreement to build a natural gas
pipeline. Also, the disagreement over declaring exclusive economic
zones has added another layer of complexity to existing power dynamics. The article believes that no matter what, Turkey will be among the
strongest power players in the Eastern Mediterranean and it has its place among the countries who have claims over natural gas reserves. While
this remains to be seen, the article reflects how the Turkish government continues to deal with the situation. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Eastern Mediterranean Gas Forum
Threatens Turkey
Source: İsmail Kavaz, “Doğu Akdeniz’de Türkiye’siz bir mutabakat mümkün mü? (Is it possible to reconcile without Turkey in
the eastern Mediterranean?),” Anadolu Ajansı, 17 January 2019. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/dogu-akdeniz-de-turkiyesiz-bir-mutabakat-mumkun-mu/1367182
…the struggles and collaborations over sharing hydrocarbon reserves in the Eastern Mediterranean are becoming more
evident…
Turkey, in terms of its geostrategic position is situated in the center of the world’s supply and demand… the issue of transferring
energy resources to global markets brings Turkey and some other regional states up against each other.
The regions’ resources [can be carried] to the European continent via two routes… the first one is to flow natural gas to Turkey
then to Europe. The second is to transfer natural gas to global markets with the Eastern Mediterranean Natural Gas Pipeline
project through Israel, GKRY [Republic of Cyprus], Greece and Italy. This results in leaving Turkey out [of the forum]…
The attitude of Israel and Greece towards Turkey makes the issue in the Eastern Mediterranean more political than economic…
…Ankara closely follows the developments between Egypt and the GKRY. Finally, the natural gas pipeline agreement signed
between Egypt and the GKRY damages already strained bilateral relations [between Turkey and these countries]. Also, the
disagreement over the exclusive economic zones causes a face-off between parties…

Known oil and gas fields in the Levant Basin (US EIA).

Source: US Energy Information Administration [Public domain], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Levant_Basin.png.

OE Watch | March 2019

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Privatization of Turkish Military Factory Draws
Different Reactions
OE Watch Commentary: On 13 January 2019 Turkish President Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan announced the privatization of Turkey’s Tank and Pallet
Factory to increase the operational efficiency of the factory and to boost
the national defense industry. Some welcomed this decision to hand over
a military-run factory to a privately-owned company and argued the
Turkish defense industry is “aiming high.” However, some former military
personnel, Turk Harb-Is (the labor union of the factory workers) and
opposition parties voiced their concerns over privatization and handing
the plant over to BMC, an armored vehicles manufacturer partially owned
by Qatar. While the accompanying excerpted article from Turkey’s
English-language daily Hurriyet Daily News analyzes the overall success
of the Turkish defense industry, the article from left-leaning Cumhuriyet
criticizes the government’s decision to privatize the Tank and Pallet
Factory.
The article entitled “Turkish defense industry aims high” argues that the
Turkish defense industry is one of the fastest growing sectors in Turkey
thanks to “President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s foreign and security policy
understanding.” The article quotes President Erdoğan saying “Turkey will
be a global power, a leading country in the new term. Our fundamental
focus is on our Defense Industry to achieve this aim.” Turkey’s foreign
dependence in defense has decreased from 80 percent to 35 percent since
2002 and the president closely monitors major defense projects. Turkey
projects to reach 100 percent independence in the defense industry by
2053 “with an export capacity of $50 billion.” İsmail Demir, the head
of the Presidency of Defense Industries stated that they are currently
managing 610 projects. The article notes that 2019 will be significant for
the defense industry as it plans to deliver a TCG Kınalıada, MILGEM
corvette to the Turkish Navy, the TCG Anadolu, multipurpose amphibious
assault ship will sail into the sea in February, and “Turkey’s first new
generation submarine, Piri Reis, is also expected to hit the seas in 2019.”
The Tank and Pallet Factory was established in 1975 and operated by
the Land Forces Command as a military unit. It manufactured indigenous
equipment, including howitzers, ammunition carriers, day and night
vision binoculars and tracks for tanks, among other things. As the article
from Cumhuriyet points out, the land and some existing structures of the
factory were given to BMC free of charge months before the privatization
decision was announced. Giving the factory to BMC, a company headed
by Ethem Sancak, known to have close ties to Erdoğan, drew strong
criticism from opposition political parties. Qatar’s ties to BMC is another
point of contention. Turkish Minister of Defense Hulusi Akar visited the
factory on 4 January 2019 to assuage the criticism and reaffirmed that the
government will not back down from privatizing the factory. This factory
will be under the management of BMC for 25 years. It will manufacture
Altay main battle tanks (see: “Turkey to Mass Produce Altay Tank” OE
Watch, December 2018), military and commercial vehicles, and engines
of various platforms and the factory is expected to be fully operational by
2023. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“[Erdoğan] said Turkey decreased foreign
dependence in its defense sector from 80 percent
in 2002 to 35 percent since coming to power in
2002.”
Source: Serkan Demirtaş, “Turkish defense industry aims
high,” Hurriyet Daily News, 14 January 2019. http://www.
hurriyetdailynews.com/opinion/serkan-demirtas/turkish-defenseindustry-aims-high-140473
The last decade and a half under the rule of the Justice and
Development Party (AKP) have surely singled out the defense
industry as the most steadfastly growing sector in Turkey... This
is no coincidence but a reflection of President Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan’s foreign and security policy understanding.
“Turkey will be a global power, a leading country in the new
term. Our fundamental focus is on our Defense Industry to
achieve this aim…”
In December 2017, the Presidency of Defense Industries was
tied to the Presidency from the Defense Ministry in order to
highlight the importance attached to this agency by President
Erdoğan. He chairs each and every executive-committee of the
presidency and closely follows all major projects.
In an address on the occasion of a groundbreaking ceremony
for one of the biggest defense industry investments in recent
years by BMC, one of the largest commercial and defense vehicle
producers, with the partnership of Qatar, Erdoğan explained his
devotion to the national and independent defense industry…
[Erdoğan] said Turkey decreased foreign dependence in its
defense sector from 80 percent in 2002 to 35 percent since
coming to power in 2002…
By 2053, the Turkish defense industry aims to be 100 percent
independent with an export capacity of $50 billion, Demir said…
İsmail Demir informed that his presidency is currently
running more than 610 projects with more than $6 billion in
endorsements, describing this achievement as a big revolution in
only 15 years.
Yet 2019 will be important in terms of Turkey’s defense industry
objectives.
TCG Kınalıada, another MILGEM corvette, will be given to the
service of the Naval Forces while TCG Anadolu, Turkey’s first
indigenously built multipurpose amphibious assault ship which
can also be configured as a light aircraft carrier, will hit the seas
in February. Turkey’s first new generation submarine, Piri Reis,
is also expected to hit the seas in 2019.

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Privatization of Turkish Military Factory
Draws Different Reactions
Source: Hüseyin Hayatsever, “Bakanlık: Bence BMC (Ministry: I think BMC),” Cumhuriyet, 7 January 2019. http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/
haber/siyaset/1193132/Bakanlik__Bence_BMC.html
With the signature of President Tayyip Erdoğan, a decision was made to privatize the Tank and Pallet Factory belonging to the Ministry
of National Defense in Sakarya. It was reported that many months ago, the land and existing structures were allocated to BMC, a company
owned by Ethem Sancak in partnership with Qatar, free of charge… a visit by the National Defense Minister Hulusi Akar to the factory last
week, did not dispel concerns about privatization. In the meantime, the Türk Harb-İş Union [that the factory workers belong to] decided to
continue to resist privatization.
…The Tank and Pallet Factory, established in 1975 manufactured completely indigenous equipment such as howitzers, ammunition carriers,
day-and-night binoculars and tracks for tanks and other military carriers. The factory was also modernizing Leopard 1 and 2 and other
tanks.

BMC trucks at Eurosatory 2012.

Source: Copyleft [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2012_Eurosatory_BMC_trucks.JPG.

OE Watch | March 2019

46

AFRICA
Russia Makes Strategic Inroads into Africa
OE Watch Commentary: While a great deal of
attention has been devoted to China’s increasing
influence in Africa, generally underreported has
also been Russia’s inroads into the continent. As the
accompanying excerpted article from the South African
news site The Conversation points out, back in the days
of the Soviet Union, there was strong diplomatic and/
or military support from Moscow for several African
countries. When the Soviet Union collapsed, so did that
support. However, more than 25 years later, and in line
with Vladimir Putin’s aspirations of great-power status
for his country, Russia is reestablishing itself in Africa.
To an extent, Russia is following the same playbook
China uses in its dealings with Africa. Like China,
Russian investments and trade on the continent come
with none of the prescriptions or conditions institutions
such as the IMF and World Bank frequently impose.
Also, like China, Russia is investing heavily in Africa’s
energy and minerals sectors.

Vladimir Putin met with President of the Central African Republic Faustin Archange Touadera.
Source: President of Russia, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/57534, CC 4.0.

Trade and investment between Russia and Africa grew by 185 percent from 2005 to 2015. On the energy side, Russia has been investing
heavily in Africa’s oil, gas, and nuclear power sectors, with Russian companies such as Gazprom, Lukoil, Rostec, and Rosatom being quite
active on the continent. These companies, the article points out, are mostly state-run, and their investments are often linked to both Russian
military and diplomatic interests.
As for Russia’s interest in African minerals, it is especially evident in several countries, including Zimbabwe, where it is developing that
country’s large deposits of platinum group metals, and in Angola, where it mines diamonds. Then there is the resource rich Central African
Republic (CAR), where in 2017, Russian military instructors and what has been described as “170 civilian advisors,” were sent to train that
country’s army and presidential guard. The next year, three Russian journalists in CAR, investigating what other articles have referred to as a
private military company with Kremlin links, were found murdered in a remote area.
Besides minerals and energy, Russia has another revenue stream from Africa as a major supplier of weapons to several nations. These
military ties, as the article notes, are frequently linked to bilateral military agreements. Russia has also been active in providing troops for UN
peacekeeping operations. However, while Russia is anxious to play a key role in Africa’s future, its own economy has experienced only modest
growth, limiting its ability to do so. This is in contrast to China, whose strong economy has allowed it to make massive investments in Africa.
Still, while Russia’s domestic economy may limit what it can do in Africa, it has, under Putin, returned to a prominent role there. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Russia is gradually increasing its influence in Africa through strategic investment in energy and minerals.
It’s also using military muscle and soft power.”
Source: Theo Neethling, “How Russia is growing its strategic influence in Africa,” The Conversation, 6 February 2019. https://
theconversation.com/how-russia-is-growing-its-strategic-influence-in-africa-110930
Much has been made about China’s role and profile in Africa and the factors underlying its activities on the continent. Less debated is the
spread and depth of Russia’s contemporary presence and profile in Africa.
Russia is gradually increasing its influence in Africa through strategic investment in energy and minerals. It’s also using military muscle and
soft power.
For African leaders, the key word is agency and the question is how to play the renewed Russian attention to their countries’ advantage, and
not to fall victim to the contemporary “geopolitical chess” game played by the major powers on the continent.

OE Watch | March 2019

47

AFRICA
With Russian Help, A Fragile Peace Agreement
in the Central African Republic
OE Watch Commentary: Since 2012, seven peace
treaties have been signed by the warring parties in the
Central African Republic and all seven failed to deliver
peace between the country’s Christians and Muslims.
Now, as the accompanying excerpted article from the
South African website CAJ News reports, an eighth
treaty is attempting to succeed where the others have
not. The negotiations leading to this agreement were
held in Sudan with mediation from both the African
Union and UN. Interestingly, while this article gave
credit to Russia for brokering a meeting last year
between the mainly Christian anti-Balaka alliance (led
by Maxime Mokom) and Seleka, an alliance of Muslim
rebel groups (led by Noureddine Adam), many other
news sites did not mention Russia’s role in the peace
process.
Although this agreement between the government and
14 rebel groups is being praised, like its predecessors,
Members of the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
it faces formidable obstacles. There is, however, some (MINUSCA) on patrol. Violence between Christians and Muslims has necessitated a military presence to try
and keep the peace.
Source: UN Photo/Eskinder Debebe, https://goo.gl/YttqQJ, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.
cautious optimism for success, as described in the
accompanying excerpted article from Deutsche Welle, based on the long negotiations that culminated in the agreement, including many that
attempted to tackle the numerous grievances of the various groups as well as to understand the socioeconomic pressures behind them. Still,
there are concerns the treaty could unravel in this thinly populated country that is often at or near the bottom of human development indices.
One of the largest concerns is whether or not the Seleka rebels, who control large parts of the country, including some that are mineral rich,
will give up power. Along these same lines, one attempt to provide the rebels with some power in the government is to have the prime minister
appointed from within their ranks. However, the rebels are not fully unified, and there is a rivalry among several of the groups, so it could be
difficult choosing one person who is acceptable to all factions. Additionally, it is unclear how much power the Muslim prime minister will
actually wield in this country that has a Christian majority.
Although the government rejected the idea of a blanket amnesty, the treaty does call for the establishment of a Truth, Reconciliation and
Compensation Commission. It also establishes a goal of integrating the rebels into the armed forces. It is hoped that these and other key
components of the treaty will be enough to end a war that has resulted in thousands dead and over one million fleeing their homes. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“A prime minister from the ranks of the rebels and no general amnesty — these are the cornerstones of
the peace treaty that has been signed by the government of the Central African Republic and several rebel
groups.”
Source: Raji Bashir, “Russia plays momentous
truce to usher peace in CAR,” CAJ, 4 February
2019. http://cajnewsafrica.com/2019/02/04/
russia-plays-momentous-truce-to-usher-peacein-car/
However, Russia played a prominent role
in laying the foundation for the peace talks
between Touadera’s administration and the 14
armed groups that control most of the country.
CAR has been in crisis since 2013 when
Muslim rebels seized power.

Source: Silja Fröhlich, “New Hope for the Central African Republic,” Deutsche
Welle, 5 February 2019. https://www.dw.com/en/new-hope-for-the-central-africanrepublic/a-47373650
A prime minister from the ranks of the rebels and no general amnesty — these are the
cornerstones of the peace treaty that has been signed by the government of the Central
African Republic and several rebel groups.
The agreement covers various aspects, including the implementation of a government of
national unity bringing together all political and social forces of the country.
“These groups don’t respect international humanitarian law. They don’t delineate between
civilians and combatants. So to treat these groups as equal partners at the table to give
them some autonomy, if that does emerge, is very worrying.”

OE Watch | March 2019

48

AFRICA
Is Boko Haram “in Charge” of Baga, Borno State?
OE Watch Commentary: At the end of December 2018, the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria (ISIS)-loyal faction of Boko Haram attacked the town of Baga in
northern Nigeria’s Borno State and took control of it for at least several hours. The
group released a video of the operation, making clear they inflicted casualties on
Nigerian soldiers. According to the accompanying excerpted article from Nigeria’s
Premium Times, internally displaced persons (IDPs) are challenging government
claims about Baga having been retaken by the military. They say that the ISIS flags
are still in the town and that the ISIS-loyal militants are even inspecting civilians as
they enter or exit the town.
Consistent with the messaging of this faction of Boko Haram, which promises to
focus on targeting the Nigerian government and “Christian” NGOs, the civilians
report they have generally not been maltreated. The article notes that they claim
that if they want to leave Baga and take refuge in other cities like Monguno or
Maiduguri, then the militants allow them to do so after determining they are not a
threat. At the same time, civilians reported that when an identity card of an antiBoko Haram vigilante member was found on a man, then he was taken away and
later assumed to have been killed. In contrast, when a civilian who had a voter’s
card on his person was noticed by the militants they told him to leave the town and
vote elsewhere but not in Baga. It therefore seems voting itself is not an offense for
which the militants serve the death penalty.

Source: “Boko Haram in charge, issues movement
permit in Baga – Fleeing residents,” Premium Times,
5 February 2019, https://www.premiumtimesng.com/
news/headlines/310341-boko-haram-in-charge-issuesmovement-permit-in-baga-fleeing-residents.html
Displaced residents of Baga, a border community
in Borno State recently taken over by Boko Haram
insurgents, said the Nigerian government is lying
in the claims that the town has been reclaimed by
government troops. According to multiple civilian
sources, the insurgents are not only flying their flags in
the commercial border town but are also controlling
the movement of civilians in an out of the town. But the
military has described the report as another propaganda
of Boko Haram. It insisted that its troops are currently
in charge of Baga. But weeks after celebrating the
military’s reported liberation of Baga, residents just
returning from the community said the insurgents had
not moved an inch since they took over the town. Most of
them said the insurgents were not only in control of the
town but also allow civilians to return and pick up their
belongings without harming them.

The article demonstrates that even though many civilians do not want to live
under the rule of the militants, the militants are not necessarily administering the
areas under their control in as a brutal a way as they did in the past, such as when they conquered Baga in 2014 and killed dozens of people
before losing it again to the Nigerian security forces. At the same time, the claims of the civilians interviewed by Premium Times and the
military absolutely do not match up. The military asserts it is in control of Baga, but if civilians find such assertions to not represent reality it
could further undermine the legitimacy of the military in the eyes of the local people. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Most of them said the insurgents were not only in control of the town but also allow civilians to return and
pick up their belongings without harming them.”

Lake Chad (Baga site) borno state.

Source: Sani Ahmad Usman [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lake_Chad_(Baga_site)_borno_state.jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

49

AFRICA
Kenya’s Homegrown Terrorists
OE Watch Commentary: On 21
September 2013, Somalian-born members
of al-Shabaab launched a devastating assault
on Nairobi’s Westgate Mall. In contrast, as
the accompanying excerpted article from
the South African Institute for Security
Studies points out, the 2015 attack on Garissa
University and the 15 January 2019 attack
on Nairobi’s dusitD2 Hotel, which often has
foreign guests, were perpetrated mostly by
Kenyan-born al-Shabaab members. There
have been other Kenyan-born al-Shabaab
terrorists who have launched attacks within
Kenya, but those were mainly near the
Somali border. However, with the dusitD2
Hotel attack in the country’s capital, as the
article states, Kenya finds itself increasingly
worried about homegrown terrorists and
terrorism.

Police provide cover as civilians run to safety during the dusitD2 Hotel attack in Nairobi. Several of the al-Shabaab
terrorists involved in the assault were Kenyan-born, raising fears of homegrown terrorism.

According to a statement released by
Source: Shadychiri/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Civilians_Scamper_to_safety_as_plain_clothe_police_provide_cover_at_dusit_d2_nairobi.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0..
al-Shabaab, the Saleh an-Nabhan battalion,
named in honor of Kenyan national and former al-Shabaab leader
This means al-Shabaab’s influence and cells may
Saleh Nabhan, carried out the dusitD2 Hotel attack in accordance
have penetrated many parts of Kenya.
with the guidelines of al-Qaeda supreme leader Sheikh Ayman
Adh-Dhawahiri. The statement also gives a reason for the attack…
Source: Duncan E. Omondi Gumba and Mohamed Daghar, “Homethe US moving its embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. Besides the Saleh
Grown Terror a Worsening Threat for Kenya,” Institute for Security
an-Nabhan battalion (also sometimes referred to as a brigade), there
Studies, 29 January 2019. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/home-grownis another group, Jaysh al-Ayman, that is also mainly comprised of
terror-a-worsening-threat-for-kenya
Kenyans. Both of these are reportedly active in Kenya’s Boni Forest,
The DusitD2 attack was also a litmus test of Kenya’s ability to
an area near the Somali border.
deal with terrorism. The response by security forces suggested that
counter-terrorism measures like the establishment of a joint operations
This was not Saleh an-Nabhan’s first high profile operation. It was
centre, were working. These were adopted after the Westgate attack in
responsible for the 2010 Kampala, Uganda bombings and in January
which 67 people died.
2016, attacked the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
base in El Adde, Somalia, killing over 100 Kenyan soldiers. It is
The six attackers and 12 suspects in court for the 15 January terror
unknown whether Saleh an-Nabhan deliberately chose 15 January to
attack on Nairobi’s dusitD2 hotel complex are mostly Kenyans.
attack the dusitD2 for the date’s symbolism, but it fell on the three
The latest attack – claimed by extremist group al-Shabaab – shows
year anniversary of the El Adde attack. It was also the day after a
that not only is the terror threat far from over, but it is increasingly
Nairobi court declared that suspects from the Westgate Mall attack,
a local problem, with logistical support from Somalia. Most of the
based on evidence pieced together over the past five years, would
18 who appeared in court were from counties like Isiolo, Nyeri,
stand trial.
Kiambu, Mombasa and Machakos – hundreds of kilometres from the

“

”

Somali border. This means al-Shabaab’s influence and cells may have
While the assault on the dusitD2 Hotel brought attention to alpenetrated many parts of Kenya.
Shabaab’s ability to launch a major operation in Kenya’s capital, it
also increased the Kenyan government’s resolve not to withdraw its
forces from Somalia until stability and security are established there. However, as the article points out, such a position clashes with the UN
stance that foreign troops should start withdrawing from Somalia. Additionally, Kenya wanting to stay in Somalia also encourages further
attacks by al-Shabaab on Kenyan soil, including by its own homegrown Kenyan terrorists. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | March 2019

50

AFRICA
Operation Targets Purported “Katiba Serma” in Mali
OE Watch Commentary: Among the jihadist groups in Mali are the well-known
al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and its Malian offshoot, Jama’at Nasr alIslam wal Muslimin (JNIM), and JNIM’s Burkina Faso-oriented offshoot, Ansroul
Islam. Also active in Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso is the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS)-loyal Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS). Yet around the town of
Serma in northern Mali, there is also a local jihadist group that is allied with JNIM,
but does not have its own formal name. It is now being referred to, however, as Katiba
Serma (Serma Brigade) as reported in the accompanying excerpted article from the
French-language RFI Afrique.
The article discusses an operation in early January in a town called Boni near Serma
where the French-led Operation Barkhane, in coordination with Malian Armed Forces,
carried out air strikes on Katiba Serma. According to the article, up to 20 jihadists in
Katiba Serma were killed and five of the jihadists were captured and then evacuated
out of the area by helicopter. Presumably, they could provide valuable intelligence
information to the Operation Barkhane forces. In addition to this, a training base and
weapons storage depot was discovered around the town. According to the article, most
of Katiba Serma’s members, including those who were arrested, are Fulani.

Source: “Bilan de l’opération contre la katiba Serma
au Mali (Review of the operation against katiba
Serma in Mali),” RFI Afrique, 10 January 2019.
http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20190110-bilan-operationcontre-katiba-serma-mali
After several days of operations in the region of
Boni, Mali, the headquarters of the armies in Paris
said that the operation targeted Katiba Serma.
A military maneuver that occurred in two stages
between January 4 and 9 permitted the capture or
killing of about twenty jihadists. The mission was
conducted in coordination with the Malian Armed
Forces and involved Mountain Commandos and
French Parachute Commandos. Katiba Serma is
recruiting in the Fulani community of central Mali
and could be involved in major terrorist operations in
neighboring countries, particularly in Burkina Faso.

What is notable about this article is that it now formally refers to Katiba Serma by that name even though no group has previously gone by that
moniker. This could indicate that Katiba Serma has certain unique attributes in terms of its area of operations around Serma, its style of attack,
such as using IEDs and conducting ambushes, and its ideology, which is similar to the other al-Qaeda groups, that the media now brands it as
Katiba Serma. For the time being Katiba Serma is still localized, but because it is part of broader network in Mali and the Sahel, and it is thus
one component of a larger jihadist insurgency. Although the successful operation described in the article may limit Katiba Serma’s capabilities in
the short-term, the media is bringing new attention on its militancy. It remains to be seen whether it will ever formally announce itself as Katiba
Serma and gain increased attention or whether it will be a name only used in the media. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Katiba Serma is recruiting in the Fulani community of central Mali and could be involved in major
terrorist operations in neighboring countries, particularly in Burkina Faso.”

French and Malian military northeast of Gao, 2017.

Source: France 3 Grand Est [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BarkhaneGao2017(8).jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

51

AFRICA
Mali Releases Militant Reintegration Policy
OE Watch Commentary: Although there has been a civil war and other more
localized conflicts in Mali since 2012, the country has never been forthcoming
about its policies towards demobilizing, disarming and reintegrating ex-combatants.
However, on 25 January, maliweb.net published the accompanying excerpted
French-language article, which for the first time revealed details on those programs.
According to the article, which references a Malian decree about the programs,
eligibility to be demobilized, disarmed and reintegrated is limited to Malian
nationals who are mentally and physically fit and have not been involved in major
human rights abuses or received a maximum sentence. In addition, those who have
colluded with terrorist groups are excluded, which would bar virtually anyone
involved with al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) or its Malian affiliate, but
not members of local vigilante or militia groups. Nevertheless, there is sometimes
only a fine line between AQIM’s Malian affiliate and ethnic-based Fulani militias,
which could make it difficult to discern whether or not a detained militant was in
AQIM or not.
Among those who are eligible to be reintegrated into the Malian army the main
requirement is to be above the age of 18 but below the age of 40. However, any
position of a higher rank requires also the ability to read and write in Arabic or
French. Further trainings, which result in the receipt of a diploma, allow those
who are reintegrated to eventually be promoted. Notably, a number of positions
are available for specialists not in military duties, such as drivers, carpenters, and
plumbers.
The generally wide opportunities for ex-combatants to be demobilized, disarmed
and reintegrated suggests that after several years of war Mali recognizes it
cannot hold on to the ex-combatants forever. The publication of the criteria for
demobilizing, disarming and reintegrating the ex-combatants is considered a
sign in the right direction in terms of transparency and could encourage more
combatants to take advantage of the program. However, details on some specifics
of the program, such as how it will be determined whether the ex-combatants are
physically or mentally fit or whether or not they were in AQIM, are still unclear.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“This decree sets the criteria for the integration of the excombatants… including into the armed forces and security
forces.”

Source: “Démobilisation, désarmement et réinsertion
des ex-combattants: Les critères rendus publics
(Demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
ex-combatants: Criteria made public),” maliweb.net, 25
January 2019. https://www.maliweb.net/la-situationpolitique-et-securitaire-au-nord/demobilisationdesarmement-et-reinsertion-des-ex-combattants-lescriteres-rendus-publics-2798933.html
With regard to Decree No. 2015-0894 / P-RM of
31 December 2015 establishing, organizing and
operating procedures of the National Commission
for Disarmament -Demobilization and Reinsertion
(CNDDR);
Article 1: This decree sets the criteria for the
integration of the ex-combatants of signatory movements
into the bodies of the State, including into the armed
forces and security forces.
Article 2: The ex-combatants of the signatory
movements of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from the Algiers
process, wishing to integrate into the Constituent Corps
of the State, including in the Armed and Security Forces,
will be subject to the following integration criteria:
- Be of Malian nationality;
- not to be prosecuted for violation of human rights;
- Not to be in collusion with terrorists and organized
crime groups;
- have not been the subject of a final sentence to an
afflictive or infamous punishment;
- To be physically fit and to enjoy all his faculties.
Exceptionally, ex-combatant specialists (secretaries,
drivers, carpenters, plumbers etc.), can also
be integrated on the basis of their professional
qualification.

Al-Qaida rejoint par ses militants du Maghreb au Mali.

Source: Magharebia [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Al-Qaida_rejoint_par_ses_militants_du_Maghreb_au_Mali_(8142141394).jpg.

OE Watch | March 2019

52

AFRICA
South Africa Looks to Increase UAV Exports
OE Watch Commentary: Back in the 1960’s, amidst a
[The South African company] Milkor is now part of a
period of growing international isolation and sanctions because
of its policy of apartheid, South Africa encouraged the further
handful of elite companies around the world producing
development of its own arms-related companies. Over the
armed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
next few decades the country would develop a significant
military-industrial base. With the end of apartheid in the
Source: “South Africa – an emerging player in the global unmanned military
1990’s, South Africa was able to greatly increase the number
vehicle market,” DefenceWeb, 11 February 2019. https://www.defenceweb.
of countries to which it could export its domestically
co.za/industry/industry-industry/south-africa-an-emerging-player-in-the-globalmanufactured weapons, from small arms to fighter jets. As
unmanned-military-vehicle-market/
the accompanying excerpted article from the South African
Milkor is now part of a handful of elite companies around the world producing
website DefenceWeb notes, now the country is also involved
armed
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Its first UAV weapon is a small
in meeting the global demand for military unmanned aerial
diameter laser-guided bomb. The 12-metre wingspan MA380 will carry two of
vehicles (UAVs).
these weapons.
The three examples of UAVs mentioned in the article
Apart from weapons, mission equipment on the larger UAVs includes electrowere all from Milkor, a South African company that
optical/infrared sensors, synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and communications/
manufactures several military-related items but is most well
signals/electronic intelligence payloads.
known for its grenade launchers, which have been exported
These projects are purely South African initiatives, using the majority of
to over 60 countries. Its UAVs will also launch explosives,
locally-sourced components. Milkor sees this as helping develop the local
only in this case the company’s weapon is a small diameter
defense industry, boosting the economy and benefiting the South African
bomb that is laser guided. Milkor’s 12 meter wingspan
National Defense Force (SANDF).
MA380 will be capable of carrying two of these. Its MA80,
which is smaller, might carry one laser-guided bomb. Its
Source: “There is no Saudi proposal on Denel under consideration: Gordhan,”
third UAV, the hand-launched MA18, is unarmed and built
eNews Channel Africa, 22 January 2019. https://www.enca.com/news/there-nosaudi-proposal-denel-under-consideration-gordhan
for tactical surveillance. It should be noted that while the
article does not mention it, Milkor is not the country’s only
The South African government is not considering any proposal from Saudi
manufacturer of UAVs.
Arabia on taking a stake in struggling state arms company Denel, Public

“

”

Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan said, after the Gulf country offered to
The DefenceWeb article also discusses Denel, a South
partner with Denel last year.
African state-owned conglomerate that is one of South
Africa’s largest military equipment manufacturers. The
company, which sells a large amount of products to Saudi Arabia and its allies, has had several setbacks in recent years, and according to the
accompanying excerpted article from eNews Channel Africa, Riyadh offered to partner with Denel, but that proposal eventually fell through.
The DefenceWeb article raises the idea of a future alliance between Milkor and Denel, with the former helping the latter regain its international
reputation. Thus, DefenceWeb, which should be noted listed partner content in its article, is looking at South Africa’s push into the global UAV
market as being particularly promising, and one that could possibly lead to a significant increase in the country’s export of hi-tech military
equipment. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter

OE Watch | March 2019

53

AFRICA
As Economy Sinks, Military Discontent Rises in Zimbabwe
OE Watch Commentary: With a rising cost of living, low wages, poor working
conditions, and numerous other grievances, members of the Zimbabwe Defense
Forces are extremely disgruntled. As the accompanying excerpted article from the
Zimbabwe Independent reveals, their morale is the lowest it has been in decades.
Although the problems leading up to this discontent have been brewing for a
while, around October of last year the process began to accelerate. A 150 percent
hike in the cost of fuel, which sparked protests, brought things to a head in midJanuary 2019.
Complicating the situation have been accusations that the military used
unnecessary force in cracking down on the protests. At least 12 civilians were shot
and several females, including young girls, were raped, purportedly by members
of the armed forces. President Emmerson Mnangagwa and the country’s senior
military leaders have had, as the article notes, difficulty explaining the soldiers’
actions. In order to deal with the rising discontent among his populace and also to
launch a probe into how the security forces dealt with the protesters, the president
canceled his trip to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
Mnangagwa owes his position to the military, for in 2017 the army ousted
former president Robert Mugabe, enabling Mnangagwa to eventually assume
the presidency. During the coup – Operation Restore Legacy – numerous verbal
promises were made to soldiers, including having their salaries paid in foreign
currency and better working conditions. As one army source reported, these were
intended to boost their morale. However, with regards to their compensation,
Zimbabwe’s struggling economy led the government to declare it was unable to
pay the soldiers in hard cash. This and other broken promises have fueled the
growing discontent sweeping the armed forces today.

The morale of the Zimbabwean military was high during this Solidarity
March in 2017 telling President Mugabe to go, but with poor working
conditions and low pay, has since tumbled to extremely low levels.

Source: Zimbabwean-eyes Flickr, https://goo.gl/LKdRLw, Public Domain.
There are signs that the low morale has resulted in a general mistrust and sense
of suspicion within the government, including the military. Soldiers have also taken certain actions, causing the president to tweet that “chaos
and insubordination would not be tolerated.” At one point, some officers described as “rogue soldiers” were detained, accused of propping up
protesters.

Zimbabwe Defense Forces spokesperson Overson Mugwisi has denied that the military is suffering from low morale. However, despite
Mugwisi’s insistence that there is no discord, his military’s own Directorate of Signals has purportedly been receiving numerous reports
saying otherwise. Meanwhile, military leaders, according to the article, are warning of grave consequences if the soldiers’ discontent
continues. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Military bosses, sources said, were edgy, amid fears that if the grievances raised by the restive soldiers
were not urgently addressed, the situation could have grave consequences.”
Source: “Army morale lowest as economy implodes,” Zimbabwe Independent, 25 January 2019. https://www.theindependent.
co.zw/2019/01/25/army-morale-lowest-as-economy-implodes
Morale within the Zimbabwe Defence Forces has reportedly hit rock bottom, the lowest ever since the country’s Independence in 1980, amid
reports that the troops are disgruntled over the rising cost of living, poor salaries and working conditions, among several other grievances,
the Zimbabwe Independent can report.
Military bosses, sources said, were edgy, amid fears that if the grievances raised by the restive soldiers were not urgently addressed, the
situation could have grave consequences.
Conditions within the barracks, military sources said, have deteriorated, as Zimbabwe reels from the devastating impact of a multi-faceted
economic crisis.
“Chaos and insubordination will not be tolerated. Misconduct will be investigated. If required, heads will roll,” Mnangagwa said on his
Twitter handle this week.

OE Watch | March 2019

54

AFRICA
Kidnapping in Nigeria: An Underreported,
Multifaceted, Criminal Enterprise
OE Watch Commentary: Kidnapping by locals in the oil-producing Niger Delta in
the early 2000’s, as described by the accompanying excerpted article from the ENACT
website, has morphed significantly over the years. Back then, the perpetrators would
abduct foreign oil workers and use them as bargaining chips to draw international
attention to the environmental destruction and underdevelopment in their region.
However, what started as an attempt by a group of people who felt victimized to
bring notice to their plight, over time evolved into a monetized operation that is, as
the article describes, a multifaceted criminal enterprise operating across land and at
sea, and driven by different motivations, including financial, political, ideological, and
sociocultural.
The Niger Delta is still the epicenter of kidnapping, although now it is for money, as
the militants learned the oil executives would pay hefty amounts to have their workers
released. It did not take long before they began targeting others who would draw
large ransoms, including politicians and wealthy businesspeople. Even offshore from
the Niger Delta is not immune from kidnappings, a problem that has raised the Gulf
of Guinea’s insecurity level. To be sure, there are also numerous abductions in areas
outside the Niger Delta region, with perhaps the most infamous occurring in the town
of Chibok, where 276 girls were taken by the terrorist group Boko Haram. As for the
country’s roads, they present a particular hazard, where kidnapping by criminal gangs
frequently takes place.
Some Nigerian analysts believe the most common reason for kidnapping is not
financial or political, but rather ritual. There is an entrenched myth in parts of the
country, as the article notes, that claims certain body parts, when used for magic,
bring wealth, power, and protection.

Source: William Assanvo and Don Okereke,
“Nigeria’s Kidnapping Crisis,” ENACT, 1 February
2019. https://enactafrica.org/enact-observer/nigeriaskidnapping-crisis
If more proactive and effective responses are not
developed to address the socio-political economy
underpinning it, the situation could further
deteriorate with the proliferation of criminal
syndicates across the country, and beyond.
Kidnapping carried out at sea is also increasingly
common, specifically offshore from the Niger Delta
states where it contributes to increasing insecurity
in the Gulf of Guinea. Criminal groups pursuing
financial gain are responsible for these abductions.
High-net-worth individuals are the main targets:
businessmen, politicians, traditional leaders and their
family members, including schoolchildren, religious
leaders and public servants. Random citizens are also
kidnapped, particularly on the street.
Suspected kidnappers are frequently arrested and
gangs dismantled, but security services remain
mainly reactive. The crime continues apace and the
search for more effective measures continues.

It is difficult to give precise numbers as to how many people are kidnapped each year in Nigeria. Between May 2016 and May 2017,
the Nigerian Police Force reported 886. However, as many people fear or do not trust the police, it is estimated that the actual number of
kidnappings is significantly higher. Attempts to bring down the kidnapping rate by methods such as deploying large numbers of officers along
troublesome roads has had mixed results. Thus, kidnapping remains a serious problem as the country searches for more effective means to
combat it. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“If more proactive and effective responses are not developed to address the socio-political economy
underpinning [kidnapping], the situation could further deteriorate with the proliferation of criminal
syndicates across the country, and beyond.”

Destruction following the Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping.

Source: Yaroh Dauda/VOA/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chibok_kidnapping_destruction_VOA.jpg, Public Domain.

OE Watch | March 2019

55

LATIN AMERICA
Convoy of Armed CJNG Survey Neighborhoods in Zacatecas
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying excerpted article by NarcoViolencia, the Jalisco New Generation Cartel (CJNG)
has increasingly been expanding throughout Mexican territories. In a video published in the accompanying article, CJNG gunmen can be
seen armed with .50 caliber machine guns and assault rifles as they drive through Zacatecas neighborhoods in what appear to be newermodel vehicles. The report notes that the CJNG similarly drive through streets in the municipalities of Apulco, Nochistlán, and Tlachichila in
Zacatecas.
According to the accompanying excerpted article by La Net Noticias, civilians who witnessed the cartel’s vehicles were shocked by CJNG’s
arrival, as this would represent more violence in the area and more armed clashes in their streets. Since there are no municipal police, residents
have requested the intervention of the Secretariat of the Navy (SEMAR) and the Secretariat of National Defense (SEDENA) to help push the
cartel out of their towns. As the report indicates, CJNG is expanding their patrol across Mexican territories and publicly displaying their military
grade weaponry to send a message of financial superiority and strength. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

“CJNG sicarios survey the area at all hours and even put up road blocks.”
Source: “Video: En un gran convoy sicarios del CJNG
armados con barrets y ametralladoras caliber 50 circulen
Zacatecas (Video: In a large convoy, CJNG gunmen are
armed with barretts and .50 caliber machine guns as they
circulate Zacatecas),” NarcoViolencia, 29 January 2019.
https://www.narcoviolencia.mx/2019/01/video-en-ungran-convoy-sicarios-del.html?m=1
“As shown in the video, CJNG sicarios were in a large
convoy in recent model trucks across towns in Zacatecas.
They are seen carrying assault rifles, some with barretts
and machine guns, and appear to be conducting
surveillance.”

Source: “Convoy del CJNG alarma a pobladores en municipios de Zacatecas
[Video] (Convoy of CJNG alarms residents in municipalities of Zacatecas
[Video]),” La Net Noticias, 24 January 2019. https://www.lanetnoticias.com/
estados/372216/convoy-del-cjng-alarma-a-pobladores-de-municipios-dezacatecas-video
“After seeing the presence of CJNG members, the citizens of the towns of
Apulco, Nochistlán, Tlachichila in Zacatecas requested the intervention of
the Secretariat of the Navy (SEMAR) and the Secretariat of National Defense
(SEDENA) to remove the criminals from the streets.”
“CJNG sicarios survey the area at all hours and even put up road blocks.”

The Gulf Cartel’s Armored Vehicles
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 January 2019, at least two members of the Scorpions of the Gulf Cartel were killed by officers from the
National Defense Secretariat (SEDENA) and the State Police of Tamaulipas in Mexico. The Scorpions are the armed wing of the Gulf Cartel.
According to the accompanying excerpted article by La Net Noticias, a Mexico-based news outlet, police reported the confrontation first in
Monterreal. The Scorpions were traveling in an armored Hummer and firing at authorities from a turret that was attached to the vehicle. The
report explains that the fighting in the area is due to rival factions of the Gulf Cartel continuing to battle for control over Reynosa.
According to the accompanying excerpted article by NarcoViolencia, another Mexico-based news source, the Hummer had logos that
identified the occupants as Scorpions of the Gulf Cartel of Matamoros. This is not the first instance Mexican authorities had been involved in
a public shootout with the Gulf Cartel in armored vehicles. According to the report, on 31 December 2018, another group of Scorpions were
traveling in similar armored trucks with the same logos. The report notes that, while the military managed to stop the turret-equipped armored
vehicle, some of the Scorpions managed to escape in nearby armored trucks, in which a search by SEDENA and SEMAR (Secretariat of the
Navy) forces is still pending. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and Bunker)

“They were traveling in a Hummer truck armored and equipped with a turret, from which they fired
shots.”

Source: “Monstruos blindados: las imágenes
del enfrentamiento contra sicarios del CDG
(Armored Monsters: the images of the
confrontation against gunmen of the CDG),”
La Net Noticias, 4 January 2019. https://www.
lanetnoticias.com/viral/362147/monstruosblindados-las-imagenes-del-enfrentamientocontra-sicarios-del-cdg

Source: “El Cártel del Golfo traía Hummer blindada acondicionado como vehículo military
táctico equipado con torreta para dispara military táctico equipado con torreta para disparar
en Tamaulipas (The Gulf Cartel brought an armored Hummer fit to be a tactical military
vehicle equipped with a turret in a shoot in Tamaulipas),” NarcoViolencia, 3 January 2019.
https://www.narcoviolencia.mx/2019/01/el-cartel-del-golfo-traia-hummer.html#

“They were traveling in a Hummer truck
armored and equipped with a turret, from
which they fired shots, as well as with assault
rifles.”

“From 2010 to date, Tamaulipas confiscates the largest number of these armored vehicles,
which have been used in clashes with authorities and rival groups. All types of trucks are
modified with thick steel plates and have been manufactured in workshops by both the Gulf
Cartel and its rival, Los Zetas.”

“The truck had logos that identified the members as Scorpions of the Gulf Cartel of
Matamoros. On December 31, 2018, another group of sicarios were traveling in another
armored truck with the same logos.”

OE Watch | March 2019

56

LATIN AMERICA
Salvadorans Elect Nayib Bukele
OE Watch Commentary: On 3 January,
…unpopularity of the Maduro regime in all of Latin America…
thirty-seven year old Nayib Bukele won
the presidential elections held in El
Salvador as the excerpted article from
ABC reports. He is to be sworn in on 1
June. The election was novel for a number
of reasons, one of which is the evident
rejection of the traditional parties (ARENA
and the FMLN). As the excerpt from BBC
Mundo notes, Bukele’s election seems to
announce the electorate’s departure from
the country’s bi-party tradition. The article
suggests that as a result, he may have some
difficulty gaining the necessary votes
for some of his initiatives. He had been a
member of the Marxist FMLN until just
two years ago. Unable to register a new
party in time for these elections, he ran as
the candidate of a smaller rightist party,
the Grand Alliance for National Unity
(GANA). The other excerpt from ABC
notes that the results have to be counted as
a loss for El Salvador’s far left (the FMLN
Outgoing president Salvador Sánchez Cerén (L) with the president-elect Nayib Bukele (R), 2015.
Source: Presidencia El Salvador [CC0], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Reuni%C3%B3n_del_presidente_S%C3%A1nchez_Cer%C3%A9n_con_el_alcalde_de_San_
garnered under 15 percent of the vote), in
Salvador.jpg.
part a reaction to the failure of the Maduro
regime in Venezuela, as well as to a lackluster management performance by the leftist incumbent President Salvador Sánchez Cerén, who in any
case has been a staunch supporter of the Maduro regime. The results are yet another setback for the region’s Bolivarian alliance. President-elect
Bukele has already hinted, as the BBC Mundo excerpt reports, that he will not be giving further support to the Maduro regime. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“

Source: Adrián Espallargas, “Bukele gana
en El Salvador con su lucha contra la
corrupción (Bukele wins in El Salvador
with his fight against corruption),” ABC,
5 February 2019. https://www.abc.es/
internacional/abci-bukele-gana-salvadorlucha-contra-corrupcion-201902050300_
noticia.html
“Nayib Bukele …was proclaimed president
for the period 2019-2024 with 53% of the
votes…
With the victory of the GANA candidate,
the Central American country puts an end
to more than 25 years of administrations
from the rightist party… Carlos Calleja
(Arena) collected 31.77% of the votes, while
que Hugo Martínez (FMLN) gained 14.41%
of the votes and Josué Alvarado (Vamos)
0.78%...
Businessman of Palestinian origin and
only 37 years old, Bukele is a relatively
recent arrival to the political system in El
Salvador…”

”

Source: Marcos González Díaz, “Elecciones en El
Salvador: quién es Nayib Bukele, el joven empresario
que será el próximo presidente del país centroamericano
tras arrasar frente a los partidos tradicionales (Elections
in El Salvador: who is Nayib Bukele, the Young
businessman who will be the next president of the Central
American country after sweeping the traditional parties),”
BBC Mundo, 4 February 2019. https://www.bbc.com/
mundo/noticias-america-latina-47112057
“With an image characterized by a leather jacket and
sunglasses, Bukele awakened the attention of youth and
‘millennials’ thanks to a campaign centered on social
media…
Roberto Cañas, analyst and ex-commander of the
FMLN…’…the label left or right does no suffice to define
what is happening.’…’Bukele is not associated with that
political past in El Salvador in which one said that they
were of ARENA or the FMLN…
Bukele already marked a difference regarding the stance
he is thinking of holding with countries like Venezuela
or Nicaragua, publicly supported by the outgoing
[President] Sánchez Cerén. ‘A dictator is a dictator. Of
left or right, he [Bukele] asserted [on Twitter].”

Source: Emiili J. Blasco, “La
cercanía a Maduro y la mala
gestión económica castigan
al FMLN en El Salvador
(Closeness to Maduro and por
economic management punishes
the FMLN in El Salvador),”
ABC, 6 February 2019. https://
www.abc.es/internacional/abcicercania-maduro-y-mala-gestioneconomica-castigan-fmlnsalvador-201902061658_noticia.
html
“The growing unpopularity of
the Maduro regime in all of Latin
America and the unviability of
the same Chavista prescriptions
during the last ten years in El
Salvador by the old guerrilla of
the Farabundo Martí National
Liberation Front (FMLN)
explains to a great extent the
presidential election results this
Sunday.”

OE Watch | March 2019

57

LATIN AMERICA
Focus on Cuba
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying reference by Carlos Sánchez Berzain in
…Gaining time is the objective…
Infobae about the political situation in northern South America and the Caribbean is relevant
and insightful. It is also representative of an increasing number of articles focusing on the
role of Cubans. Mr. Sánchez is an accomplished lawyer, bureaucrat and scholar. Moreover, he is a political exile from Bolivia, a condition which
informs his opinion both in terms of direct experience and in terms of emotional impetus. His take is that the Cubans are in charge, have a great
deal to lose if their power in Venezuela were greatly reduced, and will do everything to delay that eventuality while they look for ways to stay
in control. Mr. Sánchez opines that Maduro is obedient to his Cuban masters, but that the Cubans will ultimately sacrifice him. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“

”

Source: Carlos Sánchez Berzain, “La dictadura cubana inmolará al dictador Maduro en Venezuela (The Cuban dictator will sacrifice dictator
Maduro),” Infobae, 3 February 2019. https://www.infobae.com/america/opinion/2019/02/03/la-dictadura-cubana-inmolara-al-dictadormaduro-en-venezuela/
“In the Castroist analysis, a negotiated withdrawal by dictator Maduro would grant a rapid and relatively easy victory to the United States and to
his declared enemies of the Group of Lima and the European Parliament, aggravating and accelerating the crisis that is already underway in the
dictatorships of Nicaragua, Bolivia and in Cuba itself where signs of growing citizen reaction are being seen. Accordingly, delaying and resisting in
Venezuela at all cost is their strategy. …
The more the forced term of dictator Maduro is drawn out, the more Castroism has hope in the possibilities that its accomplices (because to protect
the crime is complicity) can achieve an opening for ‘dialog’, or manipulate some ‘elections’ or promote a ‘humanitarian action’ keeping Maduro,
or anything in order to ‘ease up’ and later go back to misleading. Gaining time is the objective and the means are simply all, including threats and
destabilization of the democratic governments that support Guaidó….
Maduro responds to the interests of the Castroist dictatorship of Cuba to which he owes power and by which he has always been controlled and
directed. The extreme continuation of dictatorship in Venezuela is determined by a foreign power, called Cuba.”

1986

2019

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:

OVER 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES OF THE OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT

OE Watch | March 2019

58

LATIN AMERICA
Germans in Bolivia
OE Watch Commentary: Last December, the German government announced some diplomatic efforts in Bolivia aimed toward gaining
participation in lithium exploitation there. As the reference from Mineria en Línea indicates, doing big business in Bolivia means doing business
with the government and the Bolivian government says it is interested in geopolitical partnership as much as it is in business partnership. The
article notes that Germany is making a competitive play that possibly challenges interests of the Chinese, who have been making their own
investments in Bolivia. The article does not mention current events involving the Maduro regime in Venezuela, but Bolivia’s government is
decidedly Bolivarian and so far an unwavering supporter of the Cuban and Venezuelan Bolivarians. The excerpted article from Gestión reports
of a choice recently made by the Bolivians in favor of the Chinese. That choice does not mean the Germans have been cut out, as there is some
potential for geographic sorting as to where different operations might occur, as the article indicates. Still, one cannot help but wonder if the
timing of the announcement is not related to the “geopolitics” mentioned by the Bolivian Bolivarians, especially given that so much current
geopolitics in the Western Hemisphere revolves around the Venezuela question. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)
Source: Editors, “En el nuevo “Gran Juego” del litio, Alemania adelanta a China
en Bolivia (In the new ‘Great Game’ Germany gets a step on China in Bolivia),”
Mineria en Línea, 28 January 2019. https://mineriaenlinea.com/2019/01/en-elnuevo-gran-juego-del-litio-alemania-adelanta-a-china-en-bolivia/
the environment, emphasizing the commitment of Germany in social and
environmental issues…
German diplomats in La Paz also emphasized the high-level German government
support for the project…
The ACI [German company] victory signifies that Germany now has a beachhead
in the last frontier called the Lithium Triangle of South America: the Bolivian
Uyuni salt lake, one of the largest unexploited deposits in the world…
Some risks…
While Uyuni has at least 21 million tons of lithium, the nationalization of natural
resources has been a key policy of Morales…
ACI stated that the automobile manufacturers with which it had spoken could not
confirm anything publicly until final agreement had been reached…
Juan Carlos Montenegro, head of YLB, said that geopolitics is important for
Bolivia when deciding with what companies to associate itself…

Source: “Bolivia elige firma china para invertir US$
2,300 millones en proyectos de litio (Bolivia chooses
a Chinese Company to invest $2.3 billion in lithium
projects),” Gestión, 6 February 2019. https://gestion.
pe/mundo/bolivia-elige-firma-china-invertir-us-2-300millones-proyectos-litio-257968
“Bolivia chose the Chinese Company Xinjiang Tbea
Group as ‘strategic partner’ to implement various
projects of industrialization of lithium…
The investment calculated for ‘potential projects’ that
will be carried out in the Coipasa salt flats in Oruro,
and in Pastos Grandes, in Potosí, is for some $2.3
billion dollars….
The indicated capital expenditures ‘are subject to
confirmation’ once the results of feasibility studies of the
projects is known…
The salt flats of Coipasa and Pastos Grandes are close
to Uyuni…”

“... geopolitics is important for Bolivia...”

Mountains and reflections surrounding the Uyuni salt flat during sunrise, Daniel Campos Province, Potosí Department, southwesten Bolivia.
Source: By Diego Delso, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=47617647.

OE Watch | March 2019

59

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil’s Migrant Problem
OE Watch Commentary: Last month the Brazilian
newspaper O Estado published the accompanying
excerpted article regarding Brazil’s official exit from
the United Nation’s Global Compact for Migration.
In December, Jair Bolsonaro had indicated he would
withdrawal Brazil from the Compact, signed only
weeks earlier on 19 December 2018 by president
Michel Temer as reported by the accompanying
excerpted article from Istoé. True to its word, the
Bolsonaro government announced on 8 January 2019
it would leave the compact.
The O Estado article focus was three fold. First,
Brazil’s withdrawal and the possible repercussions
to the UN would be negative. The article implied
that leaving the Compact despite the fact that
according to the Compact itself, it is non-binding
under international law and it does not effect a state’s
national sovereignty, Brazil is demonstrating it may
Army checkpoint near Iguazu Falls.
be willing to remove itself from other multilateral
Source: Dodge Billingsley.
agreements. The article includes a quote from a
diplomat that “the message that Brazil sends is that, to the developing countries, the UN may not be so relevant in the future and this is of great
gravity.” It is easy to see why the UN might feel this way considering that last year Brazil withdrew from hosting world climate talks in 2019.
Second, the UN hopes, as it does with its many other compacts and non-binding affirmations, that the Compact will stand as a set of
guidelines for nation states around the world dealing with immigration issues. UN officials and local Brazilian NGOs including the Brazil-based
Conectas suggest as per the article, that the Compact could be damaging to Brazilian immigrants, stating that there are approximately three
million Brazilians living abroad.
Third, is the fact that despite its seemingly endemic corruption, and financial ups and downs, Brazil has become the economic powerhouse
of South America, and in the past couple decades tens of thousands of migrants have entered the country in hopes of a better life. Bolivians,
Haitians, most recently Venezuelans, and others from neighboring countries, have flocked to Brazil to take advantage of Brazil’s open border
policy.
While migrants are able to enter the country all along its 10,000 mile land border, once they arrive there is little to no government
infrastructure to assimilate migrants into the Brazilian socio-economic system. This strains government ability to manage the inflows of
migrants. Once, back when Brazil was considered just another poor country in South America it may have been possible to have an open border,
but today it is proving to be more difficult.
On any given day at the Peace Mission (Missão Paz), a charity run by the Catholic Church in central São Paulo, hundreds of Haitians and
Bolivians stand outside or sit on bleachers underneath a huge canvas top to escape the heat. Inside, there are basic Portuguese language classes,
assistance to get the necessary documentation needed to integrate into Brazilian society, and vocational training. However, even with the correct
paperwork in hand, migrants do not find it easy in Brazil and the number of migrants entering Brazil is far more than organizations like the
Peace Mission can process.
Consider Haitian migration into Brazil. After the earthquake in Haiti and in conjunction with a number of other factors, nearly 100,000
Haitians entered Brazil. One of the primary migration points is the border between Peru and the state of Acre. There is a Brazilian Army Special
Border Platoon at the border crossing point and after cursory checks, the army pointed migrants toward the capital of Rio Branco. In Rio Branco
migrants were more fully processed, with the expectation they would continue further into to greater Brazil. However, many did not leave the
state of Acre, or went only as far as the neighboring state of Rondonia and its capitol Porto Velho. Eventually there were many more Haitians
than the border states could support and the governments of both Acre and Rondonia chartered buses and civilian jet airliners to send Haitians
on a one way journey to São Paulo. The flights led to a war of words between the regional leaders and the leadership of São Paulo that was
closely followed by the press until it faded from the headlines.
Some Brazilians believe that the outcome of it all is that the country, with its open border policy, is sorely lacking an effective policy to
manage migration. Most of the migrants that cross the borders by land end up squeezing into ever expanding favelas in Brazil’s mega cities like
Rio de Janero and São Paulo. It should not be completely unexpected that an international compact on migration, even though non-binding,
might be perceived as infringing on sovereignty. In fact, it is likely that because Brazil has serious migration issues to contend with that the
Compact may have been jettisoned. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

(continued)
OE Watch | March 2019

60

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Brazil’s Migrant Problem
“Brazil will seek a regulatory framework compatible with the national reality and with the well-being of
Brazilians and foreigners”
Source: “Bolsonaro retira Brasil de Pacto de Migração e ONU teme
reviravolta (Bolsonaro withdraws Brazil from Migration Pact and UN fears
turnaround),” O Estado de S.Paulo, 8 January 2019. https://internacional.
estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,brasil-deixa-pacto-global-pela-imigracao-daonu,70002671958

Source: “Futuro chanceler diz que Brasil vai deixar Pacto
Global de Migração (Future chancellor says Brazil will leave
Global Migration Compact),” Istoé, 10 December 2018.
https://istoe.com.br/futuro-chanceler-diz-que-brasil-vaideixar-pacto-global-de-migracao/

The first announcement of the departure of the new government was made in
December by Twitter by Chancellor Ernesto Araújo, on the same day that the
Itamaraty approved the agreement, at a UN meeting in Morocco… “Brazil
will seek a regulatory framework compatible with the national reality and
with the well-being of Brazilians and foreigners. In the case of Venezuelans
fleeing the Maduro regime, we will continue to welcome them, “he said…
“The message that Brazil sends is that, to the developing countries, the UN
may not be so relevant in the future and this is of great gravity,” commented
an experienced ambassador, on condition of anonymity.”

The ambassador [Ernesto Araújo] also added that
immigrants are welcome in Brazil and will not be
discriminated against. However, he defended a definition of
criteria to guarantee safety to all. He did not elaborate on
those criteria. “Immigration is welcome, but it should not be
indiscriminate. There must be criteria to ensure the safety
of both migrants and citizens in the destination country.
Immigration must be at the service of the individual interests
and cohesion of each society. “

Traffic crosses the open border between Paraguay and Brazil 24 hours a day via the Friendship Bridge.
Source: Dodge Billingsley.

OE Watch | March 2019

61

LATIN AMERICA
Paraguay Announces Plan to Reinforce Security
along its Border with Brazil
OE Watch Commentary: In 2017, Lincoln Gakiya, a São
Paulo-based prosecutor and one of the greatest authorities on
organized crime in Brazil, stated that “Organized crime grows
stronger where the state is absent” in reference to the First
Capital Command (Primeiro Commando da Capital or PCC).
The accompanying excerpted article from Istoé reports on
Gakiya’s statement and as of 2019, his assertions have come
true as the PCC is now Brazil’s largest criminal organization
with a significant presence in the country. Regionally, the
PCC controls drug trafficking routes between Brazil, Bolivia,
Paraguay and Colombia. The PCC’s drug shipments along
the routes through these countries are sent abroad, making it
a transnational criminal organization. Although the PCC has
been of concern for some time now, Paraguay in particular is
taking measures to reinforce security along its shared border
with Brazil because according to the excerpted article from
Telefuturo, the Paraguayan People’s Army (EEP), a communist
insurgent group, has aligned itself with the PCC to provide
the Brazilian group protection in Paraguay in exchange for
weapons.
In early January 2019, the Paraguayan National Police
announced an increase in security measures in the city of
Pedro Juan Caballero, which sits along the border with Brazil,
as part of a strategy to eradicate criminal groups operating
in the area, including the PCC. Other measures Paraguay is
prepared to take in order to reinforce security are highlighted
in the excerpted article from Ultima Hora. This article also
discusses the significance of the security efforts in the city of
Pedro Juan Caballero. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The Paraguayan National Police is
asking for citizen collaboration in reporting
suspicious individuals or vehicles entering
from Pedro Juan Caballero.”

Source: “O avanço do PCC (PCC Spreads),” Istoé, 13 July 2017. https://istoe.
com.br/o-avanco-do-pcc/
Back in 2017, Brazilian Prosecutor and Security Expert Lincoln Gakiya warned
that, “Organized crime grows stronger where the state is absent.” This statement
was made in reference to the exponential growth of the PCC within Brazil,
regionally (Paraguay, Bolivia and Colombia) and transnationally as the end
goal of this group is to distribute internationally where it can sell cocaine at a
higher cost.
Source: “Confirman alianza del EPP con el PCC (Alliance between EPP and
PCC Confirmed),” Telefuturo, 4 January 2019. https://telefuturo.com.py/
noticia/26728-Confirman-alianza-del-EPP-con-el-PCCThe Paraguayan People’s Army (EEP) has aligned itself with the PCC to
provide the Brazilian group protection in Paraguay in exchange for weapons.
This information was confirmed during a meeting between Paraguay,
Argentina and Brazil where all three countries’ agreed to work together to fight
transnational organized crime during 2019.
Source: “Policía anuncia aumento de seguridad en Pedro Juan Caballero
(Police Announce Increased Security Measures along Brazilian City of Pedro
Juan Caballero),” Ultima Hora, 22 January 2019. https://www.ultimahora.
com/policia-anuncia-aumento-seguridad-pedro-juan-caballero-n2793106.
html
The Paraguayan National Police is asking for citizen collaboration in reporting
suspicious individuals or vehicles entering from Pedro Juan Caballero, Brazil
into Paraguay as the Brazilian city is considered as one of the most violent in
the region. As a result of this request, citizen reports and security checkpoints
aided Paraguayan authorities in arresting two PCC operatives at in Pedro Juan
Caballero in late January. After searching the vehicle of the PCC operatives,
authorities seized several large caliber rifles, pistols and ammunition. In
addition to citizen support and border security checkpoints, Paraguayan Police
are also asking for Brazil and Argentina to help support its efforts as the PCC is
active in all three countries and is continuously looking for areas to grow both
regionally and abroad.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | March 2019

62

LATIN AMERICA
Changing Brazilian-Chinese Trade Relations?
OE Watch Commentary: The Brazilian economy (the
largest in South America) has become somewhat dependent
on exports to China. As the brief excerpt from the centrist
Brazilian newspaper, O Globo points out, “the level of
production and employment in 11 [Brazilian] states depend
on the behavior of the Chinese economy.” While China has
become the leading destination of Brazilian exports over the
past decade, Chinese investments within Brazil have declined
over the past two years. As the excerpt indicates, last year
alone, China’s investments in Brazil dropped by 75 percent,
going from $11.3 billion in 2017 to $2.8 billion in 2018.
The excerpt criticizes the government’s lack of a trade
strategy toward China, its largest partner. It points out that
the recently elected Bolsonaro administration is not focusing
on the country’s objective interests and is instead fixed in an
impractical mindset where China remains “an enigma in the
Brazilian foreign policy.” The article advocates “evaluating
the alternatives with China…in foreign policy that leads to the
development of long-term strategies, with positive results in
the production chains and the country’s level of employment.”
As one of the founding members of BRICS, the new Brazilian
government may end up taking a more pragmatic approach
regarding its trade with China. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wedman)

Source: “Brazil Has Yet to Formulate a Strategy Toward China, Its Main
Partner.” O Globo, 15 January 2019. https://oglobo.globo.com/opiniao/brasilpermanece-sem-estrategia-para-china-seu-maior-parceiro-23371621
China has become the main destination of Brazilian exports in this decade.
It buys more exports than the United States, the European Union, and Latin
America. Overall, the level of production and employment in 11 states depends
on the behavior of the Chinese economy. Recently, China reduced investments
in Brazil. The investments amounted to $2.8 billion last year, a 75 percent drop
from $11.3 billion in 2017. Even without considering the atypical flow in 2017,
there was a significant reduction last year: 47 percent less than in 2016, when the
investments amounted to $5.3 billion.
Beijing defined a trading policy early in the millennium. It has advanced in
the construction of a network of agreements, free trade, with the objective
of guaranteeing the energy and food security of its 1.3 billion inhabitants.
In Chinese pragmatism these agreements mean not only business but also a
projection of political and economic power… On the other hand, Brazil has
long defined priorities and the trend of the relationship with the United States, a
historical ally and fundamental partner. China, however, remains an enigma in
the Brazilian foreign policy.
According to O Globo, the signs issued by the current government suggest that
China will remain a perennial foreign policy enigma. Jair Bolsonaro, President
of Brazil, stressed his automatic alignment with Washington in the trade war
with Beijing during his election campaign….

“China has become the main destination of
Brazilian exports in this decade.”

Brazilian Soybean Exports, 2008.

Source: Roosewelt Pinheiro, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Soja_exportacao.jpg, CC-BY-3.0..

OE Watch | March 2019

63

LATIN AMERICA
Will Haiti Break Ties with Taiwan in 2019 and Opt for China?
OE Watch Commentary: Haiti’s weak economy, lack of
jobs and inability to attract foreign investors are just a few
reasons that the country has looked at all potential financial
opportunities offered to them in the past two years. While
the Haitian government has continuously asserted that its
intentions are to maintain diplomatic ties with Taiwan, it has
not ruled out that if the deal is right, it is open to working with
other countries that may be more financially advantageous
(many assert China) according to the accompanying excerpted
article from Diario Libre. This is of interest as over the last
decade, China has successfully poached many of Taiwan’s
diplomatic partners in the Caribbean, Central and South
America; the most recent being the Dominican Republic and
Panama in 2018. However, throughout 2018, Haiti has kept its
word to Taiwan in maintaining diplomatic ties and accepting
foreign aid from them.
One example of fidelity is Haitian President Jovenel Moïse’s
visit to Taiwan along with parliamentarians, business owners
and other members of his administration in mid-2018.
However, despite this trip, Moïse’s (now former) chief of staff,
Wilson Laleau, noted that Haiti is not closing the door to other
potential partnerships, including China, as indicated by the
excerpted article from PV Latam.
The PV Latam article also discusses how Taiwan offered
the Haitian government a loan of $150 million to provide
electricity to all of Haiti during negotiations that began in May
2018. There are questions that the loan will materialize, and
if so, whether Taiwan can keep its promise to provide Haiti
with continued electricity. At the same time, the Taiwanese
offer pales against the $4.7 billion which China offered Haiti
in the summer months of 2017 to completely overhaul Portau-Prince’s crumbling infrastructure, from roads and bridges
to electrical grids and water systems as discussed in the
excerpted article from Haiti Libre. Despite the amount of cash
offered by China in 2017 and the subsequent smaller amount
offered by Taiwan in 2018, this article simply provides an
overview of past events and is a topic that is of interest in the
region given the large number of former diplomatic partners
China has poached from Taiwan in recent years. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The initial infrastructure investment is estimated at $
4.711 billion, whose terms and conditions of financing are
still unknown.”
Source: “Haití mantiene su fidelidad con Taiwán pese a ofertas de China
(Haiti Remains Faithful to Taiwan Despite Offers from China,)” Diario
Libre, 2 May 2018. https://www.diariolibre.com/actualidad/internacional/
haiti-mantiene-su-fidelidad-con-taiwan-pese-a-ofertas-de-china-LL9782508
With all external financial offers presented to Haiti by both Taiwan and China,
the country has opted to choose carefully. According to an unnamed Haitian
official, Haiti sees Chinese money as money for tomorrow whereas they see
Taiwanese money that would potentially be available more expeditiously which
would help Haiti find some relief so that they can govern. At this time, Haiti
appears more willing to deny China’s most recent offer, but there is an intent to
shift and accept Chinese aid.
Source: “Haití recibirá un préstamo de $ 150 millones de Taiwán (Taiwan
Grants Haiti US$150 Million Loan to Build Electricity Grid),” PV Latam, 6
June 2018. https://www.pv-magazine-latam.com/2018/06/01/haiti-recibiraun-prestamo-de-150-millones-de-taiwan/
Taiwan offered to lend Haiti $150 million for infrastructure development aimed
at developing rural power grids in the impoverished Caribbean nation that is
still recovering from a devastating 2010 earthquake. The same offer allegedly
serves as an attempt in a bid to shore up relations amid a renewed diplomatic
onslaught by rival China that has stripped it of two foreign allies in the past
month. According to the Foreign Ministry spokesman Andrew Lee, a deal of this
nature with Taiwan “provides a win-win situation to help a diplomatic ally with
a major infrastructure development project and also creates overseas business
opportunities for Taiwanese companies.”
Source: “Chinese interested in the renovation of Port-au-Prince,” Haiti
Libre, 12 August 2017. https://www.haitilibre.com/en/news-21936-haitireconstruction-chinese-interested-in-the-renovation-of-port-au-prince.html
…This very general draft contains proposals for water and drainage works,
road improvements, environmental protection, drainage and sanitation, a
communication network and the reconstruction of the old town of Port-au
-Prince; The initial infrastructure investment is estimated at $ 4.711 billion,
whose terms and conditions of financing are still unknown, as this proposal has
not yet officially reached the gates of the Central Government or borrowed the
official channels of bilateral cooperation…

OE Watch | March 2019

64

LATIN AMERICA
Police Dismantle Largest Cocaine Processing
Laboratories Ever Discovered in Spain
OE Watch Commentary: On 21 January 2019, a joint
operation run by Spanish, Portuguese and Colombian police
resulted in the seizure of one of the largest cocaine processing
labs to ever be discovered in Spain, and even in Europe.
According to Spanish police, as reported in the accompanying
excerpted articles from Europa Press and Las Provincias,
11 individuals were arrested as part of the operation and
identified as being from multiple countries, including two
from Colombia, one each from Spain and Morocco, and five
from Albania, while no further information was reported
on the remaining two individuals arrested. These same
individuals allegedly worked together in areas throughout
Spain to pick up chemical precursors and concealed narcotics
from ports located along the Spanish coast. The cocaine
processing lab in question was located in an isolated chalet in
the village of El Puig, near the city of Valencia. As the article
from Las Provincias reports, authorities were initially alerted
to this lab based on multiple visits to Spain by two Colombian
chemists. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The agents were aware of the presence
in our country of a couple of Colombians
who had been sent up to three times by the
organization providing the palm kernel flour
mixed with cocaine.”

Source: “Detenidas 11 personas y desarticulado uno de los mayores
laboratorios de cocaína de Europa en El Puig, Valencia (Eleven
Individuals Detained in Mega-Cocaine Lab in Spain),” Europa Press, 21
January 2019. https://www.europapress.es/nacional/noticia-detenidas11-personas-desarticulado-mayores-laboratorios-cocaina-europa-puigvalencia-20190121094538.html
…The organization was composed of citizens of Spanish, Colombian and
Albanian nationality dedicated to the introduction of sacks of a thousand
kilograms each with the purpose of extracting the base paste of the palm kernel
flour (residue that remains after the extraction of the seed oil of the palm that is
cultivated in tropical zones) and, once separated, proceed to the transformation
of it into cocaine hydrochloride…
Source: “Desmantelan en Albalat dels Tarongers uno de los laboratorios
de cocaína más importantes de Europa (Authorities Dismantle One of the
Most Significant Cocaine Processing Labs in Europe),” Las Provincias, 21
January 2019. https://www.lasprovincias.es/sucesos/desmantelan-chalet-puig20190121094336-nt.html
The agents made ten records in real estate, several of them in El Puig, and
seized some 8,500 liters of various controlled chemical substances that were
difficult to acquire and that were to be used for the preparation of cocaine
hydrochloride
As a result of the police investigations, the agents were aware of the presence
in our country of a couple of Colombians who had been sent up to three times by
the organization providing the palm kernel flour mixed with cocaine…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | March 2019

65

