community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 9
Issue #12
December 2019

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 Russia’s 1L125 Niobium-SV Mobile Radar System
4 Improvements to the Onyx Coastal Defense Missile
6 Russia Grows Missile Warning Constellation
7 Russia’s Nationwide Strategic Forces Exercise: Grom2019
8 Russian Navy Commander Discusses Surface
Shipbuilding and Modernization
9 Strategic Missile Test for Submarine Slated for Northern
Fleet
10 The Three ‘Faces’ of Russia’s AI Strategy
11 A Century of Military-Humanitarian Studies
12 Russia Plans to Revive Soviet Law on Classified Military
Information
13 Kalashnikov and Youth Patriotism
14 Soviet-Finnish War Lessons
15 Arctic Coal Barges from Russia to India
16 Russia Transfers S-300s to Tajikistan
17 The Development of UAVs in Armenia
INDO-PACIFIC
18 China’s New Type Combat Forces: Tomorrow’s Ground
Forces
20 Zhongguancun: China’s Silicon Valley
21 “Intelligentization” and a Chinese Vision of Future War
22 Chinese Military Sponsors Exoskeleton Competition
23 China Introduces New Battle Rifle for the PLA
25 New PLA Air Force Training Exercise Focuses on
Electronic Warfare

26 The People’s Liberation Army Air Force Turns 70
28 Chinese Maritime Militia Increase Realism in Training
30 PLA Navy Ships Conduct Replenishment at Sea with
Civilian Cargo Ships for the First Time
31 Taiwan Debuts Indigenous Jet Trainer
32 Malaysia Weighs Releasing 9/11-Linked Terrorist from
Prison
34 Indonesia: JAD Poses Renewed Threat to Bali
35 A New Domestically Produced Service Rifle in Pakistan?
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
36 Russia’s Increasing Military Presence in Libya
38 AI-Powered Surveillance: All Eyes on Dubai and Abu
Dhabi
39 Saudi Arabia and the UAE: Space Ambitions in the
Arabian Peninsula
40 Commerce, Rail and Electricity Returning to Syria’s
Euphrates River Valley with Help from Iraq and Iran
42 Russia’s Position on Syrian Kurds
44 Russia Facilitating Dialogue between Syrian Kurds and
Damascus
46 Turkey and the Question of Foreign ISIS Fighters
48 Egypt and the Arab League Condemn Turkey’s Operation
in Syria
49 China’s Increasing Investment Projects in Turkey
50 China to Build Boron Carbide Plant in Turkey to Boost
Defense Industry
52 Iran: Khamenei Speaks on America
54 Iran: Chahbahar Port Developments

55 Iran Establishes Official VPN Operators
AFRICA
56 Al-Shabaab Looks to Launch Attacks in Ethiopia
57 Somalia: How Climate Change Impacts Security
58 Will Baghdadi’s Death Impact Terrorism in Africa?
59 The Roots of Violent Extremism in Northern Mozambique
60 Zimbabwe: An Economic Crisis and Sinking Army Morale
61 Russia’s Rosoboronexport Looks to Sell More Military
Hardware to Africa
62 The Revival of Mali-Russia Relations
63 Russia Shows Up at Public Demonstrations in Mali
64 West African Troops to Deploy to Mali, Niger, and Burkina
Faso
65 Nigerian Committee Finds Officials Complicit in Banditry
66 Nigeria Implements ID Regulations to Curb Boko Haram
LATIN AMERICA
67 Chile Under Attack
68 What is the Puebla Group?
69 Colombia Collapsing Left?
70 Bolivia: Evo Morales Out
71 Argentina Votes Left
72 Propping Up Venezuelan Status Quo
73 China Increases its Engagement with Brazil
74 Warmer Russian-Cuban Relations
75 Catalonia Not Well
76 Spain Next to Ignite?

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 9 | Issue 12

December | 2019

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Matthew Stein
Sergey Sukhankin

Indo-Pacific

Andrew Hartnett
Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gündüz
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter
Africa

Source: AMISOM/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/61765479@N08/27550154106/, Public Domain

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Ray Finch
Shanti Salas

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Ethiopian soldier serving with AMISOM in Somalia

Zachary Fesen

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
Russia’s 1L125 Niobium-SV Mobile Radar System
OE Watch Commentary: The 1L125 Niobium-SV [1Л125 «НиобийСВ»] mobile radar system is a smaller version of the Aerospace Defense
Forces’ 55ZH6UM Niobium [55Ж6УМ «Ниобий»] (a Nebo-series radar)
intended for use by the Air Defense Troops of the Russian Ground Forces.
The modification of Aerospace Defense Forces’ systems for use by Ground
Forces is a common practice, as it was done with the 1L13 Nebo-SV
[1Л13 «Небо-СВ»] and 1L119 Nebo-SVU [1Л119 «Небо-СВУ»]. The
1L125 Niobium-SV was developed by the Nizhny Novgorod Research
Institute of Radio Engineering (NNIIRT) [«Нижегородский научноисследовательский институт радиотехники» (ННИИРТ)], which is part
of the Almaz-Antey Aerospace Defense Corporation.
The 1L125 Niobium-SV mobile radar system is designed to provide 360°
reconnaissance of air targets at medium and high altitudes by means of an
active phased antenna array. It can detect, provide coordinates, track, and
55Zh6M Nebo-M Radar System.
Source: Vitaly Kuzmin via Vitalykuzmin.net, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Static-p4/i-cXc78Lz/A, CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
recognize (determine state affiliation) of aircraft, helicopters, cruise and
ballistic missiles, and small unmanned aerial vehicles, including those with
stealth technology, and providing this information to consumers. The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses plans to field the
1L125 Niobium-SV in Crimea to augment the Russian air defense system. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The VHF band, in which the radar [1L125 Niobium-SV mobile radar system]

operates, permits it to see stealth aircraft (including the B-2 Spirit Bomber) and
the latest American F-22 Raptor and F-35 Lightning II fighter aircraft.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Aleksey Kozachenko, Bogdan Stepovoy, “Появление РЛС «Ниобий-СВ» в Крыму станет ответом на
развертывание ПРО США (The Appearance of ‘Niobiy-SV’ Radars Will Become the Response to the Deployment of the American Missile
Defense Systems in Romania),” Izvestiya, 15 October 2019. https://iz.ru/931984/aleksei-ramm-aleksei-kozachenko-bogdan-stepovoi/zator-nagranitce-novye-zenitnye-kompleksy-zashchitiat-kaliningrad
The Appearance of ‘Niobiy-SV’ Radars Will Become the Response to the Deployment of the American Missile Defense Systems in Romania
The extremely-powerful “Niobiy-SV” long-range radars will cover the Crimean Peninsula and Russia’s South. Izvestiya’s sources at the Ministry of
Defense have reported “that the hunters for stealth aircraft” will arrive in the inventory of Southern Military District units already by the end of the year.
These radar sites easily detect not only ordinary aircraft but also stealth aircraft and even hypersonic and cruise missiles. In the process, The Niobiy is
practically invulnerable due to its high maneuverability and unique technical characteristics. The appearance of those radars in the troops will seriously
augment radar monitoring of the airspace on the southern axis. In the opinion of the experts that Izvestiya polled, this mission is becoming especially
pertinent since the breakdown of the Treaty on Intermediate Range Missiles…
The new radars will reliably cover the Crimea and the country’s entire south. What is more, there is something to protect from, military experts think.
For example, the so-called missile defense launch area, which the US has created in Romania and is called upon to defend Europe from the “Iranian
threat” - a pretty legend in order to conceal the deployment of offensive weapons, Colonel-General Leonid Ivashov, the President of the Academy of
Geopolitical Problems, is confident. “It is well known to specialists that the Missile Defense System’s launchers can be used to launch ‘Tomahawks’
without modifications”, the expert told Izvestiya. “You can’t call them a defensive weapon. These multipurpose precision-guided cruise missiles can attack
both ground-based and also naval surface targets. Their deployment in Romania is advantageous for the US from the strategic point of view. From here,
they can threaten Russia’s South and even Turkey, which is leaving the orbit of American influence right now”.
The Niobiy-SV 3D radar station, which has been named in honor of the metal of the same name, was developed for Ground Troops PVO. It is designed
to detect, track, and identify airborne objects of all types – aircraft, helicopters, cruise and ballistic missiles, and also small unmanned aerial vehicles.
These radars can operate in the round-the-clock mode for a long time, while tracking the air situation. For example, several Niobiy-SV radars, which
are deployed in the Crimea, will be able to monitor the entire Black Sea, Lieutenant-General Aleksandr Luzan, the former Ground Troops PVO Deputy
Commander for Ordnance-Ground Troops PVO Chief Engineer, told Izvestiya.
The VHF band, in which the radar operates, permits it to see stealth aircraft (including the B-2 Spirit Bomber) and the latest American F-22 Raptor and
F-35 Lightning II fighter aircraft.
“This is the main property of the VHF range radars, which nullifies stealth technology”, he told Izvestiya. “If we complement the Niobiy-SV radars with
S-band radars, target designation will become even more precise. It is also very important that the seeker heads of enemy AGM-88 HARM anti-radiation
missiles do not detect radars, which operate in this frequency range. Consequently, those radars are invulnerable to them”. Thanks to these qualities,
the Niobiy-SV permits the organization of effective combat alert both in peacetime and in wartime. The radar operates trouble free in complex jamming
conditions, which permits it to be used under the serious countermeasures of enemy electronic warfare systems. The radar even sees complex targets at
a range of 300 kilometers and simultaneously tracks up to 300 targets. The Niobiy-SV is mounted on a KamAZ all-terrain wheeled motor vehicle chassis,
which permits the equipment to be redeployed in a matter of minutes. These qualities increase the radar’s survivability – it will be extremely difficult to
destroy those…

OE Watch | December 2019

3

EURASIA
Improvements to the Onyx Coastal Defense Missile
OE Watch Commentary: The Onyx (Yakhont for export variant) supersonic homing anti-ship missiles were first fielded in 2002, after being
in development since 1982. They were designed to destroy surface ships of all classes, particularly vessels comprising surface strike groups,
carrier battle groups, amphibious assault forces, and convoys. One of the Onyx missile’s most interesting characteristics is its guidance system.
The guidance system can purportedly work in tandem with other missiles, and can allocate and classify targets based on their importance, and
then select an appropriate attack scheme. Following the destruction of the primary target, the remaining missiles attack other ships, so no target
is attacked by more than one missile. After an initial target lock is achieved, the Onyx shuts down its radar and descends to a low altitude (5
to 10 meters), below the operational level of most air defense radars. Once the missile emerges from beneath the radio horizon, the radar is
reactivated and locks back on to the target. This feature, in conjunction with the Onyx’s high rate of speed, greatly complicates adversarial air
defense and electronic warfare countermeasures. The Onyx can be ship-launched, and launched from the “Bastion” Coastal Missile Complex
(BRK).
The accompanying excerpted article from TASS discusses plans to upgrade the Onyx missile that currently has a 600km range to the Onyx-M
with an 800km range, among other improvements. The passage from Izvestiya discusses Russia’s efforts to provide additional targeting data to
these Onyx-M missiles, so the missiles’ enhanced range may be fully exploited. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“A machine-building science and production association has developed an

Onyx-M sea-launched cruise missile with a maximum range of 800 km and
enhanced accuracy of delivery to naval surface and ground targets.”

Bastion-P Coastal Defense Missile System.

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense via mil.ru http://eng.mil.ru/images/military/gallery/2018/_
NEV1557-550%281%29.jpg, CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

OE Watch | December 2019

4

EURASIA
Continued: Improvements to the Onyx Coastal Defense
Missile
Source: “Эксперт: бросковые испытания ракеты “Оникс-М” с дальностью 800 км уже проведены (Expert: An ‘Onyx-M’ Cruise Missile
with an 800 km Range Has Been Developed in Russia),” TASS Online, 25 September 2019. https://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/6925991
Expert: An ‘Onyx-M’ Cruise Missile with an 800 km Range Has Been Developed in Russia
A machine-building science and production association has developed an Onyx-M sea-launched cruise missile with a maximum range of
800 km and enhanced accuracy of delivery to naval surface and ground targets. The missile’s flight tests will begin in the months immediately
ahead, two sources in the Russian Federation defense industry complex informed TASS on Wednesday.
“Based on the Onyx cruise missile that exists in the armory, a new version -- the Onyx-M -- has been developed, with a maximum range of
800 km,” one agency informant reported.
The source added that “the missile is equipped with a perfected control system and will be able to destroy both naval surface and ground
targets with greater accuracy.” The missile’s protection against effects of electronic warfare equipment has also been increased, the agency’s
informant added.
The other defense-sector source informed TASS that the flight design tests of the Onyx’s latest version were due to begin in the first ten days
of September, on the Northern Fleet’s naval weapons test range in the Barents Sea water area. To guarantee the safety of shipping and of civil
aviation flights, several areas of the sea were being closed off to accommodate these tests; “However, the launches were not executed, because
of the need for additional checks on the product’s experimental models.” “It is expected that the flight tests will begin in the next month or
two,” the agency’s informant said. According to the source, the upgraded missile, like the Onyx currently in the arsenal, is capable of carrying
a conventional and a nuclear warhead. The Onyx-M’s maximum velocity and its weight and size characteristics have remained the same as
those of the missile’s original version. The machine-building science and production association that developed the Onyx has not commented
on the information provided by the sources.
The machine-building science and production association earlier announced plans for improving the Onyx’s characteristics, without
specifying which actual parameters were meant. “Yes, we proposed to improve the Onyx missiles’ flight characteristics in order to boost this
antiship system’s effectiveness,”…
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Bogdan Stepovoy, “С корабля на «Бастион»: атака береговых батарей станет внезапной (From the Ship to the
‘Bastion’: An Attack of the Coastal Batteries Will Become a Surprise Attack),” Izvestiya, 22 October 2019. https://iz.ru/930452/aleksei-rammbogdan-stepovoi/s-korablia-na-bastion-ataka-beregovykh-batarei-stanet-vnezapnoi
From the Ship to the ‘Bastion’: An Attack of the Coastal Batteries Will Become a Surprise Attack
State-of-the-art Project 22160 “Vasiliy Bykov” corvettes will be able to guide “Bastion” coastal missile complexes (BRK) to the enemy. The
new tactic will permit them to operate from an ambush. The low-observable “Bykov” corvettes, which are manufactured based upon “stealth”
technologies, will track the enemy from a safe distance for themselves. But the BRKs, which are now impossible to detect with their radars
switched off, having received target designations from the seamen, will immediately conduct a strike against the enemy…
The coordination system of the “Bastions” and the corvettes was tested this year, when the “Vasiliy Bykov” was following US military ships
on the Black Sea. The seamen conducted surveillance of the Americans not only visually but also using radars and reconnaissance – these
systems permit them to pinpoint the location of ships based upon the operation of their equipment, sources in the Ministry of Defense told
Izvestiya.
Inter-branch reconnaissance-weapon loops, which seriously increase the effectiveness of the coordination of the Ground Forces, Aerospace
Forces (VKS), and the Navy, are being introduced into the Armed Forces right now, Arsenal of the Fatherland” Publication Editor-in-Chief
Viktor Murakhovskiy pointed out. “Three components are part of the loop – reconnaissance and target designation systems, the command
post, where the decision is made on the strike, and the weapon systems directly”, the expert told Izvestiya. “In our case, the ships must find
the enemy and transmit the information to the command post, where they will conduct an analysis of the situation and will make a decision on
target destruction. Then the order and coordinates of the enemy ships will arrive at the ‘Bastion’ battery, which will open fire”…
The coastal complexes can destroy both individual ships and also ships in the composition of landing formations, convoys, and carrier
strike groups. Their missiles are capable of destroying targets at a distance of approximately 500 kilometers…The “Bastion’s” launchers are
installed on a highly-mobile MZKT-7903 chassis, which provides the capability to the batteries to change firing positions. The BRKs that are
roving along the coast with their radars switched off will be inconspicuous to the enemy. One will only be able to find them using satellite or
aircraft reconnaissance, which will be difficult to do.
Meanwhile, having received a target designation from the escort ship, they will be able to practically immediately conduct a surprise attack
against the enemy. New “Onyx” supersonic anti-ship missiles, which any state-of-the-art air defense system is unable to combat, are in the
BRK’s ammunition allowance. Military personnel don’t need precise coordinates for a successful attack – it is sufficient to know the quadrant,
where the hostile ships are located.
The supersonic “Onyx”, having reached the detection locations, will switch on the seeker head, which will find the target. A warhead
weighing 300 kilograms can destroy or disable even the largest surface combatants. After the attack, the complexes will leave the firing
positions without turning on the radars…
OE Watch | December 2019

5

EURASIA
Russia Grows Missile Warning Constellation
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian Federation is currently fielding its third generation of missile warning satellites. Russia’s second
generation of satellites, the Oko series, consisted of eight satellites with infrared payloads. As noted in Russian open sources, the Oko series had
some serious limitations, and even with a full constellation, they were only able to identify the fact of a missile launch, but could not determine
the missile’s ballistic trajectory. Russia’s last Oko ceased operation in the fall of 2014, but a successor system was ready to be fielded. (The
Oko-1 (71Kh6) type satellites operated in a geostationary orbit, while the Oko-2 (72Kh6) satellites operated in highly elliptical orbits.)
Russia’s third generation of missile warning satellites, the Tundra (14F142) series, are part of the Russian Missile Attack Warning System
(SPRN) [Системой Предупреждения о Ракетном Нападении (СПРН)], which consists of space and ground-based systems. The Unified
Space System (YeKS) is the space component of the SPRN, in which the Tundra satellites are replacing the Oko satellites. The main capability
of the Tundra over the Oko series satellites is that the Tundra can independently determines parameters of a missile’s ballistic trajectory and
probable target areas of launched missiles.
In 2014, after some delays, the Deputy Commander of the Aerospace Defense Forces, Major General Anatoliy Nestechuk, announced that
Russia would deploy ten Tundra-series satellites by 2018, the schedule was later pushed back to 2022. As of 2019, only three Tundra satellites
have been deployed. The first Tundra satellite, the YeKS-1 (Kosmos-2510) was launched on 17 November 2015. The second satellite, the YeKS2 (Kosmos-2518) was launched on 25 May 2017. The third, as explained in the accompanying excerpted Interfax article, YeKS-3 (Kosmos-2541)
was launched on 26 September 2019. Given the current situation, it appears likely that if the constellation is fully deployed, the date of full
deployment will be well after 2022. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The Russian military inserted the third satellite of the “Tundra”

Unified Space System (YeKS-3), which is designed to detect launches of
intercontinental ballistic missiles…”
Source: “Военный космический аппарат отделился от третьей ступени ‘Союза-2.1б’ (Military Satellite Separates from the Third Stage of
Soyuz-2.16),” Interfax Online, 26 September 2019. https://www.interfax.ru/world/678018
Military Satellite Separates from the Third Stage of Soyuz-2.16
A military satellite has separated from the third stage of a Soyuz-2.16 space launch vehicle launched on Thursday from the Plesetsk
Cosmodrome, the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense reported…
The specialized website Spaceflightnow had earlier reported that on Thursday that the Russian military inserted the third satellite of the
“Tundra” Unified Space System (YeKS-3), which is designed to detect launches of intercontinental ballistic missiles…
The first two new satellites of the Missile Attack Warning System (SPRN), the YeKS-1 and YeKS-2 (designated as Kosmos-2510 and
Kosmos-2518), were inserted into orbit in 2015 and 2017.
It has been reported that in the future the orbital grouping will consist of 10 “Tundra” satellites and that their deployment would be
completed by 2022…

RUSSIA MILITARY STRATEGY: IMPACTING 21ST CENTURY
REFORM AND GEOPOLITICS by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
Russian military’s main tasks are to maintain the combat readiness of the Armed Forces and to
ensure the Russian Federation’s defensive capability. Russia’s military heritage will assist this process tremendously. Combat readiness includes updated strategic thought, new equipment revelations, and future-war projections. Defensive capability includes not just protecting Russia’s territory, but also the security of the nation’s national interests and conduct of geopolitics. Capturing
the essence of these developments is the goal of this book. In the process a few templates for
understanding Russian military thought and actions are offered for further consideration and use.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195605/download

OE Watch | December 2019

6

EURASIA
Russia’s Nationwide Strategic Forces Exercise: Grom-2019
OE Watch Commentary: The Grom-19 strategic command-staff exercise was quite an impressive undertaking. The nationwide exercise of
strategic command and control, systems and crews involved President Putin and the National Defense Command Center. Grom exercises have
been held since 2012 and this was the most involved exercise yet. The accompanying passage from Krasnaya Zvezda discusses the exercise.
Not all went according to plan. The Ryazan was supposed to launch two ballistic missiles. However, an R-29R ballistic missile, fired from the
Rayazin Delta III-Class nuclear-powered submarine failed to leave the silo. The R-29R is a Soviet-era system introduced in 1977.
The passage quotes the Minister of Defense, General of the Army Sergey Shoygu as saying “The exercise evaluated the capability of the
Armed Forces of the Russian Federation to resolve missions in an armed conflict and in a nuclear war involving the implementation of the
integrated use of precision nuclear weapons and weapons based on new physical principles.” The inclusion of the phrase “weapons based on
new physical principles” is interesting and signals general staff doctrinal categorization. Hypersonic missiles are included in that category,
among others. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Armed Forces of Russia have completed the strategic
command-staff exercise Grom-2019. Under the leadership of
Supreme Commander in Chief of the Russian Federation Forces
Vladimir Putin, ground, sea and air components of the strategic
deterrence forces conducted cruise and ballistic missile training
launches on 17 October, as part of a СКШУ [strategic commandstaff exercise]. All missiles reached their targets.”
Source: “The Strategic Triad performed as expected” Krasnaya Zvezda, 18 October 2019. http://redstar.ru/strategicheskaya-triada-otchitalasdostojno
The Strategic Triad performed as expected
Minister of Defense, General of the Army Sergey Shoygu stated that, the training launches were the concluding phase of the Grom-2019
strategic command-staff exercise. The exercise evaluated the capability of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation to resolve missions in
an armed conflict and in a nuclear war involving the implementation of the integrated use of precision nuclear weapons and weapons based
on new physical principles.
Formations and military units of the Strategic Missile Forces, the high commands of long-range and military transport aviation, subunits
and military units of the western, southern, central and eastern military districts, and the Northern Fleet were involved during the Grom-2019
strategic command-staff exercise.
On the final day of the exercise, the crew of a Yars mobile, land-based missile complex executed a launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile from the Plesetsk State Testing Cosmodrome to the Kura test range on Kamchatka, which struck the designated target. The strategic
Yars mobile, land- and silo-based missile complex is able to strike targets at ranges up to 11,000 kilometers. It is equipped with a separating
reentry vehicle with maneuvering, individually guided warheads.
This was not the only use of ground-based missile systems during the Grom-2019 exercise. Crews of an Iskander operational-tactical missile
system conducted training launches of cruise missiles at test ranges in the Southern and Eastern Military Districts.
On the same day strategic submarines of the Northern and Pacific Fleets from regions of the Barents Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk,
respectively, launched ballistic missiles to the Kura range on Kamchatka and the Chizha [range] in Arkhangel’skaya Oblast. And surface
ships of the Northern Fleet and the Caspian Flotilla in the Barents and Caspian Seas launched Kalibr precision cruise missiles against shore
targets.
During the exercise strategic Tu-95MS missile-carrying bombers launched cruise missiles over the Republic of Komi and over Kamchatka
against ground targets at the Pemboy and Kura ranges, respectively.
Command and control of the actual launches of cruise and ballistic missile was conducted by the Russian Federation’s National Defense
Command Center, at which Supreme Commander in Chief of the Russian Federation Forces Vladimir Putin directed the training exercise.
The Grom-2019 strategic command-staff exercise, which began on 15 October, engaged approximately 12,000 servicemen and involved
213 Strategic Missile Troops launchers, up to 105 aircraft (including five strategic missile-carrying bombers), up to 15 surface ships and
five submarines, and 310 combat and special equipment systems. Long-range, military transport and operational tactical aviation airfields,
training ranges of the military districts and the Northern Fleet, and naval ranges in the Barents, Baltic, Black and Caspian seas and the Sea
of Okhotsk were used during the exercise.
The missions designated for execution during the training exercise of the strategic deterrence forces were fully performed. All missiles
reached their targets and validated their specific characteristics.
OE Watch | December 2019

7

EURASIA
Russian Navy Commander Discusses Surface Shipbuilding
and Modernization
OE Watch Commentary: The rapid modernization of Russia’s military seems to be slowing to a more moderate and sustainable pace. Russia
is primarily a ground power and much of its defense spending has gone to upgrading the ground forces and nuclear delivery systems. The
Russian Navy has had a lower priority, but it is more a green water navy than blue water navy. It has one aircraft carrier which is undergoing
a three-year upgrade and rebuild. The nuclear strike submarines have received priority modernization. Modernization of the surface fleet is
also underway. In the accompanying Krasnaya Zvezda interview, the Commander of the Russian Navy discusses the developments in surface
shipbuilding. The Commander also notes the part of the fleet that has been most overworked in support of the fighting in Syria- the large
amphibious landing ships that have been essential in logistics support. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The intensity of combat training substantially
increased practically along all of the indicators. … The
surface ships’ total time spent underway during 2019 has
total more than 12,000 underway days….”
Source: Olga Vorobyeva, “The St. Andrew’s Flag Demonstrates Sovereign Power on the World Ocean,” Krasnaya Zvezda, 30 October 2019.
http://redstar.ru/andreevskij-flag-v-mirovom-okeane-demonstriruet-derzhavnuyu-moshh/
The St. Andrew’s Flag Demonstrates Sovereign Power on the World Ocean
[Vorobyeva] What are main directions in the development of surface shipbuilding? At which Defense Industrial Complexes are they being
implemented?
[Yevmenov] Baltic “Yantar” Shipyard is constructing Project 11711 large landing ships. The latest BDK [Large Landing Ship] Ivan Gren –
the lead ship of this project – arrived in the Northern Fleet a year ago. Its younger brother the BDK Petr Morgunov is nearing the completion
of trials. The keel laying of two more large landing … occurred this year. These are the BDKs Vladimir Andreyev and Vasiliy Trushin.
“Severnaya Verf” Shipyard is building several multipurpose off-shore maritime zone frigates and their subsequent modifications. The
lead Project 22350 Ship Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Gorshkov joined the Navy more than a year ago and, along with a surface
combatant squadron, conducted the first long-range cruise in its history from February through August. This was a unique round-the-world
cruise with a length of 35,000 nautical miles and with a duration of six months.
The trials of the second Project 22350 Frigate Admiral of the Fleet Kasatonov are proceeding … now. The “Severnaya Verf” shipbuilders
are preparing to launch Admiral of the Fleet Golovko. The frigate Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Isakov is under construction. The
keels of the Admiral Amelko and the Admiral …were laid in April 2019.
The latest series production mine defense ships… [are being built} at “Sredne-Nevskiy” Shipyard. They are built from monolithic fiberglass
and are distinguished by the ship’s increased durability, maneuverability, and survivability…. The fourth Project 12700 Minesweeper Vladimir
Yemelyanov was launched in May. It was built right after the Mine Defense Ship Aleksandr Obukhov, … Georgiy Kurbatov and Ivan Antonov.
Construction of the ships of this project, the Yakov Balyayev and the Peter Ilichev continues. And the keel laying of the seventh Project 12700
Minesweeper, the Anatoliy Shlemov occurred in July.
The Project 22800 Small Missile Ships are being actively built in St. Petersburg and Tatarstan….
[Vorobyeva] Comrade Commander-in-Chief, tell us about the intensity of combat training.
[Yevmenov] One can illustrate this intensity …by the effective accomplishment of the mission of the naval presence on the World Ocean. At
this time, over 70 Russian Navy ships and vessels are accomplishing the missions of the naval presence in various maritime zones and ocean
areas. In the 2019 Training Year, the Russian Navy once again confirmed its readiness to accomplish the assigned missions in various areas
of the World Ocean. The crews of the surface ships and support vessels accomplished dozens of long range cruises. In the reporting period,
approximately 200 ships and approximately 50 tactical ship groups were prepared to accomplish their designated combat missions.

OE Watch | December 2019

8

EURASIA
Strategic Missile Test for Submarine Slated for Northern
Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: The Borei class (also called the Dolgorukii class)
nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine is replacing the Typhoon and
Delta class submarines of the Russian Navy. Reportedly, the Boreis carry
on board up to 16 R-30 Bulava-30 solid-propellant intercontinental ballistic
missiles with an operating radius of over 9,000 kilometers. Each of these is
fitted with 150-kiloton warhead-armed reentry vehicles. Norway reported ten
Russian submarines involved in a major submarine exercise. The strategic
launch discussed in the passage from The Barents Sea Independent Observer
was a separate event from the nonstrategic submarine deployment, but was
probably not coincidental. The Izvestia article listed ten nonstrategic nuclear
submarines and six diesel submarines in the Northern Fleet. The fact that the
submarine launch was detected is an indication that the purpose of the exercise
was not stealth, but statement. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Map of Northern Fleet Bases.

Source: Insider via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_Northern_Fleet_bases_
ENG.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0

“Simultaneously, while the Northern Fleet conducted the
largest submarine maneuvers since the days of the Cold
War, the Knyaz Vladimir Borei-class submarine launched
its first test missile that crossed the Arctic and hit its
target on Kamchatka in the Far East.”
Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Bulava ballistic missile launch from brand new strategic sub in White Sea,” The Barents Sea Independent Observer,
30 October 2019. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2019/10/bulava-ballistic-missile-launch-brand-new-strategic-sub-white-sea
Bulava ballistic missile launch from brand new strategic sub in White Sea
In late October, eight Russian nuclear-powered submarines sailed out from their bases on the Kola Peninsula. Two of the subs protected the entrance to
the eastern Barents Sea [from] the waters east of the Bear Island. Another two sailed south and southwest of the Bear Island and other sailed south and
southwest in the northern part of the Norwegian Sea.
On 29 October, a ballistic missile launched from the White Sea. According the Russian Defense Ministry, “For the first time, the newest strategic missile
submarine “Knyaz Vladimir” of project Borei-A, test-fired a sea-based Bulava ballistic missile.”
This launch was necessary in order for Knyaz Vladimir to pass its acceptance tests before transfer to the fleet from the Sevmash shipyard that built the
submarine. Kura training ground, where the missile hit after crossing the skies of the Arctic, is located on the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Far East of
Russia. The submarine was submerged during the launch.
Commander of the Russian Northern Fleet, Vice-Admiral Aleksandr Moiseyev previously told TASS that Knyaz Vladimir will be accepted by the navy
after all its weapons tests are conducted. The transfer is likely to happen in late December. Knyaz Vladimir is the fourth Borei-class submarine, but the
first version of the upgraded Borei-A. The submarine will serve with the Northern Fleet with a homeport in Gadzhiyevo. This will be the second Boreiclass sub with the Northern Fleet, joining the “Yuri Dolgoruykii. Two others, the “Aleksandr Nevsky” and “Vladimir Monomakh” serve with the Pacific
Fleet.

Source: Dmitriy Boltenkov, “Penetration to the West: What Russian Submarine Crews Did in the Atlantic. The Northern Fleet Forces’
Exercises Became the Most Massive Exercises Since the Times of the Soviet Union,” Izvestia, 1 November 2019.
Penetration to the West: What Russian Submarine Crews Did in the Atlantic. The Northern Fleet Forces’ Exercises Became the Most Massive
Exercises since the Times of the Soviet Union
One can determine the composition of the Northern Fleet nonstrategic submarine forces grouping, which recently “stormed” the Atlantic. Four
submarines with cruise missiles are at the disposal of the Submarine Forces Command …: the Project 949A “Voronezh”, “Smolensk”, and “Orel”, and
also the Project 885 Submarine “Severodvinsk”.
Furthermore, there are the two Project 945A Submarines “Nizhniy Novgorod” and “Pskov”. They are unique because they have titanium pressure hulls,
an extreme low level of physical fields (magnetic, acoustic portrait, the amount of water being displaced, and so forth), and a great maximum dive depth.
The Project 971 Submarines “Pantera”, “Tigr”, and “Gepard”, and also the Project 671RTM Nuclear Submarine “Obninsk” are also registered as in
service. The majority of the nuclear submarines listed above are classified as third generation.
The Northern Fleet diesel submarine fleet is represented by the Kola Flotilla’s 161st Submarine Brigade, which has second generations submarines at its
disposal: one Project 677 “Sankt Peterburg”, and five Project 877 – these are the “Kaluga”, “Vladikavkaz”, “Lipetsk”, “Yaroslavl”, and “Magnitogorsk”.
…The “Kaluga” and “Vladikavkaz” recently returned from overhaul at “Zvezdochka” Plant in Severodvinsk.

OE Watch | December 2019

9

EURASIA
The Three ‘Faces’ of Russia’s AI Strategy
by Sergey Sukhankin
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 16, Issue 154, dated 5 November 2019.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/the-three-faces-of-russias-ai-strategy/

OE Watch Commentary: On 11 October, Russian President Vladimir Putin approved the “National Strategy for the Development of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) for the Period Until 2030.” The documents calls for “accelerated development of AI,” including an emphasis on “research,
availability of information and computing resources for users” as well as improving “training in this area.” Although Russia is not presently
considered a global leader in AI, it does arguably possess a national base of knowledge and domestic expertise on which the government could
draw on and achieve more impressive results.
Historically, the first major research into AI was initiated in the Soviet Union in 1954 (under the roof of Moscow State University) as an
interdisciplinary initiative, assembling prominent Soviet physiologists, linguists, psychologists and mathematicians. In 1988, the Association of
Artificial Intelligence (AAI) was inaugurated and brought together 300 Soviet researchers. Nonetheless—similar to some other technological
novelties of the time, including the Internet—the Soviet authorities failed to fully comprehend the future potential of AI, and both state interest
and funding flagged. A similar trend continued after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Only in recent years has there been a visible
shift in the Russian state’s approach to the issue. Assessing Moscow’s current policies in this domain, the development of AI (and related
technologies) could serve the country’s strategic objectives in three main areas.
First are domestic-civilian purposes, premised on expectations that the integration of AI technologies in various spheres of public life will
result in much-needed socio-economic transformations. As noted earlier this year by Russia’s Minister for Economic Development Maksim
Oreshkin, the integration of AI could result in significant increases to labor productivity by 2030. German Gref, the CEO and chair of the
executive board of Sberbank, has pointed to the potential Russia has in this realm, claiming that the integration of new economic or financial
solutions based on AI could have a huge transformative effect “on the whole country [Russia].”
During a recent conference hosted by the League for Assisting Defense Enterprises of Russia—an event that assembled a large number of both
civilian and military experts, participants offered interesting assessments of the benefits associated with integrating AI in Russia’s public sphere.
Notably, the deputy director of Ruselectronics (fully owned by the defense-contractor Rostec), Azret Bekkiev, highlighted that, “Achievements
in the realm of AI will have a large influence on almost all markets, including security, manufacturing, energy, agriculture, education, medicine
and others.” In turn, the director for AI issues at the Institute of Artificial Intelligence (at the Russian Academy of Science), Gennady Osipov,
approached the issue from a different angle. When referring to the strategic importance of AI for Russia, he pointed to the link between nonmilitary and military use of AI-related technologies, which he considers inherently essential. He also argued, “[O]ne may reasonably argue that a
group of countries, a country or a coalition that wields the most powerful means of intellectual analysis of information could become the winner
of any conflict even before its official eruption.”
As such, the second important facet of AI research for Moscow is related to military objectives. Here, Russia’s main motivator appears to
be keeping pace with the United States in terms of integrating AI into its Armed Forces. A recent article in Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer
suggests that, by 2025, over 30 percent of US land forces will consist of various robotics- and AI-based systems. The piece posits that, since
US war spending is (and will remain) far larger than Russia can afford, “we [Russia] need to create more effective and less expensive means
to confront looming challenges. It is quite clear that a forerunner’s strategy [strategiya dogoniayushego] in this situation will result only in the
existing gap [between Russia and the US] widening even more. Direct and asymmetric measures should be combined and used against our
opponents, creating our own means of military-specific technologies… we need to concentrate on the creation of domestic… systems equipped
with AI, [and] continue studies in the realm of optical and quantum computers. Special attention must be diverted to AI. Its development opens
up unlimited prospects in perfecting the methods of military confrontation.”
Speaking about the military-related domain of AI, special attention should be paid to Russia’s ERA “technopolis,” inaugurated on 25 June
2018, located in Anapa, Krasnodar Krai. Primarily, the defense-and-high-technology research-and-development facility focuses on “a complex
of issues” that include finding solutions to “expedite the development and practical integration of most advanced technologies in the defense
sector… [as well as] support [the country’s] most talented youth via special programs designed for the young scientist in the Russian Armed
Forces.” At least at this level, the Russian defense-industrial complex seems to have successfully overcome one of its most damaging Soviet
legacies. Mainly, the ERA (aside from serving military purposes per se) has purportedly become a platform for intra-ministerial collaboration
and is now an embodiment of “business-army” interlinkages. Currently, 250 scientific, business- and defense-related enterprises have signed
agreements and are actively cooperating with the ERA, already resulting in a broad spectrum of research activities conducted at the Anapa
technopolis, which has doubled in size in the past year alone. As noted by Russian Deputy Prime Minister Yury Borisov (former deputy minister
of defense), “[T]he ERA has become the leading [in Russia] platform for cooperation between consumers and producers of arms and weaponry,
special, as well as dual-use technologies.”
Russia’s third domain of AI focus involves using this area of technological research to achieve various foreign policy objectives. Namely,
Gazprom Neft and Saudi Aramco have concluded an agreement—during President Putin’s recent trip to Saudi Arabia—that inter alia envisages
tightening cooperation in developing AI solutions for oil-sector research and exploration/extraction. Additionally, according to Russia’s Ministry
of Digital Development, Communications and Mass Media (MinComSvyaz), the Russian and Saudi governments agreed to broaden wider
technological collaboration on AI, mass communication, media and information outlets, as well as cyber security. Similarly to Russia’s use of
arms production and exports, artificial intelligence is now emerging as a tool for the Kremlin to secure strategic interests both at home and
abroad. (Also see: Update on Technopolis-ERA,” OE Watch, September 2019.) End OE Watch Commentary (Sukhankin)

OE Watch | December 2019

10

EURASIA
A Century of Military-Humanitarian Studies
OE Watch Commentary: In November, the Russian military celebrated
“the centenary of the Military University of the Ministry of Defense of
Russia.” Given the dramatic changes which have occurred in Russia over
the past 100 years, tracing the lineage of this hybrid organization can be
tricky. Nevertheless, as the brief excerpt from the popular military weekly
Voenno-Promyshlenny Kurier (VPK) points out, “the Military University is
the successor of the famous Soviet universities: the Lenin Military-Political
Academy, the Military Institute of Foreign Languages, the Military-Financial
and Military-Law Academies, the Lviv Military-Political School and the
Moscow Military Conservatory.”
During the ceremony to mark the occasion, Deputy Minister ColonelGeneral Andrei Kartapolov stated, “our university is a unique educational
institution that combines the entire humanitarian component of Russia’s
military education.” The university is a huge and complex organization, and
Deputy Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, Colonel General Andrei
according to the excerpt “includes 1,500 disciplines taught among 10 faculties,
Kartapolov speaks to graduates at the Military University, 16 October 2019.
Source: mil.ru CCA 4.0
51 departments and 5 five research centers.” The university offers three degrees
(“bachelor’s degree, specialty, master’s program,”) where they “train psychologists, economists, lawyers, social educators, linguists, journalists
and conductors,” among others.
Entrance requirements for new Military University cadets are quite intense, and as the article points out, “there are four to five applicants
per slot.” Besides training specialists in military-political work for the recently reactivated Main Military-Political Directorate, the university
also serves as the primary foreign language training facility, where 44 foreign languages are studied according to the website (http://vumo.
mil.ru/). The article states that “cadet translators can be found at all major events - they worked at the Olympics in Sochi, attend the Moscow
International Security Conference and the Army forums in Patriot Park.”
While much attention has been paid to the reform and modernization of Russia’s conventional armed forces over the past decade, similar
processes have also taken place within their military education and training system. As this article makes clear, the Russian military will
continue to place a high priority on humanitarian skills such as military-political work and foreign language expertise, which are taught at the
Military University of the Ministry of Defense of Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…Our university is a unique educational institution that combines the
entire humanitarian component of Russia’s military education….”
Source: Peter Kamnev, “Школа командиров гуманитарных войск,” [School of humanitarian commanders] Voenno-Promyshlenny Kurier, 5
November 2019. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/53442
On the eve of the centenary of the Military University of the Ministry of Defense of Russia, Deputy Minister Colonel-General Andrei
Kartapolov unveiled a monument to university graduates. A bronze monument on a granite pedestal is a collective image.
…The Military University is the successor of the famous Soviet universities: the Lenin Military-Political Academy, the Military Institute
of Foreign Languages, the Military-Financial and Military-Law Academies, the Lviv Military-Political School and the Moscow Military
Conservatory.
“Our university is a unique educational institution that combines the entire humanitarian component of Russia’s military education. Over
the course of the university’s existence, more than 230,000 officers have been trained, who have become generals and leaders who have
completely fulfilled their military duty,” Colonel General Kartapolov said at the opening of the monument.
Today, at the Military University, educational programs of three degrees - bachelor’s degree, specialty, master’s program - train
psychologists, economists, lawyers, social educators, linguists, journalists and conductors….
The uniqueness of the university is that personnel for law enforcement agencies are trained in the humanitarian, legal, financial, linguistic
military areas. The educational process includes 1,500 disciplines taught at 10 faculties, 51 departments and 5 five research centers.
…Before gaining the right to take entrance exams, the applicant will have to pass serious tests, and assessing the knowledge acquired at
school is not the most important thing…. Cadet competition is intense…there are four to five applicants per slot.
…Cadet translators can be found at all major events - they worked at the Olympics in Sochi, attend the Moscow Moscow International
Security Conference and the Army forums in Patriot Park.
The plans of the leadership of the Military University include the opening of training for cadets and students in new specialties.
OE Watch | December 2019

11

EURASIA
Russia Plans to Revive Soviet Law on Classified Military
Information
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying passage from Sputnik, Russia is planning to resurrect a Soviet law under which
“information about the location of military forces, their composition, assignment and armament, as well as their designation and force structure,
will be classified.” As the passage notes, a KGB General claims this is necessary “due to the rise in leaks of classified information” and would
apply only to servicemen. The Defense Ministry is responding to this by “examining all legal aspects and nuances.”
This effort appears to seek a legal cudgel over the military preventing the release of low-level material. However, it also raises the issue of
increased government control over the public at large. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Currently, some military information is protected by the law on
state secrets. However, security experts point out that this legislation
doesn’t address all the loopholes. The Russian government plans to
introduce the notion of military secrets...”

Source: “X-Files! Russia Plans to Resurrect Law on Classified Military Information,” Sputnik, 5 November 2019. https://sputniknews.com/
russia/201911051077231289-x-files-russia-plans-to-resurrect-law-on-classified-military-information/
X-Files! Russia Plans to Resurrect Law on Classified Military Information
… Former KGB General Boris Kurdyumov said that the resurrection of a Soviet law is necessary due to the rise in leaks of classified
information. “The situation on the geopolitical arena is tense now and many countries want to obtain our secrets. Unfortunately there have
been many leaks. Very often the West gets information about Russia’s new armament right after the weaponry is sent to military bases or
after the military has tested the new equipment”…Under the new law, information about the location of military forces, their composition,
assignment and armament, as well as their designation and force structure, will be classified. At the moment, this information is protected by
the law on state secrets, but it doesn’t address all the intricacies of military information. For example, the law on state secrets doesn’t protect
information that is qualified as confidential or “ for internal use”. Hence Russian authorities cannot prosecute individuals who have disclosed
this data. The Defense Ministry said it is examining all legal aspects and nuances while preparing documents for the future law. The ministry
noted that the legislation’s requirements would extend only to servicemen. Individuals that would be granted access and would work with
classified information will receive privileges, while violation of the law would amount to criminal offence. Russia abolished the Soviet-era law
on military secrets in the 1990s and replaced it with the law on state secrets. In the Soviet Union, individuals were punished with up to ten
years in jail for disclosure of classified information.

OE Watch | December 2019

12

EURASIA
Kalashnikov and Youth Patriotism
OE Watch Commentary: In September 2017, Kremlin authorities unveiled a statue in
downtown Moscow dedicated to the designer of the AK-47, Mikhail Kalashnikov. At the
time, some observers suggested that this new statue reflected not only an appreciation for
Kalashnikov’s weapon design, but the Kremlin’s increased focus on defense and military
readiness. This emphasis of defense preparedness continues today. As the brief excerpt
from the pro-government news agency Lenta.ru points out, in November, the “Ministry of
Education suggested that Russian schools conduct a 10 November lesson on the centenary
of the birth of designer Mikhail Kalashnikov.”
The excerpt stresses that “the nation-wide lesson with machine guns will help to form
a sense of patriotism among schoolchildren ‘as a spiritual and moral category,’ lay ‘the
foundations of national self-awareness’ and raise in children ‘a sense of responsibility and
duty towards the Motherland, the formation of readiness to protect it.’” More importantly,
the article points out that this “focus on Kalashnikov’s centenary should “help to increase
the interest of schoolchildren in military service in the Russian Armed Forces, in
military specialties and studies in the country’s military universities, in their physical and
psychological preparation for service in the Armed Forces.”
A key portion of the lesson will allow a contest where “children will compete to
assemble and disassemble the AK-47 and AK-74.” Providing an international aspect to
the lesson, the excerpt also points out that “schoolchildren will also be offered to compare
domestic Kalashnikov assault rifles with an American-made M-16 assault rifle.” The
article concludes by describing the “Parade of Preschool Troops” which was held earlier
this year and where over 500 children “marched across the area at the Eternal Flame in the
Russian weapon designer, Mikhail Kalashnikov.
Source: mil.ru CCA 4.0 Intl
form of foot soldiers, tankmen, pilots, sailors, artillerymen and nurses. The children were
also wearing modern camouflage and held toy weapons in their hands.” The article quotes a local education expert who claims that “the sooner
patriotic education begins, the healthier the society is.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“It is expected that the nation-wide lesson with machine guns
will help to form a sense of patriotism among schoolchildren “as
a spiritual and moral category”
Source: “Российским школьникам предложили отпраздновать столетие Калашникова с автоматами,” [Russian students were invited to
celebrate the centenary of Kalashnikov with machine guns] Lenta.ru, 29 October 2019. https://lenta.ru/news/2019/10/29/kalashnikovvv/
The Ministry of Education suggested that Russian schools conduct a November 10 lesson on the centenary of the birth of designer Mikhail
Kalashnikov, in which children will compete to assemble and disassemble the AK-47 and AK-74….
It is expected that the nation-wide lesson with machine guns will help to form a sense of patriotism among schoolchildren “as a spiritual
and moral category”, lay “the foundations of national self-awareness” and raise in children “a sense of responsibility and duty towards the
Motherland, the formation of readiness to protect it.”
In addition, the focus on Kalashnikov’s centenary should “help to increase the interest of schoolchildren in military service in the Russian
Armed Forces, in military specialties and studies in the country’s military universities, in their physical and psychological preparation for
service in the Armed Forces,” according to the recommendations for conducting the lesson.
In addition to assembling and disassembling the AK-47 and AK-74, schoolchildren will also be offered to compare domestic Kalashnikov
assault rifles with an American-made M-16 assault rifle. Students of all ages are invited to participate in the lesson.
Russian designer of small arms Mikhail Kalashnikov was born on November 10, 1919. The AK-47 he invented is considered one of the most
sought-after automatic weapons in the world.
On May 7, a “Parade of Preschool Troops” was held in the center of Pyatigorsk, in which more than 500 children took part. They marched
across the area at the Eternal Flame in the form of foot soldiers, tankmen, pilots, sailors, artillerymen and nurses. The children were also
wearing modern camouflage, they held toy weapons in their hands, saluted and laid flowers at the memorial.
According to Natalya Vasyutina, the head of the education department of the Pyatigorsk administration, this parade was supposed to help
teach children how to behave properly. In her opinion, “the sooner patriotic education begins, the healthier the society is.”
OE Watch | December 2019

13

EURASIA
Soviet-Finnish War Lessons
OE Watch Commentary: In November, the popular military weekly
Voenno-Promyshlenny Kurier (VPK) included a short article that discussed
some of the painful lessons learned from the Soviet-Finnish War (193940) and how “that bitter experience must be taken into account when
building the modern army of Russia.” The author, former Soviet Chief
of the General Staff, General Mikhail Moiseev, stated that the “war with
Finland forced a critical look at the current state of the Armed Forces,” and
that even though corrective measures were taken, “only a year remained
before the start of the Great Patriotic War, and it was not possible to fully
implement the plan.”
General Moiseev then describes the Russian military today where
Soviet troops invading Finland, 30 November 1939.
Source: Wikimedia Commons. Public Domain
he asserts that “military reform is being systematically carried out, the
command and control system is being modernized, and the organizational structure is being optimized.” He goes on to list all the impressive
statistics regarding new military equipment, recently formed units, and improvements in personnel, asserting that “staffing of the Armed Forces
has been brought up to 95-100 percent… [and] 96 percent of commanders of combined arms brigades and regiments have combat experience.”
He concludes by praising the reintroduction of the “Main Military-Political Directorate of the Armed Forces… the central military-political
control body that carries out military-patriotic work in the Armed Forces,” suggesting that “the de-ideologization of the political system,
including the Armed Forces, in my opinion, was erroneous.”
Russian military leaders (both past and present) continue to scour their history for pertinent lessons that might be applied today. The SovietFinnish War certainly provided a number of painful lessons, not least of which are the hazards of invading a neighboring country under spurious
pretexts. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… That bitter experience must be taken into account when building the
modern army of Russia….”
Source: Mikhail Moiseev, “Уроки финского не забываются,” [Finnish lessons are not forgotten] Voenno-Promyshlenny Kurier, 5 November
2019. vpk-news.ru/articles/53455
The war of the mighty Soviet Union with little Finland, which began 80 years ago, laid bare strategic problems, revealed political and military leadership
errors in the Armed Forces, miscalculations in strategy, operational art and tactics of military operations. That bitter experience must be taken into
account when building the modern army of Russia.
Being the Chief of the General Staff in the late 90s, I thoroughly analyzed the report of the People’s Commissariat of Defense of the USSR S.K.
Timoshenko from comrade K. Y. Voroshilova (May 1940), which, among other things, reflected the shortcomings that emerged during the war with
Finland….
…The war with Finland forced a critical look at the state of the Armed Forces, unresolved problems, put an end to the widespread mood of complacency,
unreasonable self-confidence, forced the leading cadres to look at the combat readiness… with different eyes. It became clear that urgent extraordinary
measures were needed to correct the situation, and in the conditions of growing military danger it was impossible to hesitate further…. The corresponding
reform program was developed, however, only a year remained before the start of the Great Patriotic War, and it was not possible to fully implement the
plan….
Now in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, military reform is being systematically carried out, the command and control system is being
modernized, and the organizational structure is being optimized….
Equipment with modern weapons reached 61.5 percent: in the Strategic Nuclear Forces, 82 percent, in the Ground Forces - 48.3 percent, in the Air
Forces - 74 percent, in the Navy - 62.3 percent, in the Airborne Forces - 63.7 percent…. The staffing of the Armed Forces has been brought up to 95-100
percent. All commanders of the military districts, combined arms armies, air force and air defense armies, divisional commanders, as well as 96 percent
of commanders of combined arms brigades and regiments have combat experience.
The country’s leadership pursues an active foreign policy, analyzes the international situation, takes care of equipping the army and navy with modern
weapons and military equipment, and improving the professional skills of personnel.
War forced an evaluation of the entire system of military-political work in the army and navy, and to begin its restructuring on new foundations. It
is proved that one-man management is the only acceptable and most effective method of command in the Armed Forces. The de-ideologization of the
political system, including the Armed Forces, in my opinion, was erroneous. The state and society cannot function and develop effectively without a
national idea, their own system of views and relations.
The leadership of the country and the Armed Forces have taken practical steps to revive the military-political system in the Army and the Navy. President
Vladimir Putin signed a decree (No. 454 dated July 30, 2018), in accordance with which the Main Military-Political Directorate of the Armed Forces of
the Russian Federation was created - the central military-political control body that carries out military-patriotic work in the Armed Forces….

OE Watch | December 2019

14

EURASIA
Arctic Coal Barges from Russia to India
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying excerpt from The Barents Sea Independent Observer discusses, “India needs about 70
million tons of high-quality coal for its aluminum and steel industry.” Indian Minister of Oil, Natural Gas and Steel, Dharmendra Pradhan and
the Indian business leaders are looking to the Russian Arctic, which has all the carbon-rich rocks they ever might need. Russia is planning to
mine the Arctic tundra for coal and export it out of a new port terminal near Dikson on the Kara Sea of the Arctic Ocean. The coal will then
begin a sea voyage on the Northern Sea Route to India. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“While coal is a dying industry in Europe, nearby Russia
continues to place its bets of the polluting mineral.”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “Russia finds market for its vast reserves of Arctic coal,” The Barents Sea Independent Observer, 1 November 2019.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-and-energy/2019/11/russia-finds-market-its-vast-reserves-arctic-coal
Russia finds market for its vast reserves of Arctic coal
It was not alternative and green power that was discussed when Indian Minister of oil, natural gas and steel Dharmendra Debendra Pradhan
visited Russia in October…. “Our negotiations must end with a successful project decision on the development of metallurgic coal, that is to
be exported from Russia” the minister stated in a meeting with the Russian Ministry of the Far East and Arctic. According to Pradhan, India
needs about 70 million tons of high-quality coal for its aluminum and steel industry. Pradhan and the Indian business leaders are looking
towards the Russian Arctic, where they will find all the carbon-rich rocks they ever might need.
Several new major mining projects are under development in the remote northern region. Among them are the projects of company Vostok
Coal in the Taymyr Peninsula. Vostok Coal plans to extract an annual 30 million tons of anthracite, a high-quality coal, from its fields in
Taymyr…. Vostok Coal believes that the lands of the Taymyr tundra hides unprecedented volumes of coal… as much as 225 billion tons of
high-quality coal….
The coal exports from Taymyr constitute a core part of Russia’s ambitious development plans for the Northern Sea Route. Vladimir Putin’s
national 5-year plan presented after his re-election in 2018 includes a total annual shipping volume on the Arctic shipping route of 80
million tons. That objective will not be possible to reach without the coal from Taymyr. The Arctic cooperation between Russia and India
consequently comes with backing from the highest political level in Moscow….
While coal is a dying industry in Europe, nearby Russia continues to place its bets of the polluting mineral.
Over the last 10 years, Russia has boosted its coal production by more than 30 percent to a total of 440 million tons, and the country is now
the world’s third biggest producer.
In the same period, investments in the industry surged 150 percent.
And production is to continue upwards. According to a draft development program, annual coal production might reach as much as 670
million tons in the course of the next 15 years.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | December 2019

15

EURASIA
Russia Transfers S-300s to Tajikistan
OE Watch Commentary: In late 2015, the Russian
government closed the base of the 149th Motorized
Rifle Regiment (one of three regiments that make
up the 201st Motorized Rifle Division) in Kulyab,
Tajikistan and transferred the unit to Dushanbe.
The change led to questions about what military
presence the Russian government would maintain
in Tajikistan. The accompanying excerpted article
reports on the transfer of S-300 surface-to-air missile
systems from Russia’s Central Military District to
Tajikistan and it provides a look at how security
cooperation in Tajikistan could play out over the next
several years.
The article comes from Asia-Plus, a Russianlanguage news website based in Tajikistan, and it
reports that the S-300 unit “is made up of about
30 pieces of equipment. Among these – a radar
for illumination and guidance, a command post,
24th Anti-Aircraft Rocket Brigade’s exercise. S-300PS.
launchers and support vehicles” and that it will
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anti-AircraftExercise2019-40.jpg, CC BY 4.0
“provide cover for the facilities of the 201st military
base from aerospace attacks as well as air defense of the Central Asian region.” The article also notes how “until now, this kind of system in the
region was only in service in Kazakhstan.” The Russian government has stated an interest in strengthening air defense for the region in the past,
but had held off on related security assistance or cooperation, other than annual joint air defense exercises. The article does not mention when
the Russian government made the decision to deploy the S-300 to Tajikistan, but it comes after the Chinese government reportedly established a
presence in the region with a post in Gorno-Badakhshan near the Tajik-Afghan border. Ultimately, the transfer of the S-300 to the 201st bases in
Tajikistan does provide better air defense in the region, but this move might be worth putting into context alongside future Chinese or Russian
security cooperation in Tajikistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The main tasks of the division will be to provide cover for the
facilities of the 201st military base from aerospace attacks as well
as air defense of the Central Asian region.”

Source: “Россия перебросила С-300ПС на российскую базу в Таджикистан (Russia transferred the S-300PS to the Russian base in
Tajikistan),” Asia-Plus, 28 October 2019. https://asiaplustj.info/ru/news/tajikistan/security/20191028/rossiya-perebrosila-s-300ps-narossiiskuyu-bazu-v-tadzhikistan
A division of S-300 surface-to-air missile systems were delivered by rail to the 201st Russian military base in Tajikistan from the Volga…
The unit is made up of about 30 pieces of equipment. Among these – a radar for illumination and guidance, a command post, launchers and
support vehicles.
“The main tasks of the division will be to provide cover for the facilities of the 201st military base from aerospace attacks as well as air
defense of the Central Asian region,” explained the press service of the Central Military District…until now, this kind of system in the region
was only in service in Kazakhstan.
…The bilateral agreement, which the base in Tajikistan falls under, is valid until 2042. The units of the base are in Dushanbe and Bokhtar
(formerly Qurgonteppa).

OE Watch | December 2019

16

EURASIA
The Development of UAVs in Armenia
OE Watch Commentary: The inventory of the
Armed Forces of Azerbaijan reportedly includes
Israeli-made “kamikaze” unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), which were sighted during the April 2016
conflict with Armenia. This is in addition to an
incident in July 2017, during which an Israeli defense
firm tested a kamikaze UAV on an Armenian target,
allegedly at the behest of Azerbaijan officials (see:
“The Israeli Defense Ministry’s Investigation into
a UAV strike on the Armenian Army,” OE Watch,
October 2017). The accompanying excerpted
article reports on the development of UAVs by the
Armenian company UAVLab and there are a couple
of things worth noting.
The article, from the Russian-language News.am,
is an interview with the director of UAVLab, who
discusses the development of UAVs in Armenia. He
mentions how the company “produces both types
IAI Harop UAV at Paris Air Show, 2103.
Source: Julian Herzog via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IAI_Harop_PAS_2013_01.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
of unmanned vehicles – planes and copters” and that
the new “Bzez” model “can carry a payload of 4.6
kg up to 9 kilometers,” and is “considered the first Armenian offensive UAV” with a “self-destruct function.” The director also notes how the
“Bzez” first appeared in 2012, but that the company “started production only after the April 2016 war.” The director states that the “Bzez” is a
“kamikaze quadcopter,” which is different than the fixed-wing type of kamikaze UAVs Azerbaijan’s military reportedly uses. The article shows
how small UAVs with offensive capabilities are becoming more of a factor in the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“The “Bzez” belongs in the category of “kamikaze,” it has a
self-destruct function.”
Source: Nana Vagramyan, “Армянские беспилотники выходят на международный рынок (Armenian unmanned aerial vehicles are
entering the international market),” News.am, 22 October 2019. https://news.am/rus/news/540355.html
UAVLab is a pioneer in the production of unmanned aerial vehicles in Armenia and in a short period has managed to achieve impressive
results…The director of the company, Armen Vardanyan, spoke with News.am on UAV production trends.
(Vagramyan/News.am) – What are the best practices of the Armenian specialists in this field and what models of UAVs does UAVLab
produce?
(Vardanyan) – …We have five successful developments, two of which passed the necessary tests and I hope will be in service in our army in
the near future…UAVLab produces both types of unmanned vehicles – planes and copters
We have participated in a number of international exhibitions, our UAV model “Bzez” is the most successful…it can carry a payload of 4.6 kg
up to 9 kilometers, while shooting video in real time with a coverage area of 400 square meters transmitted via a secure channel…This model
is considered the first Armenian offensive UAV. The “Bzez” belongs in the category of “kamikaze,” it has a self-destruct function.
(Vagramyan/News.am) – How long has the company been manufacturing this model?
(Vardanyan) – Despite its development and appearance at the “DigiTec-Expo 2012,” we started production only after the April 2016 war…in
2012 it did not receive much attention, since no one considered these kinds of UAVs could be turned into effective weapons. During the events
of the April conflict, we decided on our own to start producing the “Bzez”…After a month, we not only recreated it, but also conducted all the
necessary tests…In addition to the “Bzez” kamikaze quadcopter, we have several reconnaissance-type models…
(Vagramyan/News.am) – What countries are showing interest in Armenian UAVs?
(Vardanyan) – We are already working with dozens of Russian enterprises…

OE Watch | December 2019

17

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s New Type Combat Forces: Tomorrow’s Ground
Forces
OE Watch Commentary: The People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
has been pushing to develop “new-type combat forces,” which it
says are important forces to win future wars. While the country’s
military has come a long way in the development and training of
its combat forces, China has recognized shortfalls and is moving to
rectify things.
Over the past 70 years, PLA ground forces have undergone a
number of developmental stages, from being mule and horsemounted to motorized, mechanized, and informationized. The
Emblem of People’s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force.
Source: 漫漫长冬 via Wikimedia,
PLA has gone from being a manpower-intensive military service,
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Emblem_of_People%27s_Liberation_Army_Strategic_Support_Force.png, Public Domain.
with infantry as the primary body to being a technology-intensive
military service, with infantry forces being trimmed back. It has also transitioned from mechanization to informatization. Now, the PLA has
its sights set on becoming “intelligentized,” with an intensified focus on better-trained soldiers. “New-type combat forces” as they are being
referred to, have been a growing focus of Chinese media reports, such as the accompanying article excerpts published in China Daily and
Beijing Jingshen – Qian Xian.
China Daily referred to the PLA Strategic Support Force, which was founded on 31 December 2015, as being a “new type of combat force.”
The same article also refers to “new type of informationized combat forces” in the PLA Navy. With the rapid modernization of China’s military,
“new type of combat forces” are likely becoming the new normal throughout all branches of service.
With this new normal, as Beijing Jingshen - Qian Xian points out, new training methods need to be used to train combat forces. Some of
the author’s points include: New type combat forces are more information and technology intensive. They are deployed in critical missions
and therefore “training should be conducted in the same way that the forces are employed on the battlefield.” Personnel will likely be a higher
caliber and more highly educated, capable, and trained in information and domains. They are also expected to be more versatile. This means
that while soldiers are specialists in one area, they are expected to be “jacks of all trades.” Finally, training methods need to be revamped to
become more interactive and diverse. The author argues, “the new-type combat forces and the conventional combat forces should band together
in combined training around their concrete combat missions, thus realizing the grand fusion of all types of forces in the operational system.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The new-type combat forces are important forces in our [China’s]
military for winning future wars, and represent the developmental
trend of military technologies and warfighting patterns.”
Source: “China Daily: President Xi Reviews Armed Forces on National Day,” PR Newswire, 3 October 2019. https://www.prnewswire.com/
news-releases/china-daily-president-xi-reviews-armed-forces-on-national-day-300930646.html
China Daily: President Xi Reviews Armed Forces on National Day
A formation of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army Strategic Support Force (PLASSF) was reviewed. It marked the first attendance of
PLASSF, a new type of combat force for safeguarding national security, in National Day parade. The PLASSF was established on December
31, 2015.
A maritime patrol aircraft echelon was reviewed on Tuesday in China’s National Day military parade, marking the collective public debut of
the new type of informationized combat forces of the People’s Liberation Army Navy. The echelon consists of the KJ-500H and KJ-200 early
warning aircraft, the Y-8 anti-submarine patrol aircraft and the y-8 technical reconnaissance aircraft.

OE Watch | December 2019

18

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s New Type Combat Forces: Tomorrow’s
Ground Forces
Source: Zhao Ruibing, “新型作战力量训练须用“新”招 (New Methods should be Used to Train the New-Type Combat Forces),” Beijing
Jingshen - Qian Xian, 17 October 2019. http://www.bjqx.org.cn/qxweb/n429183c1096.aspx
The new-type combat forces are important forces in our military for winning future wars and represent the developmental trend of military
technologies and warfighting patterns.
… Training for the new-type combat forces is different from that for the conventional forces. … In general, the new-type combat forces
have the characteristics of being information-dominating and technology-intensive… the new-type combat forces will mostly be employed in
the key areas to perform critical missions. So, training should be conducted in the same way the forces are employed on the battlefield, and
should truly be oriented to and driven by actual operations, be conducted according to the use timing, organizational scale, action forms and
methods, and battlefield environment of the new-type combat forces. …Training methods and regularity should be studied around the building
of individual capability, single-piece equipment capability, units combined capability, elements interaction capability, and systems integration
capability.
… In addition to the good qualities of physical fitness, operational skills, and intelligent capacity, the new-type personnel should also have
the following three types of crucial qualities. First, the quality of informatization…. Second, the quality of professional proficiency…. Third,
the quality of versatility.
…the new forces are technology-intensive and include diverse specialties, and in particular, as the key posts have high requirements for the
personnel’s skills and require a long training cycle, it is necessary to concentrate the organization of training at a high level of precision and
accuracy.
Forces should be grouped for training in the same way as in wartime.
To maximize their combat effectiveness, the new-type combat forces must be merged with other forces to shape an integrated entity. So
the new-type combat forces and the conventional combat forces should band together in combined training around their concrete combat
missions, thus realizing the grand fusion of all types of forces in the operational system.

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | December 2019

19

INDO-PACIFIC
Zhongguancun: China’s Silicon Valley
OE Watch Commentary: In October, China held
its 11th annual Zhongguancun Forum. Zhongguancun
is a government-backed “incubation zone for startups.” It is a place that aims to find “the next big thing
in technology.” It is at the forefront of China’s drive to
turn the country from a workshop of the world into a
global technology powerhouse.
During the event, President Xi Jinping sent a letter
to congratulate the forum for achieving “win-win
Buildings in Zhongguancun/ Panorama of a Tech Hub.
results.” China has been leaving no stone unturned
Source: Charlie Fong via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:中关村科技园全景图.jpg, Public Domain.
in its effort to become an innovation superpower
and Zhongguancun is part of this effort. One of the main goals of the Zhongguancun Forum is to help build a world-leading sci-tech park and
innovation highland, according to the first article extract, published in Xinhuanet. An important strategy China uses to build its technological
base, is the cooperation in various key technologies with participants from around the world.
The excerpts from the second article, published in South China Morning Post a year ago, offer an excellent write-up on the history and goals
of Zhongguancun. In 1978, when Deng Xiaoping was about to kick off his economic reforms, Zhongguancun was merely a street where people
could purchase consumer electronics (“cun” means “village” in Chinese). In 1988, with the approval of China’s State Council, Zhongguancun
became the country’s first hi-tech industry pilot zone. Its mission was to learn from and replicate Silicon Valley. Since then, it has become the
“launch pad” for some of the China’s most successful entrepreneurial firms. With the government’s backing, it has been transformed into “a
national innovation center with global influence.” Today the 488-square kilometer zone is home to nearly 9,000 hi-tech firms, including some
of China’s biggest internet firms, such as Baidu and Sina Corp. It is also located near some of China’s most prestigious universities and research
institutes. In the Haidian park of Zhongguancun, there are more than 40 universities, including Peking and Tsinghua Universities, often cited as
China’s top two academic institutions. There are also over 200 research institutes and key state laboratories within the vicinity. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“Founded 30 years ago with a mission to “learn from Silicon

Valley and replicate Silicon Valley,” Zhongguancun is at the
forefront of Beijing’s drive to turn the country from [the]‘workshop
of the world’ into a global technology powerhouse.”
Source: “Xi Sends Congratulatory Letter to Zhongguancun Forum,” Xinhuanet, 17 October 2019. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/201910/17/c_138479841.htm
Xi Sends Congratulatory Letter to Zhongguancun Forum
President Xi Jinping on Thursday sent a congratulatory letter to the 2019 Zhongguancun Forum (ZGC Forum) held in Beijing.
Xi said in the letter that with the accelerating new round of sci-tech revolution and industrial transformation, innovation, development and cooperation
with win-win results have become an inevitable trend.
The ZGC Forum is of great significance to the sharing of innovative ideas and development concepts among all countries by discussing cutting-edge
science and technologies, future industrial development trends, global innovation rules and innovative governance, he said.

Source: Meng Jing, “Zhongguancun: Beijing’s Innovation Hub is at the Centre of China’s Aim to Become a Tech Powerhouse,” South China
Morning Post, 13 November 2018. https://www.scmp.com/tech/start-ups/article/2172713/zhongguancun-beijings-innovation-hub-centrechinas-aim-become-tech
Founded 30 years ago with a mission to “learn from Silicon Valley and replicate Silicon Valley”, Zhongguancun is at the forefront of Beijing’s drive to
turn the country from ‘workshop of the world’ into a global technology powerhouse.
It is home to nearly 9,000 hi-tech firms, including some of China’s biggest internet firms, such as Nasdaq-listed Baidu and Sina Corp. Nearly half of
China’s 70 unicorns – start-ups with a valuation of more than US$1 billion each – are located in the area. As many as 80 tech start-ups are born there
every day.
… in 1988, Zhongguancun became the country’s first hi-tech industry pilot zone. Since then, the areas has become the launch pad for some of China’s
most successful entrepreneurial firms with the backing of Beijing to make it “a national innovation centre with global influence”.
… Zhongguancun enjoys great advantages in access to talent. The Haidian park of Zhongguancun is home to more than 40 universities, including the
world-class Peking and Tsinghua Universities, as well as more than 200 research institutes and national-level laboratories.
Government also lends a hand. Preferential policies, including tax breaks and funding, offered in Zhongguancun by local and central government, helps
to make the place a magnet for tech talent and companies. To attract global talent, Beijing’s municipal authorities earlier this year announced plans to
offer permanent residence for senior hires and allow them to bring their domestic helpers – if needed – with them to China.

OE Watch | December 2019

20

INDO-PACIFIC
“Intelligentization” and a Chinese Vision of Future War
OE Watch Commentary: In today’s world of rapidly developing concepts and technologies, many theories are emerging about what warfare
will resemble in the future. Nowhere does this seem truer than in China, where scholars, researchers, and scientists are putting their thoughts to
paper, such as the accompanying article, which looks at how “intelligentization” will change the structure and outcome of warfare.
The thought-provoking article, which was republished in various journals, such as Jiefangjun Bao, the official newspaper of the People’s
Republic of China’s Central Military Commission and Qiushi Journal, which falls under the Central Party School and the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China, looks at how intelligentized warfare, a term commonly used by Chinese scholars, is expected to redraw the
boundaries of warfare, restructure combat forces, and reshape the rules of engagement. Some of the more salient points worth pondering are
highlighted in the accompanying excerpted passages.
The article claims that the art of combat power will inevitably change because artificial intelligence is rapidly infiltrating military operations.
Traditional battlefields and battlefronts will “be hard to reproduce.” The current battle domains in warfare (the physical dimensions of land,
sea, air, and space and the informational dimensions of electromagnetic and cyber) will be updated to include a new dimension: the cognitive
domain, which would fall under the cognitive dimension.
Intelligentized warfare will see the integration of military and non-military domains; and the boundary between peacetime and wartime will
get increasingly blurred. The outcome of a war will not be determined by who destroys whom in a kinetic sense, but rather who gains maximum
political benefits. Intelligentized warfare will see the integration of human and machine intelligence. It will reshape warfighting in every
dimension and within every realm. Human fighters will eventually stop being the first line of fighting and intelligence systems will prevail.
“Human-on-human” warfare will be replaced by “machine-on-human” or “machine-on-machine warfare.”
Combining humans and machines into brain-machine interfaces, external skeletal systems, wearable devices, and gadgets implanted into
human bodies will “comprehensively enhance the inherent cognitive and physiological capacity of human fighters and will forge out superman
combatants.” Intelligentized warfare will upend traditional rules of military engagement. Cross-domain unconventional and asymmetrical
fighting in military engagements will become the new normal. Unmanned operations will rewrite the rules of engagement and reshape the
support process. Intelligence control will become the center of gravity.
Based on the article, one might surmise that the military tactics of yesterday and today are not likely the area in which the People’s Liberation
Army will place too much effort, if any at all. With artificial intelligence and other technologies rapidly gaining ground, China seems keener on
leading the curve in the long term than honing tactics in the immediate future. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The cognitive domain will become another battle

domain next to the land, sea, air, space, electromagnetic,
and cyber domains of warfare.”
Source: Yang Wenzhe, “在变与不变中探寻智能 化战争制胜之道 (How to Win Intelligentized Warfare by Analyzing what are Changed and
What are Unchanged),” Jiefangjun Bao, 22 October 2019. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2019-10/22/content_245810.htm
Seeking the Way to Win Intelligentized Warfare by Analyzing what are Changed and What are Unchanged
…With AI technology rapidly infiltrating into the military domain, it will inevitably lead to a thorough change in the way combat power manifests itself.
… The cognitive domain will become another battle domain next to the land, sea, air, space, electromagnetic, and cyber domains of warfare. …the three
major warfighting dimensions, that is, the physical dimension, the informational dimension, and the cognitive dimension. The boundaries of war will
extend into the deep land, deep sea, deep air, deep cyber, and deep brain domains… Intelligentized warfare will be generalized to all military conflicts
and rivalries, giving rise to a more striking feature of integration between military and non-military domains. The scope of warfighting will expand to the
extremes. The boundary between peacetime and wartime will get increasingly blurred.
Gaining political benefits is an invariable standard for measuring winning in war.… Military victories must guarantee political predominance.
Human fighters will fade away from the first line of fighting. Intelligent equipment will be brought onto the battlefield in large quantities and as whole
units. “Human-on-human” warfare in the traditional sense will be superseded by “machine-on-human” or “machine-on-machine” warfare.
Such means of human-machine combination as brain-machine interfaces, external skeletal systems, wearable devices, gadgets implanted into human
bodies will comprehensively enhance the inherent cognitive and physiological capacity of human fighters, and will forge out “superman combatants”…
…operations”. Cross-domain unconventional and asymmetrical fighting will become a new normal in military engagements…Unmanned operations, as
a prominent hallmark of the new warfighting pattern, will rewrite the rules of engagements and reshape the support processes. Intelligence control will
replace spaces control as the center of gravity in war.

OE Watch | December 2019

21

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Military Sponsors Exoskeleton Competition
OE Watch Commentary: In October, the PLA’s Army Equipment Department [陆军装备部]
held a competition for exoskeleton designs. The accompanying article explains that the competition
showcased recent advances in loadbearing and maneuverability for a number of different designs. A
group of 29 teams fielded 50 prototype exoskeletons submitted to the competition. The exoskeletons
were put through a series of tests, including light maneuvering, marching carrying heavy loads,
handling materials, and reloading artillery.
Exoskeletons are wearable frameworks meant to aid in lifting heavy objects or carrying
equipment. The article explains that the strain of these tasks can lead to long-term medical
problems. There are numerous military and civilian applications for exoskeletons. As noted in the
article, Russia has fielded “K-2” exoskeletons for mine clearing work in Syria. The US and Canada
have also shown a number of models. In 2010 for example, Lockheed Martin displayed a Human
Universal Load Carrier (HULC) intended for a number of applications, including artillery. The
article further notes that exoskeletons potentially offer a breakthrough in mobility in complex
terrain, or behind enemy lines, where opportunities for fuel resupply are limited.
While not identified in the article, photos circulating in Chinese language forums indicate that
Chinese armaments giant Norinco has an exoskeleton program. Norinco’s Northwest Institute of
Electrical and Mechanical Engineering (202 Research Institute), established an exoskeleton research
DARPA Exoskeleton.
Source: DARPA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DARPA_
program in April 2013. The research institute apparently completed the digital design, modeling and
Exoskeleton.tiff, Public domain
physical prototyping of the exoskeleton in two years and it entered environmental testing in 2015. A number of civilian universities appear to be
involved related work with civilian applications. Walking assistance exoskeletons for the elderly in particular seems to be an area of interest, due
to China’s ballooning elderly population.
For the moment, the application of these exoskeletons will remain limited. Unpowered exoskeletons have already been used for some
physically demanding tasks in manufacturing, but these systems are still limited by the operator. To allow more demanding tasks or further
reduce strain on the operator, powered systems are necessary. A key hurdle has been the energy density of battery power—the amount of
energy a given weight battery can put out. While the specifics vary depending on the battery application, it appears that energy density has
roughly doubled every decade. Combined with the development of lighter and stronger structural materials and better drive systems (such as
electric motors or hydraulics), more powerful exoskeletons are on the horizon. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The competition... tested light-duty mobility, weight-bearing marching,

material handling, and other areas, fully demonstrating that exoskeletons
have a strong prospect for use on a future battlefield.”
Source: “有了这款单兵外骨骼，我军炮弹装填手就不用这么辛苦了 (With this Exoskeleton, Reloading Artillery Shells Does Not Have to
Be So Hard),” Ordnance Industry Science & Technology 《兵工科技, 30 October 2019. Post on Wechat - https://mp.weixin.qq.com/
As we all know, reloading artillery is tiring work. This is especially true for large-caliber howitzers, whose shells often weigh tens of kilograms, and
repeated movement of reloading artillery is exhausting, and many people suffer from deteriorative back problems starting at a young age, impacting the
effectiveness of artillery operations.
So, how to reduce this burden? From October 23 to 27, the Army Equipment Department organized the “Super Warrior - 2019” Individual Soldier
Exoskeleton System Challenge. At the challenge, they presented an exoskeleton system specially developed for artillery reloaders. The loaders, wearing
mechanical power-assisted exoskeletons, were transformed into “Hercules” effortlessly lifting 155mm shells weighing between forty and fifty kilograms.
Exoskeletons are able to achieve these marvelous effects mainly through external power and mechanical power-assist systems, helping address some
of the limitations of individual soldiers such as insufficient strength, limited mobility, etc. In combat situations such as operations behind enemy lines,
mountain warfare, on border patrols, or rescue and disaster relief, mobile platforms generally cannot reach mission areas or their fuel supplies are
insufficient to operate for very long. Exoskeletons could enhance mobility while carrying heavy loads or adaptability to complex terrain while reducing
the physical fatigue of long-term marching.
…
Many people believe exoskeletons remain in the realm of science fiction, but this view has been disproved, and with the advance of technology, the
exoskeleton has become practical. Russia has released videos of soldiers on the Syrian battlefield employing K-2 exoskeletons for mine clearance
operations, and several U.S. exoskeleton systems have been put into use on the battlefield in the Middle East.
China, of course, is not backward, and this “Super-Power Warrior - 2019” competition demonstrates that China’s exoskeleton systems have also
gradually moved towards practicality. In addition to reloading, the competition also tested light-duty mobility, weight-bearing marching, material
handling, and other areas, fully demonstrating that exoskeletons have a strong prospect for use on future battlefields.

OE Watch | December 2019

22

INDO-PACIFIC
China Introduces New Battle Rifle for the PLA
OE Watch Commentary: China recently displayed a new rifle during the military parade held to celebrate the 70th anniversary of its
founding. According to the accompanying excerpted article, the new rifle was developed by the state-owned defense firm NORINCO’s 208
Research Institute [208所], also known as the Chinese Soldier Equipment Research Institute [中国兵器装备研究院] in Beijing. As laid out in
the article and related interviews with members of the development team, the new rifle represents a shift in how China develops firearms.
The new rifle, which does not currently have a public designation, incorporates a number of significant changes from the QBZ-95 used by
most PLA units. Elements of the Chinese Armed Forces, including People’s Armed Police and border guards, use the QBZ-03 assault rifle,
which uses the same ammunition as the QBZ-95 but which follows a more traditional configuration.
Most obviously the new rifle abandons the Type 95’s bullpup design, which places the rifle’s action and magazine behind the trigger, with a
more traditional configuration with the magazine in front as in the AK-47 or M-16. Both rifles use a 5.8mm cartridge designed at the time to
pierce standard NATO body armor.
The top of the rifle has a Picatinny-style rail for mounting optics and the plastic handguard is capable of mounting lights and vertical grips.
The rifle uses a new rail-mounted 3x optic called the QMK152, which uses light-gathering fiber optics. It is also equipped with backup iron sides
that fold down when not in use and an ambidextrous charging handle. Several barrel lengths for the rifle appear to exist, with a shorter carbine
version carried by some vehicle crews during the parade.
The rifle also includes improved magazines produced by Chongqing Construction Industry Company [重庆建设工业 ] that feature an
enhanced grip over their predecessors, and the magazine release appears to have been lengthened to speed reloading or manipulation when
using gloves. The rifle also features an adjustable buttstock, a change from the QBZ-95 whose bullpup design does not allow it. Another
difference with the QBZ-95 is that the grip is removable and includes a storage compartment, likely for a cleaning kit or lubrication.
Overall these changes address a number of the criticisms of the QBZ-95 and bring it up to a standard adopted by most countries (though
notably the UK, Australia, France, and Singapore among others still use bullpup designs).
Also on display at the parade was a pistol-caliber submachine gun or personal defense weapon (PDW) design, designated as the CS/LS-7 and
carried by the crew of armored vehicles. It features an MP-5-like magazine and a retractable buttstock. It is equipped with a holographic sight
similar to that produced by US-based company EOTECH.
He Long [何龙], deputy chief of the 208 Institute noted that previously whatever the 208 Institute developed the PLA would adopt, but that
now they work together to develop equipment appropriate to requirements.
Wang Yingsong [王英松], director of the 208 Institute’s Firearms Research Institute [枪械技术研究所], emphasized that digital design tools
have significantly decreased their research and development times, with the various stages compressed from between six months or a year to
roughly a month allowing them to move from conceptualization to prototype much faster. The 208 institute is able to fully model a prototype
in a digital environment, fabricate a practical prototype and then begin testing at the institutes’ environmental simulation labs. It was noted for
example that the new rifle had undergone rigorous testing including firing after immersion in muddy water meant to mimic China’s famously
salty rivers.
More importantly, these new firearms are only one component of a broader set of improvements to the PLA’s individual soldier equipment.
What appear to be earlier versions of the new “Integrated Soldier Combat System” [单兵综合作战系统] from NORINCO were designed as
a modularized system “composed of a weapon system, information system and protection system,” “targeted at improving integrated combat
capability of soldiers.” End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The rifle is highly reliable, feels comfortable to operate,

shoots with very high accuracy and has less recoil, Li Xiang, a
test marksman at the research institute, told CCTV, noting that
the ergonomics of the weapon can better fit the battlefield.”

OE Watch | December 2019

23

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China Introduces New Battle Rifle for the PLA

QBZ95 Automatic Rifle.

Source: User:Tyg728 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:QBZ95_automatic_rifle.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

Source: “China’s New Rifle to help Create Future ‘Super Soldiers’,” Global Times, 24 October 2019. www.globaltimes.cn/content/1167915.
shtml
China’s new service rifle, first made public at the National Day parade on October 1, is said to be reliable, accurate and comfortable to
shoot with and has low recoil. China’s recently revealed new service rifle is reliable and comfortable, and “super soldiers” are in the making
when paired with an advanced individual soldier combat system, said a senior Chinese light arms developer.
The gun, which was first shown to the public at the National Day parade on October 1, was developed by the No. 208 Research Institute of
China Ordnance Industries, the developer of the QBZ-95 rifle, national broadcaster China Central Television (CCTV) reported on Monday.
The rifle is highly reliable, feels comfortable to operate, shoots with very high accuracy and has less recoil, Li Xiang, a test marksman at the
research institute, told CCTV, noting that the ergonomics of the weapon can better fit the battlefield.
Wei Dongxu, a Beijing-based military analyst, told the Global Times on Thursday that compared to the QBZ-95, China’s previous generation
of service rifles that features a bullpup design, the new one has an optimized conventional design with better ergonomics.
It will likely use new materials that make it very light, and its advanced optics could help the user measure distance and accurately acquire
targets any time of the day, Wei said.
Multiple tests under harsh conditions, including in simulated sandstorms and sand-filled river water, were conducted to make sure the gun
can adapt to any situation and remain consistent, CCTV reported.
The No. 208 Research Institute applied advanced computer simulation technologies during the rifle’s development that can simulate
every component of the gun and their movements and status when the gun fires or falls from high places. This greatly shortened the rifle’s
development period, according to CCTV.
China’s guns have been ranked among the world’s most popular guns as China’s gun development capability grew, CCTV said.
Wei said China’s guns are very competitive in the international market. Older generations of guns still have huge international
demand because they are cheaper and perform very well, while new and advanced guns can also compete in high-end markets, he said.
Accompanying the new rifle is an individual soldier combat system, which integrates dozens of advanced devices, including an information
exchange interface packed up on the chest of a soldier, the CCTV report said.
“We will provide the Chinese warriors with our advanced equipment, making them super soldiers on the future battlefield,” He Long, deputy
head of the No. 208 Research Institute, told CCTV.
Wei said the individual soldier combat system can greatly increase the battlefield situational awareness of soldiers by sharing information,
so the battlefield would become more transparent to them as they can recognize danger and more accurately attack targets, gaining a
significant advantage.
OE Watch | December 2019

24

INDO-PACIFIC
New PLA Air Force Training Exercise Focuses on Electronic
Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: The PLA Air Force has
announced a new annual training exercise focused
on electronic warfare (EW). The exercise joins the
existing set of “four major training brands” [四大训
练品牌], its annual large scale exercises, each focused
on a particular mission set. The new exercise is called
Qingdian [擎电] (which so far lacks a standardized
English translation) while the others are called “Red
Sword,” “Blue Shield,” “Golden Helmet” and “Golden
PLANAF-GX4-02.
Source: 日本防衛省統合幕僚監部via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PLANAF-GX4-02.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
Dart.” While Red Sword is focused on Command and
Control, Golden Dart on Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD), Golden Helmet on air-to-air combat, and Blue Shield on integrated air
defenses, the new exercise will further enhance EW training. The first of these exercises was established in 2009 to test the PLAAF’s ability
to carry out complex aerial combat operations. Golden Helmet added additional competitions to address severe deficiencies in pilot skills. The
Golden Helmet fighter exercise has evolved into a significant competition, with the winners receiving the prestigious award for PLAAF pilots.
The PLAAF’s role has evolved significantly in the past 20 years, form acting in a subordinate and supporting role for the PLA Ground Forces
and engaging in territorial defense [国土防御], to its 2004 adoption of “Integrated Air and Space Operations, Simultaneous Offensive and
Defensive Operations” [空天一体, 攻防兼备]. In particular, descriptions of training exercises have seen a rising emphasis on integration with
airborne early warning and control (AEW&C) aircraft, and both use of and response to electronic warfare.
With new aircraft equipped with more powerful radars and longer-range weaponry being fielded, pilot training has lagged behind as
integration of these new skills requires time and opportunities to test their full capabilities. Chinese military writers have paid close attention to
the use of electronic warfare by Russia in Ukraine and Syria. All of the PLA’s services can be expected to integrate this more heavily into their
training. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The Shaheen series has become a real combat training brand of

the PLAAF, effectively deepening and promoting the cooperation and
exchanges between the two air forces.”
Source: “空军实战化训练推出‘擎电’提升电子战能力 ( PLA Air Force Launches ‘Qingdian’ Exercises to Raise Electronic Warfare
Capability),” Xinhua, 14 October 2019. china.zjol.com.cn/gnxw/201910/t20191014_11181855.shtml
On October 13th, at the opening press conference at an event held in Beijing to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s
Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF), PLAAF spokesperson Shen Jinke [申进科], said that in addition to the existing “ four major training
brands,” the PLAAF will launch a new “Qingdian” brand to improve the Air Force’s electronic warfare capability.
Shen Jinke said that in information systems combat operations, the side that seizes control of the electromagnetic spectrum the
electromagnetic power, will control the course of the war. Echelons of electronic warfare aircraft featured prominently during the military
parade held in commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China. In the new era of training and
preparation, the PLAAF will take new steps to strengthen electronic warfare capabilities. Qingdian will act as a new hallmark of the Air
Force’s operational training.
Shen explained that the PLAAF has carried out continuous improvement of its combat training, establishing the “Red Sword,” “Blue
Shield,” “Golden Helmet,” “Golden Darts” and now Qingdian, comprehensively enhancing the PLAAF’s overall combat capability. He noted
that a ceremony was planned for a few days after the news conference to confer awards on pilots who won the “Golden Helmet” and “Golden
Darts” competitions will be presented to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the Founding of the People’s Air Force.
Shen Jinke said that the Air Force will never forget to prepare for war, be capable of winning wars, closely adhere to the mission and
battlefield environment to strengthen the actual combat training, and constantly improve the ability to win, to maintain the national air and
space security.
Shen Jinke said that the Air Force will always uphold its mission of training to fight and win wars, closely adhere to realistic battlefield
environment conditions in training, and safeguard China’s national air and space security.

OE Watch | December 2019

25

INDO-PACIFIC
The People’s Liberation Army Air Force Turns 70
OE Watch Commentary: On 9 November,
the Chinese state media outlet People’s Daily
announced that President Xi Jinping had visited
the China Aviation Museum in the Changping
District of Beijing to congratulate the People’s
Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) ahead
of their 70th anniversary celebration, which
took place on 11 November. President Xi began
his visit by presenting a flower basket outside
of the museum to honor PLAAF soldiers and
subsequently visited an exhibition illustrating
the history and achievements of the PLAAF.
According to the article, “Xi Jinping emphasized
that the People’s Liberation Army Air Force
stands at a new historical starting point. We must
thoroughly implement the party’s strong military
ideology and strategy in the coming era, bear in
mind our original mission while carrying forward
the glorious tradition, dare to innovate, strive to
build the People’s Liberation Army Air Force into
a world-class air force, and constantly create new
and greater achievements!”

Chengdu J-10 of the ‘August 1st’ Aerobatic Team.

Source: Peng Chen via Wikimedia Commons. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:August_1st_(aerobatic_team), CC BY-SA 2.0

In preparation for the 70th anniversary of the PLAAF’s founding, Chinese government outlet Xinhua News Agency published an article on 3
November boasting of a “new leap” in combat capabilities and aviation technology. The article claims the PLAAF has accelerated its equipment
upgrades since the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, which began on 8 November 2012. Domestically produced fighter
planes including the J-10B, J-10C, J-16, J-20, Yun-20, H-6K, and the Air Police (空警)-500 have “successfully installed” new upgrades including
early warning devices, reconnaissance equipment, and upgraded bombing capabilities within each aircraft structure. The H-6K bomber
has recently “cruised around the island of Taiwan” while the J-20 stealth fighter plane “carried out practical training on the sea,” potentially
signaling the PLAAF’s interest in developing air presence within the region.
According to the Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post, China’s new supersonic arsenal can give the H-6N bomber force greater
reach. Citing official Chinese military sources, the article claimed the upgraded H-6N bomber can now carry “CJ-100 supersonic cruise missiles
or the WZ-8 supersonic stealth spy drone, increasing its maximum strike range to 6,000km (3,728 miles).” The new H-6N bomber was unveiled
most recently at China’s National Day Parade on 1 October and featured two distinctive upgrades including an aerial refueling probe on the
planes’ noses and a semi-recessed area on their bellies. An anonymous PLAAF source claimed the newest upgrades allow the H-6N bombers to
carry oversized weapons payloads to the required altitude and launch coordinates. End OE Watch Commentary (Hartnett)

“Xi Jinping emphasized that the People’s Liberation Army Air

Force stands at a new historical starting point. We must thoroughly
implement the party’s strong military ideology and strategy in the
coming era, bear in mind our original mission while carrying forward
the glorious tradition, dare to innovate, strive to build the People’s
Liberation Army Air Force into a world-class air force, and constantly
create new and greater achievements!”

OE Watch | December 2019

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: The People’s Liberation Army Air Force Turns 70
Source: Li Xuanliang & Zhang Yuqing, “Xi Jinping: Build the People’s Liberation Army Air Force Into a World-Class Air Force,” People’s
Daily, 9 November 2019. http://military.people.com.cn/n1/2019/1109/c1011-31446538.html
Xi Jinping emphasized that the People’s Liberation Army Air Force stands at a new historical starting point. We must thoroughly implement
the party’s strong military ideology and strategy in the coming era, bear in mind our original mission while carrying forward the glorious
tradition, dare to innovate, strive to build the People’s Liberation Army Air Force into a world-class air force, and constantly create new and
greater achievements!

Source: Zhang Yuqing, Huang Shubo, & Wang Zhijia, “A New Leap In the Combat Capability of the People’s Liberation Army Air Force
Aviation System,” Xinhua News Agency, 3 November 2019. http://www.xinhuanet.com/2019-11/03/c_1125187402.htm
Since the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, the air force has accelerated the upgrading of its equipment. The
domestically-produced new fighters such as the J-10B/C, J-16, J-20, Yun-2 and Air Police-500 have been successively installed. With
the three-generation machine as the main body and the fourth-generation machine as the backbone, early warning, sniper, bombing,
reconnaissance, transportation and other aircraft upgrades have been added.
Entering a new era, the air force aviation police patrol the East China Sea and South China Sea, and cruise around the island. The farsea ocean training is normalized, systematic, and the new track is continuously extended. The multi-type fighters such as the H-6K cruised
around the island J-20 fighters carried out practical training on the sea, and the Sino-Russian Air Force combined air strategy achieved a
new leap in combat capability.

Source: Minnie Chan & Liu Zhen, “China’s new supersonic arsenal could give H-6N bomber force greater reach, military experts say,” South
China Morning Post, 10 November 2019. https://www.scmp.com/print/news/china/military/article/3036994/chinas-new-supersonic-arsenalcould-give-h-6n-bomber-force
China’s new H-6N strategic bomber could carry CJ-100 supersonic cruise missiles or the WZ-8 supersonic stealth spy drone, increasing its
maximum strike range to 6,000km (3,728 miles), military sources said.
When a flight of three H-6Ns passed over Beijing during rehearsals for the October 1
military parade to mark the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic, military experts and aircraft enthusiasts reported two
distinct new features: an aerial refueling probe on the planes’ noses and a semi-recessed area on their bellies.
The latest designs suggested that the planes could carry oversized weapons payloads to the required altitude and launch coordinates, the air
force source said.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | December 2019

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Maritime Militia Increase Realism in Training
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article highlights some of the improvements
in training that have been implemented in maritime militia units in Zhejiang Province, on
China’s east coast. Maritime militia units have been effectively used to support so-called
“grey zone” operations below the threshold of war to assert Chinese territorial claims, but
their explicit purpose is to support the PLA Navy during wartime or act in a variety of law
enforcement or aid roles in peacetime (see inset chart). Elements (sometimes Romanized
as fendui [分队]) are the smallest organizations and are believed to typically include 3040 personnel. Larger organizations, such as Squadrons [中队] or Companies [连] are also
common in China’s coastal provinces (see map).
While these units appear to be located in almost every major coastal city and many small
ones, the Chinese military acknowledges that a number of problems are severely limiting
their utility in a conflict.
An article in July 2016 by Wang Wenqing [王文清], head of the Militia and Reserve
Bureau in the Central Military Commission’s National Defense Mobilization Department [
军委国防动员部民兵预备役局局长] had highlighted some of the problems that the maritime
militia units needed to overcome to become an effective force. Wenqing identified four areas
in need of improvement: force reorganization, improved training, data-enabled management, and financial incentives. He argued that greater
effort should be put into recruiting militia fishermen, employees of maritime transport companies, and coastal communities. Targeted training
was vital, he argued, especially for captains and chief engineers of fishing vessels, oil tankers, and cargo ships. Lastly, he noted that the Chinese
military lacked an up-to-date database of militia units and equipment, hampering training and planning. Lastly, the article acknowledged that
greater financial incentives were needed to offset the costs of participation in militia activities, something he believed was achievable through
greater “Military Civil Fusion” [军民融合], or stronger links between civilian organizations and businesses and militia units.
The excerpted article from earlier this year, which describes a unit preparing to participate in joint exercises with the PLA Navy, provides
some insight into how many of the problems laid out by Wang Wenqing have been addressed. Of particular note is the emphasis in training
further offshore, rather than keeping to more routinized and superficial training. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“They discarded the old training routine, repositioned
the mission mandate of each detachment, reconstructed
the battlefield environment, and reorganized the training
content. The training field has been “extended” to the
open ocean for the various…Military Subdistrict leaders
also arranged for the training window to coincide with the
PLAN’s training missions, to help the militia effectively
learn operational requirements.”

OE Watch | December 2019

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Chinese Maritime Militia Increase Realism in
Training

Source: “让民兵训练搭上强军快车——浙江省紧贴新时代强军备战需求开展民兵训练闻思录 (Let Militia Train on the ‘Strong Army
Express’--Record of Zhejiang Province’s Close Adherence to Militia Training Following New Era Strong Military Readiness),” China
Defense News [中国国防报], 14 February 2019. http://www.81.cn/gfbmap/content/2019-02/14/content_227234.htm
In February 2019, Li Demin [李德民], a Staff Officer of the Taizhou Military Subdistrict Mobilization Division in Zhejiang Province [浙江省台州军分
区动员处参谋], began working on the plan for the annual militia training program [年度民兵训练计划]. Planning the training program was supposed
to be “a piece of cake” for Li, who has been in charge of training planning for many years, but this time, Li spent a week meeting with grassroots
units in preparation for this. Why was that? According to Li, in order to bring militia training in line with the demands put forth by Xi Jinping’s Strong
Military mandate, and against the backdrop of the national defense and military reform, it is necessary to break away from the old routine and establish
a benchmark for measuring combat capabilities. As a result, every component of the militia training program—from the initial planning, coordination
to the finalization of personnel and training subjects to be involved in the training—must be examined for its feasibility, soundness, and potential utility
for improving actual-combat capabilities. This is the secret behind the Zhejiang Military District’s success when it took home the championship during
the 2018 militia reorganization and reform inspection assessment, organized by the Central Military Commission’s National Defense Mobilization
Department.
In the Wenzhou Military Subdistrict [温州军分区], the reporter reviewed the maritime militia’s annual training plan and noticed that each of the units
added long-distance sailing and maritime psychological endurance training components to their training plans.
…
At the start of 2018, when planning the annual military training of the maritime militia, senior leaders of the Military Subdistrict reoriented the training
program to reflect the priority of “responding to enemies on the battlefield.” They discarded the old training routine, repositioned the mission mandate
of each detachment, reconstructed the battlefield environment, and reorganized the training content. The training field has been “extended” to the open
ocean for the various data-enabled, including the maritime rights protection, maritime search and rescue, maritime transport, maritime police patrol,
and vessel rapid repair, among others, who honed their combat skills through day-into-night training under complex weather conditions. Military
Subdistrict leaders also arranged for the training window to coincide with the PLAN’s training missions, to help the militia effectively learn operational
requirements.

OE Watch | December 2019

29

INDO-PACIFIC
PLA Navy Ships Conduct Replenishment at Sea with
Civilian Cargo Ships for the First Time
OE Watch Commentary: In November, the PLA Navy announced a
breakthrough in logistics resupply for its ships, successfully carrying out
dry goods resupply at sea between a civilian cargo ship and two navy
ships. The civilian ship involved, the SinoTrans Fuzhou [中外运福州], is a
180m-long, container ship operated by Sinotrans & CSC Holdings, a state
owned enterprise and the largest logistics company in China. According
to the exerpted article, the PLA Navy regards this as a major step forward
in development of new technologies for replenishment-at-sea, and for the
rapid installation of these systems aboard members of China’s extensive
merchant vessel fleet.
According to the article, the exercise was set up by naval units under
the PLA’s Northern Theater Command to test a new electrical sling
system and validate whether it could be installed aboard a civilian vessel.
Members of three naval ships were involved: the Linyi [临沂] (Pennant
number 547), Taihu [太湖] (Pennant number 889) and Dongping Lake
[东平湖] (Pennant number 960). The Linyi is a Type 054A (Jiangkai II)
Type 054A Frigate.
Guided Missile Frigate and the Taihu and Dongping Lake are Type 903
Source: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Shannon Renfroe via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:People%27s_Liberation_Army_(Navy)_frigate_PLA(N)_Yueyang_(FF_575)_steams_in_formation_with_42_other_ships_and_
resupply ships. Both are assigned to the North Sea Fleet. The Linyi has
submarines_during_Rim_of_the_Pacific_(RIMPAC)_Exercise_2014.jpg, Public domain
participated in a number of long distance voyages and foreign port calls since its commissioning in 2012, including evacuation of Chinese
citizens from Yemen in 2015.
Video of the exercise shown on Chinese state television included short interviews with members of the crew. Zhao Zhenqiang [赵珍强], head
of an unspecified research office at China’s Naval Research Academy who was aboard noted that “This test of this maritime replenishment
system integrated the use of a number of key technologies, and features high compatibility with other ship types and is suitable for rapid
conversion of merchant ships into dry cargo resupply ships with offshore resupply capability.”
Captain of the Taihu, Guo Dong [郭栋], further noted that “The success of maritime replenishment mission further verifies and improves the
suitability of civilian ships to resupply warships.” According to the video, replenishment operations with the Linyi altogether took 13 minutes.
The Taihu then maneuvered to begin replenishment operations with the Fuzhou. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“China has a large number of civilian ships, with a vast number

of supply routes. If supplied with equipment for maritime
replenishment, it would create a capable force with great potential
military and economic potential. The success of this test will provide
important technical support for the application of fully electric
sling transfer systems for replenishment ships, which will have real
significance in helping China achieve its military goals.”
Source: “重大突破！民船为水面舰艇实施干货补给 (Major Breakthrough! Civilian Ship Carries out Dry Cargo Replenishment At Sea for
Surface Ships),” Navy News Public Wechat Account [海军新闻 微信公众], posted on The Observer [观察者], 16 November 2019. https://
www.guancha.cn/military-affairs/2019_11_16_525353.shtml
Recently, the Chinese navy used civilian ships in modular underway replenishment, a major breakthrough.
The replenishment test officially began at 9 a.m., with naval research institute experts and crew from the Dongping Lake’s Combat Support Ship Detachment providing
guidance from the deck of the Fuzhou. The Linyi maneuvered to the port side of the Fuzhou and launched a cable which was quickly used to attach the cargo transfer
system. The Fuzhou then smoothly transferred modular dry cargo containers to the deck of the Linyi, completing the test.
At about 2 p.m., the Fuzhou cargo vessel and the Navy’s Taihu vessel began their connection test. The two goals of the test were to verify the smooth operation of the
system and test resupply operations with a civilian vessel.
According to this reporter’s understanding, the system was developed by PLA Naval Research Institute, and the test was organized by naval units of the Northern
Theater Command. The use of civilian ships to carry out dry cargo resupply of naval vessels at sea is a new development in the field of naval logistics support, with the
growing numbers of China’s naval surface ships, and in increase in the number of long-distance missions, there is greater demand for maritime logistics support.
The system adopts the modular design concept, using an electric drive system, super capacitor energy storage, constant tension control and many other key
technologies, and is meant to be easily integrated into other ships so that cargo supply ships can be converted to be capable of maritime replenishment in a short period
of time.
China has a large number of civilian ships, with a vast number of supply routes. If supplied with equipment for maritime replenishment, it would create a capable force
with great potential military and economic potential. The success of this test will provide important technical support for the application of fully electric sling transfer
systems for replenishment ships, which will have real significance in helping China achieve its military goals.

OE Watch | December 2019

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Taiwan Debuts Indigenous Jet Trainer
OE Watch Commentary: Taiwan has unveiled a new jet trainer,
developed locally, to improve fighter pilot training and increase the
countries’ self-reliance. The “Brave Eagle” [鹰勇] project was first
proposed in 2016 and work began in 2017.
Though Taiwan continues to operate submarines and fighter jets
purchased from the Netherlands and France, most nations have ceased
selling arms to the island due to pressure from the People’s Republic
of China. Taiwan has roughly 100 fixed wing aircraft for pilot training
split between T-34C propeller driven trainers and AT-3A/B Tzu-Chung
advanced jet trainer. According to the article, Taiwan’s inventory of aging
F-5 E/FII fighters are also used in training.
Developed in the mid-1980s, the AT-3 Tzu Chung (自强; lit. Self
Reliance), was one of several earlier initiatives, which included F-CK-1
indigenous fighter to reduce Taiwan’s reliance on imports of fighter jets
from abroad.

AIDC T-5 Brave Eagle.

Source: 玄史生 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:XAT-5_Advanced_Trainer_Model_Display_at_AIDC_
Booth_20150815a.jpg, Public Domain.

Taiwan has raised defense spending, and promoted self-reliance in the defense sector as both a national security issue and a way to promote
growth in high-tech manufacturing and related fields. According to Taiwan’s 2017 Quadrennial Defense Report, another goal of indigenizing the
program is to promote spin-off technologies for the civilian sector. Taiwan is also attempting to indigenize much of its naval development with a
facility under construction to build Taiwan’s first indigenous submarine. The first prototype is slated for completion by the end of 2024.
The article notes that without domestic programs replacing imports, Taiwan’s aerospace and maritime R&D would likely wither. End OE
Watch Commentary (Wood)

“If we still relied on importing advanced jet trainers, our

research and development capability of military aircraft and
vessels would stand very little chance of surviving.”
Source: “Taiwan’s 1st indigenous advanced jet trainer makes public debut,” Kyodo News, 24 September 2019. https://english.kyodonews.net/
news/2019/09/1fdee542565d-taiwans-1st-indigenous-advanced-jet-trainer-makes-public-debut.html
Taiwan’s first prototype of indigenous advanced jet trainer made its public debut on Tuesday, the first completion of a major project of President Tsai Ing-wen’s
“design and build at home” policy for military equipment.
At the launching ceremony at a factory of the state-owned Aerospace Industrial Development
Corp. (ADIC) in Greater Taichung, central Taiwan, Tsai called the completion of the aircraft, named Yong Ying or Brave Eagle in English, a “historic moment.” Tsai
recalled that she decided not long after taking office May 2016 to build advanced jet trainers at home “to turn the tide around.”
“If we still relied on importing advanced jet trainers, our research and development capability of military aircraft and vessels would stand very little chance of
surviving,” she said. Tsai said since the work began in 2017, the NT$68.6 billion (US$2.2 billion) project has created at least 1,200 jobs at home and more than half
of the orders go to local manufacturers. The air force contracted AIDC to build 66 advanced trainers to replace Taiwan’s aging AT-3 Tzu Chung jet trainers, as well
as F-5E/F “Tiger II” fighters that are mainly used now to train pilots. It plans to see the completion of the prototype of the aircraft this year and the start of mass
production in 2023. The goal is to take the delivery of the last batch no later than 2028.
A high-ranking AIDC manager, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that the company plans to build four prototypes: two for ground testing and two others for
flight testing.
The prototype made public debut on Tuesday is scheduled for its flight testing in June next year. If all goes well, maybe it can deliver the last batch ahead of time, he
said.
AIDC President Ma Wan-june told reporters that the advanced jet trainer is aimed to simplify the training process of fighter jet pilots.
Currently, a fighter jet pilot first flies a propeller plane before moving on to AT-3 and then F-5. With the advanced jet trainer, the person can fly a fighter jet after
completing the training of a propeller aircraft and then the advanced jet trainer.
The AIDC has the experience of co-building the AIDC F-CK-1 Ching-kuo, commonly known as the Indigenous Defense Fighter, with the help of the United States in
the late 1980s. The IDF fighter was until now the last project of indigenous aircraft.
When Tsai’s predecessor Ma Ying-jeou was in power between 2008 and 2016, the AIDC signed a teaming agreement with the manufacture of Alenia Aermacchi M-346
Master transonic trainer to build advanced trainers.
However, since Tsai took office, she has been pushing a “design and build at home” policy for military airplanes, vessels and submarines, leaving the Italian aircraft
maker out of the picture.
After years of reluctance to sell new, advanced fighter jets to Taiwan, the United States finally decided last month to sell F-16 Block 70 fighter jets worth $8 billion. The
last sale of U.S. fighter jets to Taiwan took place in 1992 under the George H.W. Bush administration. The move drew strong protests from China, which regards Taiwan
as a renegade province awaiting unification, by force if necessary.
The AIDC is also responsible for refitting a fleet of 142 older model F-16s, which has undergone several upgrades.

OE Watch | December 2019

31

INDO-PACIFIC
Malaysia Weighs Releasing 9/11-Linked Terrorist from
Prison
OE Watch Commentary: In December 2001,
Malaysian militant Yazid Sufaat was arrested for his
alleged involvement with al-Qaeda and links to the
September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States. A
former biochemistry student in the US, he was tasked
with developing anthrax as a bio-terror weapon for
al-Qaeda and was an explosives expert for Southeast
Asia-based Jemaa Islamiya, a group responsible for a
series of large attacks in Indonesia. According to the
first excerpted article in the Malaysian Berita Haria
[Daily News], Malaysia is now facing the prospect
of Sufaat being released from prison. However, the
government is examining whether his detention should
be extended and whether his release will foment
terrorism in the country.
According to the article, Malaysia has a Terrorism
Prevention Board, which will be reviewing Sufaat’s
case and deciding whether he may be released. It
will need to determine whether he is fully recovered
and deradicalized. Given the difficulty of this type of
examination, the article notes the Board recognizes
the evaluation will need to be thorough. If Sufaat no
longer holds his previous views and is no longer a
threat to the public, according to Malaysia’s former
chief of police, “there is nothing immoral about
releasing Sufaat.”
The article also demonstrates that this case is unique
insofar as the Terrorism Prevention Act under which
Sufaat has been detained was previously used to
detain Communists in the country, but only until even
Communists recanted their ideology. Now the same
Act is being used in a new era and the Sufaat case is
the first major test. Before concluding the article, it
also lists Sufaat’s experience, including his service in
the Malaysian Armed Forces.
Perhaps most relevant, however, is that he was
Malaysian UNGERIN anti-terror-police on 23 May 2009, at the Muar in Johore, Malaysia.
Source: Rizuan via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marine_UNGERIN021.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0
released once before, and then recruited for the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). This may raise questions about whether he will recant his ideology this time if he did not the last time. The
second accompanying passage provides further details on his background, links to the September 11 attacks, and previous arrests. It notes that
“Yazid, a US trained bio-chemist, was detained... in December 2001 for his alleged involvement with bin Laden’s al-Qaeda. He was released
in 2008 but re-arrested five years later and again in 2017 after a brief release. Yazid was arrested in 2013... for recruiting new members for
the Islamic State. Following his release, Yazid was detained in December 2017 after authorities discovered that he had been recruiting fellow
inmates for al-Qaeda while in jail.” End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“For me, it is not wrong to give him a chance if he is fully recovered,
but the examination of Yazid [Sufaat] must be done very carefully.”

OE Watch | December 2019

32

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Malaysia Weighs Releasing 9/11-Linked
Terrorist from Prison
Source: “Apakah Yazid Sufaat Sudah Benar-Benar Pulih (Has Yazid Benefit Really Recovered?),” Berita Harian, 20 October 2019. https://
www.bhplus.com.my/berita/kes/2019/10/619767/apakah-yazid-sufaat-sudah-benar-benar-pulih
A local militant, Yazid Sufaat, must prove he no longer supports the terrorist ideology before a decision is made to release him next month.
If there is still a threat to the country and the public, then his release will need to be re-evaluated by the Terrorism Prevention Board.
Regarding that, former Chief of Police, Tan Sri Musa Hassan, said “The board will need to conduct a thorough review and evaluation
before deciding whether to release or extend Yazid’s detention. “For me, it is not wrong to give him a chance if he is fully recovered, but the
examination of Yazid must be done very carefully,” he said. When it comes to issues of ideology, Musa explains, the important thing to know
is whether Yazid is willing to change something about his past or is he still trying to perpetuate elements of violence within himself. If he is
fully aware and recovered, it is not wrong for the government to release him because it concerns the rights of every individual in our country.
In the past, Communist detainees under the Internal Security Act were also released after they were fully recovered, he said.

Source: Ali Nufael, “Police: Malaysian Terrorist Linked to 9/11 Attacks is Set to be Freed Next Month,” Benar News, 23 October 2019.
https://www.benarnews.org/english/news/malaysian/sentence-done-10232019163232.html
Yazid Sufaat, the only Malaysian directly involved in the 9/11 terror attacks against the United States, is set to be released from prison next
month, but police will continue to monitor him, the nation’s police chief says.
...
Yazid, a U.S. trained bio-chemist, was detained under the now-defunct Internal Security Act (ISA) in December 2001 for his alleged
involvement with bin Laden’s al-Qaeda. He was released in 2008 but re-arrested five years later and again in 2017 after a brief release.
Yazid was arrested in 2013 under SOSMA [the Security Offenses (Special Measures) Act] and sentenced to four years for recruiting new
members for the Islamic State.
Following his release, Yazid was detained in December 2017 after authorities discovered that he had been recruiting fellow inmates for alQaeda while in jail. He is finishing up his two-year sentence and is to be released, according to officials.
...
A bio-chemistry graduate from the University of Sacramento in California, Yazid joined Jemaah Islamiyah terror group shortly after its
founding in 1993. He was tasked with developing anthrax as a bio-terror weapon for al-Qaeda, investigators said.
In January 2000 key al-Qaeda members met at Yazid’s home in Kuala Lumpur to discuss terror plans, according to reports. He also
allegedly provided lodging to two Sept. 11 hijackers, Khalid al-Mihdhar and Nawaf al-Hazmi.
Yazid was flown to Kandahar, Afghanistan, in 2001 under the command of Ayman al-Zawahiri to spend several months attempting to
cultivate anthrax in a laboratory he helped set up near the Kandahar airport, according to the 9/11 commission report.
He was in Afghanistan during the Sept. 11 attack and later fled through Pakistan to Malaysia where he was caught by authorities and jailed
under ISA at the Kamunting Camp prison, which housed convicted terrorists and political detainees.
Home Minister Muhyiddin Yassin told reporters the government would wait for the Prevention of Terrorism Board to decide Yazid’s fate.
Muhyiddin said the board would meet next month to examine details of Yazid’s detention.
“I have not come to the final decision, I just reviewed the matter and the two-year detention under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) is
likely to end soon,” Muhyiddin said, according to state news agency Bernama.
“Regardless, there is a procedure before the final decision is made through a single board where it will look at circumstances during the
detention period and how he (Yazid) has behaved, whether he has improved or not,” he said. “This will be looked at and then the decision
will be made.”

OE Watch | December 2019

33

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia: JAD Poses Renewed Threat to Bali
OE Watch Commentary: Indonesia’s popular
tourist island of Bali suffered two of the country’s
most severe terrorist attacks in 2002 and 2005,
but has since been relatively peaceful. However,
according to the excerpted article from the local
Tribun News, a recent terrorist threat to the island
was thwarted after two members of Jamaah
Anshorut Daulah (JAD) were arrested in Bali,
for planning to carry out attacks. The arrest of
the two JAD members, who were a father and
son pair, followed an earlier attack in October by
a radicalized JAD member who stabbed a highlevel government official. Therefore, the article
indicates the security services devoted extra
attention to this Bali-based duo.
While the 2002 and 2005 Bali bombings
involved sophistication and caused numerous
deaths, the article’s description of the arrested
individuals suggests terrorists in Indonesia are
The Bali bombing memorial.
no longer capable of the same scale of attacks
Source: Jorge Láscar from Melbourne, Australiavia Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_Bali_bombing_memorial_(16702974500).jpg, CC BY 2.0
as more than a decade ago. The stabbing of the
government official earlier in October involved only a knife; and in this case the suspects only held arrows and a modified gun. Therefore, they
would have been incapable of a large-scale operation even if they carried out their mission. According to a source interviewed by Tribun News,
there was, however, additional information the security services had not yet released.
Finally, the article also demonstrates linkages between terrorist networks in Indonesia. The individual who stabbed the high-level government
official, for example, claimed his teacher in JAD was called Abu Zee. The article then notes it is suspected that this teacher, Abu Zee, was also a
relative of the latest two arrested suspects in Bali. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“It is suspected that the perpetrators were affiliated with the Jamaah

Ansharut Daulah (JAD) in Indonesia and the network is spreading in
various regions, including in Bali.”

Source: “Densus 88 Tangkap 2 Terduga Teroris di Bali (Two members of the Anshorut Daulah (JAD) network were arrested in Bali),” Bali
Tribun News, 11 October 2019. https://bali.tribunnews.com/2019/10/11/breaking-news-densus-88-tangkap-2-terduga-teroris-di-bali-terkaitkasus-penyerangan-wiranto
Two members of the Jamaah Anshorut Daulah (JAD) network were arrested in Bali region. This was stated by the Head of Bali Police
Public Relations, Senior Commissioner Hengky Widjaja. It is known that the Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal, and Security Affairs,
Wiranto, was stabbed by Syahril Alamsyah alias Abu Rara suspected of being exposed to radical understanding. It is suspected that these
perpetrators were affiliated with JAD in Indonesia and the network is spreading in various regions, including in Bali. Meanwhile, a source
from the Bali Tribune at the Bali Regional Police said that both of them had prepared materials to carry out terrorist acts in Bali. “Lots of
evidence exists. There were arrows and modified guns. The information is a lot,” said a source of the Bali Tribune. Previously, details have
not been provided since the time of arrest about these two suspected terrorists. However, the terrorist suspects are related to Fazri Pahlawan
alias Abu Zee Ghuroba, leader of JAD Bekasi.

OE Watch | December 2019

34

INDO-PACIFIC
A New Domestically Produced Service Rifle in Pakistan?
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Pakistan has been looking to
replace the current service rifle for its armed forces for the past few years and as
the accompanying excerpted article reports, it may have taken a step forward in this
process. The article from Quwa.org, a website with defense news on Pakistan, reports
how “Pakistan Ordnance Factories (POF) revealed three new firearms in its product
catalogue,” including the PK18 and PK21. The author notes several aspects of the
PK18 and points out how POF is marketing the rifle as “ergonomic, modular, accurate
and highly reliable in most difficult operational conditions.” The article does not
mention it, but if chosen, the PK18 would apparently replace the Heckler & Koch G3
currently in service.
The author also points out how the PK21 appears to be a “Kalashnikov variant” and
that while POF labeled it as an “AK-103 in parenthesis” during a recent exhibition,
“no licensed production agreement is in place between the Kalashnikov Concern and
POF.” The announcement of the development of the PK18 and PK21 comes a few
months after the Pakistani government failed to reach an agreement with Kalashnikov
Concern for the purchase of a modern variant of a Kalashnikov rifle, partly due
to the efforts of the Indian government to block the deal (see: “India and Pakistan:
Deal or No Deal for Russian Rifles,” OE Watch, September 2019). The PK21 would
presumably replace the Type 56 rifle currently in service.
Lastly, the author mentions that in order to produce the amount of rifles needed
to replace the G3 and/or the Type 56, “POF will need access to polymers and other
materials as well as a highly precise machining equipment.” The author also notes
how a few years ago POF “requested $250 million US (spread over five years) to
Pakistani soldier carrying the G3A4 variant after Swat Operation at
modernize its facilities, especially as 58% of its machinery is now over 30 years of
the highest point in the Swat valley on May 12, 2009.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Raising_the_flag_in_Swat_-_
age.” It is not mentioned if this budget request was granted, but the appearance of the Source: Al Jazeera English via Wikimedia,
Flickr_-_Al_Jazeera_English.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0
PK18 and PK21 could indicate the Pakistani government put some effort toward this. While it is unknown when a decision on selecting a new
service rifle will be made, the article shows that the government appears to be trying to move forward to produce a rifle on its own. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

“It is unclear if the Pakistan Army will opt for the PK18 and/or PK21
for its standard-issue firearms requirements.”
Source: Bilal Khan, “Pakistan Ordnance Factories Reveals New PK18 and PK21 Assault Rifles,” Quwa, 31 October 2019.
https://quwa.org/2019/10/31/pakistan-ordnance-factories-reveals-new-pk18-and-pk21-assault-rifles/
Pakistan Ordnance Factories (POF) revealed three new firearms in its product catalogue: the PK18 assault rifle, PK21 submachine gun
(SMG), and POF-10 pistol.
POF is marketing the PK18 as a 7.62×51 mm gas operated assault rifle…the PK18 has a total weight of 3.8 kg and effective range of 400 m to
600 m. It has a muzzle velocity of 780-820 m/second, and each of the PK18’s magazines can carry 20 rounds.
POF states that the PK18 is “ergonomic, modular, accurate and highly reliable in most difficult operational conditions.”…
The PK21 is a 7.62×39 mm assault rifle.
It appears that the PK21 is a Kalashnikov variant, and though POF labels it as an AK-103 in parenthesis, no licensed production agreement
is in place between the Kalashnikov Concern and POF…
The PK18 appears to be based on the AR-platform and, given the availability of marketing materials, the closest to availability. It is unclear
if the Pakistan Army will opt for the PK18 and/or PK21 for its standard-issue firearms requirements…
For full-scale production, POF will need access to polymers and other materials as well as a highly precise machining equipment. In fact, in
November 2017 POF requested $250 million US (spread over five years) to modernize its facilities, especially as 58% of its machinery is now
over 30 years of age.
These constraints have likely affected its sharp drop in exports in 2018-2019, which stood at $7.13 million US (from $58.15 million US in
2017-2018 and $67.80 million US in 2016-2017).

OE Watch | December 2019

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s Increasing Military Presence in Libya
OE Watch Commentary: Libya has been in turmoil since 2011, when
Gaddafi was overthrown and killed in an uprising after four decades
in power. Since then, two rival centers of power have emerged in the
country: one in Tobruk in eastern Libya, and one in Tripoli in western
Libya. In the east, Khalifa Haftar heads what he calls the Libyan Arab
Armed Forces (LAAF), formerly the Libyan National Army (LNA), with
support from the UAE, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. In the west, the Tripolibased Government of National Accord (GNA) enjoys UN support as well
as military backing from Turkey.
In this conflict, Russia’s position has generally been to maintain
contacts with authorities in both Tripoli and Tobruk, while staying in the
background in providing covert support to Haftar but refraining from any
official military support. According to the accompanying passages, recent
developments suggest a departure from Russia’s previous approach, while
still maintaining some level of ambiguity for deniability.
The first two accompanying passages discuss reports that, in recent
months, Moscow-linked paramilitaries belonging to the Wagner Group
have appeared in the frontlines of the Libyan conflict, apparently to
support Haftar’s stalled assault on Tripoli. According to the passages,
Russia’s help includes skilled snipers, Sukhoi jets and precision-guided
Map of Libya.
artillery, as well as around 200 fighters. While some draw parallels
Source: Rafy, en:User:Interchange88 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Libyan_Uprising.svg, Public Domain.
between this and Russia’s strategy in Syria, the third passage contrasts
Russia’s use of mercenaries in Libya and Syria. The author notes, “In Syria, the private military companies have frequently acted as land
assault formations within the Russian troop contingent — a non-traditional role for such structures. In Libya, they are not bearing these
functions as Russia does not have an actual military presence there.”
Russia’s use of private security companies and the fact that they don’t wear uniforms, allows Russia deniability, as seen in the fourth passage
from The Moscow Times, where Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabov rejects these allegations and says, “We’re acting in the interest
of Libyan [conflict] settlement. We support the appropriate efforts [to achieve this], including through the UN. We’re in dialogue with those
who... influence the situation.” 										
The fifth passage, from Middle East Eye features comments by an official in the Tripoli-based GNA, who claims that “Russia [is] fuelling the
country’s civil war” and providing the local chapter of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) an opportunity to regroup.			
Russia’s ultimate goals in this strategy, according to the passages, likely include access to oil reserves and permanent access to a North
African port or base, with influence over sea routes to the entrance to the Suez. In addition, the final passage from a Turkish source notes that
Russia eventually aims to install a friendly Minister of Defense in Libya, to increase its military and political influence in the region. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Around 200 Russians who have entered the conflict in recent weeks likely belong to
the Wagner Group, a private military contracting firm with links to the Kremlin...”
Source: Jack Detsch, “Congress moves to sanction Russians for mercenary surge in Libya,” Al Monitor, 18 November 2019. https://www.almonitor.com/pulse/originals/2019/11/congress-move-sanction-russia-mercenary-surge-libya.html
The proposed sanctions come amid reports that Russia has begun to add mercenaries to the front lines of the conflict to support eastern
Libya warlord Khalifa Hifter’s stalled offensive to take Tripoli; the help reportedly includes snipers, Sukhoi jets and precision-guided artillery.
Around 200 Russians who have entered the conflict in recent weeks likely belong to the Wagner Group, a private military contracting firm
with links to the Kremlin; some believe the move is linked to corralling the country’s oil supplies.
“Russia is very interested in oil reserves, it is very interested in restoring previous contracts, it will be interested in supporting the side that
can deliver that,” said Nikolay Kozhanov of St. Petersburg, Russia, who is a senior research fellow at the Moscow-based Institute of World
Economy and International Relations. “It maintains good contacts with this camp and that camp trying to decide where the situation is
going.”
OE Watch | December 2019

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia’s Increasing Military Presence in Libya
Source: Guma el-Gamaty, “Militias and mercenaries: Haftar’s army in Libya,” Middle East Eye, 7 November 2019. https://www.
middleeasteye.net/opinion/militias-and-mercenaries-haftars-army-libya
But the most significant addition to Haftar’s list of mercenaries comprises fighters belonging to the Russian Wagner Group, the Kremlinlinked private security company that was also involved in Russia’s intervention in Syria. Some 200 highly professional Wagner fighters are
believed to have arrived in Libya in recent months to support Haftar’s assault on Tripoli.
According to the Moscow Times, between 10 and 35 Russian mercenaries might have died while fighting in Libya recently. Photographs of
what appear to be Russian fighters in areas of combat south of Tripoli have been shared widely on social media.
Source: Kirill Semenov, “Sarraj visit to Sochi exposes rival Russian factions on Libya policy,” Al Monitor, 28 October 2019.
https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2019/10/russia-libya-sarraj-hifter-tripoli-pmcs.html
The scope of their [Russian private military companies’] activities in Libya and Syria is substantially different. In Syria, the private military
companies has frequently acted as land assault formations within the Russian troop contingent — a non-traditional role for such structures.
In Libya, they are not bearing these functions as Russia does not have an actual military presence there. Thus, some private military
companies came to Libya under contract for specific jobs — for instance, the RSB-Group was responsible for mine removal. There were other
covert, but traditional actions, of private military companies, such as providing security for oil facilities, guarding high-level government
officials and training personnel.
Moreover, Russian specialists repair damaged weapons and equipment of the Libyan National Army troops; transport aircraft belonging to
semi-legal corporations deliver goods for this structure.
Source: “Russia Denies Military Presence in Libya,” The Moscow Times, 7 November 2019. https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2019/11/07/
russia-denies-military-presence-in-libya-a68073
“I categorically reject speculation of this kind ... “We’re acting in the interest of Libyan [conflict] settlement. We support the appropriate
efforts [to achieve this], including through the UN. We’re in dialogue with those who in one way or another influence the situation,” he
[Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov] added.
Source: ‘Wherever Wagner goes destruction happens’: Libya’s GNA slams Russian role in conflict,” Middle East Eye, 10 November 2019.
https://www.middleeasteye.net/news/wherever-wagner-goes-destruction-happens-libyan-govt-slams-russian-role-conflict
Libya’s UN-recognised government has accused Russia of fuelling the country’s civil war by sending mercenaries to back eastern
commander Khalifa Haftar.
Fathi Bashagha, the interior minister of the Tripoli-based Government of National Accord (GNA), called on the US to help resolve the
conflict, adding that the unrest was providing the local chapter of the Islamic State group (IS) an opportunity to regroup.
“The Russians have intervened to pour fuel on the fire and enhance the crisis rather than find a solution,” Bashahga told Bloomberg on
Saturday.
“The proof is their deployment of Wagner to Libya. They had sent it to Syria before, and central Africa, and wherever Wagner goes
destruction happens,” he added.
Source: “Rusya’nin Libya’daki stratejisi askeri varligin ötesine mi geçiyor? (Is Russia’s strategy in Libya going beyond a military
presence?),” Anadolu Ajansi, 26 October 2018. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/dunya/rusyanin-libya-stratejisi-askeri-varligin-otesine-migeciyor/1294145#!
Russia’s military presence in Libya cannot be expressed in certain terms. Moscow’s military activities are not clear. This uncertainty is due
to Russia’s use of private security companies and the fact that they don’t wear uniforms.
...
What’s behind the Moscow government’s inclusion in the international community’s efforts to bring peace to Libya is its goal to install Hifter
or someone close to Hifter as Defense Minister in the new Libya government expected to be established after elections. Russia’s close ally
Hifter is also allied with Egypt and the UAE. Thus, these two countries would support an increase in Russia’s military and political influence
in Libya.

OE Watch | December 2019

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
AI-Powered Surveillance: All Eyes on Dubai and Abu Dhabi
OE Watch Commentary: To great domestic fanfare, the UAE recently announced
the launch of the Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
(MBZUAI) in Abu Dhabi. MBZUAI will be “the first graduate-level, research-based
artificial intelligence (AI) university in the world.” With its first cohort set to enroll
in the fall of 2020, the university will offer master’s and doctoral degrees in machine
learning, computer vision and natural language processing. It will also provide
“full scholarships, monthly stipends, health insurance and accommodation to all
students.” Over 3,200 prospective students applied in the first week, mostly “from
the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Egypt, India and China.” The university’s applied
partner is an Abu Dhabi-based research lab called the Inception Institute of Artificial
Intelligence (IIAI), which will “serve as a principal partner for collaborative
research.” One of the IIAI’s specialties is video understanding, which its website
explains as a technology that “can be deployed for face detection and annotation,
object identification and tracking, scene analysis and tagging, human behavior
analysis and content enhancement” (http://www.inceptioniai.org/about).

Dubai Police Cars.

Source: Abdullah AlBargan via Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/albargan/10706671516, CC BY-ND 2.0

Abu Dhabi is not the only emirate interested in AI-powered surveillance technology. The neighboring emirate of Dubai is rapidly increasing
its own capabilities in this domain, as it seeks to be fully retrofitted as a “smart city” by 2021. Dubai’s police force has embraced AI with
enthusiasm, establishing an internal AI department and unveiling its own strategic AI plan, which stipulates that “by 2031, artificial intelligence
(AI) methods will be used 100 per cent in all areas of police.” To that end, last summer it began a “smart patrol” program that includes
“installing vehicle panel recognition, panel control, contact chip, fingerprint recognition, electronic tracking devices, road monitoring systems,
driver recognition readers and smart screens” on “2,000 civil, service and military patrols.” According to the plan, “by the end of 2020, all
vehicles, motorcycles and boats” will have this technology installed, and the data they gather will be transferred “to special operations rooms to
be processed using AI technology.” An even larger data source for Dubai’s AI-powered police force comes through a program called “Oyoon”
(eyes), consisting of thousands of cameras that “relay live images of security breaches to the Central Command Centre” and which last year led
to 319 arrests using “automatic facial recognition technology.” The program, according to the final accompanying passage, gives police “the
ability to digitally track criminals around the city just by uploading their mugshot into a database.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… AI will give surveillance cameras digital brains to match their eyes, letting
them analyze live video with no human intervention…”
Source: “World’s first artificial intelligence university to open in Abu Dhabi,” The National, 16 October 2019. https://www.thenational.ae/
business/technology/world-s-first-artificial-intelligence-university-to-open-in-abu-dhabi-1.924350
The Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), a new graduate-level AI research institution in Abu Dhabi, is accepting applications for
its first masters and PhD programmes this month, with classes scheduled to begin in September 2020… To compete with more than a hundred graduate degree
programmes in AI – mainly in North America, China and the UK – MBZUAI is offering full scholarships, monthly stipends, health insurance and accommodation to all
students… MBZUAI has partnered with the Abu Dhabi-based Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), an applied research lab, to supervise PhD students and
curriculum development. IIAI will also serve as a principal partner for collaborative research. The university will offer master of science and PhD programmes in three
of the fastest-growing areas of AI: machine learning, computer vision and natural language processing.

Source: “Over 3,200 students apply to world’s first AI university,” Khaleej Times, 27 October 2019. https://www.khaleejtimes.com/uae/abudhabi/over-3200-students-apply-to-worlds-first-ai-university
Over 3,200 graduate students have applied to the Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI) within the first week since its launch on October
16… The majority of applications were received from the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Egypt, India and China.

Source: “Dubai Police Reveals Strategic AI Plan,” Dubai Police, 21 December 2017. https://preview.tinyurl.com/t2nmsom
As per the strategic plan, by 2031, artificial intelligence (AI) methods will be used 100 per cent in all areas of police including security, forecasting of crime, traffic
accidents and developing the best techniques and AI tools that serve the needs of the people, locally and globally.

Source: “Dubai Police to develop 2,000 smart patrols,” Gulf News, 22 June 2019. https://gulfnews.com/uae/dubai-police-to-develop-2000smart-patrols-1.64775696
The Smart Patrols project includes installing vehicle panel recognition, panel control, contact chip, fingerprint recognition, electronic tracking devices, road
monitoring systems, driver recognition readers and smart screens… The project will be implemented in two phases. The first one will cover 2,000 civil, service and
military patrols and will be completed this year while the second phase will cover all vehicles, motorcycles and boats, which is due to be completed by 2020.

Source: “How Dubai’s AI cameras helped arrest 319 suspects last year,” Gulf News, 18 March 2019. https://gulfnews.com/uae/how-dubais-aicameras-helped-arrest-319-suspects-last-year-1.62750675
Thousands of CCTV cameras in Dubai helped in the arrest of 319 suspects last year under the Oyoon (Eyes) project that employs artificial intelligence (AI), a Dubai
Police official said on Monday… Dubai Police said AI will give surveillance cameras digital brains to match their eyes, letting them analyse live video with no human
intervention… The Oyoon committee includes strategic partners from the government sector such as the State Security Agency, Security Industry Regulatory Agency,
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority, Dubai Municipality, Dubai Electricity and Water Authority, Roads and Transport Authority, Mohammad Bin Rashid Space
Centre, Dubai Smart Office, among other entities.

OE Watch | December 2019

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Saudi Arabia and the UAE: Space Ambitions in the Arabian
Peninsula
OE Watch Commentary: UAE media was recently abuzz with reporting on Emirati astronaut Hazzaa al-Mansoori’s weeklong trip to the
International Space Station (ISS), the first of its kind by an Arab astronaut. Since establishing a government space agency in 2014, the UAE has
worked hard to promote its space ambitions. Its National Space Policy, published in 2016, calls for building a “strong and sustainable UAE space
sector that supports and protects national interests and vital industries.” The country’s signature ambition, called the “Mars 2117” project, “aims
to build the knowledge and scientific capabilities that will enable the UAE to realize humankind’s universal dream of the very first sustainable
colony on the red planet within the next 100 years.” Some of the knowledge and capabilities needed to colonize Mars, such as atmospheric
manipulation and 3-D printing, have more mundane applications and can be used to “address the challenges of food, water and energy security
on Earth.” Next year, the UAE intends to launch a probe to Mars (the “Hope Probe”) that will gather sufficient information to “draw a clear and
comprehensive picture of the Martian climate.” (https://www.mbrsc.ae/mars-2117; https://www.mbrsc.ae/emirates-mars-mission).
The UAE is hardly the only Arab country with space ambitions. Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Algeria and Morocco all have relatively developed
programs, at least in terms of orbital satellites. In March 2019, the UAE established an “Arab Space Cooperation Group,” which, in addition
to the aforementioned countries, includes Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait, Jordan, Lebanon and Sudan. The group’s first project is a collaboration to
build a satellite in the UAE. The satellite is to be called “813,” in reference to the first year of the reign of the Abbasid Caliph al-Ma’mun, who
presided over a golden era of the Muslim Empire. Already last year, Dubai’s Mohammed bin Rashid Space Center (MBRSC) claims to have
fully developed and assembled a remote sensing satellite – “100% Made in the UAE” per a tweet by the ruler of Dubai. The satellite, called
“KhalifaSat,” was successfully launched from Japan’s Tanegashima Space Center in October 2018.
Saudi Arabia’s national space agency, the Saudi Arabian Space Commission, was only established late last year. It is led by Sultan bin
Salman, the son of the current Saudi king and half-brother of the kingdom’s de facto ruler Mohammed bin Salman. Sultan bin Salman is famous
for being the first Arab astronaut in space, having served as a crew member on a weeklong mission aboard the Discovery Space Shuttle back in
1985.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s mid-October visit to Saudi Arabia gave a boost to the burgeoning relationship between the Saudi Space
Commission and its Russian counterpart (Roscosmos). During the visit, the two agencies signed a “statement of intent” to cooperate in the
fields of “manned space flights” and “satellite navigation systems.” The accompanying article from Sputnik cites the head of the Russian Direct
Investment Fund (RDIF) as saying there have also been talks of a project to “launch a satellite from Saudi Arabia into orbit using interesting
Russian technologies.” According to the article, Roscosmos and Saudi Arabia’s King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST)
have been collaborating on using the GLONASS navigation system. Perhaps most interestingly, it claims that “Moscow has also considered the
possibility of using the territory of the Kingdom as a potential location to host an optical station for an automated warning system that would
track possible dangers in near-Earth space.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…Moscow has also considered the possibility of using the territory of the
Kingdom as a potential location to host an optical station for an automated
warning system that would track possible dangers in near-Earth space…”
Source: “National Space Policy of the United Arab Emirates.” UAE Government, September 2016. https://space.gov.ae/Documents/
PublicationPDFFiles/UAE_National_Space_Policy_English.pdf
The Ultimate Goal of the National Space Policy
To build a strong and sustainable UAE space sector that supports and protects national interests and vital industries, contributes to the diversification and growth
of the economy, boosts UAE specialized competencies, develops scientific and technological capabilities, engrains the culture of innovation and national pride, and
strengthens UAE’s status and role regionally and globally.

Source: “UAE launches Arab Space Collaboration Group,” Khaleej Times, 19 March 2019. https://www.khaleejtimes.com/uae-launches-arabspace-collaboration-group
The UAE has launched a regional space collaboration programme that aims to empower the Arab world in the global space industry… “The group’s first project will
be a satellite built by Arab scientists in the UAE. I personally believe in Arab talents,” Sheikh Mohammed tweeted. The satellite will be called ‘813’ and has been given
that name to highlight an important year in the Arab history. “We called the new satellite ‘813’ in reference to the date that marked the beginning of prosperity for the
House of Wisdom in Baghdad under the reign of Al Ma’mun. Resembling our region, the House embraced scientists, translated notable texts and produced scientific
capabilities,” Sheikh Mohammed said in a tweet.

Source: “As it happened: Launch of UAE KhalifaSat,” Gulf News, 29 October 2019. https://gulfnews.com/going-out/society/as-it-happenedlaunch-of-uae-khalifasat-1.2294850
Shaikh Mohammad Bin Rashid Al Maktoum, UAE Vice President and Prime Minister and Ruler of Dubai, said in a tweet: “A new historic day for the UAE. The launch
of ‘KhalifaSat’ is the first Arabic satellite 100% Emirati-made. A milestone for UAE as Emiratis proved their ability, maturity, knowledge and ambition, joining the
global race with our heads up.”

Source: “Ad Astra: Russian Fund Eyes Launching Satellite Into Orbit From Saudi Arabia,” Sputnik, 14 October 2019. https://sputniknews.
com/world/201910141077042849-ad-astra-russian-fund-eyes-launching-satellite-into-orbit-from-saudi-arabia/
Shaikh Mohammad Bin Rashid Al Maktoum, UAE Vice President and Prime Minister and Ruler of Dubai, said in a tweet: “A new historic day for the UAE. The launch
of ‘KhalifaSat’ is the first Arabic satellite 100% Emirati-made. A milestone for UAE as Emiratis proved their ability, maturity, knowledge and ambition, joining the
global race with our heads up.”

OE Watch | December 2019

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Commerce, Rail and Electricity Returning to Syria’s
Euphrates River Valley with Help from Iraq and Iran
OE Watch Commentary: The governments of Iran,
Syria and Iraq are all seeking to grow their economies
through increased trade. The accompanying passages
from local Arabic-language news sources suggest that
trilateral efforts are underway to revitalize the SyrianIraqi Euphrates borderlands, which are a key node in
the strategic land corridor linking Iran to Syria via
Iraq. They also shed light on some local-level efforts.
In late September 2019, the border crossing between
al-Bukamal and al-Qa’im, linking Syria and Iraq along
the Euphrates River was reopened. Formerly under
ISIS control, the area was captured by the Syrian and
Iraqi militaries in November 2017, in a coordinated
campaign that relied heavily on Syrian loyalist militias
and Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF). The
first accompanying article, from the news website
al-Modon, reports that commercial traffic has been
minimal in the first month of operation. Although
Syrian customs personnel has been deployed to the
crossing, the article claims that the al-Tafuf Brigade,
an Iraqi PMF formation (PMF Brigade 13) affiliated
with the Imam Hussein Shrine in Karbala, is in defacto control.
In the meantime, Syrian government efforts to reelectrify al-Bukamal and surrounding villages are
underway. The Syrian Middle Euphrates River Valley
(MERV) has been cut off from the national grid for
much of the conflict. Portions of the provincial capital
Deir ez-Zor were reconnected earlier this year, and
the article describes how in al-Bukamal, the state-run
electrical company “faces great difficulties in its work
due to the magnitude of the destruction in the area.”

Middle East at Night (2012), NASA.

Source: Allameh https://eoimages.gsfc.nasa.gov/images/imagerecords/90000/90100/middleast_vir_2012_lrg.jpg, Public Domain.

Middle East at Night (2016), NASA.

Source: https://eoimages.gsfc.nasa.gov/images/imagerecords/90000/90100/middleast_vir_2016_lrg.jpg, Public Domain

At the 19th International Electricity Exhibition held
in Tehran last November, the Syrian and Iranian ministers of electricity signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) granting Iran broad
control over the rebuilding and upgrading of the Syrian electricity sector. Syrian officials have previously stated that over half of the country’s
electrical production and distribution infrastructure was affected by the conflict. Aleppo and the MERV were hardest hit, as the accompanying
images attest. MAPNA Group, an Iranian industrial construction conglomerate, recently began building a 540-megawatt gas-fired combinedcycle power plant in Lattakia. Plans are in place for Iranian entities to build several smaller plants along the coast and rehabilitate or replace
existing plants in Aleppo, Homs and Deir ez-Zor. The recently signed Syrian-Iranian MoU also stipulated plans “to create a trilateral electrical
link between Syria, Iran and Iraq, through a joint partnership that conducts the necessary studies and technical preparations.” Iraq has recently
become a major importer of Iranian electricity, and the two countries signed their own bilateral agreement at the Tehran electricity exhibition, in
this case to synchronize their power grids.
According to a recent study published by the Syrian Ministry of Transport and cited in the passage from the daily newspaper al-Watan,
work is also moving ahead on rebuilding the railway connecting the Syrian city of Deir ez-Zor to al-Bukamal. The broader goal, as the article
notes, is to lay tracks for a “strategic transit corridor for Syria and Iraq,” linking Iran’s Imam Khomeini Port on the Persian Gulf to the Iraniancontrolled Syrian port of Lattakia on the Mediterranean Sea. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…The rail line is part of an international east-west transportation axis from
Syria’s ports via Aleppo to Iraq, Iran and East Asia. It represents a strategic
transit corridor for Syria and Iraq…”
OE Watch | December 2019

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Commerce, Rail and Electricity Returning to
Syria’s Euphrates River Valley with Help from Iraq and Iran
Source:
‫للحجاج واملليشيات االيرانية‬..‫معرب البوكامل‬:‫بعد شهر من افتتاحه‬
“A Month After Opening, the al-Bukamal Crossing… for Pilgrims and Iranian Militias,” al-Modon, 13 November 2019. https://tinyurl.com/vxsjsnl

Al-Modon’s sources revealed that only 10 trucks had crossed from Iraq in the month since the crossing was opened. The sources were unable
to determine the cargo of the trucks and whether they were of a purely commercial nature or military equipment. Despite the cancellation
of so-called entry cards required of Syrian vehicles entering Iraq prior to 2011, Syrian merchants have not been encouraged to export
their goods through this crossing… A source at Syrian customs recently discussed the assignment of 148 employees to support work at the
crossing, mostly as patrolmen and squad chiefs. They were sent outside of the normal schedule of deployments to support customs work, in the
expectation of improved traffic and transport of goods and materials. However, al-Modon’s sources indicated that the Al-Tafuf Brigade of the
Imam Hussein Shrine in Karbala controls the Syrian side of the crossing. The Imam Hussein Shrine here refers to an “institution” focused on
pilgrimage to the holy shrines, and is responsible for the spread of Shi’ism in Syria and Iraq.

Source:
‫وصول معدات كهربائية إىل البوكامل متهيدا ً لعودة “التيار” إليها‬
“Arrival of Electrical Machinery to Albu Kamal Preparing for the Return of Electricity,” Snack Syrian, 27 October 2019. https://tinyurl.com/wkad4of

According to Engineer Khaled Lotfi, the director of the Deir ez-Zor General Company for Electricity, some of the electrical equipment and
transformers needed to restore electricity to the city of al-Bukamal and its countryside have arrived at the company in conjunction with
electricity projects and workshops in the city, currently focused on the village of Sabikhan. According to Lotfi, the company’s work and
workshops are going as planned, but it faces great difficulties in its work due to the magnitude of the destruction in the area, which has been
without electricity for seven years. In a call with Snack Syrian, he refused to disclose the numbers and types of equipment that the company
had obtained, merely indicating that the costs are under study. State electricity reached government facilities in the city of Deir ez-Zor in
March of this year, and has returned to select neighborhoods, including al-Qusur, al-Muaziffin and al-Joura. In terms of whether al-Bukamal
and its outskirts will be the new recipients of government electricity, he said “God Willing.”

Source:
‫سورية وإيران توقعان مذكرة تفاهم لتوطني التكنولوجيا وصناعة التجهيزات الكهربائية يف سورية‬
“Syria and Iran Sign a Memorandum of Understanding to Localize Technology and Build Electrical Equipment in Syria,” Syrian News Agency (SANA), 2
November 2019. https://sana.sy/?p=1046439

The Memorandum of Understanding… includes work to rebuild Syria’s electrical grid and to localize the manufacture of electrical
equipment. It also includes building power plants, transmission and distribution networks and rebuilding and reducing the damage to
the distribution grid in terms of engineering, operation and customer services. The Memorandum of Understanding provides for joint
investment and the exchange of technical information for power plant construction and renewable energy, as well as the reconstruction,
rehabilitation and upgrading of power plants. It also includes operation and maintenance, securing spare parts for plants, repairing electrical
transformers and producing electrical products and devices, giving priority to the production of smart equipment, transformers and cables.
The memorandum also included the work to create a trilateral electrical link between Syria, Iran and Iraq, through a joint partnership that
conducts the necessary studies and technical preparations.

Source:
‫إنشاء خط حديدي بني دير الزور والبوكامل مبواصفات عاملية … دراسة لربط ميناء اإلمام الخميني مبيناء الالذقية‬
“Building of a Railway Line Between Deir ez-Zor and Albu Kamal,” al-Watan, 3 November 2019. http://alwatan.sy/archives/218971

The Ministry of Transport revealed that the 142.8-kilometer long railway linking Deir ez-Zor - al-Tabiyyah - al-Bukamal is under
construction using modern technical specifications in terms of speed and infrastructure. It noted that the railway is designed as a double
line, with investment and execution completed for the 30 kilometers to the al-Tabiyyah station. The groundwork and industrial work all the
way to al-Bukamal is 96% complete and there are 6 main stations on this line… The report noted that the rail line is part of an international
east-west transportation axis from Syria’s ports via Aleppo to Iraq, Iran and East Asia. It represents a strategic transit corridor for Syria and
Iraq… The ministry revealed the discussion of a project linking the Imam Khomeini Port, located on the Iranian side of Gulf, with the port of
Latakia on the Mediterranean Sea, in addition to a 32-kilometer project linking the Iranian city of Shalmagh with the Iraqi city of Basra, to be
implemented and funded by Iran, and which will end by linking the Imam Khomeini Port with Basra and Lattakia.

OE Watch | December 2019

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s Position on Syrian Kurds
OE Watch Commentary: Recent statements
by Russian President Vladimir Putin and his
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov have led some
analysts to wonder whether the new protector
of the Kurds in Syria will be Russia. While two
of the accompanying articles argue that Russia
might push for granting legal status to the
Kurds in Syria, the final article looks at Russia’s
position on the Kurds in a historical context.
The author of the first accompanying article
from pro-government Turkish daily Hürriyet
predicts that Russia will be advocating for
Kurdish rights in the near future, and this
should not come as a surprise. The author
reaches this conclusion by analyzing President
Putin and Foreign Minister Lavrov’s recent
statements. On 22 October, President Putin
Meeting on Russia’s Armed Forces actions in Syria.
Source: Kremlin.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Meeting_on_Russia%E2%80%99s_Armed_Forces_actions_in_Syria_(03).jpg, CC BY 4.0
said, “an extensive dialogue between the
Syrian government and the Kurds living in northeastern Syria should be initiated. Obviously, the rights and interests of the Kurds who are an
integral part of the multi-ethnic Syrian nation can only be addressed through an inclusive dialogue.” President Putin has also previously made
a statement pointing out that “the Kurds in Syria have the right to participate in all political processes and find their own place in the future of
Syria.” Similarly, on 21 October, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov stated Russia’s objective is the legalization of all Kurdish groups in Syria in
accordance with the Syrian constitution. He stated that “a dialogue between the Kurds and Damascus is necessary.” He continued saying Russia
believes “this is the best way to resolve the current situation.”
The second article from Kurdistan24, a news portal broadcasting from the Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq provides a Kurdish view
on the Russian position regarding the situation of the Kurds in Syria. The article provides analysis from two Kurdish academics, both of whom
share a view similar to that of the first article which states that Russia is likely to push for legal status and rights for Kurds in Syria. According
to one of the Kurdish academics, Russian support for the Kurds to find a solution with Assad will further loosen the Kurdish alliance with the
United States, and strengthen Russia’s position in Syria.
The final excerpted passage from Turkish daily Ahval states that Russian support for the Kurds to obtain legal status and their rights is tactical
rather than being based on a long-term Russian strategy to support the Kurds within Syria. The author provides the example of the short-lived
Republic of Mahabad that was established by the Kurds with the support of Russians in 1946 in Iran. As the article states, Russian intent was
to support the Kurds in carving away territory from Iran by declaring independence first and then incorporating this territory into the Soviet
Republic of Azerbaijan. He claims that the ultimate goal was not to support Kurds in their struggle to obtain rights and sovereignty, rather it was
purely to advance Russian interests. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“…the Kurds in Syria have the right to participate in all political processes and
find their own place in the future of Syria.”
-Russian President Vladimir Putin

OE Watch | December 2019

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia’s Position on Syrian Kurds
Source: Sedat Ergin, “Suriyeli Kürtlerin yeni hamisi Putin mi? (Is Putin the new protector of the Syrian Kurds?),” Hürriyet, 24 October 2019.
http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sedat-ergin/suriyeli-kurtlerin-yeni-hamisi-putin-mi-41357683
…another framework in which the status of Syrian Kurds will be shaped in the new period will be the negotiation process between the Assad
regime and the PYD/YPG with the encouragement of Russia. Russia has already played a decisive role in the dialogue between the regime,
Syrian Kurds and the PYD/YPG in this context, as it did between Ankara and Damascus.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, a day before the Sochi summit announced the official position of his country as follows: “For us,
the target should be: A threat should not come from Syrian territories to neither Turkey nor to any other countries... For this reason, to ensure
there are no illegal armed groups in Syria, all Kurdish structures should be legalized in accordance with the Syrian constitution. To achieve
this goal, dialogue between the Kurds and Damascus is necessary. We believe this is the right way to resolve the current situation.
Russian leader Vladimir Putin said…an extensive dialogue between the Syrian government and the Kurds living in northeastern Syria should
be initiated. Obviously, the rights and interests of the Kurds who are an integral part of the multi-ethnic Syrian nation can only be addressed
through an inclusive dialogue.
Putin stated that… the Kurds in Syria have the right to participate in all political processes and find their own place in the future of Syria.
As a result, it is understood that the Kremlin will encourage the Assad regime and Kurdish groups to reach a consensus in parallel with the
Constitutional Committee.
In the new era, we should be ready to find a Putin that also advocates for the rights of Syrian Kurds.

Source: Cesim İlhan, “Rusya Kürtlere statü verilmesi hakkında ne düşünüyor? (What does Russia think about granting status to Kurds?),”
Kurdistan24.net, 29 October 2019. https://www.kurdistan24.net/tr/news/39d1c8da-d2d2-4233-8d13-bd62d30e8e82?fbclid=IwAR1vpMTsa
Nt_TZsXd2oJl3iFQEhRLAmXau6bycL952wcc4rOQS5I1pMOS7M
Experts say Russia will recognize the status of Kurds in Syria.
Kurdish politician and scholar Iqbal Durra, said Russia is trying to persuade the Syrian regime and Turkey to grant political status to the
Kurds…
The reason is that if Russia is unable to broker an agreement between al-Assad and the Kurds, it will create an environment for a permanent
US presence in the region. Russia thinks a [United States presence] will harm its own interests.

Source: Çetin Gürer, “Mahabad’dan Rojava’ya Rus oyunu (A Russian game from Mahabad to Rojava),” ahvalnews.com, 06 November 2019.
https://ahvalnews.com/tr/rusya/mahabaddan-rojavaya-rus-oyunu
Looking back at the period of the Republic of Mahabad, we can see that Russia’s current policy is no different than that of that period. In
other words, Russia does not appear before the Kurds with a brand new policy today.
We can list the prominent points of the policies of the period for the Kurds as follows:
Russia seems to support the demand of the Kurds for [a legal] status tactically, but it does not support the demands of the Kurds strategically
in the long run…
Russia does not support a unified Kurdish political structure, creating cliques such as “radicals” and “moderates” among the Kurdish
parties.

OE Watch | December 2019

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia Facilitating Dialogue between Syrian Kurds and
Damascus
OE Watch Commentary: The Turkish offensive
into northern Syria led the Syrian Kurds to seek
protection from the Assad regime and Russia. On
13 October, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF) announced a Russian-brokered
agreement with Damascus. Under the agreement,
Assad’s forces would move into major cities
to support the Kurds against the attacks of the
Turkish military and allied rebel groups that Turkey
refers to as the Syrian National Army (SNA) and
re-establish the Syrian government’s authority
in Kurdish areas. The accompanying excerpted
articles discuss the Russian-facilitated dialogue
between Syrian Kurds and Damascus.
The first excerpted article from Kurdistan24,
a news portal broadcasting from the Kurdistan
Vladimir Putin’s visit to Khmeimim Air Base in Syria, 11 December 2017.
Regional Government of Iraq, argues that despite
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Putin_visited_Khmeimim_Air_Base_in_Syria_(2017-12-11)_37.jpg, CC BY 4.0
reaching an agreement with Damascus, the SDF
continues to reject “plans by President Bashar al-Assad to bring autonomous Kurdish-controlled areas under his authority, or demands by
Damascus to have the SDF join the Syrian army.” The article quotes Russian Ambassador to Iraq Maksim Maksimov as saying Russia always
“encourages dialogue between Kurdish parties and Damascus.” The ambassador further notes that Russia supports the rights of Syrian Kurds
and the terms of their rights to co-exist within Syria are “subject to the negotiations with the Syrian Government.” While Russia facilitates
and encourages Kurds to continue to engage in a dialogue with Damascus, it has also acquiesced to Turkish pressure to exclude the Syrian
Democratic Council (SDC), and the Democratic Union Party (PYD) from ongoing peace talks.
The second article discusses comments by Russia’s special envoy to Syria, Alexander Lavrentiev who also said that Russia mediated a deal
between the Kurds and the Assad regime. Apparently, the negotiations took place at the Russian Khmeimim Air Base in Syria.
The third article from left-leaning Turkish Yeni Yaşam newspaper discusses the SDC’s willingness to engage in a dialogue with the Assad
regime. As the article states, SDC perceives the Russian-facilitated military agreement between the SDF and the Assad regime as a good faith
effort to build trust between the sides for further negotiations. Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad already announced that while he wants to
establish his government’s authority in Kurdish areas, he would respect the realities on the ground. While Kurds have agreed to allow Syrian
regime soldiers to enter cities in their self-declared autonomous region, the negotiations over the status of this region is ongoing. The article also
quotes Aslambek Mozloyev from the Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation as saying that Russia
initially supported Turkey’s efforts to exclude the Kurds from negotiations in Geneva to get the negotiations started as soon as possible. The
next step will be finding a “resolution to the Kurdish problem.” Whatever Russia’s real intent is regarding Syrian Kurds, it has strengthened its
position in Syria and emerged as the main power broker on the ground. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“We always encourage the authorities in Damascus, and we met very often
with the representatives of the Syrian Kurds in Moscow, discussed and
informed them about our projects about this issue.”
- Maksim Maksimov, Russian Ambassador to Iraq

OE Watch | December 2019

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia Facilitating Dialogue between Syrian
Kurds and Damascus
Source: Wladimir van Wilgenburg, “Ambassador: Moscow encouraged dialogue between Damascus and Syrian Kurdish parties,”
kurdistan24.net, 06 November 2019. https://www.kurdistan24.net/en/news/5eadc334-f8ae-4271-9b22-f90e48d46c1e
In early October, the SDF reached a deal with Damascus for national troops to counter the recent Turkish military incursion into northern
Syria.
However, top Kurdish officials continue to reject plans by President Bashar al-Assad to bring autonomous Kurdish-controlled areas under
his authority, or demands by Damascus to have the SDF join the Syrian army.
Ambassador Maksimov, however, said there is no other way to continue dialogue. “We always encourage the authorities in Damascus, and
we met very often with the representatives of the Syrian Kurds in Moscow, discussed and informed them about our projects about this issue.”
Moreover, while the Kurdish National Council (KNC) was always part of the peace talks, and also the recently formed constitutional
committee, the SDF-linked Syrian Democratic Council (SDC), and the Democratic Union Party (PYD), were always blocked from
participation due to opposition from Turkey.
The Russian official added that there are already several Kurdish representatives in the constitutional committee formed in late September,
referring to the KNC, which is part of the Turkish-backed Syrian opposition.
Source: “Rusya: Şam’la Kürtler arasında arabuluculuğu biz yaptık (Russia: We mediated between Damascus and Kurds),” Gazeteduvar.com.
tr, 15 October 2019. https://www.gazeteduvar.com.tr/dunya/2019/10/15/rusya-samla-kurtler-arasinda-arabuluculugu-biz-yaptik/
Regarding Turkey’s operation into Syria, Russia issued statements back to back…
Russian leader Vladimir Putin’s Special Representative to Syria, Alexander Lavrentiev, announced that they mediated the agreement
between the Damascus administration and the Kurds.
Source: “DSM’den Esad’a ‘olumlu’ yanıt (A ‘positive’ response from SDC to Assad),” Yeni Yaşam, 30 October 2019. http://
yeniyasamgazetesi1.com/dsmden-esada-olumlu-yanit/
The Syrian Democratic Council (SDC) issued a written statement on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s statements, saying that they were
open to dialogue…
In an interview with state television, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad said that his ultimate goal was re-establishment of state authority in
Kurdish-controlled areas, but said that the new reality on the ground would be respected...
Aslambek Mozloyev, “As is known, during the initial process, Turkey was strongly opposed to the Kurds joining as a political party and
Russia supported Turkey. Because the important thing was to organize the Geneva meeting. But the next process will be the resolution process
of the Kurdish problem.”

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download
OE Watch | December 2019

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey and the Question of Foreign ISIS Fighters
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey recently stepped up
its operations against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) cells and captured hundreds of ISIS militants and
their family members concurrently with its offensive
against Kurdish militias in northern Syria. While some
of these ISIS militants are Turkish citizens, a significant
number of them are nationals of European countries. The
issue of what to do with the foreign fighters has lingered
for some time as thousands of them remain in detention
centers or prisons across the Middle East including in
Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. The accompanying passages from
two articles in Al Monitor provide insight into the future of
ISIS fighters and sympathizers and Turkey’s fight against
them.
According to the first article, Turkey faces challenges
Al-Hol Camp, March 2019.
Source: VOA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Al-Hol_camp_March_2019.jpg, Public domain
in repatriating foreign fighters to their countries of
nationality because “most European nations do not want the fighters and some have even revoked citizenship for a handful of militants.”
Recently Turkish Interior Minister Süleyman Soylu lambasted European countries for their reluctance to repatriate their nationals held in
Turkish prisons regardless of being stripped of their citizenship. He noted that Turkey is “not a hotel for IS[IS] members” of any country. The
article states that the reasons European countries are unwilling to repatriate their nationals are lack of resources of intelligence agencies and
“a high burden of proof in European courts and relatively lenient sentencing” which is unlikely to keep those foreign fighters behind bars for a
prolonged period of time.
Besides noting the recent Turkish operations against ISIS, the second article provides insights into why Turkey was not aware of the
whereabouts of ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi despite his geographic proximity to the Turkish border and Turkish controlled territories in
Syria. Contrary to the argument that Turkey might have been aware of al-Baghdadi’s “presence across the border,” and had chosen not to take
any action against him “due to ideological affinities and support,” the author believes that “Ankara was really unaware, and its inadequate efforts
against [ISIS] both inside Turkey and Syria stem from capacity problems rather than unwillingness.” The author further argues that fighting
Kurdish militants-- the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and the People’s Protection Units (YPG) is the top priority for the Turkish
government. The author claims that the second priority is to wage war on the Gülen Movement, which the Turkish government blames for the
failed coup d’état attempt in July 2016. These factors put the fight against ISIS at priority number three. In light of these factors, the author
argues that Ankara failed to track down al-Baghdadi because of its “overstretched military and intelligence capabilities in northwestern Syria”
against Kurdish militants.
Furthermore, the second article recounts the story of two female Dutch ISIS sympathizers and their three children who were able to make the
journey from al-Hol camp, where Syrian Kurdish militias held ISIS family members, to Ankara. The fact that these ISIS sympathizers were
able to smuggle themselves from Syria all the way to Ankara show “the human-smuggling networks between Syria, Turkey and Europe, which
IS[IS] frequently uses, remain active and efficient despite all security measures along the route.” Also, it seems “a new crisis is brewing between
Turkey and Europe” over repatriating ISIS militants and their relatives. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“In Ankara’s perception of threats… the fight against IS-linked networks [is]
in third place at best.”

“We’re not a hotel for IS[IS] members...”
- Turkish Interior Minister Süleyman Soylu

OE Watch | December 2019

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkey and the Question of Foreign ISIS
Fighters
Source: Ayla Jean Yackley, “Turkey to send foreign Islamic State fighters home,” Al Monitor, 04 November 2019. https://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2019/11/turkey-send-islamic-state-foreign-fighters-back.html
Turkey wants to send Islamic State fighters and their families back to their countries of origin after capturing parts of northeast Syria from
the Kurdish forces who have held the prisoners since toppling the so-called caliphate earlier this year.
…
Turkey says it has captured hundreds of IS militants and their family members since entering Syria on Oct. 9. It has urged Western
governments to take responsibility for their citizens who went to Syria and Iraq to wage jihad beginning in 2014. But most European nations
do not want the fighters and some have even revoked citizenship for a handful of militants.
Turkish Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu told reporters called the citizenship revocation an “unacceptable” attempt to subvert international
law. “We’re not a hotel for IS members...”
The EU is loath to take back IS suspects because domestic intelligence agencies are already strained tracking thousands of threats.
Insufficient legal safeguards, including a high burden of proof in European courts and relatively lenient sentencing, won’t keep extremists
locked up for long, analysts say. Diplomats have told Al-Monitor the fighters should be tried and punished where they committed the crimes.
…
Erdogan told reporters at an Oct. 18 briefing that Turkish nationals will be brought home for prosecution. “As for the others, we will speak
with their countries and undertake the work to send them to their own countries, which will decide” their fate, he said.

Source: Metin Gürcan, “Turkey-Europe ties brace for fresh rift over stateless IS militants,” Al Monitor, 08 November 2019. https://www.almonitor.com/pulse/originals/2019/11/turkey-syria-ties-fresh-rift-with-west-over-isis-militants.html
An oft-asked question over Baghdadi’s death concerns Turkey: Was Turkey not aware that Baghdadi was hiding right under its nose,
apparently for many days? It is a pertinent question indeed. The answers “no” and “yes” would both be a problem for Ankara for different
reasons.
Some say it is impossible for Turkey to have been unaware of Baghdadi’s presence across the border, arguing that Ankara has never truly
fought the group and has even offered it protection and safe haven due to ideological affinities.
In my opinion, however, Ankara was really unaware, and its inadequate efforts against IS both inside Turkey and Syria stem from capacity
problems rather than unwillingness.
In Ankara’s perception of threats — inside Turkey as well as Syria and Iraq — the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) and… the
People’s Protection Units (YPG), have top priority. Second comes the Gulenist network, which Ankara has designated a terrorist group
and holds responsible for the deadly coup attempt in July 2016. This leaves the fight against IS-linked networks in third place at best. In this
context, the likely answer to why Ankara failed to get wind of Baghdadi’s presence in a village a few kilometers from its border appears to
lie in its overstretched military and intelligence capabilities in northwestern Syria, with the bulk of surveillance drones, human intelligence,
electronic and signal intelligence efforts employed in the campaign against the YPG to the east of the Euphrates.
…
On Nov. 2, the Turkish media reported the detention of two Dutch female IS sympathizers who were trying to go to the Netherlands after
fleeing the al-Hol camp in northern Syria. According to local sources, the women and their three children managed to reach Ankara in late
October after paying about $4,000 per person to human traffickers but were turned down by the Dutch Embassy…
The group’s journey from al-Hol to Ankara puts the spotlight on two crucial facts. First, the human-smuggling networks between Syria,
Turkey and Europe, which IS frequently uses, remain active and efficient despite all security measures along the route. Second, a new crisis
is brewing between Turkey and Europe over IS militants and their relatives in Turkish custody who have been stripped of their citizenships by
European governments.

OE Watch | December 2019

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt and the Arab League Condemn Turkey’s Operation
in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passages from local sources discuss
reactions from Egypt and the Arab League to Turkey’s latest military operation into Syria.
These countries are calling for Turkey’s immediate withdrawal from Syria, and considering
various actions to punish Turkey.
The first passage from The Arab Weekly outlines Egypt’s heightened support for the
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). On 12 October, Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh
Shoukry met with a delegation from the Syrian Democratic Council (SDC), the political
arm of the SDF. Shoukry stated, “resisting Turkish aggression is a legitimate right,” while
also emphasizing his support for the territorial integrity of Syria.
The second passage by Amr Eltohamy from Al-Monitor provides statements from Egypt’s
permanent representative to the UN, Mohammad Idriss at a meeting of the UN General
Arab League (orthographic projection).
Source: Shadi Kabajah via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Arab_League_
Assembly: “Erdogan’s policies sponsor terrorism in Syria” while “he also commits crimes
(orthographic_projection).PNG, Public Domain
against his people and Kurds.” The article also provides statements from Egyptian Foreign
Minister Shoukry during a meeting with the UN Special envoy to Syria where he said, “there should not be any kind of tolerance in dealing
with countries that support terrorism and terrorist groups in Syria.”
The Egyptian-SDC talks occurred immediately before an Arab League meeting called by Shoukry on 12 October. Members of the Arab
League except for Qatar, the Government of National Accord in Libya, and Somalia called for increased economic pressure on Turkey, including
boycotting it as a tourist haven and downgrading its diplomatic representation. As the passage from the news site Egypt Independent discusses,
foreign ministries of the Arab League called for Turkey’s immediate withdrawal from Syria. The ministries also called for a reduction in
military aid and support to Turkey while the Egyptian Foreign Minister referred to Turkey’s actions as an “unacceptable occupation.”
It is not just Arab countries that are condemning Turkey’s actions. As the fourth passage from the Greek newspaper Kathimerini details,
during a tripartite summit between Greece, Cyprus, and Egypt, the three countries issued a joint declaration denouncing “any Turkish attempt
to undermine... Syrian territorial integrity.” End OE Watch Commentary (Fesen)

“There should not be any kind of tolerance in dealing with countries that support
terrorism and terrorist groups in Syria.”
Source: Hassan Abdel Zaher, “Egypt steps up support for Syrian Kurds, increases political pressure on Turkey,” The Arab Weekly, 19 October,
2019. https://thearabweekly.com/egypt-steps-support-syrian-kurds-increases-political-pressure-turkey
“Resisting this Turkish aggression is a legitimate right,” Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry said during a meeting October 12 in Cairo with a
delegation of the Syrian Democratic Council, the political arm of the Syrian Democratic Forces.
Arab countries, except for Turkish allies Qatar, Somalia and the western Libya government, signalled intentions to ramp up pressure on Istanbul through
curtailing economic cooperation, boycotting Turkey as a tourist destination and downgrading diplomatic representation.

Source: Amr Eltohamy, “Egypt escalates campaign against Turkey’s Erdogan,” Al Monitor, 28 October 2019. https://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/originals/2019/10/egypt-un-complaint-turkey-erdogan-criticism-terrorism.html
…Recep Tayyip Erdogan blasted Egypt during his September 24 address of the UNGA session, Mohammad Idriss, Egypt’s permanent representative to
the UN, lodged an official complaint Sept. 25 with General Assembly President Tijjani Muhammad Bande…
“Erdogan’s policies sponsor terrorism in Syria and support extremist armed militias in Libya,” Idriss said. “He also commits crimes against his people
and Kurds.”
Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry, who met with UN special envoy for Syria Geir Pedersen on the sidelines of the General Assembly, said then,
“There should not be any kind of tolerance in dealing with countries that support terrorism and terrorist groups in Syria.”

Source: “Arab League condemns Turkish incursion to Syria,” Egypt Independent, 13 October 2019. https://ww.egyptindependent.com/arableague-condemns-turkish-incursion-to-syria/
During an emergency meeting of the Arab League called by Egypt, the ministries saw the incursion as a direct threat to Arab national security and
international peace and security, demanding an immediate and unconditional withdrawal from Syria.
The ministries asserted that Arab League rejects the Turkish government’s attempts to impose demographic changes in Syrian territories, urging the
international community to stop providing Turkey with military and intelligence support.
Egypt’s Foreign Minister Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry said on Saturday that the Turkish aggression against Syria is an unacceptable
“occupation” towards a brotherly Arab country.

Source: “Egypt, Cyprus, Greece condemn gas exploration by Turkey,” Ekathimerini, 18 October 2019. http://www.ekathimerini.com/245292/
article/ekathimerini/news/egypt-cyprus-greece-condemn-gas-exploration-by-turkey
The three leaders [of Egypt, Cyprus, and Greece]... condemned Turkey’s planned military offensive into northeastern Syria

OE Watch | December 2019

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
China’s Increasing Investment Projects in Turkey
OE Watch Commentary: Cooperation between Turkey and China has resulted in
several Chinese investment projects in Turkey both in the public and private sectors. The
accompanying article from Al-Monitor highlights the increasing economic cooperation
between Turkey and China, discussing each side’s interests in this cooperation.
Turkey is part of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a Chinese infrastructure and trade
project spanning from China to more than 100 African and European countries. BRI seems
to be a tool to strengthen China’s position on the global stage through investment and trade
without entangling itself in regional politics. According to the article, various initiatives
indicate Turkey’s dependence on China is growing in many sectors as China steps up its
efforts to double its direct investment in Turkey by the end of 2019. China’s first effort
to boost bilateral trade and direct investment seems to be diversifying investment in
several sectors “including infrastructure, energy, mining, telecommunication, information
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.
Source: 陈少举 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:INDUSTRIAL_AND_
technologies, agriculture and health” as the Chinese consul general in Istanbul noted
COMMERCIAL_BANK_OF_CHINA.jpg#/media/File:INDUSTRIAL_AND_COMMERCIAL_BANK_OF_CHINA.
jpg, Public Domain.
for Turkish media. Second, Chinese banks are also pouring money into Turkish markets
during this time of economic slowdown and getting licenses to operate in Turkey. The Chinese Central Bank “transferred $1 billion worth of
funds to Turkey in August” under the lira-yuan swap agreement with China. Also, “Turkey’s Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency
granted operation licenses to the Bank of China and [the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC)] for their activities in Turkey.”
Third, the author states that China has extended its investment in Turkish “ports, power plants and terminals” as indicated by the Chinese
purchase of 65 percent of shares in the Turkish container terminal Kumport in Istanbul. Additionally, in July 2018, “the ICBC issued a $3.6
billion finance package for Turkey’s energy and transportation sectors” to expand Turkish-Chinese cooperation in the energy sector. The
largest direct investment by China has been the construction of a coal plant in Turkey’s Adana province. Turkey finds Chinese investment and
involvement in Turkish markets beneficial because its boosts the Turkish economy.
The author states that three key factors contribute to Turkey’s significance in OBOR. First, Turkey’s proximity to Europe incentivizes China’s
investment as it creates a non-stop trade route to Europe. The second is a “qualified workforce” in Turkey. The final factor is “a geostrategic
location facilitating access to the Middle East and North Africa.” The author cautions Turkey “not to fall into ‘debt trap diplomacy’ …which
some small Pacific debtor countries have already fallen [prey to] by borrowing sky-high sums from China.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Gündüz)

“Direct Chinese investments in Turkey are expected to double by the end of 2019
and exceed $4 billion.”
Source: Metin Gürcan, “Turkey-China economic cooperation on rise,” Al Monitor, 23 October 2019. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2019/10/turkey-united-states-turkish-chinese-ties-rapidly-grow.html
Direct Chinese investments in Turkey are expected to double by the end of 2019 and exceed $4 billion. Cui Wei, the Chinese consul general in Istanbul,
affirmed the trend, telling the Turkish media there will be a huge leap in mutual trade.
As part of efforts to boost bilateral trade, Wei said Chinese companies will continue their investments in several areas, including infrastructure, energy,
mining, telecommunication, information technologies, agriculture and health. The current trade volume between the two countries is more than $23
billion, with Chinese exports to Turkey totaling $21 billion.
Chinese banks are also gaining sway in the Turkish financial system. China’s central bank transferred $1 billion worth of funds to Turkey in August…
This represents the largest amount Turkey has gotten from China under the lira-yuan swap agreement with Beijing…
In March, Turkey’s Eximbank signed a credit deal worth $350 million with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC). In September, China’s
Eximbank issued a $140 million loan to Turkey’s state lender Vakifbank to be used in bilateral trade.
China also eyes crucial facilities in Turkey, such as ports, power plants and terminals. A Chinese consortium paid a little less than $1 billion to buy a
65% stake in a Turkish container terminal, Kumport, in Istanbul, in 2015. The terminal will serve as a door to Turkish markets for Chinese goods.
After this step, the flow of Chinese infrastructure loans in Turkey also sped up. Turkey’s Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency granted operation
licenses to Bank of China and ICBC for their activities in Turkey…
The ICBC issued a $3.6 billion finance package for Turkey’s energy and transportation sectors; $1.2 billion of the loan was used to expand the capacity
of two underground natural gas storage facilities in Turkey.
Energy is another realm where cooperation grows. A Chinese enterprise paid $1.7 billion to finance the construction of a coal plant near Turkey’s
Mediterranean province of Adana. The plant, which is currently under construction, represents China’s largest direct investment in Turkey…
…
But what significance does Turkey have for China’s Belt and Road initiative? According to experts, there are three key factors: Turkey’s proximity to
Europe, a qualified workforce and a geostrategic location facilitating access to the Middle East and North Africa…
...Being a recipient of huge sums from Chinese lenders also poses some risks. Turkey has to be careful not to fall in the so-called “debt trap diplomacy”
into which some small Pacific debtor countries have already fallen by borrowing sky-high sums from China.

OE Watch | December 2019

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
China to Build Boron Carbide Plant in Turkey to Boost
Defense Industry
OE Watch Commentary: Boron carbide (B4C) is
one of the hardest synthetic substances known and is
used in tank armor, helicopters, aircraft, and bulletproof vests. Turkey is home to 73% of the world’s
boron reserves, and is now planning to refine and
process this natural resource to develop boron carbide
with a view to strengthen its defense industry. On 25
October, construction started on a new boron carbide
plant in Turkey, to be built by the Chinese Machinery
Engineering Corporation (CMEC) over the next two
years. The accompanying passages from Turkish
and Chinese sources discuss the significance of this
project.
According to the passages, the plant will produce
around 1000-1500 tons of boron carbide annually,
worth some $25-30 million; and is expected to be
completed in 24 months. The project will employ
250 people and cost $70 million. Speaking at the
A piece of Boron carbide (B4C).
groundbreaking ceremony of the facility, Turkey’s
Source: Preslav via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boron_carbide.JPG, Public domain
Minister of Energy and Natural Resources said that
the boron carbide that will be produced would have low density, and a high level of resilience to high temperatures, making it ideal for military
use such as helicopters, aircraft, armored vehicles, tanks and artillery tubes.
As the passages discuss, China Machinery Engineering Corporation (CMEC) will build the facility. CMEC and TRBOR Boron Technologies
Inc of Turkey signed a deal on the plant in June. The second passage notes that CMEC would be collaborating with its Turkish counterpart
in the fields of know-how and technology, and would continue to invest in Turkey. According to the second passage, China currently leads the
global production of boron carbide, with Germany, India, Japan, the US, Ukraine, South Korea and England also on the list. With this new
facility, Turkey is looking to join this list in two years.
This is part of a greater goal for the Turkish defense industry- to become more self-sufficient through increased indigenous production. This is
why CMEC’s promise to share know-how and technology is critical for Turkey. Currently, the rate at which the equipment needs of the Turkish
Armed Forces are domestically produced is at 70%, with a declared a goal to become fully indigenous by 2023, the centennial of the Republic.
(Also see: “Trends in the Turkish Military Industry,” OE Watch, June 2017) End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“We want to make energy the new defense industry of Turkey...”

- Energy and Natural Resources Minister of Turkey, Fatih Dönmez

“Boron carbide will be used mostly in military items such as tactical
vehicles, helicopters, planes, artillery tubes, bullet-proof vests that
require a high level of resistance and density.”

OE Watch | December 2019

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: China to Build Boron Carbide Plant in Turkey to
Boost Defense Industry
Source: “Bor Karbür Üretim Tesisi’nin temeli Bandırma’da atıldı (Construction Starts in Bandırma for Boron Carbide Production Plant),”
Petroturk.com.tr, 25 October 2019. http://petroturk.com/yenilenebilir/bor-karbur-uretim-tesisinin-temeli-bandirmada-atildi
Turkey breaks ground on first Boron Carbide Production Facility today at the town of Bandırma in the province of Balıkesir.
Turkey, which is home to 73% of the world’s boron reserves, is launching an important project to take the treasure it has and use it for valueadded production. The groundbreaking ceremony for the Boron Carbide Production Facility took place today, with the attendance of Fatih
Dönmez, Turkey’s Minister for Energy and Natural Resources. The facility will contribute to the defense industry once it starts production.
Dönmez... who spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony, highlighted that boron has a strategic place in the world market and is used in
fields ranging from the defense industry to the glass sector, from ceramics to agriculture and cleaning materials, saying, “It is an area ripe
for development and growth for us. With increased value-added production, we will use technology to solidify our leading place in the
boron market. This is why indigenous production, which makes up one of the three pillars of our National Energy and Mineral Policy, is so
important. We’ve taken important steps to create this indigenous transformation in energy technologies. We’ve built the cornerstones of our
energy and mineral [policy] around national human resources, national technology and national products.
“National Energy will Strengthen National Security”
Minister Dönmez, who expressed that this was proof of what Turkey could accomplish when it uses its domestic resources to take advantage
of the technological transformation taking place in the defense sector, said, “Today, we are demonstrating the best example of what we can
achieve with domestic and national technology. Indigenous production in the defense industry has reached 70%. It has become an important
export industry. We want to make energy Turkey’s new defense industry in technology.”
Dönmez, who said that the new facility was the first step in the production of advanced-technology boron production noted, “...The boron
carbide that we will produce at our facility in Bandırma, with its low density and resilience to high temperatures, will greatly contribute to
our level of indigenous production in our defense industry. Boron carbide will be used mostly in military items such as tactical vehicles,
helicopters, planes, artillery tubes, bullet-proof vests that require a high level of hardness and density.”
Dönmez, who also noted that the boron carbide would be used in the production of heavy machinery and ceramic pieces along with nuclear
applications, said “With this strategic transformation, the value-added to our country will be multiplied by 150 for products like boron
carbine, by 500 for the production of armored vehicles and by 2000 in sectors like the nuclear sector.”
One Thousand Tons will be Produced Annually
According to data, there are between 12-15 thousand tons of boron carbide produced in the world [annually]. In this market, where China
takes the lead as the main producer country, Germany, India, Japan, the US, Ukraine, South Korea and England also produce this mineral.
Turkey is now joining this list, with the Bandırma Boron Carbide Facility, which will produce one thousand tons of boron carbide annually,
worth some $25-30 million. ...
A Chinese Company will Build It
The boron carbide production facility will be built by Chinese company China Machinery Engineering Corporation (CMEC) and will cost
$70 million. It is estimated that the facility will be complete within 24 months.
General Manager of Eti Maden, owner of a 33% steak in the project, Serkan Keleşer, also spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony, saying....
“This facility is extremely important for our country. Boron carbide is the world’s hardest and most resilient substance after diamond.
Keleşer, also highlighted that CMEC, which Turkey will be collaborating in the fields of know-how and technology, would continue to invest
in Turkey...
The facility is expected to be completed in 24 months. The facility will provide employment to 250 people and produce items that contain
Source: “New boron carbide plant to strengthen Turkey’s defense industry: minister,” Xinhuanet.com, 25 October 2019. http://www.
xinhuanet.com/english/2019-10/25/c_138503382.htm
Turkey is preparing to strengthen its national defense industry through a boron carbide plant to be built by a Chinese company and
operational in 2021 in the northwestern province of Balikesir, Turkish Minister of Energy and Natural Resources Fatih Donmez said Friday.
The groundbreaking ceremony of the plant, undertaken by China Machinery Engineering Corporation, was held in the district of Bandirma.
Speaking at the ceremony, Donmez said the plant would make Turkey’s defense sector more “powerful, dynamic and active” by increasing
the ratio of the production of domestic goods.
“We will be able to use boron carbide in the production of military equipment, such as steel shells, protective vests, helicopters and tanks
which require high hardness and strength,” said the minister.
He said Turkey has a total of 3.3 billion tons of boron, accounting for 73 percent of the world reserves and 59 percent of the world market.
... China Machinery Engineering Corporation and the TRBOR Boron Technologies Inc of Turkey signed a deal on the plant in June, which
shall have an annual production capacity of 1,500 tons of boron carbide, one of the hardest synthetic substances known.
OE Watch | December 2019

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Khamenei Speaks on America
OE Watch Commentary: Ali Khamenei,
Iran’s supreme leader for over 30 years,
delivers numerous speeches each year. There
are weekly Friday sermons, for example,
sometimes delivered by Khamenei himself
and other times by a substitute prayer leader
in his name. When it comes to relations
with the United States, the most important
speech is often on or around the anniversary
of the 4 November 1979 seizure of the US
Embassy in Tehran. This year, Khamenei
used the occasion to address both high
school and university students, a symbolic
audience given the primary role of students
in seizing the embassy four decades ago.
Khamenei’s overview of US-Iran relations
is as uncompromising as it is at times
inaccurate. The leader glosses over the
World War II-era US occupation of a supply
route through Iran—a largely uneventful
Students greeting Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, 3 November 2019.
affair—by suggesting that the friendliness
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://idc0-cdn0.khamenei.ir/ndata/news/43880/C/13980812_2143880.jpg
of US forces toward Iranian ones at the time
was purposeful deception. He is at his most inaccurate when describing the 1953 coup against Iranian premier Mohammad Mosaddegh: Firstly,
that event did not install the shah’s regime. The alleged Nazi sympathies of the shah’s father and predecessor Reza Pahlavi led to his 1941 exile
to South Africa and the installation of the young Mohammed Reza Shah, who was ultimately overthrown in 1979. Growing street violence
instigated by Mosaddegh who had refused to step down upon his government’s dismissal, had led the shah to leave temporarily, though he
returned upon what at the time was described as a “countercoup” (this was also the title of Kermit Roosevelt’s book on the episode). At the time
of the 1953 coup, the clergy—including those or the teachers of those who now dominate the Islamic Republic—largely supported the ouster of
Mosaddegh whom they saw as too close to the Soviet Union and anti-religious. At the time, this was described as ‘the red versus the black,’ with
the former being the pro-Soviet Mosaddegh backers and the latter referring to the clergy, whose turbans were often black. Khamenei therefore
downplays and revises the role of the clergy in the 1953 coup in order to exaggerate grievance against the United States.
That Khamenei emphasizes the 1964 exile of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini—who 15 years later would lead the Islamic Revolution—shows
the exile’s importance in the mindset of Iran’s revolutionary leaders. Its context is also important, as it came against the context of the shah’s
largely progressive ‘White Revolution,’ a series of reforms which included granting religious minorities equality under the law and women’s
enfranchisement. Khomeini rallied against such reforms, calling them an assault on religion. For Khamenei, then, to suggest the exile of
Khomenei is as great a grievance as the 1953 coup, which regardless of accuracy has become original sin in popular imagination, is to condemn
fundamentally much of the reformist or liberal platform within the Islamic Republic.
More broadly speaking, however, at the beginning of the Islamic Republic’s fifth decade, Khamenei asserts that reconciliation with the United
States is as impossible today as it was at the time of the embassy seizure. This, too, is a message for any Iranians or Iranian diplomats engaged
in Track II dialogue with Americans or advocating renewed negotiations not only the nuclear file but also on Iran’s ballistic missile work and
regional activities. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Negotiations with the United States [are] 100 percent wrong.”

OE Watch | December 2019

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran: Khamenei Speaks on America
Source: “Biyanat dar Didar Daneshamuzan va Daneshjuyan (A Statement for High School and University Students),” Khamenei.ir, 3
November 2019. http://farsi.khamenei.ir/speech-content?id=43896
Khamenei Speaks on U.S.-Iran Relations
Today, I will raise a point about America – because the occasion of our gathering and our meeting is related to America – and if there
is time God willing, I will raise another point about our domestic issues and the issues of the country. As for America, I will tell you that
America has not changed in any way since November 1964 – during which time, the regime installed by America, drove our dear Imam
[Khomeini] into exile - until November 2019 which is the present time. America is the same America. The same wolfish qualities, which
existed in those days, exist in the America in the present time as well. The same global and international dictatorship exists in the United
States today as well. That day, America was an international dictator who had certain gendarmes in different parts of the world. Its
regional gendarme and mercenary was Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. In other parts of the world, there were other individuals. Today, the
same dictatorship exists, but with newer methods and tools. There is the same wolfish quality, the same international dictatorship, the
same malevolence and the same desire for having no limits – it has no limits and borders. America is the same America. Of course, it has
weakened today. The United States has become weaker compared to the year 1964, but it has also become wilder and more brazen. This is
what America is.
America showed enmity towards Iran. Throughout the history of U.S.-Iran relations, the United States has always shown enmity towards
Iran. This even happened during the time of the heathen regime. Its enmity towards Iran before the Revolution involved overthrowing the
national government in the year 1953. An American agent came to Tehran with a suitcase full of dollars and he went and hid in the British
Embassy. From there, he began spreading money and distributing dollars in order to employ certain individuals, launch a coup and
overthrow the national government.
Of course, that administration was to blame too. Its mistake was that it placed too much trust in America, but the Americans did that
anyway and they installed a corrupt administration which was dependent on them. There is no worse form of enmity. They dominated our
armed forces, our oil, the policies of our country and our culture: it was a complete domination. This continued from 1953 – when the coup
d’état of 19 August took place – to the victory of the Revolution in the year 1979. Such was its enmity towards the Iranian nation and our
country at that time.
And after the Revolution, it is clear how it has shown enmity. Until today, it either issues threats and imposes sanctions or utters hostile
words, creates problems and tries to infiltrate the country. They have always been on bad terms towards Iran and the Iranians….
Some people think that negotiating with America solves the problems of the country. This is a grave mistake. They are one hundred percent
wrong! The other side considers Iran’s accepting and sitting at the negotiating table as bringing the Islamic Republic to its knees. It wants to
say that they have finally managed to bring Iran to its knees with severe sanctions until it agreed to sit at the negotiating table with them. It
wants to say this to the whole world. It wants to prove that the “maximum pressure” policy is a correct policy that has worked because it has
succeeded in bringing the Islamic Republic to the negotiating table.

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | December 2019

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Chahbahar Port Developments
OE Watch Commentary: Across the Middle
East (and, indeed, in other regions of the world),
cities often grew alongside coasts or rivers. Ancient
Persia—and later Iran—was an exception to this.
There is only one navigable river in Iran—the
Karun river—and it is small, roughly equivalent
in length and discharge to the Susquehanna river
which flows through Pennsylvania and Maryland.
Because Iran is a large plateau hemmed in by
mountains, swamps, and badlands, most of the
cities were in the interior. The ports they did have
initially were historically minor, either along the
Persian Gulf (Bandar Abbas and Bushehr) or
the Caspian (Bandar Anzali). The Caspian Sea
is, of course, landlocked and the Persian Gulf is
narrow, shallow, and constrained by the Strait of
An aerial view of Shahid Beheshti Port, Chahabar.
Source: General Authority of Sistan & Balochistan, https://chabaharport.pmo.ir/fa/album/1537
Hormuz. For the Islamic Republic, this has become
a strategic liability as the Strait of Hormuz chokepoint makes Iran vulnerable to blockades: Not only does Iranian oil trade remain dependent
upon the ability of its tankers to sail out though the Strait of Hormuz, but Iran also remains dependent upon the import of refined gasoline
shipped through the Strait.
In order to alleviate this strategic vulnerability, Iran has built up two ports on its southern coast in recent years: Jask, just outside the Strait
where Iran now maintains an increasingly large navy and submarine base; and Chahbahar, where Iran is rapidly expanding commercial
capacity. In the excerpted article, the head of the Chahbahar Free Zone outlines plans to build petrochemical plants around Chahbahar, in effect,
transforming the port into a major industrial center. While the quoted official Mehdi Kohi is correct about the strategic location of the port and
its greater proximity both to the Indian and Chinese markets, either he or the Fars News Agency correspondent exaggerate the water depth data
(the maximum depth of the Persian Gulf is less than 300 feet), although Chahbahar’s greater depth is accurate.
China’s involvement in financing Chahbahar is also significant, as is the Iranian port leadership’s insistence that US sanctions have not
hampered the Chinese investment. Given that Chahbahar is the largest port in the northern Indian Ocean west of the (Chinese-financed and
reconstructed) Pakistani port of Gwadar, suggests greater Iranian involvement in China’s ‘Belt-and-Road’ initiative. It also signals greater
competition with India, which in recent years has sought to increase its trade through Chahbahar, especially for imports to and exports from
Afghanistan. While, Behrouz Aghaei, director general of the Sistan va Balochestan Ports and Maritime Department, in a separate article
reported a 63 percent increase in the loading of oil and non-oil goods between March and November 2019 over the same period in 2018, both
Indian and Iranian diplomats involved in trade negotiations suggest that diplomatic bottlenecks have retarded the potential benefits of the port.
End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“China would finance phases two and three…despite American sanctions.”
Source: “Ejraye 18 Tarh-e petroshimi dar montagheh-e azad Chahbahar (Implication of 18 Petrochemical Projects in Chahbahar Free Zone),”
Fars News Agency, 11 November 2019. https://www.farsnews.com/news/13980820001096
Chahbahar Port Developments
According to the Fars News Agency’s economic correspondent, Chahbahar Free Zone infrastructure director Mehdi Kohi told reporters visiting the
Chahbahar Free Zone, There are 17 [sic] petrochemical projects to be implemented in three phases of Chabahar Free Zone. Phase 1 consists of six
units which were begun two years ago, and are 30 percent complete. He said the capacity of each unit is 1.6 million tons and they should come online
beginning in 2022. The director of the Chahbahar Free Zone said that one unit would come online each year after 2022. He said China would finance
phases two and three, and that this was agreed to during the president’s visit to Beijing. According to Morteza Bank, president of the Free Zone
Secretariat [and deputy chief-of-staff to President Rouhani], the latest legal mechanisms are being developed by China, and they are being funded despite
American sanctions. Kohi also mentioned construction of a methane pipeline and said 38 kilometers [23.6 miles] of the project have been completed….
The head of the Chahbahar Free Zone sad, the Chahbahar Port route is about 1,400 miles closer to the target markets of China and India, and so it is
closer and also our sea depth in Chabahar is between 1,600 and 8,000 feet, but at Bandar Abbas is only between 500 to 600 feet, and so large ships can
easily sail in the area. He added that 18 petrochemical projects, each creating about 400 jobs will complete the design, with even more indirect jobs
benefiting the area.

OE Watch | December 2019

54

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Establishes Official VPN Operators
OE Watch Commentary: Within the Middle
East, Iranians are among the most internet
savvy populations, an irony given official
state controls and bans on social media sites
like Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube. Virtual
Private Networks (VPNs), used by Iranians to
bypass restrictions and government censorship,
have long frustrated the Iranian regime. While
Iranian authorities have talked for years about
creating a national intranet to better control
Iranian behavior online, they have yet to be
able to implement their project. Social media
companies have ignored Iranian government
demands that they host servers inside Iran as
a prerequisite for allowing Iranians onto their
platforms. Regime efforts to slow internet
connections have also largely failed to rein
in social media growth. While the Islamic
Republic has demonstrated the ability to shut
Abolhassan Firouzabadi, secretary of Iran’s Supreme Council of Cyberspace.
Source: Allameh Tabataba’i News Agency, https://www.atnanews.ir/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/bazdid-fazaye-majazi-ertebatat-8.jpg
down the internet entirely in times of crisis
as last month, creating VPNs it can contol while banning foreign VPNs may enable it to avoid taking that dramatic step of internet shutdowns
which negatively impact Iranian business and commerce.
In the excerpted article, Abolhassan Firouzabadi, the secretary of the Supreme Council of Cyberspace, a body created by Supreme Leader
Ali Khamenei in 2012, has announced a new approach by which the Iranian government would try to regulate and limit VPNs via official VPN
operators. It is unclear why Iranians would utilize ‘official’ VPNs if their goals remain to bypass Iranian government restrictions. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Legal VPN operators will be launched in the country.”
Source: “Oporatorhay-e VPN-e rasmi dar keshavar ijad mishavand (Official VPN Operators have been established in the country),” Mehr
News Agency, 11 November 2019. https://www.mehrnews.com/news/4768865
Official VPN Operators to be established in the country
The secretary of the Supreme Council of Cyberspace announced in the filtering working group guidelines to determine different levels of internet access
for individuals and said, “Soon official VPN operators will be established in the country.”
Abolhassan Firouzabadi on Monday morning [11 November] said on the sidelines of a breakfast meeting at the Computer Trade Organization, “We
agree that different accessibility levels should be defined for different types of internet for users and for this purpose, we have tasked the Working Group
to come up with a specific guideline regarding internet accessibility.”
Firouzabadi said, “We wanted these rules to be in place three months ago, but unfortunately the meetings of this working group were delayed, and we
are seeing slowness in reaching decisions.
Referring to the legal issues of the VPNs, he added, “This issue had been long discussed, but it come to nothing. Since many organizations and people
now use VPNs, and it has grown into quite a lucrative economy, we are hoping that legal VPN operators will be launched in the country in cooperation
with the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (ICT).” That is to say that the VPNs will be delegated according to predefined rules
and regulations through official operators,” he stressed.
Although internet penetration is high in Iran compared to its neighbors, many of the world’s most popular sites are blocked, including Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube and others. This has fueled a multi-million Dollar market for VPN and proxy providers.

OE Watch | December 2019

55

AFRICA
Al-Shabaab Looks to Launch Attacks in Ethiopia
OE Watch Commentary: Al-Shabaab appears
unafraid to launch attacks beyond its home base in
Somalia. Neighboring Kenya, a particularly popular
target, has been struck at least 20 times by the terrorist
group. However, as the accompanying excerpted article
from Somalia’s Radio Dalsan points out, Ethiopia has
largely been spared from the group’s attacks, even
though it also shares a border with Somalia and has
fought al-Shabaab there. However, there are signs that
this may be changing.
In September, Ethiopian security officials arrested
about a dozen al-Shabaab suspects who had allegedly
planned to attack hotels, religious festivities, and other
events. These were to happen at specific locations over
a fairly wide geographical area, including the capital,
Addis Ababa, and Ethiopia’s Somali region in the east.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia is clearly
“One reason al-Shabaab is attempting to target Ethiopia is to punish it for sending troops, such as the
concerned, warning that the terrorist group is trying
Ethiopian soldier pictured here serving with AMISOM, to fight against them in Somalia,”.
Source: AMISOM/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/61765479@N08/27550154106/, Public Domain
to make inroads into his country. Deputy Chief of
Ethiopia’s military, Berhanu Jula, said there is evidence al-Shabaab “has recruited, trained and armed some Ethiopians.”
Although it is difficult to say for certain what factor or factors may be responsible for al-Shabaab’s increased activity in Ethiopia, the article
notes that the enormous reforms the Prime Minister has undertaken since coming into office in 2018 might be playing a part. Prior to that time,
Ethiopia’s strong security apparatus helped prevent attacks from al-Shabaab. However, the reforms have resulted in significant turnover in many
government agencies, including those in the security sector, resulting in less experienced people managing them. Al-Shabaab possibly saw an
opportunity during this transition period and decided to increase their activity while new government agency heads were learning how to run
their organizations.
Another possible reason al-Shabaab is gaining, or at least attempting to gain, a larger foothold in Ethiopia is the rapid social change that is
coming with the reforms. There has been an increase in interethnic violence since they were first introduced, which might be causing some
Ethiopians to turn to the terrorist group.
Whatever the reasons for the uptick of al-Shabaab activity in Ethiopia, Ethiopians are rightly concerned. In 2013, in response to Ethiopia
sending troops to Somalia to join AMISOM, al-Shabaab declared “jihad” against the nation. Six years later they appear to be trying harder to
make that happen. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Al-Shabab could be benefiting from increasing ethnic
violence and the fraught political transition sweeping the
country since Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed ushered in a series
of reforms when he came to power in April 2018.”
Source: “Why Al-Shabab is eyeing Ethiopia,” Radio Dalsan (Somalia), 17 October 2019. https://www.radiodalsan.com/en/2019/10/17/whyal-shabab-is-eyeing-ethipia/
Ethiopia, backed by the United States, invaded Somalia in December 2006, capturing the capital Mogadishu and helping the Somali interim
government drive out the loose-knit Union of Islamic Courts, which controlled the capital and much of southern Somalia.
Six years ago, Ethiopia was spared bloodshed when two Somali suicide bombers accidentally blew themselves up in central Addis Ababa.
Security officials assume they were preparing to kill football fans during Ethiopia’s World Cup qualifying match against Nigeria that was
to take place later that day. Back then, the country’s vulnerability to extremists’ attacks even became the subject of a written question in the
European Parliament.
Al-Shabab could be benefiting from increasing ethnic violence and the fraught political transition sweeping the country since Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed ushered in a series of reforms when he came to power in April 2018.
OE Watch | December 2019

56

AFRICA
Somalia: How Climate Change Impacts Security
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying
excerpted article from the Somali website Radio Dalsan
explains, climate change is exacerbating the conflicts
already underway in Somalia and threatens to create new
ones.
Much of the article is based on a report from the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI), which examined how conflicts as well as
peacekeeping efforts are affected by climate change. The
findings essentially show that the security landscape
changes as climate change occurs. For example, with
the change in the seasons and weather over the past few
decades, herding nomads have had to adjust their routes.
Conflict sometimes ensues as rural farmers want to
protect their crops from the grazing animals.
While weather is a short-term phenomenon and climate
a long-term one, over time as the climate gets warmer,
Source: OXFAM East Africa/Wikipedia, https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Oxfam_East_Africa_-_A_family_gathers_sticks_and_branches_for_firewood.jpg, CC BY 2.0
the weather, despite some fluctuations, also tends to
get warmer. Thus, drought and floods, already significant problems in Somalia that tend to displace large numbers of people, are expected to
become even worse in the years to come. These displaced people sometimes end up in camps where radical groups such as al-Shabaab can
recruit them.
“Pictured here is the devastating 2011 East Africa drought. Ongoing droughts in Somalia have made
the already fragile state-building even more precarious,”

The droughts in particular have made the already fragile state-building process even more difficult. Scarce resources have to be diverted
to emergency responses instead of more long-term programs such as education, health, and better governance. Additionally, power sharing
agreements falter as the displacement of people results in changes to the “demographic composition on the ground.”
The article emphasizes that evidence of the adverse effects of climate change is not something that people have to wait to see years from now.
There are already significant impacts in Somalia, and they are quite devastating. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Climate change poses serious challenges to current and future
peacebuilding efforts and can amplify conflicts...”
Source: “Climate change poses serious challenges to current and future peace-building efforts in Somalia –Report,” Radio Dalsan (Somalia),
23 October 2019. https://www.radiodalsan.com/en/2019/10/23/climate-change-poses-serious-challenges-to-current-and-future-peacebuilding-efforts-in-somalia-report/
Climate change poses serious challenges to current and future peacebuilding efforts and can amplify conflicts, according to a report on
years of devastating violence and drought in Somalia released Wednesday.
On a positive note, the growing impact of climate change has meant that UNSOM has had to adapt its peacebuilding efforts by thinking
outside the box and adopting new approaches, which may prove useful in future peacebuilding operations.
These include the establishment of coordination centres for drought operations and the appointment of an environmental security advisor.
The report however stressed that some of these novel approaches are difficult to implement under the current funding structure, since much
of the money is siloed and earmarked for specific and isolated approaches, “thereby inhibiting integrated responses”.

OE Watch | December 2019

57

AFRICA
Will Baghdadi’s Death Impact Terrorism in Africa?
OE Watch Commentary: He was the leader of what many consider the
world’s deadliest terror group, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), but a
recent US-led operation led to his fatal demise. According to the accompanying
excerpted article from the South African Institute for Security Studies, the end
of Baghdadi does not mean the end of terrorism in Africa. It is not even certain
if his death will lead to any decrease in terrorism on the continent.
While his death brings hope to many that a more peaceful future could be
in store for Africa, the pessimism expressed in the article is rooted in several
factors. First, while ISIS, also known as Daesh, has suffered losses in Africa
over the past few years, it remains active and has adapted itself to local
dynamics, thus continuing to pose a threat in the Sahara, Sahel, Lake Chad
Basin, and central and eastern parts of the continent. This adaptability could
appeal to the new leadership, who are likely to keep focused on the continent
given Africa’s strategic value to the terrorist group’s goals of “remain and
expand.”
Second, the rivalry between al-Qaeda and ISIS that has played out across the
continent will likely continue. The article explains that al-Qaeda might even try
to capitalize on Baghdadi’s death as it attempts to re-attract fighters who left it
for the appeal of ISIS’s caliphate.
The most compelling case that ISIS in Africa will continue is the third
factor-- the history of deaths of leaders of other terrorist groups. For example,
“Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi from when he was detained at Camp Bucca,
when Mohammed Yusuf, Boko Harm’s first leader, was killed, his followers
Iraq, in 2004. It is suspected that even with his recent death, ISIS will
regrouped under Abubakar Shekau. As for the 2014 drone strike that killed
continue to focus on Africa,”
Source: US Army/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mugshot_of_Abu_Bakr_al-Baghdadi,_2004.
al-Shabaab leader Ahmed Godane, it did not reduce the group’s deadly attacks.
jpg, Public Domain
One could also look beyond Africa to see removing a leader does not always
translate to the death of a movement, such as al-Qaeda’s survival following the 2011 death of bin Laden.
Finally, causes of why people join terrorist groups, such as poverty and social injustice, are not diminished with the death of a leader. Thus,
while the operation that led to Baghdadi’s demise was a significant accomplishment, the article points out that additional steps are needed
to truly make a dent in terrorist activities, including increased regional and international cooperation on counterterrorism, and improved
socioeconomic factors as well as governance. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Terror groups have remained resilient despite their leaders’
deaths, and Daesh is unlikely to be any different.”
Source: Akinola Olojo and Martin Ewi, “What does al-Baghdadi’s death mean for Africa?” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 5
November 2019. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/what-does-al-baghdadis-exit-mean-for-africa
Eliminating their leaders sets terror groups back, but isn’t a measure of success in the struggle against terrorism. Targeted killings of
leaders should not outweigh the more important task of addressing root causes and enhancing counter-terrorism responses in affected
countries.
In Africa, Daesh affiliates abound with sympathizers from North Africa to the Sahel and from the Lake Chad Basin to the Horn. Daesh has
lauded attacks in the northeastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Mozambique.
Terror groups have remained resilient despite their leaders’ deaths, and Daesh is unlikely to be any different.
Before al-Baghdadi’s death, Africa was already of high strategic importance and became a platform for Daesh’s expansion and rebuilding
after its demise in Iraq and Syria. The continent’s significance was further demonstrated in the number of foreign terrorist fighters who
travelled to Iraq and Syria – an estimated 10 000 from North Africa alone.

OE Watch | December 2019

58

AFRICA
The Roots of Violent Extremism in Northern Mozambique
OE Watch Commentary: It is probably no coincidence that Mozambique’s poorest
province, Cabo Delgado, is also the one that has seen tremendous growth in violent
extremism. With high unemployment, low literacy rates, and the few jobs in the gas and
oil industry there often going to men from other provinces, many of Cabo Delgado’s
residents are poor and in despair. As the accompanying excerpted report from the
South African website Institute for Security Studies notes, the province’s Muslim
youth are becoming increasingly radicalized. This is possibly due in part from foreign
fighters who crossed over from Tanzania. The government ignored the signs of this
radicalization; that is until the attacks began.
It was 17 October 2017 when assailants armed with machine guns and machetes
began attacking police stations and other government buildings in a northern part of the
province. The following day, 14 of the attackers, two police officers, and a civilian lay
dead.
The government response to the attacks has been criticized. Besides sending in the
military, it has suspended human rights in the affected area and shut down reporting so
that little information is leaking out. A spiraling cycle of violence between government
forces and the insurgents has ensued, including beheadings and torture.
Although it is difficult to give an exact number of how many have been killed in the
escalating violence, one estimate is that since the beginning of the attacks through
January 2019, at least 150 people have been killed. According to another estimate, the
number is double that.
The report describes several possible interventions that may help mitigate the violence.
Long-term investments in infrastructure, especially roads and telecommunications,
would be particularly beneficial, as they would help integrate the province’s people
“Cabo Delgado Province, seen here in red, has seen a rise in
with the rest of Mozambique. Additional investments could also be made in education
Islamic extremism.”
Source: Profoss/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mozambique_-_Cabo_Delgado.svg,
and jobs, so that the youth see a future besides turning to extremism. The report also
CC BY-SA 3.0
suggests that the government pursue the prosecution of human rights violations and lift
the ban on the movement of journalists to allow for more transparency regarding the situation. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The government has responded by sending in the military
to stamp out the assailants, using ‘whatever it takes’, amid
suspicions that foreign fighters from Tanzania have radicalized
local youth who are behind the violence.”
Source: David M. Matsinhe and Estacio Valoi, “The Genesis of Insurgency in Northern Mozambique,” Institute for Security Studies (South
Africa), October 2019. https://issafrica.s3.amazonaws.com/site/uploads/sar-27.pdf
Insurgents have attacked towns and villages in Cabo Delgado, the poorest province in Mozambique. The government has responded by
sending in the military to stamp out the assailants, using ‘whatever it takes’, amid suspicions that foreign fighters from Tanzania have
radicalized local youth who are behind the violence. Other measures to counter the violence include an extra-judicial state of emergency and
the suppression of information.
They appear to consist of local youth who have devised a deviant form of Islam, to the distress of local imams, who have denounced it and
ejected the youth from local mosques.
When asked how safe and secure they felt, the villagers praised the soldiers for protecting them. At the same time, they said they could not
venture out of the village because it was not safe. In terms of what the residents could and could not say to us, this was a limitation. However,
it was also clear evidence of the heavy military presence in the village.
The state has created a tight military cordon and fomented a culture of fear in the area.
The extremists proceeded to burn the vehicle and behead the driver and six passengers, most of whom were women.
OE Watch | December 2019

59

AFRICA
Zimbabwe: An Economic Crisis and Sinking Army Morale
OE Watch Commentary: The 2017 overthrow of longsitting Zimbabwean leader Robert Mugabe (who was
Prime Minister from 1980 to 1987; and President from
1987 to 2017) and the subsequent controversial election
that brought Emmerson Mnangagwa to power were
supposed to improve the lives of the country’s citizens.
But marked economic difficulties have put a severe
damper on that prospect. As the accompanying excerpted
article from The Zimbabwe Independent notes, the fiscal
difficulties are adversely impacting soldiers, who are
openly expressing their unhappiness. The situation has
reached the point that the government is looking to avert
a security crisis.
The country’s finance minister Mthuli Ncube said he
was aware of the prospect of instability and is looking for
resources to placate the disgruntled soldiers. However,
it is unknown where those resources may come from, as
“A Zimbabwean soldier during a protest. Because of low pay and high prices, many in the Zimbabwean
the country’s deteriorating economic situation has left
military are disgruntled.”
Source: PublicDomainPictures.net, https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/en/view-image.php?image=235638&picture=zimbabwean-soldier-during-protest, Public Domain
little to no extra money for the military.
Interestingly, it was not long ago that the soldiers had actually been doing fairly well. After the coup that toppled Mugabe, the military took
over some of the roles previously reserved for the civilian intelligence service and police. Additionally, during this time it received certain
privileges and trappings of comfort. However, after Mnangagwa’s victory, many of the agencies run by the army after the coup reverted back to
their previous non-military control, and the privileges and trappings enjoyed by the soldiers went away.
Thus, high prices and low salaries have made life extremely difficult for soldiers, with reports of hunger in the ranks. Unkept promises made
by politicians further aggravate the condition. The situation reports, or sitreps in military parlance, explain it succinctly... army morale is the
lowest it has ever been. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“There is growing disquiet within the rank and file of the military
over the rising cost of living, poor salaries and difficult working
conditions, with government now desperate for solutions to avert a
security crisis.”
Source: “Hungry soldiers spark government fears,” Independent (Zimbabwe), 8 November 2019. https://www.theindependent.
co.zw/2019/11/08/hungry-soldiers-spark-govt-fears/
There is growing disquiet within the rank and file of the military over the rising cost of living, poor salaries and difficult working conditions,
with government now desperate for solutions to avert a security crisis.
“On the security cluster, let me tell you, if you do not have peace, you will have (instability). There is need to get them a decent three meals
a day; a decent uniform and then there is housing. I know the issues well. I am well briefed on their issues. We want to deal with that,” Ncube
said.
Army officers who spoke to the Zimbabwe Independent revealed disgruntlement was at an all-time high in the armed service, particularly
within the junior ranks.
They said junior officers are unhappy about the unfulfilled promises made by the authorities in the aftermath of the military coup which
toppled the late former president Robert Mugabe in November 2017.

OE Watch | December 2019

60

AFRICA
Russia’s Rosoboronexport Looks to Sell More Military
Hardware to Africa
OE Watch Commentary: South Africa, which
has the most robust military industry in Africa, has
lately attracted strong interest from Russia. As the
accompanying excerpted article from the South African
website DefenceWeb reports, Dmitry Shugaev, head
of the Russian Federal Service of Military-Technical
Cooperation, stated there are some promising projects
they could cooperate on related to the joint development
and production of military hardware. This equipment
would be for the South African and Russian armed
forces as well as for export.
South Africa is not the only African nation Russia is
eyeing for military hardware deals. Alexander Mikheev,
Head of Rosoboronexport, the Russian state arms
exporter, said his company had sideline meetings with
leaders of 15 African nations during the Russia-Africa
Summit in Sochi in late October.

“The Pantsir-S1 anti-aircraft gun/missile system is just one of many items Russian state arms

To entice sales at the summit, Rosoboronexport
exporter Rosoboronexport had on display at the Russia-Africa Summit in Sochi”
Source: Vitaly V. Kuzman/Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pantsir_missile_system#/media/File:MAKS_Airshow_2013_(Ramenskoye_Airport,_
displayed a wide variety of equipment. These included
Russia)_(521-05).jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
scale models of the “Yak-130 combat training aircraft, the Pantsir-S1 anti-aircraft gun/missile system, the Tor-M2KM SAM system and the Mi171SH military transport helicopter.” Of course, no Russian arms display would be complete without Kalashnikov assault rifles and its variants,
including the latest K-200-series, GP-34 grenade launcher, and Vityaz-SN submachine gun. The full-scale models, such as the BPK-Ural and
Typhoon protected vehicles were displayed outdoors.
Africa is already responsible for about a third of Rosoboronexport’s exports, and in the years to come the company intends to increase this
amount. Part of the company’s sales pitch is its claim of offering solutions to many of Africa’s problems, including terrorism, smuggling, and
drug trafficking.
Mikheev added that Rosoboronexport appreciates Africa’s “reserved attitude” towards the various sanctions that have been imposed on
Russia. Based on sales of Russian military hardware to Africa, both in the recent past as well as those presently being negotiated, that “reserved
attitude” of some African nations is paying off quite handsomely for Rosoboronexport. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Rosoboronexport appreciates the reserved attitude of its African partners

towards various anti-Russian sanctions, which makes the continent open to fair
competition, said Alexander Mikheev, Rosoboronexport’s Director General.”
Source: “Russia keen to manufacture military hardware with South Africa, DefenceWeb (South Africa), 25 October 2019. https://www.
defenceweb.co.za/featured/russia-keen-to-manufacture-military-hardware-with-south-africa/
In a strong signal of its willingness to engage with South Africa, the Russian Air Force on Wednesday sent two Tu-160 strategic bombers to
Air Force Base Waterkloof in the type’s first visit to the continent. They flew non-stop from Engels air base in Russia.
Before the summit, Cameroon indicated that it was interested in acquiring Pantsir-S1 air defence systems, with negotiations still underway,
while Ethiopia recently agreed to by a Pantsir system and Russia and Egypt were holding talks regarding the delivery of weapons and Ka-52
combat helicopters for the Egyptian Navy’s Mistral class amphibious assault ships.
Rosoboronexport appreciates the reserved attitude of its African partners towards various anti-Russian sanctions, which makes the
continent open to fair competition, said Alexander Mikheev, Rosoboronexport’s Director General.

OE Watch | December 2019

61

AFRICA
The Revival of Mali-Russia Relations
OE Watch Commentary: On 22 October, Mali’s
French-language publication Mali Actualites discussed
a meeting between Mali’s president and Russia’s
ambassador to Mali in which Mali’s president sought
help from Russia regarding the country’s national
security crises. The article notes there have been
several other contacts between the two countries’
leaders, including one in June in Moscow. The latest
meeting took place against the backdrop of the
continued insurgency in Mali, despite French-led
military support to the country. Now Russia is seeking
to compensate by increasing its support to Mali.
The article points out that Russia is taking advantage
of the perception that France has interfered in Malian
politics and accusing France of neocolonialism, while
evoking memories of Malian-Russian cooperation
General Keba Sangaré during the review of troops, Mali, September 8, 2019.
during the Cold War era to revitalize a “golden age”
Source: Kassim Traoré via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Le_G%C3%A9n%C3%A9ral_Keba_Sangar%C3%A9_lors_de_la_revue_des_troupes,_au_Mali,_
le_8_septembre_2019.jpg, Public domain
between the countries. At the same time, the article
questions how optimistic Malians should be about the partnership with Russia. While recognizing Mali and Russia have a common heritage
through their former partnership, the article also indicates Russia has its own military and economic interests in Africa.
The article concludes by emphasizing the predicament Mali faces militarily, including multiple instances of ambushes that have led to large
numbers of casualties. Thus Mali is searching for new partners to stem the tide of terrorism, including Russia. As the article demonstrates,
Russia is an old partner from the Cold War but it is a new partner in terms of Mali’s battle against terrorist groups. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“It is easy for the new Russia to reconnect with

its ‘golden age’ of Russian-Malian cooperation
and point the finger at neocolonialism and the
mistakes of Franco-Malian cooperation.”

Source: “Rapprochement Bamako-Moscou: Pourquoi les FAMa doivent redoubler de vigilance (Bamako-Moscow Rapprochement: Why
FAMa must redouble the vigilance),” Mali Actualites, 22 October 2019. https://maliactu.net/mali-rapprochement-bamako-moscou-pourquoiles-fama-doivent-redoubler-de-vigilance/
Faced with a multidimensional crisis, Mali is forming relations with the world’s major powers in order to end the suffering of Malians. It is
in this context that the Russian track is becoming more and more defined. There have been several contacts, the most official of which were
meetings between the Minister of Defense of Mali and his Russian counterpart and followed by that of the President of the Republic, Ibrahim
Boubacar Keïta, and the Russian Ambassador to Mali.
With the growing rejection of French politics in Mali, it is easy for the new Russia to reconnect with its “golden age” of Russian-Malian
cooperation and point the finger at neocolonialism and the mistakes of Franco-Malian cooperation. Today, Operation Serval, which is
supposed to fight against terrorism, is the subject of harsh criticism to the extent that the expected results are slow to be realized. The
massacres succeed one another on the side of the Fulani, and sometimes on the other side of the Tuareg or the Dogon, while the fight against
the jihadists looks long and uncertain.
Should we fear after the meeting between [Keïta] and Igor Anatolyevich Gromyko? After the meeting of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta
with the Russian ambassador to Mali, vigilance [is necessary] in order to prevent us from yet more destruction. At the center of the exchanges
is the revitalization of historical relations between the two countries, which have a common heritage.

OE Watch | December 2019

62

AFRICA
Russia Shows Up at Public Demonstrations in Mali
OE Watch Commentary: Mali is reeling from a series of violent attacks
against its armed forces in which over 100 servicemen have died and more
than a dozen remain missing and assumed to have been taken prisoner.
On 12 and 26 October, protestors demonstrated in Bamako demanding
an end to the French military mission and MINISMA (United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stability Mission in Mali). Demonstrations
like this are on the rise, with a number of them in Sévaré as well, where the
G-5 Sahel Counterterrorism Force is headquartered. But now there is a new
wrinkle. According to multiple local press sources, ‘Russia to the rescue’
seems to be a common theme of the recent protests.
According to Journal du Mali, which covered the 12 October
demonstrations, “the accentuation of requests for Russian intervention”
began in 2017 and currently “over six million Malians favor a Russian
intervention.” There is no source material suggesting how the number of
“six million” is reached. Speaking to dozens of Malians while on a recent
trip to Mali, this author could not find one Malian who was pro-Russian
intervention, or anyone who knew of one.

.

Source: GPM’s Public Facebook Page

However, it is not totally surprising that Malians might be searching for an alternative considering that the four armed force components
operating in the country; the Mali Armed Forces, G5-Sahel Counterterrorism Force, French Army and MINUSMA have not been able to stop
the conflict and bring peace and stability.
It seams a little out of the blue and abrupt that Russia is the answer according to a small but vocal group of protestors. Yet Putin has fostered
an image of strength from the time he took the reigns of leadership in the aftermath of the first Chechen war. Russia’s record of putting down
the Chechen Islamist insurgency, its currently evolving role in Syria as peacemaker, and recent revelations of military intrigue in Libya, could
add to the credibility of the messaging now imploring Malians to get behind a Russian answer to the country’s security woes.
But there may be other forces at work as well. There is strong suspicion in local press that a Russian solution in Mali is more likely the
work of Russian information operations being carried out not only in Mali but also across the African continent. Mali press outlets list two
organizations specifically behind the pro-Russian protests, Faso Ko and Group of Patriots of Mali (GPM). GPM’s Facebook page leads with
the call, “the Group of Patriots of Mali is the initiator of the movement for petition so that Russia can return to Mali and help us recover all our
territory.” Yet, it is unclear how much Malians know about these groups—or where they come from.
The demonstrations in Bamako were small compared to those taking place in Sévaré. However, according to an AFP correspondent at the
demonstration on 12 October, GPM called for “Russian intervention to help the Malian army recover territorial integrity.”
There is very little background on either organization readily available and many Malians do not know either entity or their origins. All of this
circumstantial evidence suggests that Russia is likely complicit with much of the pro-Russian rhetoric on display at the recent public protests.
With the current cycle of violence in the country escalating, there will likely be additional pressure for alternative solutions, i.e., Russia to the
rescue End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“...We want the intervention of Russia...”
Source: “Crise sécuritaire au Mali: La Russie à la rescousse? (Security crisis in Mali: Russia to the rescue?),” Journal du Mali, 17 October
2019. https://www.journaldumali.com/2019/10/17/crise-securitaire-mali-russie-a-rescousse/
Anger—the word sums up the state of mind of the protesters in Sévaré, which on Wednesday, 9 October, committed “body and soul for the unconditional
departure of France, MINUSMA and all foreign forces” from Mali. At the call of the “Faso Ko” platform, at least a thousand people had arrived with
slogans hostile to the international forces intervening in the area. On the sidelines, the messages of solicitation of Russia multiplied, especially through
posters brandished by young protesters.

Source: “Du matériel de la mission de l’ONU pillé par des manifestants à Sévaré (UN mission equipment looted by protesters in Sévaré),”
Voice of Africa, 12 October 2019. https://www.voaafrique.com/a/du-matériel-de-la-mission-de-l-onu-pillé-par-des-manifestants-àsévaré/5121446.html
“We have no problem with France and MINUSMA, but they have proved their limit, that’s why we want the intervention of Russia,” said protester,
Clement Dembele.

OE Watch | December 2019

63

AFRICA
West African Troops to Deploy to Mali, Niger, and Burkina
Faso
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted 25 October
article in Jeune Afrique emphasizes how the focal point
of counter-terrorism in West Africa is increasingly
becoming the Mali-Niger-Burkina Faso border region.
The article mentions the upcoming West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) military
leaders’ meeting, which will occur later in 2019 or in
2020 to “plan troops in Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger
to fight against jihadist groups.” The battalions being
relocated to those three countries’ border regions will
include Ivorians and Senegalese. Their counter-terrorism
operations are urgent because the jihadist groups are
conducting daily attacks in those regions.
The decision to concentrate troops in the border
regions of Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso was made
after the summit of heads of state of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
September 2019 in Burkina Faso. At the summit it
was agreed that West African states should coordinate
because the jihadists’ pattern of operations are elusive
and any country in the region could be the next target.
For example, while Mali was originally the main
operational area for jihadists, they later expanded to
Niger and Burkina Faso.
A further reason for urgency mentioned in the article
is that not only have jihadist attacks led to 11,500 deaths,
but also thousands wounded, millions displaced, and
Economic Community of West African States.
dwindling economic vitality. Once the new deployment
Source: Alinor via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:UEMOA_and_Eco_in_ECOWAS.PNG, CC BY 3.0
of forces is made to Mali, Niger, and Burkina
Faso, it will be seen whether the surge in troops there contributes to military success and a reduction of jihadist activities. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“If we... do not integrate, if there is no synergy of action, they [jihadists]
will always be one step ahead of us.”
Source: “Lutte contre le terrorisme au Sahel: l’Uemoa projette de mobiliser des troupes dans les zones frontalières (Fight against terrorism
in the Sahel: Waemu plans to mobilize troops in border areas),” Jeune Afrique, 25 October 2019. https://www.jeuneafrique.com/847528/
politique/lutte-contre-le-terrorisme-des-troupes-ouest-africaines-bientot-au-mali-au-niger-et-au-burkina/
The military leaders of the countries of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) will meet in in late 2019 or early 2020 to
plan troops in Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger to fight against jihadist groups, the Ivorian Minister of Defense, Hamed Bakayoko, announced.
The joint operations will involve battalions of Senegalese, Ivorians, and others in theaters in Mali, Burkina Faso and elsewhere. “It’s an
urgent operation. We want to identify areas, like the three-border zone (Mali / Burkina / Niger), where we will do joint maneuvers,” he
said. These operations come in the wake of the summit of heads of state of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
September in Ouagadougou. “If we states we do not integrate, and if there is no synergy of action, they (jihadists) will always be one step
ahead of us. There is a progression. Yesterday it was Mali. (Today) Niger and Burkina.” At the Ouagadougou summit, the president of the
ECOWAS commission, Jean-Claude Brou, recalled that there had been in these last four years “2,200 attacks, 11,500 dead, thousands of
wounded, millions of displaced people, and significantly affected economic activity” in the Sahel.

OE Watch | December 2019

64

AFRICA
Nigerian Committee Finds Officials Complicit in Banditry
OE Watch Commentary: Nigeria’s northwestern
Zamfara State has witnessed an increase in banditry
and other forms of criminality, especially kidnappings,
in recent months. As a result, the state’s government
designated a committee to investigate the causes of
insecurity. The subsequently released report, which
is discussed in the excerpted article in Nigeria’s New
Telegraph, revealed that some military officers and
traditional rulers were involved in banditry themselves.
This finding resulted in the dismissal of 10 military
officers and the dethroning of over 30 traditional rulers
and local village heads.
According to the article, the Zamfara governor
recognizes that recommendations from committees to
investigate social problems in Nigeria have seldom been
implemented. The article nevertheless notes that the
current governor’s efforts should be welcome because
Zamfara’s past governor had nearly resigned his role as
chief security officer as a result of his inability to bring
change. The article also states the report itself has had
an impact already. This is because military officers
and traditional rulers are concerned they might find
themselves on the list.

Zamfara State Nigeria.

Source: Jaimz height-field via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zamfara_State_Nigeria.png, CC BY 3.0

The article recommends that the governors of Zamfara’s neighboring states also clamp down on banditry like the Zamfara governor is
attempting. Given banditry’s cross-border nature, that could help reduce the insecurity in Zamfara itself. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“We believe very strongly that the submission of

the report is a necessary step in getting to the root
of the security situation in the state.”
Source: “Fuelling insecurity in Zamfara,” New Telegraph, 22 October 2019. newtelegraphng.com/2019/10/fuelling-insecurity-in-zamfara/
Governor Bello Matawalle of Zamfara State may have ventured into an area that is dreaded by many. Two weeks ago, a committee he set up
to look into insecurity and banditry that have become the lot of the state in the past 10 years submitted its report. The report was as damning
as it could be, indicting top military officers and traditional rulers as being responsible for the banditry in the state. The committee, set up in
July this year, had a former Inspector-General of Police, Muhammad Abubakar, as the chairman. At the end, Abubakar and his committee
recommended the dismissal of some military officers and dethroning of the culpable traditional rulers. Abubakar said “five emirs, 33 district
heads and several village heads were confirmed to be complicit in the banditry activities, which has lasted for about a decade.” He went on to
say that some 10 military and police officers and civilians were “supporting the bandits, who have killed hundreds of innocent persons, burnt
villages, destroyed farmlands, foodstuff and livestock.”
The immediate past governor of the state, Abdulaziz Yari, spent his eight-year tenure, lamenting on his powerlessness in the face of the
daunting security challenges. He even vowed to drop his tag as the chief security officer of the state, owing to his inability to have a control of
the security apparatus in the state.
We believe very strongly that the submission of the report is a necessary step in getting to the root of the security situation in the state. We
also believe that such actions from other governors in the area might put a stop to the banditry that has taken over the North-West region
of the country. At least, if not for anything, there is a fear now in the air in Zamfara among the traditional rulers, the army, police and even
prominent civilians on the indictment list.

OE Watch | December 2019

65

AFRICA
Nigeria Implements ID Regulations to Curb Boko Haram
OE Watch Commentary: Since the Boko Haram insurgency began in
2010, Nigeria has attempted numerous military offensives to counter the
group. According to the excerpted article in Premium Times, the Nigerian
military is now planning a new nationwide operation intended to address
criminality generally, and to combat Boko Haram in the northeast of the
country specifically. “Operation Positive Identification” requires all Nigerian
citizens to obtain national identification documents and subjects them to
random stops where they would have to show those documents to the military.
The article states that the military had previously been implementing this
in the northeast part of the country where Boko Haram is present; but now
they are expanding it nationwide. The military apparently believes that
this policy has separated terrorists from civilians in Boko Haram-affected
areas, especially because Boko Haram members are ideologically opposed to
holding documents from a government they consider illegitimate and do not A section of seventy Nigeria Formed Police Unit officers who were rotating into
Mogadishu on 6 January 2014.
want to enter government facilities to obtain such documents. It is hoped that Source: AMISOM via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2014_01_06_Nigeria_Formed_Police_Unit_Police_
Replacement_and_Rotation_24_(11798525496).jpg, Public Domain.
taking this operation nationwide separate criminals and bandits from civilians
all over the country. However, criminals and bandits might not have the same reticence to obtain national documents as Boko Haram.
The article also highlights numerous reasons why this policy may be impractical besides that it has not been in effect long enough to conclude
whether it is even aiding the war against Boko Haram. For example, it points out that even in Nigeria’s capital, Abuja, half of the population
lacks national documents, and it will take time to obtain them. In the meantime, these civilians may be accosted by the military and be unfairly
suspected of being a criminal or terrorist.
Furthermore, the article notes previous such attempts to implement similar campaigns in Nigeria, that were held up by bureaucracy. There is
concern, therefore, that if the government does not deliver the national identification documents promptly to civilians, then it is the civilians who
will bear the burden of the military’s policy. While the military has urged citizens not to panic about the new policy and is optimistic about its
potential, the article does raise relevant concerns about how the policy’s implementation will proceed. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Soldiers had been taking similar measures to

separate citizens from terrorists in the Boko Haramravaged northeastern part of Nigeria.”
Source: “Nigerian military plans operation to demand ID cards from citizens,” Premium Times, 27 October 2019. https://www.
premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/359720-nigerian-military-plans-operation-to-demand-id-cards-from-citizens.html
The Nigerian military has planned a nationwide operation to demand identity cards from citizens across the country. ‘Operation Positive
Identification’ would see soldiers accosting citizens on the streets or highways and asking them to produce means of identification on the
spot. Soldiers had been taking similar measures to separate citizens from terrorists in the Boko Haram-ravaged northeastern part of Nigeria.
The military claimed last month that citizens in the North-east had been cooperating with troops to make the exercise successful by carrying
with them valid identity documents. But the military announced on September 25 that the exercise will be extended nationwide to “checkmate
bandits, kidnappers, armed robbers, ethnic militia, cattle rustlers as well as other sundry crimes across the various regions of Nigeria.”
Citizens have been warned to carry a valid means of identification, especially voter’s card, national identity card, driver’s license,
international passport, whenever they are going out to avoid being seen as criminally-minded by soldiers. Kennedy Angbo, a human rights
activist in Abuja, said “If law enforcement agencies have a reason to suspect a citizen, they should go after that citizen and not subject the
whole country to fear. More than half of Nigerians do not have identity cards, so what do you expect them to carry around,” the activist said.
Nigeria has long faced challenges in compiling a unified database of its citizens. In 2007, a commission was created to register and issue ID
cards to all citizens above 16. But over a decade later, only a few million people have enrolled and even fewer number of people had been
issued the plastic identity cards.
Nigerian Army spokesperson, Sagir Musa, and Defence Headquarters spokesperson, Onyema Nwachukwu, urged citizens “not to panic on
seeing an increased presence of military personnel.” He said the military would continue to secure the country, protect lives and properties of
all Nigerians through multiple exercises, including the ‘Operation Positive Identification.’
OE Watch | December 2019

66

LATIN AMERICA
Chile Under Attack
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying references attest, Chile,
fell under attack in October. Major, extensive destruction of public facilities
and services occurred in this country known for having among the best
economic performances in the hemisphere, and for taking pride in an orderly
and respectful social habit.
The first accompanying reference is of an in-depth interview with Chilean
Andrés Barrientos, co-founder of the think-tank Ciudadano Austral. Mr.
Barrientos puts the events into some context, and dispels the standard
assertion that the rioting had something to do with a rise in subway fares.
The fares were not raised much, and did not apply to students or the elderly.
The subway fare was, according to many informed Chileans including Mr.
Barrientos, a thin pretext.
Palacio de La Moneda, the seat of the President of the Republic of Chile, in

The second and third articles provide a revealing snapshot of the situation
Santiago, Chile.
Source: Miguel Hernandez via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Palacio_de_La_Moneda_-_miguelreflex.jpg,
on 13 November, the first about the level of violence, and the second about
CC BY 2.0
its political consequences. Communists and other leftist parties in the legislature have called for the resignation of the President. He has rejected
that, but has had to leave the presidential offices, evidently for reasons of personal safety. He has agreed to begin a process for re-writing the
national Constitution. Subsequently, how to go about doing that quickly became the question.
The fourth accompanying source offers one perspective about how and why this is happening. It features comments by Venezuelan President
Nicolas Maduro, who claims, “all of goals planted in the Forum of Sao Paulo are being realized.” Noteworthy is that the massive marches and
demonstrations in Venezuela did not result in extensive destruction to infrastructure or private property. They also didn’t result in any significant
political change. They were also not inspired, organized and funded by the violent left. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…This has been gestating for years…”
Source: Mamela Fiallo Flor, “Los destrozos en Santiago no son vandalismo, es guerra subversiva (The heavy damage in Santiago is not
vandalism, it is subversive war),” Panam Post, 19 October 2019. https://es.panampost.com/mamela-fiallo/2019/10/18/los-destrozos-ensantiago-no-son-vandalismo-es-guerra-subversiva/
A superficial analysis would focus on a rise of less than 4% in the ticket price on the subway train. My judgement is that this has been gestating for
years by way of the whole cultural, labor, educational and ideological narrative show, ceded by the right to our country’s left. Underestimating the power
of ideas and theoretical-practical action that is behind the constant fight in what we tend to call politics, there has been an ideological abandonment on
the part of the political elites regarding the ideas of liberty…[Just] during the course of this interview, more than eight metro stations have been burned,
in addition to part of a building of an energy company.

Source: Tomás Molina J. ed., “Gobierno: Hubo más de mil personas detenidas y 347 policías lesionados en las últimas 24 horas (Government:
There were more than a thousand persons detained and 347 policemen wounded in the last 24 hours),” EMOL.com, 13 November 2019.
https://www.emol.com/noticias/Nacional/2019/11/13/967054/Mas-de-mil-detenidos.html
As it stands, up to 0900 today, the department registered ‘398 events reported to the Carabineros’, of which ‘198 correspond to serious events’, 139 more
than what was recorded in Tuesday morning’s assessment……1,020 persons detained, close to 200% [sic] more than counted in yesterday’s report, when
342 were registered. As for wounded, Interior [office] expressed that there were 347 police officers wounded and 46 wounded civilians…

Source: María Cristina Morero, “La cronología de las tensas horas que derivaron en el anuncio del Presidente de avanzar en tres acuerdos
nacionales (The chronology of the tense hours flowing from the announcement of the President to proceed with three national agreements),”
EMOL.com, 13 November 2019. https://www.emol.com/noticias/Nacional/2019/11/13/967056/Cronologia-de-anuncio-de-Pinera.html
…President Sebastián Piniera called on all the actors to attain three great national accords: for peace, for justice and a new Constitution…all of the
parties of the center-left…signed a declaration that ratified their support for the realization of an initiating plebiscite and a Constituent Assembly as the
mechanism for changing the Fundamental Charter. [That] position got the attention of the government supporters, given that, up to that moment, from
the government standpoint, negotiations with the opposition block had been going well…

Source: Staff, “El continente americano paga el alto precio de no haber detenido a tiempo al monstruo rojo (The American Continent
pays a high price for not having detained the red monster on time),” PanAm Post, 21 October 2019. https://es.panampost.com/panamstaff/2019/10/21/editorial-la-region-paga-el-alto-precio-de-no-haber-detenido-a-tiempo-al-monstruo-rojo/
One would have to be very innocent to not realize that we Latin Americans are witnessing a dangerous reordering of the great threats that the region
has lived in the last seventy years. ‘The plan is going perfectly. You know what I’m talking about. All of the goals that we had planted in the Forum of Sao
Paulo are being realized. It is going much better than we had thought’, Nicolás Maduro said while the whole region burns in riots and sackings…But it is
nothing new…

OE Watch | December 2019

67

LATIN AMERICA
What is the Puebla Group?
OE Watch Commentary: A new organization has appeared in the firmament of activist left regional entities. It is called the Puebla Group,
and its first meeting is reported to have been in Puebla, Mexico this July. The accompanying references provide insight into this organization.
Fortuitous for the new entity is that one of its founders, Alberto Fernández, was just elected President of Argentina. He will take the reins
of that country’s government in early December, and before that, in November, Fernández will lead the second plenary of the Puebla Group in
Buenos Aires. The first accompanying reference offers an opinion as to what this organization is and does. The second reference names names.
It is a list of high-level progressivist personalities. According to the source, there are thirty-six members, including the following sixteen: Evo
Morales, Álvaro Garcia Linera, Alberto Fernández, Martín Torrijos, Alicia Bárcena, Verónika Mendoza, Inacio Lula da Silva, Dilma Rousseff,
José “Pepe” Mujica, Marco Enríquez-Ominami, Aloizio Mercadante, Fernando Lugo, Ernesto Samper, Leonel Fernández, Rafael Correa and
José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero. The list includes ten ex-presidents. The organization seems to be a holding pen of leading leftist politicians,
an obvious intention being to return them to power. The same reference ties the new organization to the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, CELAC (http://celacinternational.org/).
The third reference offers an informed opinion about what the Forum of Sao Paulo (FSP) is and does. It is included here because of the likely
relationship of the new organization to the FSP, as asserted in the fourth reference. The fourth reference especially ties the organizations to the
current violence sweeping the region. None of the three mentioned, interlocked organizations, the Puebla Group, CELAC, or the FSP is friendly
to the United States. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…A new international organization has begun to gain strength in the region in the
service of Latin-American progressive leaders…”
“…In its declaration of intentions, the Puebla Group asserts the necessity to regain
power …”
Source: La Nación, “Qué es el Grupo de Puebla, el nuevo eje progresista de América Latina al que apunta Alberto Fernández (What is the
Puebla Group, the new Latin American progressive axis directed by Alberto Fernández?),” La Nación and Rueters, 1 November 2019.
https://www.lanacion.com.ar/el-mundo/que-es-grupo-puebla-nuevo-eje-progresista-nid2302810
“…A new international organization has begun to gain strength in the region in the service of Latin-American progressive leaders, who will meet for
the second time this coming November between the 8th and the 10th in Buenos Aires, in which president-elect Alberto Fernández will participate with
the aim of planning regional integration… Between the 12th and 14th of July, more than 30 of the regions progressive leaders met for the first time in the
city of Puebla, Mexico determined to form the Latin American Progressive’s Group, ‘a space for reflection and political interchange in Latin America’,
according to its declaration… According to its members, this new progressive axis arose as a necessity to contain the ‘advance of the conservative
right’…”

Source: Ramón Jara A, “A pocos días de renunciar, Evo Morales y Álvaro García Linera se incorporan al Grupo de Puebla (Just a few days
after resigning, Evo Morales y Álvaro García Linera join the Puebla Group),” EMOL.com, 13 November 2019. https://www.emol.com/
noticias/Internacional/2019/11/13/967072/Morales-Garcia-Linera-Grupo-Puebla.html
“Both new memberships add to those of ex-president of Panama Martin Torrijos, of the Peruvian ex-candidate Verónika Mendoza and the executive
secretary of CEPAL, Mexican Alicia Bárcena…the last to join were the ex-chiefs of State of Brazil, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva y Dilma Rousseff, and on the
part of Uruguay, José “Pepe” Mujica…”

Source: Federico Boccanera, “El Foro de Sao Paulo: ¿qué es? (The Forum of Sao Paulo: What is It?),” La Patilla, 23 October 2019. https://
www.lapatilla.com/2019/10/23/federico-boccanera-el-foro-de-sao-paulo-que-es/
“As a consequence of the convulsions that are presenting themselves in countries such as Ecuador, Chile and Bolivia, the media clergy for the formation
of public opinión has frequently mentioned the Forum of Sao Paulo as an important factor, including as the fundamental factor. Much is said of the
‘Forum of Sao Paulo’, but, What is it?...a hint – it is not a political organization.
The FSP in not a ‘socialist international’, its function is analogous to the Logia P2, a degenerated masonic lodge that connected civil and military
powers of the Italian State with private legal and criminal powers (bank, Company, mafia) both national and international… The FSP is therefore
a system of power that coordinates powers, recruits operators, organizes operations and most importantly: occupies itself finding and channeling
financing. That ‘political organization’ thing is a front. Fort he P2 the front was ‘masonic lodge’.”

Source: Luis García Planchart, “El grotesco Halloween de las manifestaciones foro-paulistas (The grotesque Halloween of the foro-paulist
demonstrations),” Opinático sin oficio, 21 October 2019. https://opinaticosinoficio.blogspot.com
“It was not a coincidence that all these social grievances rose along with the launching of the Puebla Group in Mexico – during the first half of July
2019 – by the defeated candidate for the presidency of Chile, Marco Enríquez-Ominami and the founder of the Workers Party and ex- Minister of
Education, Science and Technology of Brazil, Aloizio Mercadante, supported by the foundations Center for Strategic Studies and International Relations
(CEERI), of Argentina, and Progresa, or Chile; and the meeting of the Forum of Sao Paulo in Caracas – carried out during the last week of July of this
year… In its declaration of intentions, the Puebla Group asserts the necessity to regain power…”

OE Watch | December 2019

68

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia Collapsing Left?
OE Watch Commentary: Foreign reportage and opinion about Colombia in October was disheartening to those who prefer not to see the
radical left take control of that country as they have Venezuela. The first accompanying reference is by Eduardo Mackenzie, a highly regarded
journalist and author from Paris. He is commenting on a recent event in southern Colombia in which a number of minors were perhaps killed in
a government bombardment of a FARC encampment. The victims were apparently underage recruits of the guerrilla, but the public narrative,
successfully advanced by a pro-FARC faction within the Colombian legislature (whose presence there is a result of the 2016 negotiation
between the FARC and the government) blamed it on an alleged moral lapse of the military. Leftist opposition in the legislature and media
demanded that the Minister of Defense resign, which he did. According to Mackenzie, the president, Iván Duque, did little to counter the charge.
Mackenzie laments that the president’s surrender to the left’s deployment of lawfare was just an invitation to another attack. As outlined in the
second accompanying reference, that feared attack was pre-announced as a nation-wide demonstration to begin on 21 November. Especially in
the context of a recent surge of urban violence in several South American countries, the prospects may indeed appear lamentable, especially
in Bogotá. The destruction being wrought in Santiago is a stark reminder of what is known in Latin America as the “Bogotazo,” the 1948
immolation of the city and folkloric beginning of decades of uncivil violence. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“...Their [a number of minors] presence and their death in that place... was and is the
responsibility of the FARC and... not the Military Forces…”

Cartoon that tells and illustrates the events of Bogotazo.

Source: Miguel Olaya via Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/juglardelzipa/2398542897/in/photostream/, CC BY 2.0

Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Colombie: comment la subversion a fait tomber le ministre de la Défense (Colombia: How the subversives
caused the Minister of Defense to fall),” Dreuz Info, 10 November 2019. https://www.dreuz.info/2019/11/10/colombie-comment-lasubversion-a-fait-tomber-le-ministre-de-la-defense/
“…the public force did not have knowledge of the presence of minors at the attacked encampment…their presence and their death in that
place, this past September 2, was and is the responsibility of the FARC and only them and not the Military Forces… If the chief executive had
allowed him [the Defense Minister] to make an effort to face public opinion to clear it up, combating and dismantling, as was possible, each
point in the rosary of lies…they [the accusers] would have been unmasked and isolated…The country is presently seeing how the fragility of
Colombian institutions, and the absence of State counterintelligence services, make it once again possible for thrill-seekers and extremists
to come together to take out, without much effort, a Minister of Defense. Since the government let them have that goal, they are already
preparing another…”
Source: Editors, Organizaciones plantean huelga nacional el 21 de noviembre en Colombia (Organizations plan a national strike in Colombia
the 21st of November),” El Telégrafo and EFE, 6 November 2019, https://www.eltelegrafo.com.ec/noticias/mundo/8/huelga-colombia21noviembre
The objective of the PDETs is to achieve structural transformation in the countryside and rural ambit, and an equitable [relationship
making] between the countryside and the city… The transformation of the 170 Colombian counties most affected by violence, the presence of
illicit crops, poverty and abandonment by the State, has already begun…
OE Watch | December 2019

69

LATIN AMERICA
Bolivia: Evo Morales Out
OE Watch Commentary: From Bolivia come reports of an interesting countercurrent to the leftist wave of violence and electoral victories in other Latin American
countries. On 20 October, the country held presidential elections, which Evo Morales
claimed to have won with a sufficient margin to avoid a second round run-off. Not
everyone in Bolivia was convinced. At first came curious reports that in an outlying
department, a statue of Hugo Chávez was torn down in public, followed by reports
of a seemingly indifferent response from police authority. Within a couple of weeks,
reportage emerged of police mutinies, which quickly extended to at least five of the
nine departments. President Morales called it a coup d’état, and indeed it seemed to
meet the standard rubric.
The possibility that the uprisings were spontaneous is all but zero. The mutineers
Demonstrations in La Paz, Bolivia, 23 October 2019.
were able to secure live television broadcasts of their demands, and unlike in
Source: Paulo Fabre via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Manifestaciones_en_La_Paz,_
Bolivia_en_contra_el_fraude_electoral_y_el_gobierno_de_Evo_Morales.jpg,
CC BY-SA 4.0
Venezuela, a national armed force challenged the executive. If we call it a coup,
however, it is an inside-out one in that the police did not march in and arrest the president or take over the government. They just left him with
no presidential guard, and the military backed off as well. Morales (and probably his powerful vice-president, Álvaro García Linera) saw the
writing on the wall. The socialist president of Mexico, André Manuel López Obrador, extended asylum to Morales and reportedly another 20
leading Bolivian political personalities. The official Mexican reasons may be revealing – that the situation endangered their lives. Morales called
on both the international community and his internal supporters to see these events as an affront to and violation of democracy and the rule of
law. Some categorized that assertion as a stretch, especially in light of what appeared to have been obvious election fraud on the part of Morales’
administration, and that with help from the Venezuelans. The Argentinean foreign ministry, for example, stated that the situation did not
meet the definition of a coup. If not for a few weeks, Morales might have sought asylum in Argentina rather than in Mexico. The Argentinean
electorate just voted in a leftist leader, Alberto Fernández, but his term does not begin until 10 December. It will be of value to find out how
the police were organized for a coordinated mutiny, and how the military was convinced to take a knee. At first impression, it appears that Evo
Morales and Álvaro García did not accept the Cuban formula for control of those institutions (and for otherwise guarding the executive), as did
Hugo Chávez and Nicolás Maduro in Venezuela. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Demonstrators pulled down a statue of … Hugo Chávez…”

Source: Josué Meneses, “Técnicos venezolanos pretenden cambiar los resultados en Bolivia (Venezuelan technicians attempt to change the
results in Bolivia),” La Abeja, 21 October 2019. https://www.laabeja.pe/tecnicos-venezolanos-pretenden-cambiar-los-resultados-en-bolivia/
“This 20 October, after releasing the first result of the elections carried out in Bolivia, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) suspended the
transmission of results on the orders of Evo Morales, so that it would be possible to distort the numbers, with the assistance of Venezuelan
technicians…”
Source: Bolivia: Manifestantes derribaron estatua de Hugo Chávez (Bolivia: Protesters take down statue of Hugo Chávez),” El Nacional, 22
October 2019. https://www.elnacional.com/mundo/manifestantes-derribaron-estatua-de-hugo-chavez-en-bolivia/
“…The night of 21 October 2019, opposition demonstrators pulled down a statue of the deceased Venezuelan dictator Hugo Chávez near
Riberalta, Bolivia [in Beni Department]. According to images passed around on social media, the demonstrators tied a rope around the neck
of the monument and pulled until they made it fall. They also cut off its legs with chain saws a chopped at it with machetes…The violence
went through the night into Monday in Bolivia in protest against a supposed electoral fraud in favor of Evo Morales…”
Source: Editors, Morales llama a la oposición a dialogar, mientras se extienden los motines policiales por el país (Morales calls on the
opposition to dialog, while the police riots extend through the country),” ABC and EFE, 9 November 2019. https://www.abc.es/internacional/
abci-extienden-motines-policiales-bolivia-y-morales-habla-golpe-estado-201911091159_noticia.html
“The police riots extended yesterday in Sucre, the constitutional capital of Bolivia, after which a first group of police mutinied in the
central city of Cochabamba. Apparently, according to Bolivian news sources, in other regions, such as the Andean city of Potosí, there have
also been police revolts within the Bolivian Police, although there has not been an official announcement… In a live declaration on several
Bolivarian television stations, the officer [a police woman speaking for the mutineers] called on the Armed Forces to not repress those in
revolt, and asked the President of Bolivia, Evo Morales, that he dialog with the civic and opposition movements…Evo Morales asserted that
democracy was at risk and classified the situation as a coup d’état.”
Source: Editors, “Evo Morales aceptó asilo ofrecido por México (Evo Morales accepted asylum offered by Mexico),” El Nacional, 11
November 2019. https://www.elnacional.com/mundo/latinoamerica/evo-morales-acepto-asilo-ofrecido-por-mexico/
“The chancelor [Mexican Foreign Minister Marcelo Ebrard] informed that Morales asked for political asylum in Mexico…which he decided
to give him ‘ for humanitarian reasons… Additionally, the Mexican government made known its rejection of the ‘military operation under
way’ in Bolivia, ‘like those tragic events that bloodied our Latin America in the past century’…
Argentinean diplomat [Foreign Minister Jorge Faurie] indicated that the situation in Bolivia is at an ‘impasse’ and that there de not exist
the elements to describe it as a ‘coup d’état’.”
OE Watch | December 2019

70

LATIN AMERICA
Argentina Votes Left
OE Watch Commentary: Argentineans went to the polls on 27
October. For president, they elected Alberto Fernández, whose term
will begin on 10 December. He is a leftist, and the most consequential
and clearest reaction to his victory came quickly from President Jairo
Bolsonaro of Brazil, who is not a leftist. As reported in the second
accompanying reference, President Bolsonaro is not happy with the
result. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…I think Argentina chose badly…”
- The President of Brazil, Jairo
Bolsonaro
Source: Editors, “El peronista Fernández se impone
con claridad en las presidenciales argentinas (Peronist
Fernández clearly dominates in the Argentinean presidential
elections),” El País, 28 November 2019. https://elpais.com/
internacional/2019/10/27/argentina/1572135195_737076.
html
“…the results give the victory to Alberto Fernández with
48% of the votes over 40.44% for the current president,
Mauricio Macri, who has conceded defeat and announced
that he invited his rival ‘to have breakfast tomorrow morning
in the Casa Rosada in order to advance the transition…”

Alberto Fernandez.

Source: La García via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alberto_Fern%C3%A1ndez.png, CC BY 3.0

Source: Editors, “Bolsonaro critica a los electores argentinos por dar la victoria al peronista Fernández (Bolsonaro criticizes the argentinean
electorate for giving peronist Fernandez the victory),” El País, 28 November 2019. https://elpais.com/internacional/2019/10/28/
actualidad/1572273831_556456.html
“The President of Brazil…Jairo Bolsonaro…announced that for now he is not going to congratulate him [Alberto Fernández] and blames
the electorate for having again raised the left to power in the neighboring country” ‘I lament it. I don’t have a crystal ball, but I think
Argentina chose badly’.”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | December 2019

71

LATIN AMERICA
Propping Up Venezuelan Status Quo
OE Watch Commentary: A key platform in the Kremlin’s
foreign policy revolves around the assertion that the West
(the US in particular) has developed a strategy of sparking
“color revolutions” to remove unfriendly foreign leaders and
expand its sphere of influence. Over the past several years,
the Kremlin has taken measures to thwart this process in
countries where it perceives that such a revolution would harm
its interests (e.g. Syria, Ukraine). The accompanying three
excerpts describe the measures which the Kremlin is using in
Venezuela.
The first excerpt from the Russian official newspaper,
Parlamentskaya Gazeta, describes comments made “by
Chairman of the Federation Council Committee on Foreign
Vladimir Putin held talks with President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Nicolas Maduro
Affairs Konstantin Kosachev,” who asserted “that Russia will
in Moscow, December 2018.
Source: Kremlin.ru CCA 4.0 Intl
continue to impede attempts by the United States and its allies
to ‘use the military option’ in influencing the situation in Venezuela.” Kosachev went on to claim that Venezuelans “can safely count on the
support of the Russian Federation in normalizing the social and humanitarian situation.”
The second excerpt, from the pro-Kremlin site, RIA Novosti, quotes Deputy Finance Minister Sergei Storchak who stated that “Russia is
considering the possibility of sending a permanent economic mission to Venezuela for a more detailed study of the situation in the economy.”
Curiously, Storchak claimed that “he did not rule out that one of the military advisers could become part of the economic mission,” insisting
that “there are good financiers among the military.” Finally, the third excerpt, from the liberal weekly, Novaya Gazeta, asserts that “Venezuela
received cash in the amount of $315 million from Moscow.” Quoting Western sources, the article claims, “to transport dollars and euros worth
more than $300 million, it took six aircraft. Cash flowed into the country from May 2018 to April 2019.”
Over the past few years, Kremlin authorities have demonstrated that they are willing to use a variety of tools to prevent what they believe are
Western attempts to foment revolution in certain countries where Russia has strategic interests. The Kremlin is now employing some of these
tools in Venezuela. Such a strategy may work for the short term, but may prove ineffective unless the political leadership addresses the deeper
domestic problems which initially prompted public protest. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…[Storchak] did not rule out that one of the military advisers could become part of
the economic mission. “There are good financiers among the military,” he said.”
Source: Nikita Vyatchanin, “Косачев: Россия будет препятствовать любым попыткам оказывать военное давление на Венесуэлу
(Kosachev: Russia will prevent any attempts to exert military pressure on Venezuela),” Parlamentskaya Gazeta, 17 October 2019. https://
www.pnp.ru/politics/kosachev-rossiya-budet-prepyatstvovat-lyubym-popytkam-okazyvat-voennoe-davlenie-na-venesuelu.html
Russia will continue to oppose Washington’s efforts to exert military pressure on Caracas and condemns the introduction of unilateral
sanctions against Venezuela. This was stated by Chairman of the Federation Council Committee on Foreign Affairs Konstantin Kosachev at a
meeting with the head of the National Constituent Assembly of Venezuela….
The senator noted that the Russian Federation is closely following the events in Venezuela. “Our position was formulated in a special
statement of the Federation Council on February 25 this year - we voted unanimously that our country will support the course that Venezuela
chose as part of the actions of the country’s legitimate authorities,” he recalled.
…The parliamentarian added that Russia will continue to impede attempts by the United States and its allies to “use the military option” in
influencing the situation in Venezuela - in his opinion, “this is unacceptable.”
“Россия может направить в Венесуэлу постоянную экономическую миссию,” [Russia may send a permanent economic mission to
Venezuela] RIA Novosti, 24 October 2019. https://ria.ru/20191024/1560162257.html
Russia is considering the possibility of sending a permanent economic mission to Venezuela for a more detailed study of the situation in the
economy, Deputy Finance Minister Sergei Storchak told reporters…. He did not rule out that one of the military advisers could become part
of the economic mission. “There are good financiers among the military,” he said.
“СМИ: Россия за год отправила в Венесуэлу наличных на 315 миллионов долларов,” [Media: Russia sent $ 315million in cash to
Venezuela over the past year] Novaya Gazeta, 2 November 2019. https://www.novayagazeta.ru/news/2019/11/02/156599-rossiya-za-godotpravila-v-venesuelu-315-mln-dollarov-i-evro-nalichnymi
Venezuela received cash in the amount of $ 315 million from Moscow…. To transport dollars and euros worth more than $ 300 million, it
took six aircraft. Cash flowed into the country from May 2018 to April 2019.
OE Watch | December 2019

72

LATIN AMERICA
China Increases its Engagement with Brazil
by Shanti Salas
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 19, Issue 16, dated 6 September 2019.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/looking-beyond-commodities-exports-china-increases-its-engagement-with-brazil/

OE Watch Commentary: In June 2019, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) scored a victory in its relationship with Brazil when it gained
Brazil’s support for its candidate to lead the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), over candidates put forward by France
and Georgia. The PRC’s candidate, Qu Dongyu, won 108 votes (over France’s runner-up candidate with 71 votes) to become the next directorgeneral of the FAO. The significance of Brazil’s support for the PRC over France in the international body is especially striking as it was gained
the same month that Brazil and the rest of the Mercosur South American trade bloc finalized a free trade agreement with the European Union.
China is Brazil’s largest commodities export market and the relationship has been skewed toward low value-added commodities exports from
Brazil to the PRC. However, in recent years, the PRC has emphasized infrastructure-based investment and has deepened its influence in Brazil
in the cultural, diaspora, and media spheres, expanding the China-Brazil relationship.
Brazil has maintained diplomatic relations with the PRC since 1974. The two countries announced a “strategic partnership” in 1993, and by
2009 China had become Brazil’s largest trading partner. The year 2009 also saw the first “BRIC” summit of the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India,
and China (later termed BRICS with the addition of South Africa in 2011). The 2014 BRICS summit, hosted in Fortaleza, Brazil, led to the
creation of the New Development Bank, a Shanghai-headquartered multilateral development bank within which Brazil controls one-fifth of the
voting rights. Brazil hosted the five-country BRICS summit in November 2019. In 2020, it is slated to host the fifth annual gathering of the New
Development Bank. Without Brazil—Latin America’s largest economy—the BRICS framework and its attendant New Development Bank would
not have a strong anchor in the Americas.
Despite the development cooperation envisioned by BRICS, as well as certain ideological affinities between the PRC and the former
governments of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff, the frustrations of a Sino-Brazilian relationship predicated on low value-added
commodities exports have grown more apparent. Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro has made statements highly critical of China’s economic
relationship with Brazil. During his 2018 presidential campaign (and continuing into office), he frequently repeated the statement that China
could “buy in Brazil” but “not buy Brazil.” Bolsonaro has also spoken out against further privatization of Brazil’s electricity sector to the PRC’s
State Grid Corporation of China and State Power Investment Corporation. Bolsonaro was also the first Brazilian president to visit Taiwan,
although while still a candidate.
The relationship between the PRC and Brazil has never been focused solely on trade. Although the two countries are geographically distant,
China’s geostrategic concerns remain close to the surface; and even as the existing China-Brazil economic relationship has generated criticism,
China has shifted its discourse with respect to Brazil, focusing on infrastructure development, alongside an active PRC outreach in the cultural,
diaspora, and media spheres.
In 2017, with the launch of a $20 billion China-Brazil Fund, former PRC Vice Premier Wang Yang stated that investment in Brazil would
focus on infrastructure development. The same year Xi Jinping stated to former Brazilian president Michel Temer that the PRC “appreciates”
Brazil’s long-time adhesion to a “One China” policy, and aims to “synergize” the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) with Brazil’s own development
strategies. In 2019, PRC Vice President Wang Qishan also stressed the importance of coupling the BRI to Brazil’s development.
While Chinese public discourse stresses large-scale infrastructure investment, the reality is that much of this investment reinforces the
commodities export relationship. PRC companies have shown particular interest in projects that enhance Brazil’s infrastructure for the purpose
of agricultural and mineral exports. State-owned China Communications Construction Company has taken particular interest in railroad
concessions for grain transport, and is currently building a port in the northern coastal city of São Luís to expand export cargoes.
The PRC’s state television network China Central Television (CCTV) has had a presence in Brazil since 2010, and Beijing’s engagement with
Brazilian media has further ramped up in recent years. In 2017, CCTV inked a strategic partnership agreement with one of Brazil’s largest
private broadcast networks, Rede Bandeirantes.
The Bolsonaro government has recognized the need to diversify its commercial relationship with China into higher value-added activities such
as services and renewable energy. Despite this, commodities exports are expected to grow. Observers of Brazil-China relations should watch
for increased PRC presence in the Brazilian media, and targeted infrastructure investments in the country. Such engagements, and investments
under the rubric of the BRI, are gradually expanding a relationship that continues to be skewed toward low value-added commodities exports.
End OE Watch Commentary (Salas)

OE Watch | December 2019

73

LATIN AMERICA
Warmer Russian-Cuban Relations
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past couple of months, the Kremlin
leadership has worked diligently to strengthen its relations with Cuba. The
accompanying brief excerpt from the military supplement Nezavisamoye
Voennoye Obozreniye (NVO), describes the highlights of recent meetings
between Russian and Cuban officials, suggesting possible areas of future
cooperation. The article begins by recounting how “Russian President
Vladimir Putin met with Cuban leader Miguel Diaz-Canel Bermudez on
October 29 in Moscow.” While the article lacks specific details of this
meeting, it does assert, “during the talks, prospects for further strengthening
the Russian-Cuban partnership and current issues on the international
agenda were discussed.” It also points out that “at the invitation of his Cuban
counterpart, the Russian president intends to visit the island soon.”
Vladimir Putin talks with President of Cuba Miguel Diaz-Canel Bermudez,
The article then describes the October 2019 visits of both Prime Minister
Moscow, 29 October 2019.
Source: Kremlin.ru, CCA 4.0 Intl
Medvedev and Secretary of the Security Council Nikolai Patrushev to Cuba,
where they discussed increased Russian investment and security assistance. The article states that “Moscow and Havana signed contracts for
the modernization of the Cuban military industry through a loan of 38 million euros to Cuba for the development of the defense sector.” It
also points out “in 2019, the Cuban military for the first time took part in the international army games ‘ARMI-2019,’” held in August. The
article recalls, “Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu previously noted his interest in expanding cooperation in the naval area… and stated
that Russian-Cuban relations in the military and military-technical sphere are developing constructively.” Perhaps most significantly, the
article quotes “Anatoly Antonov, the ambassador of the Russian Federation to the United States,” who suggested that should the US deploy
“intermediate and shorter-range missiles on the territory of European states near the borders of Russia… Russia will have to take additional
measures to ensure its security.”

As the article emphasizes, “Russia and Cuba are really close to each other,” and that after the “break in relations in post-Soviet times, Russia
is returning to Cuba and bilateral economic, trade and military technology are resuming.” However, the article asserts that these ties are no
longer based on a discredited ideology, but rather upon “friendly and quite pragmatic relations, bringing mutual benefits to partners.” The article
concludes on a somewhat ominous note, quoting Russian Prime minister Medvedev who stated, “strictly speaking, in Soviet times we didn’t
have a base here [Cuba], there was a team, but the opening of a Russian base is being discussed.” (Also see: “More Russia in Cuba,” in OE
Watch, November 2019) End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… After a break in relations in post-Soviet times, Russia is returning to Cuba and
bilateral economic, trade and military technology are resuming…”
Source: Irina Dronina, “Россия далеко, а Куба рядом (Russia is far away, and Cuba is near),” Nezavisamoye Voennoye Obozreniye, 8
November 2019. http://nvo.ng.ru/nvo/2019-11-08/1_1069_cuba.html
Russian President Vladimir Putin met with Cuban leader Miguel Diaz-Canel Bermudez on October 29 in Moscow. During the talks, prospects
for further strengthening the Russian-Cuban partnership and current issues on the international agenda were discussed…. The positive process of
strengthening the statehood of the republic was noted by Vladimir Putin during negotiations in Moscow. At the invitation of his Cuban counterpart, the
Russian president intends to visit the island soon…
…Earlier this month, Raul Castro and Miguel Diaz-Canel Bermudez met with Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, which became the prologue
to the talks between the two presidents. During Medvedev’s visit, drilling of the first oil well at the Cuban field was launched and eight agreements were
signed, the largest of which concerned a ten-year program to restore the national railway infrastructure… , On October 15-16, 2019, Secretary of the
Security Council of the Russian Federation Nikolai Patrushev visited Cuba, who also met with the first officials of the republic.
Russia and Cuba are really close to each other…. Over the years, at the invitation of the Cuban government, many Russian delegations visited the
country, and unforgettable warm meetings remained forever in the memory of Russians, and gifts from the Castro family are stored as sacred relics.
Many Cubans studied in the USSR… After a break in relations in post-Soviet times, Russia is returning to Cuba and bilateral economic, trade and
military technology are resuming.
…Russian oil and oil products contribute to Cuba’s resource provision and its energy security. Our country is increasing investment, and the beginning
of the reconstruction of almost a thousand kilometers of railways is a confirmation of this. But now this is not irrevocable help, as in the days of the
Soviet Union. Now between the countries relations of modern states are established, which are based on the historical past, are friendly and quite
pragmatic, bringing mutual benefits to partners.
…Moscow and Havana signed contracts for the modernization of the Cuban military industry through a loan to Cuba for the development of the
defense sector of 38 million euros. All previously delivered equipment is being modernized, and assistance is being provided in the possibility of making
improvements on its own, it is planned to purchase Russian aviation products. In 2019, the Cuban military for the first time took part in the international
army games “ARMI-2019.” Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu previously noted his interest in expanding cooperation in the naval area and stated
that Russian-Cuban relations in the military and military-technical sphere are developing constructively.
…The media continues to discuss the possibility of deploying Russian weapons in response to the appearance of American intermediate and shorterrange missiles on the territory of European states near the borders of Russia. According to Anatoly Antonov, the ambassador of the Russian Federation
to the United States, who aired on Channel One in the Big Game program, if such weapons appear in Europe, Russia will have to take additional
measures to ensure its security.
…Press reports that the leaders of Russia and Cuba are discussing various scenarios for the development of the international situation, Dmitry
Medvedev confirmed. According to the Prime Minister, “strictly speaking, in Soviet times we didn’t have a base here, there was a team,” but the opening
of a Russian base is being discussed.

OE Watch | December 2019

74

LATIN AMERICA
Catalonia Not Well
OE Watch Commentary: Barcelona continues to be a political tinderbox. The most recent disturbances were investigated by the Audiencia
Nacional, a tribunal with appellate and trial competence, with jurisdiction throughout Spain. It has its own investigative capacity as well. It may
be a particularly Spanish institution, established in 1977 during the transition after Franco’s death in 1975. It is intended to consider terrorism,
drug-trafficking and other major organized criminal activities of that reach, including rebellion, while hopefully avoiding prosecutorial excesses.
As the first accompanying passage notes, its report of the disturbances in Catalonia finds what some Spanish take as a flash of the obvious -- that
they were the creature of a radical political organization, not just a public reaction. Understanding the order of battle of radical leftist opposition
organization in Spain is a difficult task, however, given the overlap of mainstream and locally governing parties and social organizations and
competing goals among those entities.
The second accompanying reference is of a completely separate yet completely related issue – Spain’s central government, led by socialist
Pedro Sánchez is acting to control an effort by the Catalonian government to create an independent database of Catalonian citizens for purposes
of citizen identification and control. The intention is to further Catalonian independence, the contraption even being called the Catalonian Digital
Republic. The Spanish government in Madrid is not having it. The tiff, however, is a clear example of the overlap of physical territoriality and
cyber-struggle.
The third reference evidences another, background problem in the application of violent forms of struggle. The economy of Catalonia, which
is a leading wealth producer in Spain, has been taking a beating. The litany of hits on the Barcelona economy is a long one, but the fourth
referenced article was apparently intended to bring the problem home to a wider set of Spanish citizens. The author claims that most of the direct
costs of the violence is going to be borne by nation-wide insurance companies, not local government. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Those acts of protest were organized, that is,
they were not spontaneous…”
Source: Carlota Guindal and Mayka Navarro, “Los disturbios de Cataluña fueron organizados, según la investigación (According to
the investigation, the Catalonian disturbances were organized),” La Vanguardia, 25 October 2019. https://www.lavanguardia.com/
politica/20191025/471176431035/disturbios-cataluna-investigacion-organizacion-actuacion-policial.html/
“…The open investigation at the Audiencia Nacional of separatist groups that are the protagonists of the altercations of this past week is
arriving at the conclusion that those acts of protest were organized, that is, they were not spontaneous, or out-of-control radicals, but that
they were remotely controlled by an organization and have a political leadership…”
Source: Editors, “Cataluña: El Govern ve un “golpe de Estado” el decreto ley contra la República digital catalana (Catalonia: The Govern
sees the legal decree opposing the digital Catalonia republic),” El Mundo and Europa Press, 31 October 2019. https://www.elmundo.es/
cataluna/2019/10/31/5dbad9e9fc6c83d3438b469d.html
“…The Pedro Sánchez Executive Office is avoiding, by way of royal decree, that the Gereralitat use data of the Catalonians to further
independence…‘Sánchez is announcing a digital coup d’état in Catalonia’… It [the Catalonian government] asserts that the Spanish
government is afraid of Catalonia advancing digitally… ‘The socialists are demonstrating that, just like the PP [traditional rightist party],
that their only interest is governing against Catalonia’…”
Source: César Urrutia and Raquel Villaécija, “La revuelta tras la sentencia del proceso sacude la economía de Cataluña (The
Uprising after the trial decision shocked the Catalonian economy),” El Mundo, 18 October 2019. https://www.elmundo.es/
economia/2019/10/18/5da8b07c21efa0d9678b45b9.html
“…The impact arrived in the form of a withdrawal of billions of euros in bank deposits toward entities outside Catalonia… In just three days
the signals are being felt in areas such as tourism and conventions and fairs…The impact on tourism is immediate… Barcelona is also an
important logistics point and the strike convoked today will generate delivery problems…”
Source: Marcos Iriarte, “La factura de los disturbios en Barcelona ya rebasa los 1,5 millones y la pagarán todos los asegurados de España
(The bill for the disturbances in Barcelona is already topping 1.5 million and will be paid by all Spanish insured),” El Mundo, 18 October
2019. https://www.elmundo.es/cataluna/2019/10/18/5da97e2821efa079038b45b9.html
“…the costs of the disturbances in Barcelona are beginning to accumulate. The bill grows as the nights of flames and acts of sabotage on
roads and railways advance… In spite of what the majority of people might think, the bill to fix all this imperfections will not be paid from the
municipal coffers or from the State. They will come from the pockets of citizens who have insurance policies, whether car, house or life…”

OE Watch | December 2019

75

LATIN AMERICA
Spain Next to Ignite?
OE Watch Commentary: In the context of spreading politically-motivated
street violence in Latin America, and recent experience of the yellow-vest
demonstrations in France, some observant Spaniards are voicing concern that
Spain may be on the verge. The Spanish government, currently left-socialist,
exhumed the body of Francisco Franco, removing it from a place of honor and
delivering it back to the Franco family for reburial. The symbolism of the move
was lost on nobody. There also exist Christian religious monuments at the
Valley of the Fallen where Franco had been buried. To some, that iconography
is as polarizing ideologically as it is poignant spiritually. The Spanish left,
emboldened by the demotion of Franco, is threatening to remove the Catholic
symbols, and not just from the Valley of the Fallen. This is no small matter, as
many historians hold attacks on the Church by radical leftists in the mid 1930s
to be the fundamental spark of the Spanish Civil War. The accompanying
references outline a reasoned Spanish fear that their country is facing a
dangerous time. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Tomb of Francisco Franco, Valley of the Fallen, Spain.

Source: Santiago Lopez-Pastor via Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/100759833@N05/14821994193, CC BY ND 2.0

“…The violence is not limited to burning Barcelona…”
Source: Sergi Doria, “También la violencia es vuestra (The violence is yours, too),” ABC, 3 November 2019. https://www.abc.es/espana/
catalunya/abci-tambien-violencia-vuestra-201911021837_noticia.html
“…The violence is not limited to burning Barcelona. It includes the loss of the freedom of movement of the citizenry, the appropriation of
public space and coercion against those who would go to work; another distinguishing fact: the kidnappers of the right to study go around
in masks. The Maoist Cultural Revolution: they dictate the system of evaluation to the rectors… At the turn of the summer, she [Elisenda
Paluzie, president of the Catalan National Assembly] lamented that, ‘the current level of violence was not sufficient to get the European
institutions to act’, and concluded, ‘Maybe the level of the conflict needs to be raised’…”
Source: Rosana Rivera, “España: los socialistas preparan un golpe contra la monarquía (Spain: the socialists prepare a coup against the
monarchy),” Actuall, 19 October 2019. https://www.actuall.com/medios/el-brief-hora-de-volar-la-cruz/
…This blow is really directed at the Monarchy and against the Religion. Once Franco is discredited, the Monarchy is discredited, because
there is a Law of Succession and there is a discredited Constitution. The Law for Political Reform approved by the Franco Courts is what
underpins the Transition… With their attacks on our liberties, on our principles and beliefs, they are expelling us from the system. I don’t
know how much time will pass before the consequences of such political irresponsibility will manifest themselves. But I don’t doubt in the
slightest that they will appear…
Source: Adrián Marina Bralo et al, “Franco ya está enterrado en Mingorrubio tras ser exhumado del Valle de los Caídos (Franco is now buried
in Mingorrubio after being exhumed from the Valley of the Fallen),” ABC, 24 October 2019. https://www.abc.es/espana/abci-franco-estamingorrubio-tras-exhumado-valle-caidos-201910241520_noticia.html
“…The Francos [family of Francisco Franco] also criticized that, ‘what the government presents as a victory for democracy is no more than
a shameless electoral media circus…One of the first promises of the new administration of Pedro Sánchez was to remove Franco from the
Valley of the Fallen… Pedro Sánchez [said]…an end has been put to the exaltation of a dictator.”
Source: Doctor Peligro, “‘¡Fuego!’. El fusilamiento y la destrucción de Jesús (‘Fire!’ The execution and destruction of Jesus),” Agente
Provocador, undated (accessed 8 November 2019). http://www.agenteprovocador.es/publicaciones/fuego-el-fusilamiento-y-la-destruccionde-jesus
“For the Francoists and the Catholics, the ‘execution by firing squad’ and posterior destruction of the Monument to the Sacred heart of
Jesus symbolized the ‘murder of God’. For others, it was performance art and the just vengeance of the people in arms.”
Source: Ricardo de la Cierva, Historia Actualizada de la Segunda República and the Spanish War 1931-1939 (Updated History of the Second
Republic and the Spanish War 1931-1936), Madrid: Editorial Féniz, 2003, comment, page 4 and cover jacket.
“Cover Art: The key to the Spanish Civil War – and of the Second Republic that performed fatally in that war – in this graphic, heart
wrenching document that is preserved in the Archives of the diocese of Getafe (Madrid) in the same place wher the events occurred. It deals
with the execution by firing squad of one image of Christ raised on the Cerro de los Angeles by a squad of red militia in July 1936. The
religious motivation – persecution and Crusade –is expressed in this key…”
OE Watch | December 2019

76

