community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 9
Issue #6
June 2019

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 Implications of the Northern Fleet Assuming Military
District Status
4 Russia Integrates Tank Battalions into the Airborne
Troops
5 Mongolian Aid to Syria; Russia Partners with Military
Airlift
6 Artillery Training in Preparation for Tsentr 2019
7 Black Sea Fleet Commander takes over Northern
Fleet
8 Cruising in a Stretch-Submarine
8 Another Major Oil Deposit Discovered in Russian
Arctic
9 Fighting for Military Death Benefits
10 Russian Pension Payment for Donbas
11 Russia to Deploy Full Radar Satellite Constellation in
2020
12 Profiting off Patriot Park
13 The Transformation of Colonel Kvachkov
14 Divine Military Sanction
15 Armenia’s Interest in Remote Sensing
16 Uzbekistan’s Choice of Partners for Joint Exercises
INDO-PACIFIC
17 Chinese Shipbuilder Launches Amphibious
Unmanned Surface Vehicle
18 Chinese Media Spotlight on PLA Marine Corps
Jiaolong Commando Training
19 China: New Stealth Material Could Improve Infrared

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Concealment
BeiDou – an Imminent Global Constellation
China Continues to Boost its Peacekeeping Role
Chinese Border Patrol Using 5G Networks to Identify
and Capture Smugglers at the Border
China’s Reaction to the Terror Attacks in Sri Lanka
Italy Joins the Belt and Road Initiative: Context,
Interests, and Drivers
China’s Reach into the Mediterranean: One Belt, One
Road Initiative (Belt Road Initiative)
Taiwan Plans Additional Forward Operations Bases
for Special Forces
Indonesia: Still Vulnerable to ISIS Ideology
Changes for Indian Forces after Pulwama

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
29 Russian-Iranian Competition in Aleppo
30 Stroytransgaz: “A Complement to Russian Security
and Military Influence”
31 The Syrian Army’s Interest in Tunnel Warfare
32 Turkish Concerns Regarding Idlib
33 Huawei Expands its Network
35 The Dynamics of Trilateral Relations between Turkey,
Russia, and Iran
36 Turkish-Russian Negotiations in Syria
37 Sudan, Algeria and the “Second Arab Spring” Debate
39 Israel’s Military Force against Cyber Threat: A New
Precedent?
40 Iranian Army Ground Forces Unveil New Drones and

Tech
40 Ex-General Claims IRGC Presence in Bosnia and Support
to Al-Qaeda
AFRICA
41 Sudan’s Junta Clings to Power
42 Can South Sudan Maintain Its Fragile Peace Without alBashir?
43 Russia Helping to Strengthen CAR Military
44 Angola and Russia Seek to Increase Ties
45 The AU Opposes Coups, but What if Popular Protests
Back Them?
46 Changing Constitutions to Enshrine Authoritarianism
47 Church Attack in Burkina Faso Suggests Tactical Change
48 Gold Mining Connections to Killings in Zamfara, Nigeria
49 Has Benin Suffered its First Terrorist Attack?
LATIN AMERICA
50 Brazil Addresses Illegal Cigarette Traffic
51 Military Refugees in Colombia
52 Panamanians Elect Laurentino Cortizo
53 Iberia Culture War
53 ELN Rising
54 Russia Steps Deeper Into the Venezuelan Battleground
55 The Antarctic Institute of Argentina and New Scientific
Discoveries
56 Chile Makes Advances in Antarctic Exploration
58 Ecuador’s Response to Increasing Narco Flights

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 9 | Issue 6

June | 2019

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Pavel Felgenhauer
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Matthew Stein
Tom Wilhelm

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Russian Airborne Troops

Source: https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Airborne-troops-day-2010/i-LWQHtcD, CC BY 4.0

Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
Ihsan Gündüz
Karen Kaya
Alma Keshavarz
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Dario Cristiani
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
Implications of the Northern Fleet Assuming Military
District Status
OE Watch Commentary: The Northern Joint Strategic Command (OSK-North) is an
experimental inter-service combined strategic formation headquartered in Severomorsk. The
command was formed on 1 December 2014 to defend Russia’s national interests in the Arctic.
The accompanying article from Izvestiya discusses Russia’s plans to upgrade the status of OSKNorth, so that it is also considered a Military District.
OSK-North was carved out of the Western OSK, consisting of the Komi Republic, Nenetsk
Autonomous Okrug, Arkhangelsk Oblast, and Murmansk Oblast. In terms of military assets,
OSK-North became responsible for most Ministry of Defense assets on theses territories; and
a few additional units were transferred to the command from the Central and Eastern OSKs.
In regard to military assets, the commands assets can generally be described in terms of sea,
land, air and components. The sea component consists of the North Sea Fleet, the Belomorsk
Naval Base, and Flotilla. The land component is in the newly formed (2017) 14th Army Corps,
which controls the 80th Motorized Rifle Brigade (Alakurrti) and 200th Motorized Rifle Brigade
(Pechenga), the 61st Naval Infantry Brigade, and supporting units. The Air component is in the
45th Air and Air Defense Army, which consists of the 1st and 3rd Air Defense Divisions, and the
98th Composite Aviation Regiment, and supporting units.
When OSK-North was formed Russia chose not duplicate the same command and control
structures that was found in the other OSKs. Instead of creating a brand new staff element
(joint headquarters) to provide command and control, Russia has chosen to simply augment
the Northern Fleet. Another difference is that although the OSK-North was considered a ‘Joint
Admiral Nikolay Yevmenov.
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Евменов,_Николай_
Анатольевич#/media/File:Nikolaj_Evmenov,_2016.jpg,
CC BY 4.0
Strategic Command’, it is not considered a Military District (MD) as the other four OSKs.
According to the accompanying article from Izvestiya, this situation may change as Russia is
now planning to upgrade the status of OSK-North, so it is also considered a Military District. Apparently, according to the article, Russia’s
experimentation with not basing an OSK on joint headquarters has been deemed a success, as it is seen as reducing the overhead associated with
(large) joint headquarters, but having sufficient capabilities to command and control a OSK/MD. Although OSK-North is the only OSK/MD in
this situation, there has been discussion of forming new Russian OSKs/MDs due to the current commands being too large to effectively control,
especially if engaged in front-level operations. (There has been recent speculation that OSKs will be responsible for front-level command and
control during large-scale combat operations.) If Russia decides to form any new OSKs/MDs, they could be based upon the OSK-North model.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The experience of the experimental combined formation was deemed a success ... [and] resulted in the
Defense Ministry deciding to elevate its status. ” -Military expert Anton Lavrov
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Alexey Kozachenko, Bogdan Stepovoy, “Северный флот получит статус отдельного военного округа (Northern
Fleet to Assume Military District Status),” Izvestiya Online, 19 April 2019. https://iz.ru/869512/aleksei-ramm-aleksei-kozachenko-bogdanstepovoi/poliarnoe-vliianie-severnyi-flot-poluchit-status-voennogo-okruga
The Defense Ministry is prepared to alter the status of the Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command (OSK-North), as of December it will be an
independent military-administrative entity equal in importance to a military district. Izvestiya Defense Ministry sources say that Admiral Nikolay
Yevmenov will continue to command the fleet.
Izvestiya sources in the Northern Fleet command say that the OSK-North was until recently essentially an experimental combined formation: it was
studied whether it could accomplish assignments involving defense of Russian interests in the Arctic region. Large-scale two-month exercises, at which
interaction of the navy, aviation, and ground troops was rehearsed, were conducted in the Northern Fleet in 2016. Ships, submarines, strategic and
long-range bombers, fighters, and S-300, S-400, and Pantsir air defense systems and also motorized riflemen and naval infantry were employed in the
maneuvers…The experience of the experimental combined formation was deemed a success, which it was that resulted in the Defense Ministry deciding to
elevate its status, Izvestiya sources report.
Military expert Anton Lavrov believes that the decision was brought about by a search for the optimum staffing structure of the Northern Fleet. “The
Defense Ministry’s decision underscores yet again that the Arctic is for us a priority military sector,” Anton Lavrov told Izvestiya.
The northern territories are deemed particularly important for Russia’s defense, military expert Viktor Murakhovskiy confirmed. “The new status reflects
the special role of the navy in the Arctic,” the expert emphasized.
For defense of the Northern Sea Route (NSR) the government recently drafted special rules of watercraft’s passage. Foreign warships and vessels will
now have to give Russia 45 days’ notice of their plans and compulsorily take Russian pilots on board. Passage may even be denied, and in the event of
unsanctioned NSR traffic, experts believe, Russia could take extraordinary action, up to and including detention or destruction of the vessel.

OE Watch | June 2019

3

EURASIA
Russia Integrates Tank Battalions into the Airborne Troops
OE Watch Commentary: In Soviet times, the Russian Airborne
(VDV) was envisioned as an exploitation force that would jump in
behind enemy lines to seize key points. In order to fulfill this mission,
almost the entire division or brigade would be on jump status and
regularly practice airborne insertion techniques. Since the VDV was
not intended to fight against heavy conventional forces and given the
aforementioned mission requirements, the Russian VDV only used
light armored vehicles that were capable of being transported and/or
parachute dropped by the Il-76 cargo plane. Due to this situation, the
Airborne possessed no main battle tanks, and instead used light tanks
such as the PT-76 (now retired) and the Sprut-SD. Although main battle
tanks were never part of the VDV’s MTO&E in Soviet times, they were
routinely operationally controlled by VDV units when necessary. The
accompanying excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda discusses how
the Russian VDV is integrating tanks into its ranks.

Russian Airborne Troops.

Source: https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Airborne-troops-day-2010/i-LWQHtcD, CC BY 4.0

In 2015, the VDV decided to add organic tank battalions to VDV
regiments and brigades. This development was due to a change in how the General Staff believed the VDV would be utilized. Large-scale rear
insertions against peer-level adversaries are now extremely difficult given the proliferation of modern air defense systems. Russian VDV units
are no longer focused on this one mission. Instead they are now focused on specific missions regarding the areas where they are located, for
example the 7th Guards Airborne Assault Division in Novorossiysk has been designated a ‘mountain division.’ (This designation has required
slight MTO&E and training changes.) In addition, the role of the VDV as a rapid reaction force has also impacted MTO&E requirements. Since
the General Staff envisages the VDV as part of the initial rapid reaction element that would fend off any NATO incursion, an armor capability
is seen as essential for this mission. Although the VDV is adding a non-airmobile friendly piece of equipment to its ranks, the deployability
of the VDV will in reality change very little. The Russian VDV, as the conventional force, primarily relies upon rail for the mass movement
of units and most combat vehicles. Regimental-level drops can be conducted, but with a great straining of resources, so the addition of tanks
units will have negligible impact on a force which is already relying on rail for the mass movement of brigades and divisions. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“The airborne assault forces are growing their tank muscle.”
Source: Vladimir Sosnitskiy, “Десантные тельняшки танкистам впору (Tank Troops in the Striped T-Shirts of the Airborne Troops),”
Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 25 March 2019. http://redstar.ru/desantnye-telnyashki-tankistam-vporu/
Rayevskiy training ground, Krasnodarskiy Kray -- The armor in Airborne Troops units just got much tougher and more reliable…The dynamics of a
company-level tactical exercise at a recently formed tank battalion of the 7th Guards Airborne Assault Division largely mirrored real warfare. The first
two companies of this subunit, which are manned by contract soldiers, have already undergone a similar appraisal of their combat proficiency. Now is
the turn of the third company, in which most of the crews are conscripts. They only recently arrived from training subunits in Kovrov, Chelyabinsk, and
Sertolovo. They chose to serve in the Airborne Troops of their own volition. Many say it was something they did not dare dream of, but it turns out that the
airborne assault forces “are growing their tank muscle.” The young tank troops have already been issued their blue-and-white striped T-shirts, of which
they are particularly proud. True, the commander of the conscript company says that this badge of distinction is, so to speak, a down payment and they
will have to sweat to earn it. Indeed they will: Even before this exercise the mechanic-drivers were tested for their driving skills and tank commanders and
gunners examined in the theory of shooting and the nuts and bolts of tank weaponry.
Battalion Commander Lieutenant Colonel Vladimir Khokhlov starts counting down the seconds on his electronic stopwatch as the company obeys the
order to assemble, and then he dispassionately notes the crews’ agility at the fighting vehicle depot and as the subunit heads to the training ground, how
they obey commands while on the march, take on ammunition at the staging area, and transition from travel to combat mode. “As the practice of the
first months shows, instructing the soldiers in the separate procedures and individual drills turned out much simpler than getting them to act cohesively
as part of a crew, platoon, or company,” Lt Col Khokhlov admits. “And this is where we rely on the experience and abilities of the tank commanders,
who are contract soldiers. It is they who have to forge the individual soldiers’ characters and skills into a team spirit. The youthful energy of the platoon
commanders comes into play as well -- they are all recent graduates of the Kazan’ and Omsk tank schools.”
The formation’s staff officers play an active role in the division’s new battalion, which is helping it to rapidly find its feet. The guards division’s deputy
commander, Colonel Andrey Kondrashkin, keeps a close eye on the tank officers’ tactical training, maintaining their focus on ways of jointly operating
with airborne assault subunits and on careful study of Airborne Troops subunits’ tactics in battle. The guards formation’s training chief, Major Yevgeniy
Solovyev, and the officers in his section help the battalion staff to use the exact format preferred in the division for organizing exercises. And the armor
and tank service specialists take care so that the battalion’s “iron” does not encounter any operating issues…
By the way, in the preceding exercise for the professional companies their commander decided to lengthen the range of fire from the T-72B3 tank’s
125-mm gun and shorten the target display time. The rate of fire accelerated. Obviously, this required more intensive and better coordinated work by
the crews. But it is fair to demand that of professionals. The airborne assault tank troops speak very highly of their T-72B3 machine, believing that its
simplicity of operation, survivability, all-terrain capabilities, weaponry, and a recent upgrade make it the best tank in the world. The company-level
tactical exercise stage for the newly formed airborne assault tank battalion has shown that these are promising innovations and that the subunit itself is
on the right track in its evolution.

OE Watch | June 2019

4

EURASIA
Mongolian Aid to Syria; Russia Partners with Military Airlift
OE Watch Commentary: Russia’s Syrian-based Center for
Reconciliation of the Opposing Sides reported the delivery of
humanitarian aid from Mongolia to the village of Zama in the
mountainous region of Latakia and noted Russia’s assistance with
use of military airlift. The village had been particularly hard
hit. The aid package included canned meat, rice, flour, sugar, tea,
blankets, mattresses, and school supplies.
Russia’s use of its military airlift capacity to facilitate this
donation on behalf of its much poorer neighbor reflects national
strategies beyond the Middle East. Mongolia shares over 2000
miles of border with Russia. Its national security strategy
includes deliberate pursuit of constructive relations with its two
giant neighbors as well as “Third Neighbors,” which can balance
foreign policy interests and raise Mongolia’s sovereignty profile.
Third Neighbors can be any other country or even international
organizations and activities. Mongolia’s participation in
peacekeeping and stability operations since 2002 worked as
a successful strategy for them; humanitarian assistance is an
extension of this. Providing humanitarian aid to Syria is quite a
feat given Mongolia’s very limited economic capacity and even
more challenging logistics but it reinforces the national security
objectives; facilitating such assistance helps Russia’s interests, too.
End OE Watch Commentary (Wilhelm)

Syria, Latakia.

Source: KureCewlik81 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SyriaLatakia.PNG, Public Domain.

“Earlier reports said the distribution of humanitarian assistance from Mongolia, which had been
delivered by a Russian Aerospace Defense Forces’ plane, had begun in the warstricken Syrian areas.”
Source: “Russian military delivers Mongolian aid to Syria’s Latakia,” Tass (in English), 16 May 2019. tass.com/defense/1058528
The Russian military has delivered Mongolia’s humanitarian aid to the most affected areas of Syria’s Latakia province, a spokesman for the Russian
Center for Reconciliation of the Opposing Sides Vladimir Ladeinov told reporters.
…
The village of Zama is located in a hard-to-reach area of mountainous Latakia. It is home
to 8,000 citizens, but all men went off to war and 250 of them died or went missing and
more than 300 others were wounded.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | June 2019

5

EURASIA
Artillery Training in Preparation for Tsentr 2019
OE Watch Commentary: The Totskoye training center has a long and remarkable history.
On 14 September 1954, the Soviets dropped a 40 kiloton RDS-4 atomic bomb there as part of
a training exercise involving 45,000 troops and massive amounts of aircraft and equipment. In
September 1994, 250 Russian and 250 American soldiers participated in “Peacekeeper ‘94”-the
first joint Russian-US training exercise held in Russia. Now, the Totskoye training center is home
to preparations for what will become another front page headline: Exercise Tsentr will be held
in September 2019. The accompanying passage from Krasnaya Zvezda discusses preparation
exercises for Tsentr 2019, which will be held in the Central Military District. The Central Military
District occupies the center of Russia [Volga, Ural and Siberian regions] and borders the Arctic
Ocean to the North and Kazakhstan and Mongolia to the South.

Central Military District Headquarters.

Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Central_Military_

District_headquarters,_Yekaterinburg.jpg, CC BY 4.0
Although the preparation exercise simulated the launches of Iskander ballistic and cruise missiles,
there was no scrimping on ammunition expenditure. A six-gun-battery of 152mm howitzers may
fire a 300 meter standing barrage (50 meters per gun). The standing barrage is planned to insert a wall of artillery fire to stop the advancing
enemy in his tracks. The standing barrage is continually fired to deny the enemy further advance. This exercise fired a 2,400 meter standing
barrage. That is a 1.49 mile wall of continuously exploding rounds and shrapnel! It takes eight batteries of 152mm artillery to fire that standing
barrage. 18 batteries were available, so the barrage was sustained by switching batteries to keep the barrels cool enough. The “Fire Vise” is
another ammunition-intensive planned fire event that uses multiple battalions to fire simultaneous moving barrages designed to force the enemy
inward to a concentration area where they can be finished by area fire. The concept was developed in Afghanistan and refined in Chechnya.

Also discussed in the article was the use of various mortars and gun/mortars, as well as antitank systems, during the exercise. This exercise
completed the winter training period. Contract soldiers are placed in those positions requiring the most training and they will still be trained
and available in September for Exercise Tsentr. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“As the conclusion of a month-long training encampment, artillery subunits of an artillery brigade,

a multiple rocket launcher brigade and motorized rifle brigade artillery conducted a live-fire tactical
exercise which included simulated missile launches by a missile brigade.”
Source: “Missile Troops and Artillerymen of Central Military District’s 2nd Guards Combined-Arms Army Have Successfully Mastered New
Tactical Devices To Combat Illegal Armed Elements,” Krasnaya Zvezda, 17 April 2019. http://redstar.ru
This was conducted at the Totskoye combined-arms training range under the direction of Guards Colonel Vasiliy Solovyev, Acting Chief of Staff of the
Central Military District’s 2nd Guards Combined-Arms Army, and Guards Col. Andrey Shabanov, Chief of Missile Troops and Artillery of the combined
formation. Under the command of these combined-arms officers, the missile troops and artillerymen accomplished missions involved in the command and
control of missile strikes and artillery fire, and rehearsed different ways of eliminating illegal armed elements.
In the exercise, missile brigade battalions, armed with Iskander-M missile systems, delivered individual and group missile strikes against particularly
important and hardened targets. … Guards Lieutenant Colonel Ruslan Bakirov, Chief of Staff and Deputy Chief of the 2nd Guards Combined-Arms
Army’s Missile Troops and Artillery, and the men under Col. Andrey Surkov conducted nine simulated strikes using conventionally armed cruise and
ballistic missiles, and -- according to objective monitoring data -- successfully “destroyed” four command and control posts, two communications
centers, and two bridges and a dam. These “strikes” thwarted an approach by the operational reserve of the hypothetical illegal armed force.
Over 2,000 men and some 500 systems were assigned to the final evaluation exercise of the winter period of instruction for artillerymen and missile
troops. Battalions and batteries of cannon and rocket artillery performed a variety of fire missions on the range’s tactical area between the Lysaya and
Kalanchovaya mountains. For the first time a wall of fixed barrage fire extending for some 2,400 meters erupted from the bursts of howitzer shells. On
the order of Guards Col. Andrey Shabanov, Chief of Missile Troops and Artillery of the combined formation, this fire mission was conducted in a wellcoordinated manner by three battalions of 2S19 Msta-S 152-mm self-propelled guns, two battalions of the Separate Guards Artillery Brigade under
Guards Col. Sergey Yurchenko and a battalion of D-30 122-mm towed howitzers. In this way the artillerymen prevented subunits of the hypothetical
illegal armed forces from breaking out of their blockaded area.
For the first time at the Totskiy range, the Samara army’s “gods of war” also employed the “fire vise” against the hypothetical militants. Using
several three- line moving barrages, heavy and medium howitzer battalions forced the notional adversary back into a 64 hectare [158 acre] artillery
concentration area. There, they delivered overlapping volleys of rocket-propelled high explosive powerful warheads, each containing 1,000 preformed
fragments. Two MLRS rocket artillery battalions from the artillery of two guards motorized infantry brigades undertook this mission. Guards LTC
Rustam Fakhrutdinov commanded the battalion of Grad 122-mm multiple-launch rocket systems and Guards Major Eduard Usov commanded his
battalion, which was recently rearmed with the Tornado-G systems.
According to Guards Lt. Col. Bakirov, the best results were posted by the rocket artillery battalions of Guards Lt. Col. Fakhrutdinov and Guards Maj.
Usov. He also singled out the self-propelled howitzer battalion under Guards Captain Aleksey Obutkin from the Guards Artillery Brigade. His men
are specialists in counterbattery fire and successfully completed seven fire missions to suppress artillery batteries and mortar platoons belonging to the
hypothetical illegal armed elements….

OE Watch | June 2019

6

EURASIA
Black Sea Fleet Commander takes over Northern Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: Vice Admiral Aleksandr Alexsanderevich Moiseev
has been a fast-burner in the Russian submarine service and has spent much of that
time beneath Arctic ice. He is no stranger to the Northern Fleet. Aside from the
expected achievements of an up-and-coming submariner, in 1998, his submarine
launched two German commercial satellites into orbit while submerged. It was
the first commercial space launch for the Russian Navy and the first commercial
payload launched from a submarine. His involvement in the November 2018
Kerch Strait incident has done nothing to slow down his meteoric career. As the
accompanying passage from the Barents Sea Independent Observer discusses, he is
replacing Nikolay Yevmenov, who is promoted to command the Russian Navy. End
OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Aleksandr Moiseev served 29 years onboard nuclear
submarines. Now, he is the new commander in charge of
Russia’s most powerful fleet.”

Map of Russian Northern Fleet bases.

Source: Kallemax at English Wikipedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_Northern_Fleet_bases.png,
Public domain

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Putin appoints new leader of Northern Fleet,” Barents Sea Independent Observer, 8 May 2019. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2019/05/putin-appoints-new-leader-northern-fleet
Putin appoints new leader of Northern Fleet
The decree from President Vladimir Putin was signed on the 3rd of May. But the news was made public by the Armed Forces only six days
later as thousands of Navy officers were marching in the streets on Victory Day May 9th.
The person who has headed the Northern Fleet for the past three years, Nikolay Yevmenov, is promoted to command the Russian Navy. He
takes over the leadership of one of most powerful military forces in the world. Yevmenov replaces Vladimir Korolev, who has been in charge
of the Russian Navy since 2016.
Aleksandr Moiseev comes from the post as commander of the Black Sea Fleet where he has served since May 2018. He has long experiences
in the North. For more than two decades, he served on board submarines that have crisscrossed the Arctic. He started in 1988 as engineer
on a sub and ended up as captain onboard one of the world’s most powerful nuclear submarines.
In 1994, he served on board the K-18 Karelia , a Delta-IV submarine, and was decorated for his participation in the planting of a Russian
flag at the North Pole.
From 1998 he headed the nuclear powered K-407 Novomoskovsk, another Delta IV sub. He later became head of the Northern Fleet’s 31st
division, the powerful unit based in Zapadnaya Litsa on the Barents Sea coast. In 2008, he was in charge of the nuclear-powered submarine
K-44 when it made a transfer from the Northern to the Pacific Fleet while submerged under the polar ice.
He is a man well-liked by the President himself. In 2011, he was awarded the medal for Hero of the Russian Federation, and subsequently
became the deputy commander of the Northern Fleet and then the leader of the submarine unit of that same fleet.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | June 2019

7

EURASIA
Cruising in a Stretch-Submarine
OE Watch Commentary: The Poseidon intercontinental-range, nuclear autonomous torpedo is reportedly capable of moving fast, far, quiet
and deep while avoiding the various interception systems designed to destroy intercontinental nuclear missiles, cruise missiles and the like. As
the accompanying passage from Barents Sea Independent Observer discusses, the Belgorod, “one of Russia’s most secret weapons carriers, a
184-meter long nuclear-powered submarine” is destined for the Northern Sea Fleet, where one of its missions will be a Poseidon launch vessel.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Built for special missions, Belgorod can carry deep-sea equipment like nuclear reactors to the Arctic
seabed, as well as deploying the Poseidon second strike, nuclear delivery [underwater] drone.”
Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Here Comes a nuclear submarine longer than the world has ever seen” Barents Sea Independent Observer, 23 April 2019. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2019/04/worlds-longest-here-comes-submarine-world-has-never-seen
Here Comes a nuclear submarine longer than the world has ever seen
April 23 was a very special day at the Sevmash yard in Severodvinsk. One of Russia’s most secret weapons carriers, a 184-meter long nuclear-powered submarine
with the project-name 09852 was launched….
The Belgorod (KS-139) is believed to have four to six tubes designed for the Poseidon nuclear-powered, nuclear armed underwater drone, a weapon that came as a
surprise when it first was confirmed in President Putin’s annual State of the Federation speech in March last year….
Belgorod is built on a elongated hull of what was originally meant to be an Oscar-II class multi-purpose submarine, a sister vessel to the ill-fated “Kursk” submarine
that sank in the Barents Sea during a naval exercise in August 2000. The hull of the submarine was laid down in 1992, but it was first twenty years later, in 2012, that
the Defense Ministry decided to use the hull to construct this giant special purpose vessel.
The extra space in the prolonged hull has room to carry equipment for deep-sea operations, like small-sized nuclear-reactors aimed to provide power to secret military
installations on the Arctic Sea bed.
Expert on Russian nuclear submarines, H. I. Sutton, suggests in a blog post on the portal Covert Shores that one of the secret missions for Belgorod will be the covert
placement of large underwater systems, like the new multi-sensor submarine detection network named “Harmony”. Similar to NATO’s SOSUS cable system, the Russian
network with sensors is aimed to detect enemy submarines. “Harmony” will be powered by nuclear reactors that will be placed on the Arctic shelf by Belgorod.
The submarine will also be able to carry other special purpose mini-submarines, like those based in Olenya Bay on the Kola Peninsula where Russia’s Main
Directorate for Deep Sea Research [Главное управление глубоководных исследований Минобороны (ГУГИ)] nicknamed GUGI, is located. Although the crew on the
Directorate’s submarines are from the Northern Fleet, these special submarines are operated directly by the General Staff of the Armed Forces.
Belgorod is 11 meters longer than the giant 173-meters Typhoon submarines of the Cold War and 29 meters longer than the Oscar-II class subs.
As reported by the Barents Observer in March when Russia’s Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu visited the yard in Severodvinsk, Belgorod will be the first full-time
carrier of the Poseidon underwater drone. The 24-meters long torpedo-looking drone is powered by a small nuclear reactor and is designed as a second nuclear
strike weapon. If an enemy targets Russia with nuclear weapons, the Poseidon will guarantee retaliation. Launched from “Belgorod” the drone is tipped with a multimegatons nuclear warhead that can cross oceans like the North Atlantic at a depth and with a silence making it impossible to stop….Poseidon will be a game changer
for global nuclear deterrence when it becomes operative…
“Belgorod” now will make mooring tests, launch its two reactors, and start sea trails in 2020, after which it will be delivered for operations by the end of that year….

Another Major Oil Deposit Discovered in Russian Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: Russian Arctic energy exploration continues to pay dividends. The Yamal Peninsula has two major gas and oil
fields producing in the Murmask/White Sea region. This latest find on the Tamir Peninsula is well located to take advantage of the nearby
Dudinka river port on the mighty Yenesei River flowing north into the Arctic Ocean. Dudinka has long been a vital link for shipping the
extracted and smelted nickel, copper, cobalt and palladium produced in Norilsk as well as coal. The new fields are about midpoint of the
Russian Arctic and certainly upgrade the already vital status of the region to the Russian economy. Russia has been concerned with the defense
of this river route and has conducted two large riverine exercises there during the last four years. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Russia’s state mineral extraction agency Rosnedra now confirms that the resource estimates of the

Paykha fields amount to as much as 1.2 billion tons….That is one of the biggest estimates ever made for a
Russian oil field.”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “Arсtic oil field could be Russia’s biggest discovery in 30 years”, Barents Sea Independent Observer, 8 May 2019. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-and-energy/2019/05/artic-oil-field-could-be-russias-biggest-discovery-30-years
Arсtic oil field could be Russia’s biggest discovery in 30 years
It is good news for company Neftegazholding and its leader Eduard Khudaynatov, who for years have been seeking ways to develop the Payakha area.
Khudaynatov had previously estimated the field resources far lower, at about 600 million tons…
Some experts reacted with skepticism to the sudden major upgrade of the Payakha. Reportedly, only few exploration wells have been drilled in the area
and seismic studies and data assessments remain sparse. No new oil samples have been presented by the company....The Payakha fields are located along
the eastern banks of the Yenisei, about 130 km north of the port town of Dudinka.
The sudden upgrade of the fields comes as the Russian government is hectically struggling to add shipment volumes to the Northern Sea Route.
President Vladimir Putin has requested a boost in Arctic shipping to an annual 80 million tons by the year 2024 and new infrastructure and industry is
planned and being built to meet the ambitious target. The Payakha fields could become a key part of the picture.
Previously, it was believed that the field could provide up to five million tons to the Northern Sea Route by 2024. That estimate might now be increased.
Furthermore, the Payakha resources could become a crucial component in the new Arctic oil pipeline planned by Rosneft. The state oil company says it
intends to build a 600 km long pipeline from the Vankor fields in western Siberia to the coast of the Taymyr Peninsula. It will have the capacity to carry 25
million tons per year and could potentially include also the Payakha resources….

OE Watch | June 2019

8

EURASIA
Fighting for Military Death Benefits
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin leadership has worked diligently over the past
decade to restore the honor and prestige of military service, and the official rhetoric reflects
their admiration for those who defend the Russian state. While not extravagant, Russian
authorities assert that they are prepared to compensate service members and their families for
losses incurred while on active duty. The first brief excerpt from the government news source
Rossiyskaya Gazeta describes a recent directive which spells out the payments which service
members or surviving family receive in the event of serious injury or death (KIA-2 million
rubles or $33K; WIA-from 1.5 million-500,000 rubles or $25K-$8.5K depending on the injury).
However, as the second excerpt from the moderately liberal source Novaya Izvestiya points
out, actually receiving these payments is another story. The article describes the “semi-annual
marathon in the courts” that the wife of an officer killed in Syria had to pass through in order
to receive these benefits. The problem stemmed from the fact that her late husband had not
received the status of “veteran of combat action” while still alive, and once he was killed, the
military said he was no longer eligible for this status. She was forced to take her case to court,
where she claimed that “the military enlistment office fought with us, as if we were its enemies”
during repeated hearings over several months.
After travelling from Volgograd to Moscow and meeting with representatives of the “main
military-political department of the Ministry of Defense,” the wife was ultimately successful
Official portrait of Sergei Shoigu.
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Official_portrait_of_
Sergey_Shoigu.jpg, CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)
in obtaining the death benefit, thanks to the personal involvement of the Minister of Defense
Sergei Shoigu. She “hopes that her case will make life easier for other widows or parents of other
dead soldiers,” pointing out that “not all of them, who survived this grief, would have the strength to knock down the thresholds of military
registration and enlistment offices and courts for months.” She notes that “Shoigu simply will not be able to intervene in every case unless
amendments are made at the legislative level.” This was not an isolated case, as many surviving family members have had to initiate legal
proceedings to receive death benefits from the military.
Strengthening Russia’s military prowess remains a key objective of the current Kremlin leadership. In their calculus, this improved military
status will help to restore the country’s great power status. The above article would suggest, however, that Russia’s actual legislation on the
matter is not consistent with these super-power aspirations. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… the military enlistment office fought with us, as if we were its enemies…”
Source: “Индексация задним числом. Военным и отставникам увеличили отдельные выплаты (Indexation in Retrospect. Individual
Payments Increased for Serving and Retired Military Personnel),” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 22 April 2019. https://rg.ru/2019/04/22/
The Russian Federation Government has published Directive No. 435, according to which former and current service personnel and their close relatives
as well as militarized department officers including police and their families and citizens on military musters will have the insurances, individual
payments, and one-time allowances granted to them under the law index-linked….
…Point 2 of Article 5 of that document says that, if a soldier is killed or dies from serious injury, wounds, trauma, contusions, or sickness contracted
in service, his close relatives are paid R2 million in insurance in equal shares. For those invalided while in service the law also provides insurance
compensation: R1.5 million for Class 1, R1 million for Class 2, and R500,000 for Class 3.

Source: “Вдова погибшего в Сирии офицера: Шойгу не сможет помочь всем (The widow of an officer who died in Syria: Shoigu will not
be able to help everyone),” Novaya Izvestiya, 10 April 2019. https://newizv.ru/news/society/10-04-2019/vdova-pogibshego-v-sirii-ofitserashoygu-ne-smozhet-pomoch-vsem
The widow of Captain Sergei Petin, who died in Syria, commented on the words of Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu about preventing red tape when
paying allowances to participants in hostilities and to the families of the dead soldiers. Previously, the woman had to obtain justice through the court with
the military registration office because of gaps in the legislation.
Yesterday, the Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu sharply criticized his subordinates for their heartlessness and red tape on the social benefits of
servicemen and their families. This happened after an embarrassing story regarding Captain Sergey Petin who died in Syria, whose widow with two
children lives in the city of Volzhsky near Volgograd. Difficulties arose since Sergei Petin was not granted the status of a veteran of combat action when
he was alive, and it’s not clear what to do if the soldier has already died and didn’t get a certificate.
“My lawyer and I had to go through a semi-annual marathon in the courts,” Elena Petina told the publication Novosti-volgograda.ru …. It turns out that
the military enlistment office fought with us, as if we were its enemies.
Elena Petina hopes that her case will make life easier for other widows or parents of the dead soldiers. After all, not all of them, who survived the grief,
have the strength to knock down the thresholds of military registration and enlistment offices and courts for months…. “I voiced these thoughts during a
trip to Moscow to the main military-political department of the Ministry of Defense. Probably, the reaction of Sergei Shoigu occurred after this problem
was brought to his attention. For me personally, this is very valuable, but if you look to the future, and such cases, I think, unfortunately, such occurrences
will reoccur, since Shoigu simply physically, will not be able to intervene in every case unless amendments are made at the legislative level.”

OE Watch | June 2019

9

EURASIA
Russian Pension Payment for Donbas
OE Watch Commentary: Even with the recent
change of presidential administrations in Kiev,
the conflict between Russia and Ukraine over the
separatist regions in the Donbas shows little sign of
resolution. Indeed, as the first excerpt from Russian
official news agency TASS points out, in late April
(just after the presidential election in Ukraine),
“Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree
which eases Russian citizenship rules for residents of
certain regions of southeastern Ukraine.” The article
goes on to specify that “individuals permanently
residing in certain areas of Ukraine’s Donetsk and
Lugansk regions have the right to apply for Russian
citizenship under a simplified procedure… in order
to protect human rights and freedoms.” Presumably,
once the majority of residents within these separatist
regions possess Russian passports, the Kremlin will
have a greater legal pretense to employ military force
to protect their “human rights and freedoms.”
Since the Kremlin’s offer of Russian citizenship
for residents in the separatist regions, there have
been economic concerns over the costs in providing
pensions to potentially 2-3 million new Russian
passport holders. However, as the brief second
excerpt (also from TASS) indicates, Russian officials
claim that the expense of providing pensions to
these new Donbas citizens “will not overload the PFR
(Pension Fund of Russia) system.”

Map showing separatist regions in Ukraine.
Source: http://www.mil.gov.ua/ CCA 4.0

Such an assertion might be surprising to at least one Russian military pensioner. The third excerpt, from the moderate source Novaya
Izvestiya, describes how Mikhail Zaikin, a military pensioner from Russia, had his Russian military pension revoked when authorities learned
that he had volunteered to serve in the military of the separatist Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR). Zaikin resorted to social media to complain
about his situation, and then pressed charges against the “Volgograd military registration and enlistment office.” In a somewhat convoluted
ruling, “the court still sided with Zaikin, finding that “since the DPR is not recognized by the UN member states, it does not exist legally,
and therefore serving in the ranks of local forces does not fall under the provisions of the Russian law on military retirees.” (For additional
background on this story, see: “Negative Military Reporting” in the December 2018 issue of OE Watch.)
Despite their consistent denials, five years ago, the Kremlin began to provide military assistance to the separatist regions in SE Ukraine.
At the time, many of the locals assumed that this military support would ultimately result in a Crimea-like annexation by Russia. While the
Kremlin has yet to make this claim, by issuing passports to the residents of separatists in the Donetsk and Lugansk regions, Russian authorities
appear to be preparing for such a seizure—whether they can afford it or not. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…Payment of pensions to residents of certain areas of the proclaimed Luhansk and Donetsk
people’s republics after they receive Russian passports will not be a big burden on the pension
system of the Russian Federation….”
Source: “Kremlin: Russian passports to provide freedom of movement to Donbass residents,” TASS, 30 April 2019. http://tass.com/
politics/1056533
…On April 24, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree, which eases Russian citizenship rules for residents of certain regions of southeastern
Ukraine. “Individuals permanently residing in certain areas of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Lugansk regions have the right to apply for Russian citizenship
under a simplified procedure,” the decree reads. According to the document, the decision has been made “in order to protect human rights and freedoms”
based on generally accepted international laws.

Source: “Топилин: пенсии жителям Донбасса по получении паспортов России не перегрузят систему ПФР (Topilin: pensions to
residents of Donbass upon receipt of passports of Russia will not overload the PFR (Pension Fund of Russia) system),” TASS, 26 April 2019.
https://tass.ru/ekonomika/6380707
Payment of pensions to residents of certain areas of the proclaimed Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics after they receive Russian passports will not
be a big burden on the pension system of the Russian Federation, Minister of Labor and Social Protection of Russia Maxim Topilin told reporters. “I don’t
think it will be a big burden,” he said, answering the relevant question.

OE Watch | June 2019

10

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Pension Payment for Donbas
Source: “Ополченец из ДНР добился выплаты российской пенсии (Militiaman from the DNR was paid his Russian pension),” Novaya
Izvestiya, 18 April 2019. https://newizv.ru/news/society/18-04-2019/opolchenets-dnr-dobilsya-vyplaty-rossiyskoy-pensii
…Mikhail Zaikin also had to plead with the Volgograd military registration and enlistment office. From the documents submitted to the Central Court of
Volgograd, it follows that he is a pensioner of the Ministry of Defense after years of service since 2003. For more than ten years, even before the armed
conflict in the Donbass, he regularly received his military pension. But a few months ago, its payment was discontinued, since it became known that
Zaikin went to Donetsk and joined the ranks of the so-called people’s militia - in the military unit 08805 (5th separate motorized rifle brigade “Oplot”).
…The regional military registration and enlistment office insisted on the termination of pension payments referring to the law - according to its
provisions, military pensioners when they return…
…But the court still sided with Zaikin, finding that since the DPR is not recognized by the UN member states, it does not exist legally, and therefore
serving in the ranks of local forces does not fall under the provisions of the Russian law on military retirees….

Russia to Deploy Full Radar Satellite Constellation in 2020
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passage from
Izvestiya discusses Russia’s plan to completely fill the “Liana”
Radar Reconnaissance System constellation. The Liana is a
four-satellite constellation currently consisting of two Lotos-S
satellites launched in 2009 and 2018, and which will eventually
be completed by the addition of two Pion-NKS satellites
planned for launch in 2020. The system is intended to do both
maritime and ground-based reconnaissance, thereby replacing
several legacy systems. These high-resolution radar satellites
provide a day/night and all-weather capability to surveil planes,
tanks, armored personnel carriers, ships. This information will
be transmitted to the Russian National Defense Management
Center for analysis and action. The deployment of the
constellation had been delayed due to import sanctions and the
Russia’s National Defense Management Center.
withdrawal of the Ukrainian defense industry, but these obstacles
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:National_Defense_Management_Center.jpg, CC BY 3.0
appear to have been overcome. If Russia does field these additional satellites, it will have significantly increased her space-based ISR capability.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The difference between civilian and military satellites is being erased.”
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Roman Kretsul, “«Лиана» опутает Землю: система радиолокационных спутников заработает к новому году
(‘Liana’ is Ensnaring the Earth: The Radar Satellite System Will Begin to Operate in the New Year),” Izvestiya Online, 8 May 2019. https://
iz.ru/868589/roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm/liana-oputaet-zemliu-sistema-radiolokatcionnykh-sputnikov-zarabotaet-k-novomu-godu
The formation of the unique “Liana” Radar Reconnaissance System (RLR) in low-earth orbit, which will cover the entire planet, will be completed over
the course of this year. A Ministry of Defense spokesman reported to Izvestiya that the launches of two satellites are planned by 1 January 2020, after
which the system will begin to operate at full performance. Putting “Liana” into operation will permit the Russian General Staff to observe even small
objects in the world.
The “Liana” Radar Reconnaissance System will consist of four satellites – two “Lotos-S” and two “Pion-NKS”…The Lotos-S, the first satellite of the
“Liana” System, was launched into orbit in 2009, and the second – in 2018. It remained to put two “Pion-NKS” satellites into operation to complete the
system’s formation, which they plan to do this year. The satellites, which are part of the “Liana” System, are already at 100-kilometer altitude. In the
process, their onboard equipment permits them to detect an object with a size from an automobile and, if necessary, to guide a precision-guided weapon
system to it. All of the System’s remaining characteristics and its elements are classified. Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu officially announced its
existence for the first time at the beginning of 2017. During the fall of last year, the Military Department Head reported that he had personally approved
the coordinated schedule of the manufacture and testing of a “Pion-NKS” satellite. “The difference between civilian and military satellites is being
erased in recent years, by way of illustration, an ordinary satellite can support Army communicates via encrypted channels”, Ivan Moiseyev, the scientific
director of the Space Policy Institute, told Izvestiya. “But signals intelligence satellites – this is such a specific sphere that only a military spacecraft can
handle this mission. These technologies have begun to be developed in the civilian sector – in particular, to monitor traffic on roads”…

OE Watch | June 2019

11

EURASIA
Profiting off Patriot Park
OE Watch Commentary: Officially opened in 2016 as a showplace
to highlight Russia’s military accomplishments and equipment, Patriot
Park continues to expand its offerings. Located some 40 miles west
of Moscow, the complex serves not only as a venue for the Russian
military to showcase its latest weapons, but also as a training ground, a
conference location and a place to host special events. As the first brief
excerpt from the pro-business daily RBK points out, Patriot Park will
soon be offering a variety of other attractions in order “to increase the
attendance of the park to 100 thousand people per day.”
The article describes that even though the exact details regarding the
funding for these new facilities have yet to be worked out, among other
additions, the plan calls for the construction of “a ski center, a children’s
amusement park, a Ferris wheel, an aquarium…, a water park, territory
for paintball, laser-tag,… hotel, and a multi-disciplinary clinic for the
President Putin studying a model of the Armed Forces Cathedral at Patriot Park,
treatment of military personnel, their families and military retirees”
September 2018.
Source: http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/58595, CC BY 4.0.
within the Patriot Park complex. To accommodate the increased traffic
and visitors, the Ministry of Defense plans to improve the transport infrastructure surrounding the park.
Besides highlighting the country’s accomplishments, large projects in Russia have often served as corruption conduits for those involved
in their construction (e.g. 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics). As the second brief excerpt from the opposition source The Insider points out, the
expansion and developments within Patriot Park appear to be no exception. As the title of this long, investigative article suggests, some of
those close to the Kremlin leadership have figured out ways to “pilfer funds through Patriot Park.” The article describes, for instance, how one
individual connected to the construction of the new cathedral at Patriot Park, “bought himself a Mercedes-Maybach, worth around 10 million
rubles ($167,000), one month after the consecration of the foundation stone.” The article goes on to review the quasi-criminal backgrounds (e.g.
embezzlement, fraud) of other individuals involved in constructing projects at Patriot Park, or what they refer to as the “military Disneyland.”
While the Kremlin continues to construct an ideology built upon patriotism and military readiness, these articles suggest that some Russians
hope to exploit this ideology for personal profit. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… And it is Putin’s friends and the Ministry of Defense leadership that are making money on
this “military Disneyland…”
Source: Inna Sidorkova, Nadezhda Fedorova, Maxim Solopov, “Частно-государственный «Патриот» Что ведомство Сергея Шойгу
решило построить в крупнейшем военном парке (Private-state ‘Patriot’ What the ministry of Sergey Shoigu decided to build in the largest
military park),” RBK, 24 April 2019. https://www.rbc.ru/society/24/04/2019/5cbf04d99a7947c2d506dbce
The Ministry of Defense plans to build 900 thousand square meters in the Patriot Park with new buildings and structures for civilian use. It is planned to
attract investors to the implementation of projects with the prospect of commercial payback…. The goal of the project is to increase the attendance of the
park to 100 thousand people per day.
To improve the transport accessibility of the park, the Ministry of Defense counts on building a new junction at the 59th kilometer of the Minsk highway
during its reconstruction and the railway line with a stylized armored train between Kubinka-1 station, Patriot air base and Kubinka air base.
…Among the entertainment facilities to be built are a ski center, a children’s amusement park, a Ferris wheel, an aquarium of 3.5 thousand square
meters, a water park, a territory for games, paintball, laser-tag… a fishing village with a sauna complex,… and hotel complex.
…In addition, the Ministry of Defense is planning to build a medical center (6 thousand square meters) in the Patriot Park - a multi-disciplinary clinic
for the treatment of military personnel, their families and military retirees.

Source: Sergey Yezhov, “Парк жуликов и воров. Как пилят на парке «Патриот» и при чем тут повар Путина, дочь Шойгу и сын
Ротенберга (Park of Crooks and Thieves. How They Pilfer Funds Through Patriot Park and What Putin’s Chef, Shoygu’s Daughter, and
Rotenberg’s Son Have to Do With That),” The Insider, 24 April 2019. https://theins.ru/korrupciya/152511
Patriot Park near Moscow has already cost the Russians more than 20 billion rubles, and today it emerged that a further 1.7 billion rubles of taxpayers’
money will be allocated for it. In addition, the park takes voluntary and compulsory donations from people for a giant khaki-colored cathedral (thousands
of people have already chipped in). And it is Putin’s friends and the Ministry of Defense leadership that are making money on this “military Disneyland…”
…The cathedral is due to be completed in a year’s time, but already now some of the individuals involved in the project can boast about their gains.
For example, the head of the Resurrection foundation [Aleksandr Kanshin] bought himself a Mercedes-Maybach, worth around 10 million rubles,
one month after the consecration of the foundation stone (the ceremony was attended by Putin and Vladimir Gundyayev [Patriarch Kirill, head of the
Russian Orthodox Church]). The Insider found out that Kanshin paid a deposit for his car in October 2018, two months after the patriotic foundation was
registered. This is despite the official salaries of the fund’s management and other expenses (website, communications) totaling approximately 300,000
rubles a month….

OE Watch | June 2019

12

EURASIA
The Transformation of Colonel Kvachkov
OE Watch Commentary: One of Russia’s more notorious military prisoners, Colonel (retired)
Vladimir Kvachkov, was released from prison earlier this year. Kvachkov gained notoriety in 2005
when accused of trying to assassinate Anatoliy Chubais, a prominent Russian official who had been
partially responsible for Russia’s painful, and often corrupt, privatization program. While ultimately
acquitted of this crime, Kvachkov was subsequently arrested in 2010 for plotting an armed mutiny and
given an eight-year sentence. While still in prison, he released an incendiary, nationalist video, and
was charged with inciting hatred, and given two additional years in prison. As a former GRU (Military
Intelligence) officer, Kvachkov gained notoriety for saying (and acting upon) what some in uniform
were thinking, becoming a hero for many Russian nationalists. In the accompanying excerpt from a
long interview in the popular, military weekly Military-Industrial Courier (VPK), Kvachkov shares
some of his observations.
While spending more than a decade behind bars, Kvachkov discovered the Orthodox faith, and
asserts that he is “no longer the colonel who knew how to fight and conduct special operations. Now I
feel like a soldier of Christ…”. He goes on to claim that the primary reason behind the Soviet Union’s
demise stemmed primarily from “the Soviet people’s loss of an understanding of the meaning of their
life on Earth,” stressing that “the collapse of the USSR showed that without a religious faith it is
impossible to build a fair state.” As a firm Orthodox believer, Kvachkov maintains not only that “the
military cannot live without ideology,” but that “the state system of Russia should be an autocratic
Orthodox monarchy.”

Colonel (ret) Vladimir Kvachkov, September 2018.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Kvachkov.jpg,
CC-BY-SA-3.0

Regarding the situation in Ukraine, Kvachkov argues that “we need to recognize the Donbas and Lugansk republics as part of Russia,”
but that if Russia wants to further expand, it must first focus on developing “an attractive economic model of our internal development, with
religious and spiritual components.” He goes on to point out that in Russia today, “the gap between the poor and the rich is huge,” noting that
him and his grandson, who is employed by the Russian National Guard may find themselves “on different sides of the barricades.”
Kvachkov has expressed admiration for certain aspects of the current Kremlin leadership (e.g. the return of Crimea), but has spoken out
strongly against a number of their actions and policies. For instance, he maintains that the country’s current economic system “is rolling into
the abyss of liberal capitalism.” While certainly not an accurate barometer of military thinking, the fact that VPK provided a forum for this
controversial officer to express his thoughts suggests that he still has followers in the ranks. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…I understood that the army cannot live without ideology…. The state system of Russia
should be an autocratic Orthodox monarchy…”
Source: Oleg Falichev, “Духовные университеты полковника Квачкова (The Spiritual Universities of Col. Kvachkov),” VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer VPK [Military-Industrial Courier], 9 April 2019. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/49517
The release of the man accused of attempting to assassinate Anatoly Chubais in 2005, and then, in 2010, an attempt at armed rebellion, …Retired
colonel, Vladimir Kvachkov, formerly an employee of the General Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, spoke to MilitaryIndustrial Courier.
-How long did you spend in prison?
11 years, four months, 15 days.
…All these years there was a process of my internal conversion. And now, in front of you, there is no longer the colonel who knew how to fight and
conduct special operations. Now I feel like a soldier of Christ, a man, I hope, having overcome my pride. …Your will must be a continuation of the will of
God. This is the duty of the Russian Orthodox officer to understand and fulfill what is ordained to you from above….
…No one believed in communism. I am convinced: the Soviet Union died, first of all, for a spiritual and moral reason - because of the loss by the Soviet
people of the understanding of the meaning of their life on Earth….The collapse of the USSR showed that without a religious faith it is impossible to build
a fair state.
…As a military man, besides having the first philological education, I understood that the army cannot live without ideology…. The state system of Russia
should be an autocratic Orthodox monarchy.
- You have not seen the country for many years. Has it changed?
It seems to me for the worse. It has become less Russian, less Christian, and is rolling into the abyss of liberal capitalism….
Of course, the return of the Crimea from the geopolitical point of view is the most important event, here I am completely on the side of Vladimir Putin….
But having raised the Russian spirit in the Crimea, we immediately extinguished it in Donetsk and Lugansk….
…When we ourselves live according to the truth, then we say: brothers, we in Great Russia restored state property, the law of God in schools, introduced
the teaching of the foundations of Orthodox culture, restored the best methods of the Soviet education system and truly free health care. Russia must
become an attractive country in all respects. Then reach out to us… Of course, we need to recognize the Donbass and Lugansk republics as part of
Russia. Moreover, to restore them in the boundaries in which they existed before the current events. The question, I repeat, is different: what will we
offer to the Donbas? New oligarchs, our flawed education and health? There should be an attractive economic model of our internal development, with
religious and spiritual components….
…Today, information war is in full swing. It is necessary to understand: without state ideology there can be no effective counteraction….
…My grandson was called up to the special division of operational assignment of the Rosguard [National Guard]. A situation may arise that we will find
ourselves on different sides of the barricades. Why does he have to shoot at his grandfather - for the good life of collective Chubais?...The gap between the
poor and the rich is huge…

OE Watch | June 2019

13

EURASIA
Divine Military Sanction
OE Watch Commentary: According to its constitution, Russia has no official state ideology.
Over the past several years, however, the traditions of organized religion, particularly those
associated with the Russian Orthodox Church (ROC), have played a prominent role in shaping the
outline of a new ideology. As the two accompanying excerpts suggest, the role of Orthodoxy has
grown particularly prominent among the Russian military.
The first excerpt from the military media source Zvezda TV, describes the arrival of a special
icon to the “Vladimir Cathedral Church in Sevastopol.” As the article points out, this icon “was
consecrated by the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia Kirill at Easter services on 28 April.”
The icon was then transported to Crimea, “where Prince Vladimir was baptized,” and will
go on to spend the next year travelling among Russian military bases throughout the country,
ending up “in Moscow in the Armed Forces Main Cathedral on the 75th Anniversary of the
The icon of the Main Church of the Armed Forces of
Great Victory” (9 May 2020). General Andrey Kartapolov, chief of Armed Forces Main MilitaryRussia
was delivered to the Black Sea Fleet, 30 April 2019.
Political Directorate, commented that “the sacred object will cover more than 57,000 kilometers Source: https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12228808@egNews
CCA
4.0
by air, water, and land. It will be in more than 120 cities, over 150 cathedrals, and more than 300
formations and military units.” The article also explains that “President of Russia Vladimir Putin donated funds for creating the Icon.”
The second excerpt from the pro-Kremlin source Svobodnaya Pressa, describes some of the religious background to the conflict in SE
Ukraine between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian forces. In the author’s assessment, the “dominant factor behind this conflict was still the
Orthodox component.” He claims that Orthodox icons were “already noticeable on the barricades in Donetsk and Lugansk in March and April
2014,” and that according to one of his fellow separatists, who “considered himself a warrior of Christ, … Orthodoxy is not a religion of the
weak and submissive. On the contrary, he argued, the Orthodox should defend their faith, including with a weapon in their hands…” He goes on
to argue that “the unified Orthodox faith... remains one of the few brackets that unites them [Ukrainians] with the Orthodox residents of Russia.”
The creation of a new Ukrainian Orthodox Church will presumably exacerbate tensions.
On the surface, the notion that the Russian Ministry of Defense would expend the time, effort and resources to transport and display a
religious icon throughout the country might appear irrational. However, the symbols of the Russian Orthodox faith have long played a prominent
role in providing military personnel with assurances of divine sanction, and will likely remain a complicating factor in the ongoing conflict with
Ukraine. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… Orthodoxy is not a religion of the weak and submissive. On the contrary ... the Orthodox
should defend their faith, including with a weapon in their hands…”
Source: Pavel Nastin, Igor Baldin, “Образ Спаса Нерукотворного для главного храма ВС России привезли в Севастополь (The image
of the Savior, not made by hands, for the main church of the Russian Armed Forces, was brought to Sevastopol),” TV Zvezda, 30 April 2019.
https://tvzvezda.ru/news/forces/content/20194301245-HhQ2f.html
“…Today we solemnly transfer the Main Icon of the Holy Mandylion of the Russian Federation Armed Forces Main Cathedral to the Southern Military
District command and the Crimean clergy,” said Colonel General Andrey Kartapolov, chief of Armed Forces Main Military-Political Directorate, at the
solemn ceremony for transferring the Icon in the Vladimir Cathedral Church in Sevastopol.
…He pointed out that the Icon will be taken through military units and cathedrals throughout the country. “During the year it will be taken through
many formations and military units of the Russian Army and through cathedrals of the Russian Orthodox Church so that not only thousands of
servicemen, but also the Orthodox faithful in various corners of our Motherland can bow to the sacred object. The sacred object will cover more than
57,000 kilometers by air, water, and land. It will be in more than 120 cities, over 150 cathedrals, and more than 300 formations and military units,”
Kartapolov emphasized.
He noted that the Icon is beginning its path in the City-Hero of Sevastopol, “on the land of Chersonesos,” where Prince Vladimir was baptized, and will
end it in Moscow in the Armed Forces Main Cathedral on the 75th Anniversary of the Great Victory….”
…President of Russia Vladimir Putin donated funds for creating the Icon. Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia Kirill consecrated the Icon at Easter
services on 28 April….

Source: Alexei Polubota, “С Богом в душе и с «калашом» в руках (With God in the soul and “Kalash” in your hands),” Svobodnaya Pressa,
28 April 2019. https://svpressa.ru/society/article/231540/
…The theme of defending Orthodoxy in connection with the events in Novorossiya is weakly marked in the public consciousness. Yes, in 2014, people
of various convictions traveled from Russia to the Donbass. Supporters of the left, nationalist ideas… But the dominant, in my opinion, was still the
Orthodox component. This was already noticeable on the barricades in Donetsk and Lugansk in March and April 2014, where Orthodox icons could be
seen next to the patriotic posters. Later, at almost all the checkpoints there were also icons. In the days of the fiercest battles in the summer of 2014, a
banner with the face of Jesus Christ was raised in the half-encircled Luhansk city by punishers of Lugansk….
My comrade, “Black Sea” considered himself a warrior of Christ. He insisted that Orthodoxy is not a religion of the weak and submissive. On the
contrary, he argued, the Orthodox should defend their faith, including with a weapon in their hands, and not be in a hurry to expose their cheeks to their
enemies….
…In such conditions, it is the unified Orthodox faith that remains one of the few brackets that unites them with the Orthodox residents of Russia. If we
take it broader, then Orthodoxy is perhaps the main thing in the near historical perspective, which allows us to speak of the unity of Great Russians and
Little Russians, as constituent parts of the Russian super-ethnos.

OE Watch | June 2019

14

EURASIA
Armenia’s Interest in Remote Sensing
OE Watch Commentary: The Armenian
government often gets attention for its
acquisitions of weapons and equipment that
improve a specific capability of its armed
forces in opposition to Azerbaijan, like the
recent purchase of Su-30SM fighters. The
accompanying excerpted articles from Lragir,
an independent news website from Armenia,
report on a recent development that allows
the Armenian government to utilize Russian
satellites for remote sensing and discuss how the
country’s defense expenditures have increased.
The first article discusses the “cooperation
agreement in the field of remote sensing signed
between Russian Space Systems (a Roscosmos
Artistic illustration of Russian satellite Canopus-B on terrestrial orbit.
structure) and the Armenian company
Source: José Furtado via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Canopus-B.jpg, CC 4.0wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Uzbekistan_Armed_Forces_Patch_(digital_
camouflage).jpg, Public domain
Geocosmos” and that the Russian and Armenian
governments are considering “the creation of a joint enterprise capable of constructing remote sensing satellites as well as software
and data processing services for imagery.” The article does not mention how Armenia will use the data provided by the satellites, but
does note that the Armenian company Geocosmos, which “closely collaborates with the defense structures of Armenia,” reportedly
“secured a contract with the Ministry of Defense,” and that the ministry has been “interested in conducting operational intelligence
through satellite imagery.”
The second article reports the increase in Armenia’s defense expenditures from 2017 to 2018, which was “an increase of
33 percent.” While the article does not offer a breakdown of Armenia’s defense spending in that timeframe or a projection of
expenditures for 2019, the agreement between Russian Space Systems and Geocosmos shows an area where the Armenian
government is looking to add a capability and could have some funding for it. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The ministry was interested in conducting operational intelligence through satellite imagery.”
Source: ”Армения сможет воспользоваться данными российских спутников (Armenia can use data from Russian satellites),” Lragir, 30
April 2019. https://www.lragir.am/ru/2019/04/30/147564/
Armenia can now utilize data received by Russian orbital groups, as reported by (Nezavisimaya Gazeta’s) Voennoe Obozrenie…the
opportunity is provided for through an cooperation agreement in the field of remote sensing signed between Russian Space Systems (a
Roscosmos structure) and the Armenian company Geocosmos…
Moscow and Yerevan have considered the creation of a joint enterprise capable of constructing remote sensing satellites as well as software
and data processing services for imagery.
“Geocosmos” closely collaborates with the defense structures of Armenia. It was reported in 2017 that the company secured a contract with
the Ministry of Defense. The ministry was interested in conducting operational intelligence through satellite imagery…

Source: ”Военные расходы Армении в 2018 году составили $609 миллионов (Armenia’s military expenditures in 2018 consisted of $609
million),” Lragir, 29 April 2019. https://www.lragir.am/ru/2019/04/29/147436/
Armenia’s military expenditures in 2018 consisted of $609 million, an increase of 33 percent from 2017. This comes from data presented by
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)…

OE Watch | June 2019

15

EURASIA
Uzbekistan’s Choice of Partners for Joint Exercises
OE Watch Commentary: The Armed Forces of Uzbekistan have rarely taken
part in joint military exercises in the years since the country became independent,
though this has changed under President Shavkat Mirziyoyev. When Uzbek units
did participate with a foreign partner (or a security organization), it provided some
insight into how the Uzbek government viewed threats and what it sought from a
security cooperation partnership. The accompanying excerpted articles report on
a two recent joint military exercises that Uzbek units took part in and shed light
on what the Uzbek government might seek as it increases participation in security
cooperation.
The article from Kun.uz reports on an exercise Uzbek units carried out with Tajiks
at the “Fakhrabad training facility in Tajikistan” and how both “worked on their
skills and shared knowledge of mountain training, engineering, first aid in the field
and other skills.” The article also mentions the first ever Uzbek-Tajik joint exercise
that took place last year. While the exercise appeared to focus more on building
cooperation than conducting a joint operation, the fact that a second exercise took
place within a year does demonstrate that the Uzbek government is putting some
priority on a partnership with Tajikistan.
The article from Gazeta.uz reports on a joint exercise Uzbekistan hosted with units
from Pakistan and Turkey around the same time as the other exercise. The exercise,
Armed Forces Patch.
titled “Commonwealth Shield 2019,” involved participants “blocking and eliminating Source: Armed Forces ofUzbekistan
the Republic of Uzbekistan via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Uzbekistan_Armed_Forces_Patch_(digital_camouflage).jpg, Public domain
illegally armed groups in mountainous terrain.” This scenario appears to be based
on an incident in 2000, when Uzbek forces clashed with members of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan who had conducted an
incursion into the country, and suggests that the incident had an impact on shaping the Uzbek view of threats.
It is difficult to determine what, if any, security cooperation partnership emerges from this exercise. Pakistan and Uzbekistan
are already members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. A number of analysts in the region have predicted that the Uzbek
government under Mirziyoyev will choose to increase security cooperation with either Russia or the US (or possibly China), but if
these exercises are any indication, the government is looking at developing multiple partnerships. End OE Watch Commentary
(Stein)

“Units of the joint operational force carried out reconnaissance of the area, blocking and eliminating
illegally armed groups in mountainous terrain with the help of helicopters.”
Source: ”Военные разведчики Узбекистана и Таджикистана закрепили сотрудничество на практике (Military scouts of Uzbekistan
and Tajikistan strengthened cooperation in practice),” Kun.uz, 28 April 2019. https://kun.uz/ru/news/2019/04/28/voyennyye-razvedchikiuzbekistana-i-tadjikistana-zakrepili-sotrudnichestvo-na-praktike
From 23-26 April, a joint training of reconnaissance personnel from units of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan took place at the Fakhrabad training
facility in Tajikistan…
The officers and NCOs of the two countries jointly worked on their skills and shared knowledge of mountain training, engineering, first aid in
the field, and other skills…in September 2018, in Tajikistan, a joint military exercise of special purpose units of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan took
place for the first time under the title “Combat Commonwealth-2018”

Source: ”Учения военных Узбекистана, Пакистана и Турции завершились (The military exercise of Uzbekistan, Pakistan, and Turkey has
ended),” Gazeta.uz, 27 April 2019. https://www.gazeta.uz/ru/2019/04/27/training/
The joint exercise of the soldiers of Uzbekistan, Pakistan and Turkey has ended…the main phase of the trilateral exercise “Commonwealth
Shield 2019” took place at the Forish range…
Units of the joint operational force carried out reconnaissance of the area, blocking and eliminating illegally armed groups in mountainous
terrain with the help of helicopters. Two Mi-24 helicopters of the armed forces of Uzbekistan were involved…

OE Watch | June 2019

16

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Shipbuilder Launches Amphibious Unmanned
Surface Vehicle
OE Watch Commentary: A Chinese shipping industry source recently
announced that the Wuchuan Shipbuilding Group and Qingdao Wujiang Technology
Co., Ltd have successfully produced a high-speed amphibious unmanned surface
vehicle (USV) called the “Sea Iguana.” The Sea Iguana recently passed multiple
navigation tests at its facilities on the Yangtze. Wuchuan touts the unmanned
amphibious system as a unique offering and a major milestone for Chinese defense
companies in the marine defense sector.
Wuchuan, a subsidiary of China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation (CSIC) [武
昌船舶], is located in Wuhan, Hunan province far up the Yangtze River in China’s
interior. Wuchuan is one of China’s major shipbuilders, also producing Type 039A/B
(Yuan) submarines and Type 072 (Yukan) landing ships among others.
Qingdao Wujiang Technology [青岛无疆技术有限公司], the private company
partner in the research and development of the Sea Iguana, is located in Qingdao
in Shandong province on China’s eastern coast. Qingdao Wujiang describes itself
as an innovative enterprise focused on the research of core unmanned technology
Sea Iguana - high speed amphibious unmanned surface vehicle (USV)
Source: Peter Wood
including deep learning algorithm, their sensors and control systems. It also
produces unmanned boats called the Black Fish [黑鱼] and Hunting Shark [猎鲨] and an unmanned minesweeper codenamed Hound [猎犬].
China Shipbuilding & Offshore International Company (CSOC), CSIC’s export arm, previously offered an armed unmanned vessel, the
15-meter JARI at the Zhuhai Airshow in 2018.
The system has low-profile retractable treads, likely to reduce drag in the water. While images from the factory were blurred, it is clear that the
Sea Iguana uses two pump jets for propulsion in the water. To navigate, the USV uses the Beidou satellite navigation system. Artist depictions of
the Sea Iguana show it firing machine guns and missiles from vertical launch cells built into its body.
Concepts of operations for the system displayed in 2018 depict several USVs variously joining a PLA amphibious assault or operating on their
own, all linked to a broader battlefield network via a loitering aerial drone. Company materials indicate that the system has an operational range
of between 600 and 1200 kilometers, but can only be controlled by systems 40-50 kilometers away, making the UAV intermediary control node
necessary. As the accompanying article states, the system is also envisioned as conducting raids on its own or being used to carry commandos.
It is unclear whether the system will be adopted by the Chinese Navy itself or is primarily for export. Regardless, given the broad requirement
for amphibious systems in China’s expanded Navy and Marine Corps, the associated technologies represent an important new capability. End
OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The “Sea Iguana” has excellent high-speed navigation and stealth characteristics.

It can stealthily travel at a maximum speed of 50 knots at sea, and perform infiltration,
intelligent patrol, fast assault, and amphibious landing, or deliver special operations
forces depending on operational requirements.”
Source: “武船交付全球首款水陆两栖智能无人防务快艇 (Wuchuan delivers the world’s first amphibious intelligent unmanned defense fast
boat),” eWorldship [国际船舶网], 12 April 2019. http://www.eworldship.com/html/2019/NewShipUnderConstrunction_0412/148414.html
On April 8th, the world’s first amphibious intelligent unmanned defense speedboat “Sea Iguana,” built by Wuchuan Shipbuilding Group, successfully passed the
factory acceptance at Wuchuan’s facility in Wuhan’s Shuangliu district and was officially delivered to Qingdao Wujiang Technology Co., Ltd.
The “Sea Iguana” is a model of military-civilian fusion
The “Sea Iguana” is jointly built by an unidentified subsidiary of Wuchuan Shipbuilding Group and Qingdao Wujiang Technology Co., Ltd., and has outstanding
overall performance. It exemplifies deep military-civilian fusion and is a masterpiece of the defense sector representing the advanced, intelligent equipment China is
developing for the marine defense market and international customer requirements. Defense equipment, marking the scientific research level of China’s intelligent
marine defense equipment has entered the world’s advanced level.…
The “Sea Iguana” power propulsion system is mainly composed of electromechanical liquid system equipment including the main engine, pump jet, and retractable
tread system.
The “Sea Iguana” is 12 meters long, 4.14 meters wide, 1.65 meters tall, and has a draft of 0.55 meters. The entire body is made of an aluminum alloy material. The
bottom uses a unique trimaran streamline structure and pump-jet propulsion technology. The bottom is equipped with a retractable tread mechanism, and a variety of
weapons are installed in the main compartment.
Powerful information technology capabilities:
The “Sea Iguana” is equipped with advanced navigation, target acquisition and fire control systems including a Beidou navigation system, various radars, and
computer information processing terminals. The speedboat may be controlled using a remote control system installed on combat platforms such as large ships. It is
integrated with space-based navigation and positioning systems, land-based theater command system, and sea-based combat system platforms.
Advanced performance:
The “Sea Iguana” has excellent high-speed navigation and stealth characteristics. It can stealthily travel at a maximum speed of 50 knots at sea, and perform
infiltration, intelligent patrol, fast assault, and amphibious landing, or deliver special operations forces depending on operational requirements. It is capable of
carrying out coastal defense tasks including acting as a coastal sentry, and island/reef airport protection duties

OE Watch | June 2019

17

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Media Spotlight on PLA Marine Corps Jiaolong
Commando Training
OE Watch Commentary: The China Global Television Network
(CGTN) was recently given special access to the Jiaolong Commando [蛟
龙突击队] training base in Sanya, Hainan province. Sanya is an important
naval base for the PLA, its largest in the South China Sea and home to
several large formations of submarines and destroyers.
The Jiaolong Commandos were founded in 2002 and have participated in
anti-piracy missions and the evacuation of civilians from Yemen in 2015.
The combination of these—and a clear desire by the central government to
highlight its expanding military power has pushed the unit more into the
spotlight.
The news article highlights various aspects of training and selection,
noting that the unit includes a graduate of Tsinghua University (widely
regarded as China’s MIT). A regular comment regarding training of
such units is the need to attract skilled soldiers with life experience
from different backgrounds and higher education. Additional details
about training from similar reporting indicate that there is a roughly 50
percent washout rate and recruits train in a full combat loadout weighing
15 kilograms (33 pounds). The unit’s mission set reportedly includes
conducting infiltration and reconnaissance missions defending and seizing
islands in the South China Sea.
China’s navy has expanded rapidly. Additional comprehensive
amphibious ships (Type 071; Yuzhao class) that have PLA Navy Marine
Jiaolong Commando Patch
complements have been commissioned, increasing the need for specialized
Source: Peter Wood
security and special mission troops. At the same time, the Marine Corps itself has been expanded from two brigades to six, with a total of seven
planned by 2020. While depictions of the unit in Chinese popular media likely serve more as a recruitment tool than deterrent to neighboring
countries, China is attempting to quickly improve its amphibious assault capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The corps was formed in the 1950s for amphibious assaults. Today, the goal is an
expeditionary force for missions far beyond territorial waters.”
Source: “The Jiaolong Commandos,” CGTN, 15 April 2019. https://news.cgtn.com/news/3d3d674e784d444d34457a6333566d54/index.html
“Our special operations force is the vanguard in joint operations. We should be the point of the sword in joint operations, to strike terror
into the enemy,” says Gong Kaifeng [龚凯峰], squadron officer of the Jiaolong Commandos.
26-year-old Gong has been a commando for seven years. He has participated in the 25th escort mission in the Gulf of Aden and joint
international operations. For him, the biggest transformation is the Marine Corps is now combat-oriented and more international.
The corps was formed in the 1950s for amphibious assaults. Today, the goal is an expeditionary force for missions far beyond territorial
waters.
According to a Defense Ministry statement, the Marine Corps was established to strengthen the structure of the Navy but later became
its own branch. With more amphibious capabilities planned, expansion and reorganization are on the table, with equipment and training
upgrades.
In contrast to its U.S. counterpart, the Chinese army does not have a unified Special Operations Force Command and the numbers of the
PLA Marine Corps have never been officially disclosed.
As the Navy’s emphasis on amphibious capabilities grows, the Jialong Commandos will be further integrated with other divisions in joint
combat operations. The Navy will continue to prioritize the Marine Corps to make it one of the strongest in the world.

OE Watch | June 2019

18

INDO-PACIFIC
China: New Stealth Material Could Improve Infrared
Concealment
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese researchers at the Suzhou
Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics [苏州纳米所] under
the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Suzhou, Zhejiang Province
have made a breakthrough in material science that allows them
to better reduce an object’s infrared signature. The results of
this discovery, if capitalized by China’s defense industry, could
be integrated into a whole range of aircraft, ships and ground
vehicles; as ground forces and naval vessels are increasingly
vulnerable to detection by satellites and airborne sensors. The
discovery can also support China’s efforts in next-generation
aircraft with low observability across the entire electromagnetic
spectrum. While there are a multitude of applications, the new
material could, for example, help improve aircrafts’ survivability
against air-to-air missiles with infrared guidance systems such as
the AIM-9 (Sidewinder).
AIM 9L Sidewinder
Reducing an object’s observability to different wavelengths in
Source: David Monniaux modified by FOX 52,
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/88/AIM_9L_Sidewinder_%28modified%29_copy.jpg, CC BY-SA 4
the electromagnetic spectrum can range from radar-absorbent
paints, to simply choosing a color that is less visible in certain levels of light. Reducing infrared signature is a difficult problem for material
science because typically absorbing the heat or dispersing it is insufficient to significantly reduce signature or involves other trade-offs such as
weight and greater rigidity. The breakthrough revolves around “Kevlar nanofiber aerogel (KNA).” The new material has additional utility due to
its apparent flexibility. According to the article, layers of the material act as an insulator and absorb heat, only releasing it slowly in a way that is
easy to mask with the ambient background temperature.

Early generations of these missiles were limited to tracking the strongest infrared (heat) signature on an enemy aircraft—the exhaust from the
engine. With the development of more sophisticated sensors, they are now capable of attacking from other aspects including the front, detecting
friction from the air heating the wings or other parts. Flexibility in a material then becomes even more important as it is necessary for proper
shaping or application to movable parts. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The new material is rugged, lightweight, and foldable, and it can escape detection
by the “eyes” of infrared sensors without the need for additional energy.”
Source: “中国学者发现新型红外隐身材料 (Chinese Scientists Discover New Infrared Stealth Material),” Science Net [科学网],” 19 April
2019. http://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlpaper/2019/4/201941613524158649883.shtm
This reporter has learned from the Suzhou Institute of Nanotechnology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences [中科院苏州纳米所] that a
research team led by Zhang Xuetong [张学同] recently discovered an infrared stealth material. The new material is rugged, lightweight, and
foldable, and it can escape detection by the “eyes” of infrared sensors without the need for additional energy.
Everything in nature radiates infrared light. The ability of an object to radiate infrared light is directly related to its surface temperature.
Therefore, no matter day or night, infrared detectors can measure the difference between the target and the background to obtain
infrared images of different objects. Current infrared stealth technology operates on the principle of changing the target’s heat emission
characteristics, but most of these stealth materials have the disadvantages of continuous energy consumption, narrow application range and
slow response.
In this study, technicians wanted to invent an infrared stealth material that could adapt to changing temperatures without the need for
additional energy. They first created a strong but soft nanofiber aerogel film that has excellent thermal insulation properties. The film is
immersed in a phase change material-polyethylene glycol (PEG) and subjected to water repellent treatment to obtain a composite material
which is light, strong, strong, and has excellent infrared stealth performance.
Since the nanofiber aerogel film itself is a good heat insulating material, the polyethylene glycol stores heat and softens when heated, and
re-hardens when heat is released during solidification, and the composite film covering the target under simulated sunlight. It can absorb
heat from the sun to achieve the purpose of suppressing temperature rise, just like the surrounding environment, making the target object
“invisible” to the infrared detector. When night comes, the film slowly releases heat to match the surrounding environment. Additionally,
the use of a suitable thickness of aerogel film between the heating target and the phase change composite film can also make the hot object
“stealth”.
“The new materials can be used not only for infrared stealth but also for electronic insulation materials, battery separator materials, etc.
We predict that there will be very broad applications [for the material].” Said Zhang Xuetong.”

OE Watch | June 2019

19

INDO-PACIFIC
BeiDou – an Imminent Global Constellation
OE Watch Commentary: China has reportedly exported highprecision BeiDou (a Chinese satellite navigation system) products to
more than 90 countries and regions and is on track to achieve its goal
of having a global navigational system. A recent article published
in Jiefangjun Bao, highlighted some of the accomplishments of the
Navigation and Space-Time Technology Research Center of the National
University of Defense Technology, stating that it was one of the driving
forces behind the BeiDou system. Having started out with a small
group of three young scientists and after suffering a number of major
setbacks over the past 24 years, the research group has since grown into
“an indispensable national team” for the construction of the navigation
system.
Along with the BeiDou satellite systems, the team also developed a
number of key systems including satellite receivers, navigation chips,
service signal receiving and transmitting subsystems, and measurement
and communications systems. These have given the BeiDou satellite
navigation systems “superior performance capabilities, such as highprecision measurement and strong jamming countermeasures.
As the third accompanying passage from Japan Times discusses,
China has spent at least $9 billion on this celestial navigation system,
which would cut its dependence on and rival the United States’ GPS
system. The BeiDou navigational satellite system has come a long
way since Chinese scientists first began to develop it. By the end of
2000, the first satellite system (BDS-1) was providing services to the
entire country. By the end of 2012, the second system (BDS-2) was
extending coverage to the Asia-Pacific region. According to the BeiDou
website, during 27 December 2018 news conference at the state Council
Information Office, Ran Chengqi, Director General of china Satellite
Navigation Office and spokesperson of the BeiDou Navigation Satellite
System, announced the completion of the BDS-3 Primary system. Four
months later, on 20 April 2019, China successfully launched its 44th
BDS satellite on 20 April, 2019. The satellite marks the beginning of an
intensive campaign to deploy the BDS constellation. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

Coverage polygon of BeiDou-1

Source: en: China-Japan-South_Korea__trilateral_meeting.png: Myouzkederivative work: Kriplozoik (talk)derivative work:
Lux.r.ck via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beidou-coverage.png, Public domain

Coverage polygon of BeiDou-2 in 2012

Source: Derivative work by Daveduv via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beidou_Navigation_Satellite_
System_2012.png, CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)

“This [the 44th BDS satellite launch] is the first BDS satellite launch in 2019, which marks the
beginning of the intensive campaign of the BDS constellation deployment.”
Source: Wang Wowen and Hu Haowei, “点亮“北斗”，中国星座闪耀 (Light up the BeiDou, the Chinese Constellation Shines Globally),”
Jiefangjun Bao, 8 May 2019. http://military.people.com.cn/GB/n1/2019/0503/c1011-31062066.html
Light up the BeiDou, the Chinese Constellation Shines Globally
According to data from the China Satellite Navigation Office, high-precision BeiDou products have been exported to more than 90 countries
and regions, and ground-based BeiDou technologies and product systems have been exported overseas. As one of the driving forces behind
the BeiDou system, for more than 20 years, the Navigation and Space-Time Technology Research Center of the National University of
Defense Technology has successively overcome [researched] nearly a hundred key satellite navigation core technologies, making the Chinese
constellation shine globally.
They have successfully developed a number of core equipment such as satellite receivers, navigation [processing] chips, service signal
receiving and transmitting subsystems, and measurement and communications systems. These have equipped China’s BeiDou satellite
navigation system with superior performance capabilities, such as high-precision measurement and strong jamming countermeasures.
The research group with only three people at the beginning has now grown into an indispensable “national team” for the construction of
China’s BeiDou satellite navigation system. During the independent innovation process to master key core technologies, a group of satellite
navigation experts and top-notch innovative talents has emerged from the team. The team has trained more than 180 doctorate-holders and
masters-holders, and won one special prize and one second prize for the State Science and Technology Progress Award. They have also
produced 78 national invention patents, achieving a double harvest of both talented personnel and scientific research results.
OE Watch | June 2019

20

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: BeiDou – an Imminent Global Constellation
Source: BaiDou website, accessed 13 May 2019. http://en.beidou.gov.cn/
The 44th BDS satellite was successfully launched onboard a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center at 22:41 on
April 20th, 2019. This is the first BDS satellite launch in 2019, which marks the beginning of the intensive campaign of the BDS constellation
deployment.
Source: “China Building $9 Billion BeiDou Rival to U.S.-Run GPS, Looks to Go Global,” Japan Times, 19 November 2018, https://www.
japantimes.co.jp/news/2018/11/26/asia-pacific/china-building-9-billion-beidou-rival-u-s-run-gps-looks-go-global/
China Building $9 Billion BeiDou Rival to U.S.-Run GPS, Looks to Go Global
China is taking its rivalry with the U.S. to the heavens, spending at least $9 billion to build a celestial navigation system and cut its
dependence on the American-owned GPS amid heightening tensions between the two countries.

China Continues to Boost its Peacekeeping Role
OE Watch Commentary: China has been involved in
United Nations peacekeeping missions for nearly three
decades. Since 1990, China has dedicated over 30,000
peacekeepers to various missions around the world.
While China was initally slow and antagonistic toward
peacekeeping, over time the country began changing its
stance and increasing its contribution, coinciding with
the evolving international situation and to further its
foreign policy agenda.
Most recently, according to the accompanying article
extract, China’s envoy to the UN gave his commitment
to continue contributing, and even boosting the role
of Chinese peacekeepers. Not only has China now
established a standby peacekeeping force of over
8,000 troops and two standby peacekeeping police
contingents, which it can put into operation at any time,
it is now actively helping other “Troop Contributing
Countries” to build their own capacity of peacekeepers.

A Chinese peacekeeper attends a medal parade ceremony in Bukavu, South Kivu

Source: en:User: MONUSCO Photos via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:A_Chinese_peacekeeper_attends_a_medal_parade_ceremony_in_Bukavu,_
South_Kivu_(10761340676).jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0

Most of China’s aid has been, and continues to be within the African Union. According to the article, China will continue to provide Africa
with $100 million worth of military assistance and an additional $80 million to “help Africa advance its standby force and rapid reaction force
and support Africa in its efforts to enhance its own peacekeeping capacity.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)
Source: Hong Xiao, “China Boosts Its Peacekeeping Role,” China Daily Online, 8 May 2019. http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2019-05/09/
content_9498765.htm
China Boosts Its Peacekeeping Role
…Ma Zhaoxu said that China, as a permanent member of the Security Council, was a major Troop Contributing Country (TCC) and
financial contributor to Peacekeeping Operations (PKOs).
At present, over 2,500 Chinese peacekeepers are implementing mandates in eight task areas, working in such fields as land-mine removal,
medical services, engineering, transportation and security.
Ma noted that a standby peacekeeping force of over 8,000 troops and two standby peacekeeping police contingents have been established
and all have passed UN inspection.
China will continue to work actively on providing the African Union (AU) with military assistance worth $100 million and an additional
$80 million to help “Africa advance its Africa standby force and rapid reaction force and support Africa in its efforts to enhance its own
peacekeeping capacity,” he said.
OE Watch | June 2019

21

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Border Patrol Using 5G Networks to Identify and
Capture Smugglers at the Border
OE Watch Commentary: In April, the South China Morning Post reported
that authorities planned to establish the country’s first 5G checkpoint in Tonghua,
in Jilin Province. According to the article, the border patrol unit there signed
an agreement with China Mobile, the largest wireless network operator in the
country, to build China’s first 5G checkpoint network. In May, Daily NK reported
that Chinese authorities had established a 5G network near Dandong, in Liaoning
Province, to help crack down on smuggling and defection at the border.
5G technology, which still has yet to be fully rolled out, has been highly
anticipated due to its low latency and high precision capacity. According to
the Daily NK, 5G is now believed to be responsible for the arrest of Chinese
smugglers. Because the previous 4G network often took too long to conduct
facial recognition and analyze imagines, there was a lag in communication,
which often allowed criminals enough time to escape before authorities realized
who they were. Under a 5G network, smugglers have far less time because
the recognition and transmission is almost instantaneous. According to Daily
5G mobile network diagram
Source: en: User:Goodtiming8871 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:5G_mobile_network_diagram.
NK, border patrol units use virtual reality fluoroscopes, drones, and 4K-quality
jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
real-time video to monitor the region. China is also reportedly running test 5G network in 16 areas of the country. Not all these locations are
announced.
The article in South China Morning Post concluded that China is competing with the United States to develop 5G technology, with its
military applications still at an early stage. Using them to crack down on illegal activities at the border area is just the start. End OE Watch
Commentary (Hurst)

“There is a possibility that Chinese authorities have given military units, including those in the
border region, priority access to 5G technology to use for security purposes.”
Source: “Minnie Chan, “China to use 5G Technology to Tackle Flow of Refugees, Smuggled Goods Over North Korean Border,” South
China Morning Post, 8 April 2019. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3005285/china-use-5g-technology-tackle-flowrefugees-smuggled-goods
A Chinese border patrol unit plans to use 5G technology to help stem the flow of refugees from North Korea and smuggled goods between
the two countries, according to mainland Chinese media. The unit in Tonghua, Jilin province, signed an agreement with China Mobile – the
largest wireless network operator – on March 23 to build the country’s first 5G checkpoint at Unbong, or Yunfeng Reservoir in Chinese,
Legal Daily reported.
… the new technologies would help to resolve the problem of blind spots as a result of the complex geography and challenging terrain in the
area.
China and the US are competing for leadership on 5G technology but its military applications are still at an early stage. Antony Wong Dong,
a military expert based in Macau, said the two countries were testing its use through trial applications. “The 5G [technology] is costly and
there are many security problems that need to be resolved before it can be used for military purposes,” Wong said.

Source: “Mun Dong Hui, “Chinese Authorities Expand 5G Technology on Border with North Korea,” Daily NK, 13 May 2019. https://www.
dailynk.com/english/chinese-authorities-expand-5g-technology-on-border-with-north-korea/
Chinese Authorities Expand 5G Technology on Border with North Korea
Dandong is the latest city slated to house a checkpoint employing 5G technology to crack down on smuggling and defections along the SinoNorth Korea border, regional sources report.
“The previous 4G network took a long time to recognize people’s faces and analyze the images, and there were many cases where the
smugglers got away before the authorities showed up […] However, the authorities are using a 5G network now and the smugglers have less
time to escape.”
Border patrol units are known to employ virtual reality fluoroscopes, drones, and 4K-quality real-time video to monitor the border region in
a significantly more hi-tech and comprehensive manner than before.
There is a possibility that Chinese authorities have given military units, including those in the border region, priority access to 5G
technology to use for security purposes.
OE Watch | June 2019

22

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Reaction to the Terror Attacks in Sri Lanka
OE Watch Commentary: Although Sri Lanka has
historically come under India’s sphere of influence, China
has increased its economic stake and investments in Sri
Lanka in recent years. As a result, the country’s security
increasingly matters to China. Thus, the recent terrorist
attacks in Sri Lanka have attracted China’s attention. The
accompanying passage from the Chinese-language website
huanqiu.com provides a Chinese perspective of the attacks.
The article describes the Sri Lanka attacks as “one of
the most serious terrorist attacks on humanity since the
September 11 event in the United States.” It discusses that
Sri Lanka probably could have prevented the attacks on its
soil given that it had prior notice of some terrorist cells in
the country with plans for attacks. At the same time, it also
acknowledges that the local cell that carried out the attack
was neither well-known nor had a history of terrorism,
making it easy to overlook. It claims that the key feature of
Southern Sri Lanka
Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Southern_Sri_Lanka.png, Public Domain.
the attacks were that they represented a true linkage between
the international network or influence of the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq (ISIS) and the local cell in Sri Lanka that launched the massive series
of bombings.
Turning to Chinese concerns, the article states that one Chinese citizen was killed; five citizens were missing or dead; and five others were
injured. According to the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson, China will seek to work with Sri Lanka or any other country in joint
counterterrorism training and cooperation. Despite the fact that the two countries do not share a border, China’s call to Sri Lanka signals
China’s willingness for increased security cooperation between the two countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“A little-known local extremist organization, with the help of an international terrorist
organization, launched a deadly attack.”
Source: “从新西兰到斯里兰卡 惨痛教训警示着恐怖主义对全世界的危害 (From New Zealand to Sri Lanka a painful lesson warning
about the harms of terrorism to the world),” huanqiu.com, 24 April 2019. http://world.huanqiu.com/exclusive/2019-04/14778745.
The series of bombings in the South Asian island nation of Sri Lanka shocked the international community. The number of victims has
risen to more than 320, including dozens of foreign citizens, and more than 500 others were injured. This is one of the most serious terrorist
attacks on humanity since the September 11 event in the United States.
From New Zealand to Sri Lanka, the bitter bloody incident has also warned the world of the dangers of extremism and terrorism. A littleknown local extremist organization, with the help of an international terrorist organization, launched a deadly attack.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Yan Shuang said at a press conference that according to the current status, one Chinese citizen
was killed in the incident and five Chinese citizens have lost contact. In addition, five injured Chinese citizens were being treated in local
hospitals, two of whom were seriously injured. Yan Shuang also said, “I would like to stress once again that we are willing to work with the
international community including Sri Lanka to strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation and jointly safeguard regional and world peace
and stability.”

OE Watch | June 2019

23

INDO-PACIFIC
Italy Joins the Belt and Road Initiative: Context, Interests,
and Drivers
by Dario Cristiani
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, Vol. 19, Issue 8, dated 24 April 2019.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/italy-joins-the-belt-and-road-initiative-context-interests-and-drivers/

OE Watch Commentary: In March 2019, following several months of accelerated diplomatic movements between Italy and the People’s
Republic of China (PRC), the two countries signed a broad and comprehensive Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for Italy to join the
Chinese-led Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). This makes Italy the first major European country, and the first Group of Seven (G7) member, to
formalize its participation in the BRI project. As such, this development is particularly remarkable. In addition, many believe that this economic
cooperation will inevitably turn into a greater geopolitical understanding between the two countries—thus reinforcing Beijing’s influence in
Europe and the Mediterranean region.
The MoU does not represent an international agreement, has no binding effect between the parties, and remains mostly generic in its contents
and wording. The collaboration will focus primarily, but not exclusively, in the sectors of transport, logistics and infrastructure. Italy is not the
first European country that China has reached out to under the framework of the BRI. The PRC’s initial focus was primarily on Eastern and
Central European countries, and several countries still waiting to become members of the EU. At the end of 2018, China first raised the bar by
signing BRI agreements with Greece and Portugal. However, Italy’s entry into this project changed the terms of the debate, given Italy’s status as
a European heavyweight: Rome is a founding state of the EU, a member of the G7, a long-standing NATO member, and remains among the top
five European countries in terms of economic size, population, and political clout. Thus, Italy entering into a BRI agreement, even a non-binding
one, is significant.
Economic considerations, geopolitical needs, and specific political conditions were at the core of Italian motivations in signing this MoU.
The economic rationale is particularly significant, as Italy considers the BRI a vital opportunity to boost Italian exports to China. Italy has
suffered from serious financial problems in recent years, and the recent deterioration of the global economic outlook is set to have an immediate
impact on Rome, threatening to trigger a new economic recession. As such, Italian policymakers, whatever their political stripe, are always
very focused on finding opportunities for Italian companies abroad as long as the Italian domestic market remains stagnant. Thus, Italians have
focused mostly on the economic impact of the MoU: for Rome, the ten trade agreements on the table are worth about $22.45 billion, and they are
expected to provide a significant stimulus to the Italian economy as a whole. The Chinese consumer market is perceived as a terrific opportunity,
particularly in light of the rising Chinese interest in Italian products.
In addition, Italy is eyeing Chinese investments in the infrastructure sector. The PRC is particularly interested in the port of Genoa—and
above all in the port of Trieste, the historical Mediterranean gateway to trade and business with Danuban Europe. In an interview with the Italian
daily La Repubblica, Wang Huiyao, the founder of the Center for China and Globalization (a Chinese think tank close to the government), said
that “the Italian economy is going nowhere and joining the Belt and Road earlier than others is a great opportunity… Italy has many economic
problems, Europe is in crisis and the BRI is the only major global investment plan.”
Another critical reason motivating the Italian approach is the shifting geopolitical reality of the Mediterranean. A number of external powers
are trying to deepen their presence in this space. China is one of the foremost of these powers, and it is increasingly active in the Maghreb, in
the Mashreq (primarily in Egypt), and in a number of European Mediterranean countries (for example, Greece, Serbia, and Croatia). Fear of
American disengagement from the Mediterranean is raising concerns in Rome about future Italian security. Inevitably, this will lead Italy to
interact with all those global powers who are becoming more involved in the Mediterranean.
Lastly, the Italian position towards China has been influenced by the peculiar political and ideological features of the current Italian
government. The current governing “yellow-green coalition” is formed by the 5 Stars Movement (5S) and the League (previously the Northern
League)—two parties that are both relatively new to power (although the League has shared government responsibilities in earlier cabinets led
by Berlusconi). The less clearly defined historical legacies, institutions, and political cultures of these parties allow room for specific political
personalities to drive the government’s agenda, and shape its stance on global affairs.Luigi Di Maio, the Minister for Economic Development and
leader of the 5S, was the major institutional actor in crafting this agreement—together with one of his undersecretaries, Michele Geracci, whose
role in promoting the deepening of Italo-Chinese relations can be hardly underestimated. Geracci lived in China for years, has an unusually
broad network of contacts in the country, and his role in government has been characterized since the very beginning by an intense focus on
deepening ties with China.
Italy is the first European heavyweight that formalized its participation in the BRI project. While the MoU is non-binding and somewhat
generic, this latter element might be used in the future to further deepen relations in several strategic sectors. Economic and geopolitical
considerations drive Italy’s approach to the BRI. However, this evolution was also favored by the presence of elements in the current government
particularly sympathetic with Chinese interests. Although the latter might change in the future if the government changes (or if less pro-China
elements within the 5S movement emerge), economic and geopolitical considerations are set to remain significant in the coming years. Given
the geopolitical significance of the BRI, the evolution of Italian relations with China will be particularly significant—not only from an economic
standpoint, but also for the future of the European and Mediterranean geopolitical equations. End OE Watch Commentary (Cristiani)

OE Watch | June 2019

24

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Reach into the Mediterranean: One Belt One Road
Initiative (Belt and Road Initiative)
OE Watch Commentary: China’s reach into
the Mediterranean through its One Belt, One Road
Initiative (OBOR) is a cause for concern among some
European countries. [OBOR is also called the Belt
and Road Initiative (BRI).] OBOR was announced in
2013 by China to encompass the historic Silk Road
trade route which would run across Eurasia and extend
through sixty countries including Turkey and some
European countries. The accompanying articles from
the Turkish press discuss Turkey’s role in this initiative
and the implications of OBOR for European countries.
The first article from October 2018 in the progovernment Daily Sabah quotes a Chinese expert
as saying that Turkey will play an essential role
in China’s OBOR project due to its geostrategic
location. The article notes that Xing Guangcheng
from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences stated
that some have voiced concerns over this project
only serving China, due to Chinese originated
One Belt One Road
loans which may pave the way to dependence on China
Source: Lommes via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:One-belt-one-road.svg#/media/File:One-belt-one-road.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0
the region. However, he claims that China intends to design the project to benefit other countries as well. China has signed multilateral trade
agreements with many countries including Turkey.

in

Six months later, as noted in the second article from state funded Anadolu Ajansı, China’s activities in the Mediterranean as part of the OBOR
project are analyzed as strengthening the European leg of OBOR. Chinese firms are already heavily invested in a marina in Greece and have
signed an agreement with Italy to ensure trade privileges. Thus, it appears that China is extending its influence to Europe especially from the
Adriatic to Mediterranean Seas, and working on trade routes to Israel, Greece, Spain, and Portugal. The article states that these activities are not
merely limited to China’s trade ambitions. In fact, these Chinese activities show that China is turning the Eastern Mediterranean into the South
China Sea in terms of logistics and supply routes security. China’s ambitions and some EU member countries’ willingness to open their doors to
China’s activities have caused tension among EU members. Despite China’s claims that this project will contribute to improving relations with
the EU, there is concern that it will lead to increased Chinese dominance in Europe. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“[These developments] will secure Chinese commercial activities in the Eastern
Mediterranean in terms of logistics and supply security as if China is conducting these
activities in the South China Sea.”
Source: Mustafa Kırıkçıoğlu, “Chinese experts point to Turkey’s central role in Belt and Road Initiative,” Daily Sabah, 24 October 2018. https://www.
dailysabah.com/economy/2018/10/25/chinese-experts-point-to-turkeys-central-role-in-belt-and-road-initiative
Turkey, given its central location, will play a pivotal role in China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), Chinese experts have said.
They also rejected claims that Beijing would use the funds and loans for the project to expand its influence over the recipient countries.
Speaking at an event in Ankara, the director general of the Institute for Borderland Studies at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Xing
Guangcheng said that because of Turkey’s geographical location, the country holds a significant position in the One Belt, One Road (OBOR), another
name for BRI, project.…
“Some experts are presenting OBOR as a project that only serves China’s interest. However, China wants to establish a common initiative with other
countries. This is a win-win project,” he said.
Source: Selim Han Yeniacun, “Çin’in Akdeniz’deki ticari hamleleri AB’yi kaygılandırıyor (China’s commercial moves in the Mediterranean concern the
EU),” Anadolu Ajansı, 4 April 2019. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz/cinin-akdeniz-deki-ticari-hamleleri-abyi-kaygilandiriyor/1456722
The Chinese companies, which will operate the port of Piraeus in Greece, and with Italy’s participation in the “Belt and Road” project, have gotten
an advantage over improving the transportation routes starting from the Trieste Port to Adriatic Sea and central Europe. In terms of commerce, these
developments will make the EU a Chinese neighbor. At the same time, they will secure the Chinese commercial activities in the Eastern Mediterranean in
terms of logistics and supply security as if China is conducting these activities in the South China Sea.
China is not only constructing a trade highway in Italy but also it is through Israel, Greece, Spain and Portugal. Although China considers its
investments as within scope of “peaceful development,” it has caused reaction from France and Germany which are politically and economically
dominant [in the region].

OE Watch | June 2019

25

INDO-PACIFIC
Taiwan Plans Additional Forward Operations Bases for
Special Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Taiwan’s Ministry of National Security
is apparently planning to build additional bases on the Kinmen and
Penghu island groups for its 101st Recon Battalion, also known as
the Sea Dragon Frogmen. Kinmen lies less than 2 kilometers from
Xiamen, a major city in Fujian province. Fujian’s coastline is dotted
with numerous small islands and islets, of which the Kinmen, Wuqiu
and Matsu Islands (see map) are controlled by Taiwan. The Penghu
Island Group lies roughly midway in the Taiwan Strait between Fujian
Province and Taiwan proper. In the 1950s Kinmen was subjected to
heavy bombardment by the PLA, and it and Penghu are likely to be the
focal point of any future conflict in the Taiwan Strait.
Taiwan’s 2017 Quadrennial Defense Review emphasizes “multidomain deterrence” and asymmetric responses to China’s military
buildup. The Defense White Paper issued the same year describes
ROC forces as “tak[ing] advantage of favorable timing and space to
strike the enemy’s center of gravity and critical weakness to disrupt
their battle tempo and paralyze their capabilities for achieving partial
advantage with the aim of “small taking on large, weak striking
strong.” The 101st Recon Battalion has historically conducted
reconnaissance and infiltration operations, and would likely be a
major part of operations meant to blunt an attack by the PLA. As the
accompanying article describes, these forward operating bases would
help speed up their ability to deploy in a crisis.

Kinmen and Penghu.
Source: Graphic by Peter Wood.

Mainland China for its part has dramatically increased the size of its amphibious forces, planning to bring the Marine Corps up from two
brigades to seven by 2020. Special Forces units within the PLA Ground Forces, Navy and Air Force have all been given a much higher profile
over the last five years, including the “frogmen” of the PLA Navy’s Jiaolong Commandos (see “ Chinese Media Spotlight on PLA Marine Corps
Jiaolong Commando Training” in this issue of OE Watch). Chinese media sources note that in addition to conventional forces, coastal militia
units in Fujian are also trained to act as sentries against enemy infiltration. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The upgraded facilities and increased mobility of the Army’s frogmen units will increase Taiwan’s
capabilities in waging asymmetric warfare in the event of a Chinese invasion.”
Source: “Taiwan plans new forward bases for Army Frogmen on Kinmen and Penghu,” Taiwan News, 21 April 2019. https://www.
taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/3685045refugees-smuggled-goods
The Taiwanese military has reportedly begun accepting bids from contractors for the development of two forward operating bases and
equipment upgrades for the Taiwan Army’s 101st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion (ARB-101st), better known as the “Sea Dragon
Frogmen” [海龍蛙兵] special forces. The Ministry of National Defense (MND) has drafted plans to upgrade special port facilities on the
outlying islands of Kinmen [金門], and Penghu [澎湖], to assist in the rapid deployment of Frogman units in the Taiwan Strait.
The MND is prepared to invest over NT$400 million (US$12.9 million) into the project, with NT$260 million going to the base in Kinmen,
and NT$165 million for the facilities in Penghu. With China’s increasingly threatening actions around Taiwan and in the South China Sea,
the MND views rapid response capabilities around Taiwan’s outlying islands a top priority for national defense. UDN reports that the new
forward bases planned for the ARB-101st are the result of strategic consultations with U.S. military officials.
The upgraded facilities and increased mobility of the Army’s frogmen units will increase Taiwan’s capabilities in waging asymmetric
warfare in the event of a Chinese invasion.
In addition to potential invasion scenarios, the ARB-101st may also be employed to occasionally survey the numerous minor islands in the
Taiwan Strait, which might serve as outposts for illegal activity or potential threats to national security if they are not secured.
Currently, most of the speedboats and other equipment for maritime operations for the ARB-101st are stored on inland military bases and
must be towed to the seashore. After the forward seaside facilities are upgraded, the frogmen will be able to deploy much faster to better
safeguard Taiwan’s territory against potential threats.

OE Watch | June 2019

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia: Still Vulnerable to ISIS Ideology
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 April, the Indonesian language
website tempo.com published the excerpted article providing
the perspective of the Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI) on the
threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to Indonesia.
According to this council (Indonesia’s top Muslim clerical body
comprised of many Indonesian Muslim groups), the ideology of the
Caliphate that ISIS instilled in its followers has spread to various
countries, including Indonesia. Therefore, the military destruction
of the ‘Caliphate’ and its demise in the Middle East is no reason to
let down vigilance about the group’s influence in Indonesia.
The Deputy Secretary of the MUI notes that new information
technologies helped ISIS in disseminating its ideology, which has
particularly affected students. He also blames the proscribed Hizb
ut-Tahrir Indonesia (HTI) for espousing a similar ideology to ISIS
about establishing a Caliphate. While HTI is different than ISIS in
many other ways, including its general avoidance of using violence,
HTI’s praise of the Caliphate made it easier for ISIS to find fertile
ground for its message. The end result was that several hundred
Indonesians joined ISIS and some have even returned back home to
launch attacks.
One solution to the problem of ISIS’s ideological influence,
according to another university lecturer cited in the article, is to
Indonesian Ulema Council Logo
continue the ban on HTI and related groups. As long as youths are Source: Indonesian Ulema Council via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Logo_Majelis_Ulama_Indonesia_(‫_ءاملعلا_سلجم‬
‫)يسينودنإلا‬.svg, Public Domain.
exposed to HTI’s ideas, future iterations of terrorist groups like ISIS
will continue to attract followers. The university lecturer also acknowledges that it is not only students but also some police, military and even
government officials who believe in the Caliphate ideology. Therefore, although religious leaders and leading intellectuals are willing to combat
the ideology, it will be a long way before they feel confident that the Indonesian citizenry is immune to the ideology, which they refer to as a
“virus.” End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The idea of the Caliphate still dominates their thoughts.”
Source: “Meski ISIS Keok, Khilafah Tetap Harus Diwaspadai (Even though ISIS is in Trouble, the Caliphate Must Be Monitored),” tempo.
com, 2 April 2019. https://dunia.tempo.co/read/1200617/pemimpin-isis-baghdadi-muncul-di-video-puji-teror-sri-lanka
The Deputy Secretary of the MUI Study and Research Commission Ali M Abdillah said the Caliphate ideology and violence still had to
be monitored even though ISIS had been destroyed on the military front. “The ideology has spread widely in various countries, including
Indonesia,” Ali said in Jakarta. Exploiting sympathizers and information technology carrying the Caliphate ideology and violence thus far
has spread the “virus” massively, including targeting students as well as those in offices and institutional environments. In addition to ISIS
sympathizers, the Caliphate ideology was also carried by activists from Hizb ut-Tahrir Indonesia (HTI), which the government has banned
institutionally.
“The idea and idea of the Caliphate still dominates their thoughts,” said the lecturer at the University of Indonesia (Unusia) University.
Therefore, the community still has to be “warded off” so that it is not affected by that ideology. According to him there must be decisive
action against people or parties who are proven to carry the Caliphate ideology in Indonesia.

OE Watch | June 2019

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Changes for Indian Forces after Pulwama
OE Watch Commentary: On 14 February 2019, a terrorist attack on India’s
Central Reserve Police Force in the Pulwama District killed over 40 and led
to India carrying out retaliatory airstrikes on militant targets inside Pakistan.
Since then, the government of India has sought to enhance the capabilities of
its armed forces along the line of control (LOC). The accompanying excerpted
articles discuss some of these efforts, which entail a change to the Indian
military’s procurement procedures, and the construction of ammunition storage
facilities.
The article from The Times of India reports on a recent change to the process
of how the Indian Army, Navy and Air Force are able to procure weapons and
equipment, specifically “to enhance their operational preparedness along the
border with Pakistan.” The article notes that the changes include “allowing
the three services to procure required weapons and equipment from a single
vendor” and that “the threshold granted to the three forces (a) couple of weeks
ago for each proposal is around Rs 300 crore (around $43 million).” While the
article does not mention it, the change reportedly took place to help fast track
purchases of ammunition.
The article from The Tribune discusses the Indian Army’s planned
construction of four ammunition storage facilities with the help of the National
Hydro Power Corporation (NHPC). The article mentions how the storage
facilities will be at “key locations facing China and Pakistan” and will hold a
“range of ammunition used by the Army — bullets, rockets, anti-tank, surfaceto-air missiles, etc.” The government claims that the storage facilities will be
Kashmir Map
“protected against strikes like those seen during the aerial engagement on 27
Source: Central Intelligence Agency via Wikimedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_of_Control#/media/File:Kashmir_map.
jpg, Public domain
February when Pakistan air force jets targeted the army installations along the
Line of Control” and that they will have a storage capacity of 200 metric tonnes.
The article also notes how the Indian Army had previously “approached the NHPC” last year, but only recently finalized the deal. End OE
Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The government also relaxed certain rules to cut delays in military purchase like allowing the three
services to procure required weapons and equipment from a single vendor.”
Source: “Post Pulwama, Centre grants more financial powers to 3 services to buy weapons,” The Times of India, 16 April 2019.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/post-pulwama-centre-grants-more-financial-powers-to-3-services-to-buy-weapons/
In the wake of the Pulwama terror attack, the government has granted emergency powers to the three services to procure weapons and
military hardware to enhance their operational preparedness along the border with Pakistan, official sources said.
The government also relaxed certain rules to cut delays in military purchase like allowing the three services to procure required weapons
and equipment from a single vendor…
Now, the government has granted more powers to the Army, Navy and the Indian Air Force to go for buying of critical weapons and
equipment to help them effectively deal with any hostilities along the border with Pakistan…Sources said the threshold granted to the three
forces (a) couple of weeks ago for each proposal is around Rs 300 crore…

Source: “Army to store ammo in caves under Himalayas,” The Tribune, 26 April 2019.
https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/nation/army-to-store-ammo-in-caves-under-himalayas/763821.html
The Army has joined hands with the National Hydro Power Corporation (NHPC) to construct underground caverns for storage of
ammunition at four locations in the Himalayas.
The services of the NHPC have been sought since it has a huge experience in making dams with underground tunnels in the mountains. The
Army’s size of ammunition storage caverns is almost the same strength as what tunnels are made for dams by the NHPC.
These ammunition storage caverns (large caves) will come up at key locations facing China and Pakistan. A range of ammunition used by
the Army — bullets, rockets, anti-tank, surface-to-air missiles, etc., can be stored in the caverns.
…it’s protected against strikes like those seen during the aerial engagement on February 27 when Pakistan air force jets targeted the army
installations along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir…Each of these will have storage capacity of 200 metric tonnes.
The Army had earlier tried to make these caverns on its own in Sikkim and Tawang. However, seepage, dampness and other geological
challenges hampered the plans. In November last year, the Army approached the NHPC.
OE Watch | June 2019

28

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russian-Iranian Competition in Aleppo
OE Watch Commentary: A news story published by Turkey’s state-run Anadolu Agency on 19 April claimed that clashes had
occurred between Iranian-backed forces and Russian-backed forces near Aleppo International Airport (in addition to separate clashes in
the eastern province of Deir Ezzor). Despite an official denial by the Syrian military, the clashes were also reported by other pro-opposition
media outlets, including al-Araby al-Jadid, which added that they subsided only after Russian military aircraft hovered overhead. Aleppo’s
airport and the adjacent military airbase are thought to be under the direct control of Iran’s Quds Force and are a key node for supplying Iran’s
military presence in Aleppo Province.
Iranian influence in Aleppo city and province is substantial. At the local level, Iran exerts influence through a complex web of local
partnerships that are subsumed under the umbrella of the Local Defense Forces (LDF). According to the accompanying excerpt from the
Lebanese news website al-Modon, Russia has invested in training, arming and growing its own local partners in Aleppo and has even
provided them with Russian Military Police uniforms. Still, according to the article, Russia’s key partner is “a weak competitor to the Iranian
militias in Aleppo” and Russia has “few military posts and bases in Aleppo compared to those of the Revolutionary Guards.”
According to the Anadolu Agency article, which is based on an anonymous source, the clashes took place after pro-Iran forces refused a
Russian order to vacate the airport. Russia apparently seeks to reopen the airport to civilian and commercial traffic, in order to help revive
the moribund Syrian economy. Curbing Iranian strength in the province may also be a motivation, which is problematic according to the
fourth accompanying excerpt, written by Abd al-Bari Atwan, a London-based Palestinian who is among the region’s most prominent political
commentators. In his view, Russian policy ought to “respect the particularities of the Syrian-Iranian relationship and the reasons behind the
existence of Iranian bases in Syria, rather than looking at this presence from the Israeli angle only.”
The frequency of fighting between Russian and Iranian proxies has been on the uptick in several parts of Syria over the past year. Clashes in
Aleppo, though, are of particular significance due not only to Iran’s substantial military presence in the area but also to Turkey’s influence and
interests there. Recent Israeli attacks on Iranian facilities in the province and the proximity of jihadist-controlled territory in Idlib Province
are additional elements feeding the multi-polar power dynamics evolving in Aleppo. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… Russia has few military posts and bases in Aleppo compared to those of the Revolutionary Guards …”
Source:
‫ قتىل وجرحى باشتباكات بني قوات روسية وأخرى إيرانية‬..‫سوريا‬
“Syria… Dead and Wounded in Clashes Between Russian and Iranian Forces,” Anadolu Agency, 19 April 2019. https://tinyurl.com/y6n42kl5
In Aleppo, clashes between the two sides took place in the international airport to the east of the city. It is unknown whether they resulted in casualties. The source did
clarify that the Aleppo clashes came after requests by Russian forces for the IRGC and Iranian-backed terrorist groups to leave the airport.

Source:
‫ روسيا تريد إخالء املليشيات اإليرانية؟‬:‫مطار حلب الدويل‬
“Aleppo International Airport: Does Russia Seek to Clear Iranian Militias?” al-Modon, 20 April 2019. https://tinyurl.com/yyokqgpy
These developments are part of a Russian attempt to pressure the Iranian militias out of Aleppo International Airport, under the pretext of reopening it for civil
transportation and commercial freight after a pause of more than 7 years. Russia says the reopening of the airport is a vital demand for the industrial and commercial
sectors in Aleppo, in addition to its importance for domestic passenger transport, given the poor road conditions between Aleppo and the rest of the provinces...
Iran recognizes the importance of the Aleppo airports in terms of its continued influence and superiority at the expense of the Russian presence, and therefore refuses
to hand them over. They are considered the fastest and safest supply route for their militias in north Syria, without which their other military bases in Aleppo would lose
their safe supply line…
Russia has few military posts and bases in Aleppo compared to those of the Revolutionary Guards…
Russia succeeded in attracting the “Jerusalem Brigade” (Liwa al-Quds) militia. Since the beginning of 2019, it has increased the number of its members more than
three-fold, to nearly 5,000. It has increased its armament and training to be a strong competitor. Hundreds of its members have been deployed in Handarat, al-Malah
and al-Zahra. Russia has, however, failed to attract tribal and local militias. Despite the arming, training and support of the “Jerusalem Brigade,” it remains a weak
competitor to the Iranian militias in Aleppo and lost many of its members in its first confrontation with Iranian militias in March.

Source:
‫رصاع رويس إيراين للسيطرة عىل حلب‬
Adnan Ahmed. “Russian-Iranian Struggle for Control over Aleppo,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 21 April 2019. https://tinyurl.com/y58htuox
According to local sources, the clashes occurred in the vicinity of Aleppo International Airport and stopped only after a Russian aircraft flew over the area...
At the beginning of April, friction broke out between the two sides in Aleppo when the Russian military police arrested a number of elements of the “resistance
movement” militia backed by Iran in the city center. This came after a group of the Revolutionary Guards intercepted a Russian military police patrol in Jabal Azan
south of the city of Aleppo, and prevented it from passing towards the base of “Sayyida Rukaya.” Iranian officers asked the Russian military police to leave because they
entered an Iranian military zone…
Russia deployed hundreds of members of the new “Jerusalem Brigade” in the Al Zahraa neighborhood and the northern outskirts of the new Aleppo district. They
established a major concentration inside the artillery battalion near the Russian observation post at the Zahraa Association, wearing uniforms of the Russian military
police and using modern and sophisticated logistics techniques. Military experts said that Moscow was seeking to rely on the “Jerusalem Brigade” to be a military arm
of Russia in the face of the Iranian-sponsored militias, so as not to force the Russian military police directly into such confrontations.

Source:
‫قصة االش ِتباكات الروس ّية اإليران ّية يف دير الزور وحلب؟‬
ّ ‫ما هي‬
Abd al-Bari Atwan. “What’s the Story of the Russian-Iranian Clashes in Deir Ezzor and Aleppo?” Rai al-Youm, 21 April 2019. https://tinyurl.com/y2tb64ja
Just as other Russian leaders demand understanding and respect of their interests, they must respect the interests and feelings of their allies at the same time and put
an end to this Israeli arrogance, stop giving Netanyahu free gifts, and respect the particularities of the Syrian-Iranian relationship and the reasons behind the existence
of Iranian bases in Syria, rather than looking at this presence from the Israeli angle only.

OE Watch | June 2019

29

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Stroytransgaz: “A Complement to Russian Security and
Military Influence”
OE Watch Commentary: In late April 2019, following a visit to Damascus by Russia’s
Deputy Prime Minister Yury Borisov, Russian and Syrian news outlets reported on an
agreement for a Russian entity to “lease” the container terminal in the Syrian port of Tartous.
The terminal is adjacent to a naval base which is already under lease to the Russian Navy
(for 49 years and with the option to renew). The first accompanying excerpt from the progovernment Syrian newspaper al-Watan, provides some details on the recent agreement,
which has yet to be ratified by the Syrian parliament. Citing Syria’s minister of transport,
it notes that the deal does not call for the commercial port to be handed over to Russian
entities, but rather establishes “a partnership in administering, expanding and operating the
Tartous port.” At a cost of over half a billion dollars, the major upgrades will require many
years to turn a profit, which the minister argues is the reason the contract length was set at 49
years. He expects the port capacity to increase from 20,000 to 2 million containers received
annually, and explains that “the presence of a global company invested in the port will create
a positive atmosphere” that will encourage global shipping companies to use it.
The “global company” that is to implement the project is Stroytransgaz (STG Group),
a Russian construction holding company that has been active in Syria since prior to the
current conflict. In 2014, the US Treasury Department placed sanctions on Stroytransgaz
and several of its divisions and subsidiaries, as well as on the investment group that controls
the company (Volga Group) and the owner of that investment group (Gennady Timchenko).
Somewhat ironically, the Syrian government expects the presence of Stroytrangaz to help it
skirt sanctions of its own, or in the words of Syria’s minister of transport, it will “reduce the
effects of the oppressive blockade imposed on Syria and help deliver needs and necessities to
the Syrian people.”

Gennady Timchenko during a meeting with Russian
President Vladimir Putin (2018).

Source: Kremlin.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gennady_
Timchenko,_2018.jpg, CC BY 4.0

Stroytransgaz has emerged as one of Russia’s key private sector vehicles for exploiting and controlling Syria’s strategic resources. The
second accompanying article, from the Lebanese news website al-Modon, describes it as “a speeding train devouring all Syrian contracts.” The
Tartous Port agreement came on the heels of a finalized contract for Stroytrangaz to upgrade and administer Syria’s large fertilizer factories in
Homs Province. Last year, the company outmaneuvered Iranian firms to gain control over Syria’s main phosphate deposits, giving it a virtual
monopoly on phosphate fertilizer production in Syria (see “Russia and Iran Compete for Syria’s Phosphates,” in the June 2018 issue of OE
Watch). Stroytrangaz and its affiliates have also obtained contracts to build irrigation systems, a gas processing plant in Homs Province, and
even a large tourist facility on the Syrian coast, near Tartous. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…Stroytransgaz is like a speeding train devouring all Syrian contracts…”
Source:
‫الوطن» تنرش تفاصيل االتفاق السوري الرويس مليناء طرطوس‬
Mohammed Rakan Moustafa. “Al-Watan Publishes Details on the Syria-Russian Agreement for Tartous Port,” al-Watan, 25 April 2019. http://alwatan.sy/
archives/195867 (translation via: https://syrianobserver.com/EN/features/50046/details-emerge-of-syrian-russian-agreement-over-the-tartous-port.html)
Transport Minister Ali Hammoud, denied reports on social media that Tartous port was being rented or bartered away with the Russians, saying that the
investment contract was for a partnership in administering, expanding and operating the Tartous port, according to the regulations used for partnerships
between the public and private sector in Syria, and that it would be signed by the private Russian Stroytransgaz company. Hammoud told Al-Watan that
the contract period had been set at 49 years because according to the economic feasibility study the project needed this long to achieve the necessary
profits for both sides…
The Minister for Transport said that this investment would help break the blockade and reduce the oppressive sanctions, and said: “The presence of a
global company invested in the port will create a positive atmosphere for global shipping and encourage them to use the harbor, which will reduce the
effects of the oppressive blockade imposed on Syria and help deliver needs and necessities to the Syrian people”…
The current depth is between four and 13 meters and after the expansion it will see two million containers annually. He noted that the port now receives
about 20,000 containers annually, which means an increase tens of times over.
Source:
Mohanad al-Hajj Ali. “The Man who is Buying Syria,” al-Modon, 26 April 2019. https://tinyurl.com/y5geymwn

‫الرجل الذي يشرتي سوريا‬

The same is true for the rest of the contracts, such as the South Middle Area Gas Plant (producing 7 million cubic meters of gas per day) and the
Tuweinan gas plant (producing about 1.4 million cubic meters of gas per day). The contract signed between the General Organization of Chemical
Industries and the Russian company Stroytransgaz goes into effect on March 17, to invest in fertilizer factories in Homs. The investment period will
be 40 years with a value of not less than 200 million Dollars. 50 years is also the length of the contract between the General Organization of Geology
and Mineral Resources of Syria and Stroytransgaz to invest and extract phosphate from the al-Sharqiya mines (2.2 million tons annually). The People’s
Assembly ratified this resolution last year.
In other words, the Timchenko-owned Stroytransgaz is like a speeding train devouring all Syrian contracts. It is the state’s partner in its resources, and
also a complement to Russian security and military influence.

OE Watch | June 2019

30

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Syrian Army’s Interest in Tunnel Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: An article in the
latest issue of the Syrian military’s bimonthly
magazine Jaysh al-Shaab (“The People’s Army”),
points to their interest in subterranean warfare.
Titled “Tunnel Wars,” the article provides a largely
detail-free overview of subterranean warfare in the
Syrian conflict and effectively conveys the Syrian
military’s continued interest in the topic. The author
emphasizes the effectiveness and asymmetry of
subterranean operations, noting that the “ideal
use of land and tunnels, whether defensively or
offensively,” will enable army units to “maintain
the element of surprise and the initiative and to
complete their missions in the most efficient and
least costly manner.” Acquiring subterranean
combat capabilities is of utmost importance in his
estimation, but it requires “high-level training for
fighting units.” Such training, he notes elsewhere
Syrian military media correspondent reporting from a seized underground bunker.
Source: Syria Military Media YouTube channel, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cSzmNM4N_Ow, Public Domain
in the article, has already been set in motion, as the
Syrian Army adapted to rebel tunneling by “reorienting forces and training to confront this complicated and difficult form of urban warfare.”
Jaysh al-Shaab is published by the Syrian Army’s “Political Department”. The department was created by Hafez al-Assad in 1971, as one of
his first initiatives after successfully consolidating power as Syria’s Baathist president. The department has extensive writ, including conscript
training and morale maintenance, as well as oversight of the various branches of the military media. Its efforts over the past eight years are
arguably a key reason for the Syrian Army’s institutional survival.
Insurgent use of tunnels has been of great interest to the Political Department since the early days of the Syrian rebellion. Throughout the
conflict, its “military media” channel has produced video reports from inside tunnels that were purportedly seized from rebels. As with other
military media reports, these dispatches are for the most part paeans to the Syrian Army’s patriotism and combat capabilities. At the same
time, they may serve to inform viewers of what the Syrian Army considers an important battlefield challenge. Thus, while these official reports
inevitably convey an exaggerated image of competence and preparedness, propagandistic excesses need not obscure their informational value-that the Syrian Army places importance on rudimentary subterranean structures. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… reorienting forces and training to confront this complicated and difficult form of
urban warfare…”

Source:
‫حروب األنفاق‬
LTC Ayad Harba. “Tunnel Wars,” Jaysh al-Shaab, No. 2111-2112 - March/April 2019, http://mod.gov.sy/SD08/msf/media/jeshalsha3bmagazine/0.pdf (page 50-52)
… reorienting forces and training to confront this complicated and difficult form of urban warfare. Syrian soldiers were able to gain these
advantages quickly and in response to their needs… The above indicates the utmost importance of high-level training for fighting units to
allow them to engage in all types of complex combat and maintain the element of surprise and the initiative and to complete their missions in
the most efficient and least costly manner. This can be achieved though the ideal use of land and tunnels, whether defensively or offensively.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | June 2019

31

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish Concerns Regarding Idlib
OE Watch Commentary: The northeast Syrian province of Idlib continues to pose
a challenge to Turkey and its relations with Russia and Iran. Despite being on opposing
sides of the Syrian conflict, Ankara and Moscow have generally managed to maintain
a working relationship. In September 2018, the Turkish President had brokered an
agreement with Russian President Vladimir Putin, promising to dismantle extremist
groups in Idlib and prevent a military operation by the Syrian regime, but failed to
deliver on this. In fact, Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) with close ties to al-Qaeda, has
almost completely taken over Idlib. As such, Turkish officials are concerned about
a Syrian regime operation on Idlib (backed by Russia and Iran). The accompanying
articles from Turkish daily Hürriyet shed light on Turkish concerns regarding the
impact of such an operation on Turkey, including refugees, danger to Turkish troops
and a potential influx of militants.
Russia and Turkey recently launched joint patrols to monitor the situation in Idlib.
According to the first article, the developments in Idlib are at a tipping point because
the Syrian regime has escalated its attacks with the support of Russian air strikes.
The article points out statements made by Russian officials regarding the situation in
Idlib. On 26 April, Alexander Lavrentiev, Russia’s special envoy to Syria, stated that
Turkey’s failed efforts to neutralize HTS has disappointed Russia. As the author points
out, this statement was not welcomed in Ankara. Two days later, President Putin stated
that in response to terrorist attacks from Idlib, Russia always coordinates with Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad and provides air support. On 29 April, Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov stated that the activities of terrorists in Idlib and other areas
could not be allowed to continue indefinitely and reaffirmed Russian support of the
Syrian regime. On 30 April, the Turkish and Russian Presidents spoke on the phone and
announced that they are working in coordination towards a solution in Idlib. The article
points out that as of 1 May, with Russian air support, the Assad regime had launched a
military operation on Idlib.
The second article is a follow up to the first article by the same journalist who is very
familiar with the situation in Idlib. The author discusses that Turkey has established 12
military observation posts around Idlib and conducted military patrols as recently as
5 May. In a likely scenario where HTS weapons turn against Turkey, Turkish soldiers
Turkish Observation Posts in Idlib.
in those posts will be in a very dangerous situation. In addition, if the current Syrian
Source: Derived from work by MrPenguin20 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Turkish_Observation_Points_in_Idlib.svg, CC BY-SA 4.0
regime’s military operation in Idlib escalates, it is highly likely that this would cause an
influx of refugees to Turkey. The author also raises the important question of “What will happen to the HTS militants in Idlib whose numbers
are estimated to be at least 15,000 to 20,000? Where will all these jihadists who have adopted al-Qaeda ideology go?” While this question
remains unanswered, it is almost inevitable that some will cross into Turkey (to transit or to stay), threatening Turkish national security. End
OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The developments in Idlib have entered an extremely dangerous course… with the escalation of the
military operation carried out by the Assad regime with the support of Russia.”
Source: Sedat Ergin, “İdlib’de tehlike çanları çalıyor (Bells of danger ring in Idlib),” Hürriyet, 3 May 2019. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/
yazarlar/sedat-ergin/idlibde-tehlike-canlari-caliyor-41201752
…The developments in Idlib have entered an extremely dangerous course concerning the entire international community, with the escalation
of the military operation carried out by the Assad regime with the support of Russia.
Alexander Lavrentiev, Putin’s special envoy to Syria… “Our Turkish friends and moderate opposition have failed to carry out their efforts
to destroy the remaining terrorists…”
Now let’s go to a more important explanation… Russian leader Putin…
“We always coordinate our actions with President al-Assad before we make any attempts. In fact, it is he who performs these initiatives, not
us. All we do is to provide support mostly air support…”
Russian Foreign Minister Serge Lavrov in a statement made in Moscow… “We cannot tolerate a situation where terrorists are held safe as in
a natural conservation zone… In Idlib and some other regions, the situation in which terrorists are somehow active cannot continue forever…
After all these statements, a telephone call was made between Putin and Erdogan on Tuesday, April 30th. In the third paragraph of the readout of this [phone call] put on the website of the Russian Presidency…:
“The two leaders emphasized the importance of Russia and Turkey maintaining close coordination in their efforts to stabilize the situation in
Idlib and the need for effective measures to suppress terrorist groups.”
OE Watch | June 2019

32

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkish Concerns Regarding Idlib
Source: Sedat Ergin, “İdlib konusunda bir muhasebe (An evaluation regarding Idlib),” Hürriyet, 4 May 2019. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/
yazarlar/sedat-ergin/idlib-konusunda-bir-muhasebe-41202918
Idlib has a vital importance for Turkey. Idlib, with nearly half of its western border neighboring Hatay [and] an important part of its
northern border is adjacent to Afrin under the control of TAF [Turkish Armed Forces], looks at Turkey from two fronts. Thus, even a small
development there will affect Turkey.…
The international community does not want a hot conflict in Idlib to lead to a humanitarian catastrophe by triggering a massive wave of
migration. It would be a most likely prediction to say such a migration wave would be headed towards Turkey.…
Even if there is a final political solution to the Syrian crisis one day, what will happen to the HTS militants in Idlib whose numbers are
estimated to be at least 15,000 to 20,000? Where will all these jihadists who have adopted al-Qaeda ideology go?
These are the questions we have before us and we have to start thinking about their responses.

Huawei Expands its Network
OE Watch Commentary: A lot has been written about the risk to Western security if the United
Kingdom moves forward with a decision to use the Chinese technology company Huawei for
its 5G telecommunication network infrastructure. Just as important, but less reported, has been
Huawei’s activities in Turkey. The accompanying passages from the Turkish press point to important
collaboration between Huawei and Turkey’s technology sector.
The first passage discusses Huawei’s activities in Turkey, noting that its Research & Development
Center in Istanbul is now the company’s “second largest R&D center outside of China.” The article
discusses that Huawei has been working with Turkish regulators, operators and other stakeholders
to establish the 5G ecosystem in Turkey. It also notes that Huawei is supporting the country’s
transformation to a 5G network and “sharing its expertise” with 33 Turkish technology companies.
The second passage discusses important collaboration between Huawei and Turkey’s “Information
Technology Valley” (or “IT Valley,” inspired by Silicon Valley both in name and concept) -- a new
initiative to advance technological innovation in Turkey. The passage discusses that Huawei and
“IT Valley” have signed a cooperation protocol to establish a “Smart Cities Research Center.” The
protocol was signed during a ceremony attended by both Turkey’s Industry and Technology Minister,
and the General Manager of Huawei Turkey. In their speeches, both men alluded to joint research
and development efforts, particularly in the fields of artificial intelligence, cloud, big data, block
chain and other future technologies. Huawei Turkey’s General Manager noted that their cooperation
with the Turkish public sector since 2002 has enabled Huawei to become Turkey’s largest provider of
information technologies.

Huawei P10 phone

Source: en: Petar Milošević via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Huawei_P10_front.jpg, CC BY-SA

The final passage is from the website of Turkey’s “New Center for Innovation and TechnologyBased Growth,” referred to simply as “IT Valley.” It is described as a platform where “science turns into technology, and technology turns
into product.” The Valley is located in Istanbul, where an area has been dedicated to this innovation-hub, described as “an ecosystem” for
entrepreneurs-- a place where they can acquire financial support and access to investors. The goal is to encourage the innovation of new
technologies to advance Turkey’s position on the global stage. This is the context in which collaboration with Huawei is taking place. End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The R&D Center that Huawei opened in its Istanbul office in 2009... [is] the second largest
R&D center among its centers outside of China.”
Source: “İstanbul, Huawei’nin teknoloji üssü oldu (Istanbul has become Huawei’s technology base),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 8 March 2019.
http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/teknoloji/istanbul-huaweinin-teknoloji-ussu-oldu-41142476
Huawei, one of the world’s leaders in software and equipment producers, is producing technologies in the internet of things, artificial intelligence, cloud
and smart/safe cities, with Turkish engineers, who make up the majority of its team.
Huawei is supporting Turkey’s 2023 goals, the country’s transformation to a 5G [network] via its support to the Openlab program, and in collaboration
with 33 Turkish technology companies. ...
The R&D Center that Huawei opened in its Istanbul office in 2009, with an investment exceeding 120 million dollars, has become the second largest
R&D center among its centers outside of China. ...
The company, which has purchased 1 billion dollars worth of goods Turkey, also employs over 1300 people.
...
Huawei Turkey is ready for Turkey’s transition to 5G. In order to establish the 5G ecosystem in Turkey in a healthy way, the company is sharing its
expertise with Turkish regulators, operators and other relevant stakeholders.

OE Watch | June 2019

33

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Huawei Expands its Network
Source: “Huawei ve Bilişim Vadisi’nden önemli işbirliği (Important Collaboration between Huawei and IT Valley),” Hurriyet.com.tr, 1 April 2019. http://
www.hurriyet.com.tr/teknoloji/huawei-ve-bilisim-vadisinden-onemli-isbirligi-41168601

Huawei and Information Technology Valley have signed a Cooperation Protocol regarding [establishing a] Smart Cities Research Center,
at a ceremony attended by Industry and Technology Minister Mustafa Varank. With this agreement, Huawei will be active in “Smart Cities”
and develop joint solutions with its R&D team and Information Technology Valley.
...Huawei and Information Technology Valley will conduct joint R&D efforts in the fields of artificial intelligence, big data, the internet of
things, blockchain and other future technologies.
The Minister of Industry and Technology Mustafa Varank said the following at the ceremony:
“...We want to make Turkey a communication hub and an industrial and technological leader.... The protocol that we signed today is an
important step in making our country a technological hub. Information Technology Valley, Tubitak and Huawei will work together and
produce many important projects. The results of these projects will add value to our country. We want to use technological resources as best
as possible and open new horizons in the field of smart cities...”
Huawei’s General Manager for Turkey Cem Zhao said the following: “Huawei is promising access to digital for every person, family and
organization for a connected and smart world. Huawei started its activities in Turkey in 2002. Thanks to the Turkish economy’s rapid
growth, and [our] cooperation with the Turkish public sector... Huawei has become Turkey’s most extensive information technology provider
in Turkey. We are determined to create a leading communication infrastructure for Turkey, and encourage a healthy development of the
information sector in Turkey. We are ready to work with our customers and partners to create a healthy ecosystem [in Turkey].”
Source: “Hakkimizda (About Us),” Bilisimvadisi.co, Undated. https://bilisimvadisi.co/kurumsalrefugees-smuggled-goods

We are forming “Turkey’s New Center for Innovation and Technology-Based Growth” in collaboration with productive and creative
members of our society who will form the spirit of Information Technology Valley, especially bright and successful students, productive
scientists, entrepreneurs, investors, researchers, advisor-mentors, technicians and other professionals. ...
Information Technology Valley is a platform where science turns into technology, and technology turns into product. It is here that an idea
will turn into a marketable project and commercialized. Our goal is, in accordance with [Turkey’s] 2023 Vision, to produce high value-added
new technologies and products that will add more strength to Turkey’s strength. Thus, Information Technology Valley will be established as
an ecosystem for the innovator, where they can acquire financial support and an investor network.

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | June 2019

34

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Dynamics of Trilateral Relations between Turkey,
Russia, and Iran
OE Watch Commentary: On 17 April 2019, Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad
Javad Zarif visited Turkey after having meetings in Damascus with Syrian regime
officials. This visit came ahead of a scheduled meeting of Russia, Iran and Turkey in
the capital of Kazakhstan, Nursultan (formerly Astana). Even though Zarif’s visits
were announced as efforts to solve the Syrian conflict, it seems they might have had
other intentions as well. On one hand, Iranian efforts aim to facilitate a dialogue
between the government of Bashar Al-Assad and the Turkish government to prevent
Turkey from launching military operations further into Syrian territory. On the other
hand, Iran aims to bring Syria’s eastern and northeastern regions under the control
of the Syrian regime so that it can undermine American influence in the region and
balance Russian ambitions in Syria. The accompanying article from pro-Kurdish news
agency Mezopotamya Ajansi and an interview from independent Turkish news portal
Medyascope discuss dynamics of trilateral relations among these three countries.

Vladamir Putin, Hassan Rouhani, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.

Source: Kremlin.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Putin,_Hassan_
Rouhani,_Recep_Tayyip_Erdo%C4%9Fan_02.jpg, CC BY 4.0

The article from Mezopotamya Ajansi provides a Kurdish perspective on relations between Turkey, Russia and Iran. According to the article,
while Russia tries to continue its strategic relationship with Turkey to weaken NATO, it does not want Turkey to sever its ties with NATO.
Russia rather prefers Turkey remain a NATO member who continues to have problems with its NATO allies. As such, Russia intends to weaken
NATO through a member that constantly troubles the alliance. The article also discusses deteriorating relations between Russia and Iran due to
conflicting objectives in Syria. Russia has signaled its objection to Iran’s presence in Syria. Meanwhile, Iran intends to strengthen its military
presence and remain in Syria. At times, friction between the two countries has led to military confrontations. Competition for control over
Aleppo has been a significant point of contention. This rivalry will ultimately have a significant affect in the future of Syria and the Syrian
conflict.
The interview from Medyascope with Middle East expert Erhan Keleşoğlu states that Turkey’s alliance with Iran and Russia is a tactical
one due to developments in Syria and a desire to counterbalance American power and involvement in the region. Turkey cannot maintain its
presence in Syria without the consent of Russia and Iran. While Turkey supports the opposition in the Syrian conflict, Russia and Iran have been
ardent supporters of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. However, these countries have converging interests in other areas. Iran and Turkey have
converging interests regarding Kurdish groups in their respective countries. Turkey also relies on Iran for natural gas and Iran expects support
or neutrality from Turkey in its strategy to undermine the alliance spearheaded by Saudi Arabia to isolate Iran in the region. The author states
that Iran has the ability to navigate between Turkey and Russia. There is growing interdependence between Russia and Turkey as both countries
have signed agreements to cooperate in several areas from defense to energy. Turkey needs Russian natural gas and Russia needs a market to
export its natural energy resources. Overall, Russia seems to be accommodating Turkey on many fronts. The developments in Syria will shape
the future of this trilateral relationship. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The alliance of Russia, Iran and Turkey was formed as a tactical alliance against the United States’
involvement in Syria…”

Source: “Suriye’de dengeler oturmadı: Türkiye ve İran çıkmazda (Unsettled balance in Syria: Turkey and Iran Impasse),”
Mezopotamyaajansi.com, 3 May 2019. https://mezopotamyaajansi.com/ANALIZ/content/view/56302
Russia gives Turkey some economic concessions to keep Turkey on its side to gain leverage against NATO. Again it is trying to extend the agreements
and relations going as much as possible over Idlib and Afrin. While Russia seeks to avoid taking a tough stance towards Turkey until July-August, it also
supports Turkey as it develops relations with the [Syrian] regime behind the scenes… Russia prefers a Turkey that remains with NATO rather than a
Turkey that severs ties with NATO so that it can trouble the United States politically…
It is said that there is conflict between Russia and Iran, another actor within the Syrian conflict. Russian and Iranian relations has strained due to
Russia’s stance that Iran and Turkey must leave Syrian soil. This tension [between Russia and Iran] has spread to the areas [that they are] militarily
dominant… The main area of contention between Russia and Iran is Aleppo.

Source: Işın Eliçin, “İran-Rusya-Türkiye ittifakı: Erhan Keleşoğlu ile söyleşi (Iran-Russia-Turkey alliance: an interview with Erhan
Keleşoğlu),” Medyascope.tv, 18 April 2019. https://medyascope.tv/2019/04/18/iran-rusya-turkiye-ittifaki-erhan-kelesoglu-ile-soylesi/
Alliance of Russia, Iran and Turkey was formed as a tactical alliance against the United States’ involvement in Syria… The alliance desires to
counterbalance the United States. These countries are disturbed by America’s Middles East policy…
[Iran and Turkey] have a Kurdish issue in the region and we can say [Iran and Turkey] have a general security alliance to manage their Kurdish issue…
In terms of solving the [Syrian Conflict] Iran is a significant actor [and] able to maintain relations with all sides on the ground such as Syria, Russia,
Turkey [and] in some ways the European Union, all with the exception of United States…
Iran works on a strategy to undermine the alliance formed against it in the region under the leadership of Saudi Arabia. Turkey holds a critical position
in this strategy. Iran expects support or at least neutrality from Turkey. Iran wants to keep Turkey on its side to break political and economic isolation
against it in the region…
[Turkish President Recep Tayyip] Erdoğan has stated that an operation on East of Euphrates is still on the table… but he needs the support of Russia
and Iran for such an operation.

OE Watch | June 2019

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkish-Russian Negotiations in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Following their joint military patrol in
Idlib, sources suggest that Turkey and Russia might have reached a
deal to allow Turkey to launch an operation on Tel Rifaat, a Syrian
town controlled by the Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG). In
exchange Russia will reportedly launch attacks on Jisr ash-Shugur,
a town near Idlib. On 5 May, Turkey’s Vice President Fuat Oktay
confirmed ongoing talks between Turkey and Russia regarding
Turkey potentially deploying forces to Tel Rifaat without providing
much details. The accompanying articles from Kurdish and Turkish
sources provide insight into this possibility.
The first article from Kurdish Hawar News Agency, an agency
that closely monitors developments regarding Syrian Kurds, points
out that Turkey and Russia conducted a meeting in the northern
region of Syria in early May 2019 to discuss Tel Rifaat. The attacks
by the Turkish-backed Free Syrian Army (FSA) on Maranaz and
Al-Malikiyah, two small villages near Tel Rifaat in Northern Syria,
came days after this meeting and coincided with the Turkish Defense
Minister Hulusi Akar’s visit to the Turkish-Syrian border. While
Kurdish sources stated that the attacks on Maranaz and Al-Malikiyah
were repelled by the YPG, Arab sources reported that the attacks were
stopped due to ongoing negotiations between Russian and Turkish officials.

De facto cantons of Rojava.

Source: Editor abcdef via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:De_facto_cantons_of_Rojava.png, CC
BY-SA 3.0

The second article, written by a well-respected Turkish journalist closely monitoring developments in Syria, claims that Russia might have
given Turkey a green light to attack Tel Rifaat. The author notes that while Russia wants to take full control of Idlib, Turkey is looking for a
face-saving move by deploying troops to Tel Rifaat. Turkish troops already conducted patrols in Tel Rifaat in coordination with Russia.
The author also states that Russia’s plans to continue collaborating with Turkey and give concessions to Turkey in Tel Rifaat bothers the
Iranian and Syrian regimes. As the article points out, the control of Tel Rifaat and surrounding areas is significant for different reasons for
Turkey, Kurdish forces, and the Syrian regime. Iran and the Syrian regime are concerned that Turkey and the opposition forces it supports
will control Tel Rifaat, posing a threat to Aleppo from the north. For Turkey, controlling Tel Rifaat means connecting the areas of Operations
Euphrates Shield and Operation Olive Branch. For Kurdish forces, Tel Rifaat is an important point from which to launch an operation on
Turkish controlled Afrin. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“[The Syrian regime] and Iran are bothered by Russia’s concession to Turkey in Tel Rifaat to
keep [Turkey] collaborating.”

Source: Nûrhat Hesen, “Merenazê planên Rûsya û Tirkiyê têk birin (Russia and Turkey’s plans were nullified),” hawarnews.com, 5 May
2019. https://www.hawarnews.com/kr/haber/merenaz-plann-rsya-tirkiy-tk-birin-h16548.html
A few days ago, a meeting between Russia and Turkey took place in the northwest of Syria…
According to information obtained, as a result of negotiations held between Russia and Turkey, Russia will launch intense attacks on Jisr ash-Shugur…
Turkey will attack Tel Rifaat.
Turkish Defense Minister Hulusi Akar’s visit to Hatay, [on] the Syrian border, at the time of the attacks by the Turkish Army and its gangs on Maranaz
and Al-Malikivah, indicate the attacks were planned…

Source: Fehim Tastekin, “Büyük düşün küçük kırıntıları: Tel Rıfat hesapları (Little crumbs of big thought: Tel Rifaat plans),” Gazete Duvar, 6
May 2019. https://www.gazeteduvar.com.tr/yazarlar/2019/05/06/buyuk-dusun-kucuk-kirintilari-tel-rifat-hesaplari/
Alliance of Russia, Iran and Turkey was formed as a tactical alliance against the United States’ involvement in Syria… The alliance desires to
counterbalance the United States. These countries are disturbed by America’s Middles East policy…
…
[Iran and Turkey] have a Kurdish issue in the region and we can say [Iran and Turkey] have a general security alliance to manage their Kurdish issue…
In terms of solving the [Syrian Conflict] Iran is a significant actor [and] able to maintain relations with all sides on the ground such as Syria, Russia,
Turkey [and] in some ways the European Union, all with the exception of United States…
Iran works on a strategy to undermine the alliance formed against it in the region under the leadership of Saudi Arabia. Turkey holds a critical position
in this strategy. Iran expects support or at least neutrality from Turkey. Iran wants to keep Turkey on its side to break political and economic isolation
against it in the region.
…
[Turkish President Recep Tayyip] Erdoğan has stated that an operation on East of Euphrates is still on the table… but he needs the support of Russia
and Iran for such an operation.

OE Watch | June 2019

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Sudan, Algeria and the “Second Arab Spring” Debate
OE Watch Commentary: The Arab Spring that started in 2010 with street
protests in several Arab countries, led to regime change in Tunisia, Egypt, and
Libya, while paving the way for some reforms towards democratization in others.
But Algeria and Sudan had not been part of this process. Now, in 2019, street
protests in these two countries have overthrown their long-time rulers-- ending
Abdelaziz Bouteflika’s 20 year rule in Algeria and Omar al-Bashir’s 30 year rule in
Sudan. This has raised the question of whether we are witnessing a second “Arab
Spring.” The accompanying passages from Turkish sources discuss the issue, noting
that the critical thing to watch will be whether the military in both countries will
voluntarily relinquish power to a civilian government.
The first three passages are from a series of articles by Sami Kohen- a respected
international relations columnist for the mass daily Milliyet. In the first passage,
Kohen focuses on Algeria, pointing out the peaceful aspect of the demonstrations,
and the fact that the military or police did not interfere. He credits the military for
siding with the people in producing the outcome, highlighting that it will be critical
to watch how the military will act at this point.
The second passage features Kohen’s views on Sudan. He notes that the first
round of the “revolution” has taken place and the al-Bashir regime has been
toppled, cautioning that “it is not clear how the second round of civilian control and
democratization will play out.” He also points out that regional and global actors
alike have been watching Sudan closely, not so much for their interest in seeing the
country democratize, but more because they want to make sure that the outcome
will help their own interests. He claims that regional countries like Saudi Arabia,
the UAE and Egypt have no interest in seeing a democratic Sudan, which he claims
will likely become a “sphere of competition” for outside powers.

Abdelaziz Bouteflika.

Source: Unknown and Vikoula5 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Abdelaziz_Bouteflika.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0

In the third accompanying passage, Kohen compares and contrasts the current events with the previous Arab Spring. He points out that the
military sided with the people in both Algeria and Sudan. Kohen writes that “this represents a much different, much more hopeful experience
than those painful experiences that took place in the previous Arab Spring countries.”
The fourth accompanying passage is from an interview with Ömer Taşpınar, another respected Middle East expert. Taşpınar notes the
common aspects of the developments in Sudan and Algeria: “economic problems...and the fact that the military, which is strong in both
countries, have convinced the leaders, or the dictators to leave power.” He is more pessimistic about the idea that the military will relinquish
control in both countries, saying that he doesn’t see any kind of “spring” or “democratization” coming out of these countries. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“In both countries, the military sided with the people.

...[T]his represents a much different, much
more hopeful experience than those painful experiences that took place in the countries of the
previous Arab Spring. In both countries, the question being asked now is: Will they be able to
establish a civilian and democratic regime?”

Source: Sami Kohen, “Cezayir Bahari (Algeria Spring),” Milliyet.com.tr, 5 April 2019. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sami-kohen/
cezayir-bahari-2853607/
The people’s movement in Algeria took place within a “spring spirit.” ... The military or police did not interfere, nobody’s nose bled.
This demonstrated that the people of Algeria are capable of showing their will peacefully, and without resorting to violence. The outcome
can be considered the victory of “the people on the street.” But it is clear that the military siding with the people and placed its weight behind
democracy has played an important role in this outcome. ...
In this process, how the military will act, and whether it will intervene or not is critical. It is also not clear whether the people will be able to
continue its united and conscientious stance.
In contrast to the painful experiences of the “Arab Spring” in Northern Africa and the Middle East, the course that the ‘Algerian Spring’ will
take is worth watching closely.

OE Watch | June 2019

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Sudan, Algeria and the “Second Arab Spring”
Debate
Source: Sami Kohen, “Sudan Neden Önemli (Why is Sudan Important?),” Milliyet.com.tr, 30 April 2019. http://www.milliyet.com.
tr/yazarlar/sami-kohen/sudan-neden-onemli--2866170/
For weeks, the entire world has been watching the developments in Sudan.
The reason for this special attention is that, Sudan, which is an Arab country but also part of Africa, has witnessed the public’s
uprising against Omar al-Bashir’s authoritarian regime and overthrown him through widespread street demonstrations. This
development has led to a hope that Sudan may be able to transition to a civil and democratic regime. But at this stage, it is not
yet clear whether the military, which is still critical, and other public institutions, will allow for this. The public is determined to
continue its resistance until there is radical regime change and the old guard is completely eliminated.
So even though the first round of the “revolution” in Sudan has taken place and the al-Bashir regime has been toppled, it is not
clear how the second round of civilian control and democratization will play out.
Of course this is part of the reason why regional and global actors are closely following the developments in Sudan, and
wondering whether this ‘Arab Spring’ experience will be successful. But in reality, the external world’s interest in Sudan has more
to do with their own interests than their passion for “democratic values.”
In principle, most countries hope to see a transition to a civilian and democratic regime in accordance with the public’s will; but
in practice the real thing that those countries want is to ensure that the new circumstances that will arise in Sudan will help their
interests.
The fact is that the Westerners can pay lip service to democracy all they want, but their goal is to keep Sudan in their sphere of
influence. Sudan’s nearby neighbors like Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Egypt have no interest in seeing a democratic regime in
Sudan. Russia and China want to develop bilateral relations with Sudan. The type of regime in Khartoum doesn’t concern them.
It is not yet clear how the process in Sudan will develop, but it is very likely that the country will become a sphere of competition
for external actors. ...
Source: Sami Kohen “Sivil darbe (Civilian Coup),” Milliyet.com.tr, 19 April 2019. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yazarlar/samikohen/sivil-darbe-2860847/
In both countries, the military sided with the people. Except for Tunisia, this represents a much different, much more hopeful
experience than those painful experiences that took place in the previous Arab Spring countries. In both countries, the question
being asked at this point is: Will they be able to establish a civilian and democratic regime?
Source: Ömer Taşpınar, “Transatlantik (Transatlantic),” Medyascope.tv, 27 April 2019. https://medyascope.tv/2019/04/27/omertaspinar-sudan-ve-cezayirden-yeni-bir-arap-baharinin-cikmasi-kolay-degil/
“The common denominator between the developments in Sudan and Algeria are economic problems... And the fact that the public
in both countries have taken to the streets due to these economic problems. A second common denominator is that the military,
which is strong in both countries, have convinced the leaders, or the dictators to leave power. (Bouteflika in Algeria, and Bashir in
Sudan).
The military - the power behind the regimes in both countries- took center stage and took initiative. What’s happening in Sudan
is a desire by the military to form temporary government, following an internal revolution ... and the suspicion of whether the
military will relinquish power to a civilian government ... Of course the most important external actor who wants the military
to stay in power is Egypt, Sudan’s northern neighbor. Sisi, who also came to power via a military coup, is currently the head
of the African Union. Sisi asked for 3 billion dollars from Saudi Arabia and the UAE to help the military regime in Sudan....
These are status quo regimes, not regimes that will lead to a democracy or elections. So I don’t see any kind of “spring” or
“democratization” coming out of these countries.”

OE Watch | June 2019

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Israel’s Military Force against Cyber Threat: A New
Precedent?
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 May, the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) tweeted “We have thwarted
an attempted Hamas cyber offensive against Israeli targets. Following our successful cyber defensive
operation, we targeted a building where the Hamas cyber operatives work.” This represents an
important turning point in warfare, as it is the first reported incident of an immediate, real-time
military force being used by a nation-state against a cyber threat or attack. The accompanying
passages from Israeli sources discuss the incident.
The first passage is the IDF tweet, which announces the cyber defensive operation, and ends with
“HamasCyberHQ.exe has been removed.” The second passage, from The Times of Israel discusses
that the attack came during a weekend of intense fighting between the IDF and terror groups in the
Gaza Strip. The article notes that IDF fighter jets “destroyed the building housing the headquarters
of [Hamas]’s cyber unit” after neutralizing “the digital threat.” The article quotes commander of the
IDF’s Cyber Division, Brig. Gen. “Dalet,” as saying that the cyber-attack was aimed at “harming the
quality of life of Israeli citizens.” According to the Brig. Gen. “Dalet,” this was also one of the first
incidents in which Israeli soldiers had to fend off a cyber-attack while also fighting a physical battle.
In an era of growing cyber threats and unclear international norms on how to respond to them, the
case could represent a precedent for immediate military action against a potential or actual cyberattack. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

Source: IDF Twitter Feed, Public Domain

“HamasCyberHQ.exe has been removed.”
Source: Israeli Defense Forces Twitter Feed, 5 May 2019. https://twitter.com/IDF/status/1125066395010699264
CLEARED FOR RELEASE: “We have thwarted an attempted Hamas cyber offensive against Israeli targets. Following our successful
operation, we targeted a building where the Hamas cyber operatives work.
HamasCyberHQ.exe has been removed.”
Source: “IDF says it thwarted a Hamas cyber attack during weekend battle,” The Times of Israel, 5 May 2019. https://www.timesofisrael.com/
idf-says-it-thwarted-a-hamas-cyber-attack-during-weekend-battle/
The Israeli military said its soldiers thwarted a cyber attack by the Hamas terror group over the weekend, without elaborating on the nature
or target of the offensive.
The Israel Defense Forces said once the digital threat was neutralized, fighter jets destroyed the building housing the headquarters of the
terror group’s cyber unit.
“Hamas no longer has cyber capabilities after our strike,” IDF spokesperson Ronen Manelis told reporters.
The attack came amid a weekend of intense fighting between the IDF and terror groups in the Gaza Strip. Since Saturday, Palestinian
terrorists launched upwards of 600 rockets and mortar shells at Israel, killing two people, and fired an anti-tank guided missile at a car north
of the Gaza Strip, killing the driver.
In response, the IDF conducted hundreds of airstrikes on targets linked to terror groups throughout the Gaza Strip, killing at least 14
Palestinians, nearly all of them members of rocket-launching cells.
...
The commander of the IDF’s Cyber Division, who can only be identified by his rank and first Hebrew letter of his name, Brig. Gen. “Dalet,”
would only say that the cyber attack occurred Saturday and was aimed at “harming the quality of life of Israeli citizens.”
The military said much of the information about the attempted attack cannot be published as it might reveal to Hamas details about Israel’s
cyber capabilities.
...
“Israel’s ability to defend itself and thwart cyber attacks means the Hamas terror group’s efforts to carry out attacks in the cyber realm fail
time and time again,” a Shin Bet official said.
According to Dalet, this was one of the first incidents in which Israeli soldiers had to fend off a cyber attack while also fighting a physical
battle.
“What’s special here is that we thwarted this threat under fire,” Dalet told reporters.
OE Watch | June 2019

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iranian Army Ground Forces Unveil New Drones and Tech
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying reports from Iranian media discuss, Iran’s
Army Ground Force (Artesh) recently unveiled six new devices including a smart multirotor bomber, an atomic plasma spectrometer, a laser warning system, as well as new handlaunched drones, communication devices, large weapons, and military vehicles.
According to the reports, the smart multi-rotor bomb can fly 5 kilometers for 30 minutes
and carries a payload of 8 kilograms. One of the drones -the Torparan- is affixed with a net
gun that can capture lightweight drones of up to 2 kilograms. The atomic plasma spectrometer
and laser warning system can either be carried by troops or attached to weapons or drones
like a quadcopter. The laser warning system can apparently identify an incoming threat from
up to 15 kilometers away. End OE Watch Commentary (Bunker and Keshavarz)

Devices unveiled at ceremony.

Source: Tasnim News, https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1398/01/31/1993287/6‫درواتسد‬-‫دیدج‬-‫یورین‬-‫ینیمز‬-‫شترا‬-‫ییامنور‬-‫دش‬-‫ریواصت‬, CC BY SA 4.0.

“During the ceremony, the ground force unveiled 6 new devices, which included communications
packs, vehicles, and 2 new squadrons of drones like the Farpod.”

Source:
‫تصاویر‬-‫شد‬-‫ارتش رومنایی‬-‫زمینی‬-‫نیروی‬-‫جدید‬-‫دستاورد‬
“6 dastavar jaded neeroo-e zameenee artesh roonemay-e shod + tasaveer (Iranian Army Ground Force Unveiled 6 New Achievements +
Pictures),” Tasnim News Agency, 20 April 2019. https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1398/01/31/1993287/6
“During the ceremony, the ground force unveiled 6 new devices, which included communications packs, vehicles, and 2 new squadrons of drones like the
Farpod.”

Source:
‫شد‬-‫رومنایی‬-‫ارتش‬-‫زمینی‬-‫نیروی‬-‫جدید‬-‫مشخصات دستاوردهای‬“6 dastavar jaded neeroo-e zameenee artesh roonemay-e shod + tasaveer (Iranian Army Ground Force Unveiled 6 New Achievements +
Pictures),” Fars News, 20 April 2019. https://www.farsnews.com/news/13980131000148/
“The Torparan drone has a net gun that can capture light drones that weigh up to 2 kilograms.”
“Another drone is able to identify people at up to 15 meters away and vehicles at up to 50 meters away…and it can be affixed with the atomic plasma
spectrometer.”

Ex-General Claims IRGC Presence in Bosnia and Support to Al-Qaeda
OE Watch Commentary: On 14 April 2019, Iranian internet channel Aparat featured a
two-hour long interview with former IRGC general Saeed Ghasemi, during which Ghasemi
stated that the IRGC was active in Bosnia in the 1990s under the guise of aid workers. As
the accompanying excerpts from the interview discuss, he explained that the IRGC was in
Bosnia as members of the Red Crescent, but were really there to train Bosnian Muslims. He
continued that mujahedeen from around the world came to Bosnia to help, including alQaeda. Ghasemi claims that al-Qaida fighters were given headbands, uniforms, badges and
flags made to look like they were affiliated with the IRGC.
Ghasemi says that IRGC’s involvement in Bosnia started when Hossein Allahkaram (the
Ansar e-Hezbollah leader) visited him at his home and asked for photos and identification to
go into Bosnia under diplomatic cover. Ghasemi ends his discussion on Bosnia by expressing
that it was the Iranian government’s responsibility to provide financial and materiel support,
which included weapons and training to all fighters active in Bosnia. Qassemi blames CNN
reporter Christiane Amanpour, who is of Iranian descent, for “giving [them] away.” Both
the IRGC and the Iranian Red Crescent have dismissed Ghasemi’s claims. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bunker and Keshavarz)
Saeed Ghasemi.

Source: Mostafameraji via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saeed_Ghasemi_
‫_نیریش_رصق_رد_گنج_قباس_هدنامرف_یمساق_دیعس_ینارنخس‬27.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

“...Sepah gave al-Qaeda headbands, uniforms, flags made to look like
they were Sepah, and they all wore badges.”

Source: “Rudarrru-21 Saeed Ghasemi, az huzoor dar bosni-e ta zelzeleh Kermanshah (Rudarru-21 Saeed Ghasemi, from presence in Bosnia
to the earthquake in Kermanshah),” Aparat, 14 April 2019. https://www.aparat.com/v/I1hOS
“We were there as members of the Red Crescent, but really there to train Bosnian Muslims…Around the time we were there, al-Qaeda came
in too to help. Sepah gave al-Qaeda headbands, uniforms, flags made to look like they were Sepah, and they all wore badges.”
“It was CNN’s spy, this fellow compatriot of ours, who all of our politicians, including Ahmadinejad and Rouhani, love to give her
interviews, this dishonorable spy of CNN gave us away.”
OE Watch | June 2019

40

AFRICA
Sudan’s Junta Clings to Power
OE Watch Commentary: The coup d’état against Sudan’s longserving president, Omar al-Bashir, driven in large part by popular
uprisings against his authoritarian ways, human rights abuses, and
mishandling of the economy, brought jubilant people to the streets.
Now those people are returning to the streets in protests against what
they perceive may be the military relinquishing power too slowly. As
the excerpted two accompanying articles from the Radio Dabanga
website relate, those protests are getting bolder as the military junta
demands wider powers for itself.
According to the first excerpted article, the junta, known as Sudan’s
Transitional Military Council (TMC), has stressed that its leadership
council (Sovereign Council) needs the powers to “impose a State of
Emergency, declare war, take command of regular forces, and appoint
governors of the provinces and ambassadors.” Additionally, the council
emphasized its large role in defining the two year transition period.

Sudanese protests over fears that the military that overthrew President al-Bashir won’t
step down in a timely fashion.

A TMC spokesman also spoke of the presence of a “deep state.” The
Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://www.tasnimnews.com/en/news/2019/04/21/1993961/sudan-protesters-to-name-civilian-councilpressure-military, CC BY 4.0
article did not go into significant detail explaining exactly what the
“deep state” is, other than to say that it causes long delays in mail delivery, and flour and fuel might not arrive at all. Reportedly the TMC says
it might take five years to dismantle this deep state.
While the junta is dictating its requirements, as the second excerpted article notes, there have been protests that remnants of the old regime
remain in power, and that the military is dragging its feet when it comes towards moving to full democracy. Some of those protests have
reportedly been put down with force, including severe beatings.

There is great concern that Sudan might enter a spiraling cycle of violence and counter-violence between the government’s security forces
and the protesters who worry that one bad regime has just been exchanged for another bad regime. Thus, whether or not there can be a peaceful
transition to democracy, and if so, when it will occur, hinges in the coming weeks on what positions the military firmly decides to adhere to.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Sudan’s Transitional Military Council (TMC) has stressed the need to grant the leadership council
(Sovereign Council) powers to impose a State of Emergency, declare war, take command of regular
forces, and appoint governors of the provinces and ambassadors.”
Source: “Sudan’s junta demands wider powers,” Radio Dabanga, 9 May 2019. https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/article/sudan-sjunta-demands-wider-powers
Sudan’s Transitional Military Council (TMC) has stressed the need to grant the leadership council (Sovereign Council) powers to impose a
State of Emergency, declare war, take command of regular forces, and appoint governors of the provinces and ambassadors.
Similarly, Lt Gen Yasir El Ata, another member of the TMC said “We will continue to liquidate the corrupt regime and the deep state,” he
said, adding that it could take five years. He said the cell, seized in the past two days with weapons and explosives, belongs to the Popular
Security militia. The entire Popular Security system is being dismantled.
He said that the deposed President Omar Al Bashir, the figures of the former regime, and a number of people accused of corruption are now
in Kober prison, some of whom are subject to investigation.
Source: “Injuries as army, militia clash with Khartoum protestors,” Radio Dabanga, 9 May 2019. https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/
article/injuries-as-army-militia-clash-with-khartoum-protestors
The Alliance for Freedom and Change (AFC) condemned the ongoing attacks on the protesters in Nyala and Khartoum and considered them
dangerous actions aimed at dragging the protesters to counter-violence, stressing the commitment of the protesters to the peaceful approach.
Paramilitaries of the Rapid Support Forces reportedly launched an attack on the demonstrators at the sit-in front of the general command of
the Sudanese army in Khartoum.
The TMC rejected the proposals of the opposition forces defining the powers and attribution of the transitional period institutions because it
gives the Sovereignty Council symbolic functions while it reserved the full power to the government.
OE Watch | June 2019

41

AFRICA
Can South Sudan Maintain Its Fragile Peace Without
al-Bashir?
OE Watch Commentary: While there has been a lot of attention on
Sudan following the coup that removed Omar al-Bashir from office,
much less attention has been paid to what the impact of that transition
will be on South Sudan, where al-Bashir was overseeing that country’s
fragile peace deal. The excerpted accompanying article from African
Arguments tries to provide just such a perspective based on careful
analysis of historical trends.
Al-Bashir was intimately tied to the peace deal. When many in the
international community were losing hope of finding a peaceful end
to the conflict between the government forces, led by President Salva
Kiir, and opposition forces, led by Riek Machar, he was able to broker
a peace deal between the two, using his influence along with Russian,
South Sudanese troops.
Chinese, and Saudi Arabian support. Although that September 2018
Source: VOA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SPLA_soldiers_near_Juba_(April_2016)_1.jpg, Originated http://www.
voanews.com/a/government-soldiers-leave-juba-before-rebel-leaders-return/3286194.html, Public Domain
agreement has resulted in relative stability in the country, there is
widespread concern that certain flaws and difficulties in implementation could lead to renewed fighting. There is precedence for that concern, as
previously brokered peace deals have failed. Now, with al-Bashir gone, it is unclear whether the military government has the ability or desire to
help South Sudan’s warring parties keep the deal.
At first glance one might think Sudan would be strongly committed to peace in South Sudan as the two countries’ economies are largely
interdependent on oil, with vast amounts of oil present in landlocked South Sudan and the necessary infrastructure and port to ship it to the
rest of the world in Sudan. However, as the article states, regional politics defy this conventional logic. Instead, localized politics, interethnic
competition, complex patronage networks, and individual ambitions often drive decisions. Additionally, there are still some in Sudan who
resent the 2005 peace deal, brokered by al-Bashir, with the southern rebels that eventually led to South Sudan seceding from the north. There is
concern that they may reassert themselves following al-Bashir’s removal.
Changes are also occurring in South Sudan. For one, Machar, who received support from al-Bashir during Sudan’s Second Civil War, is
now asking for a six month extension to the deadline for forming a transitional government. Furthermore, there is concern that there may be
several individuals within South Sudan’s opposition who are lobbying with Khartoum’s new leaders, potentially further complicating an already
complicated situation.
Thus, while many are particularly happy al-Bashir is gone from power, his absence leaves a void in the peacemaking process for South Sudan.
Presently that void is being filled with uncertainty. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Sudan’s former president was central to South Sudan’s latest peace process. Elites in both countries
may sense opportunity in his absence.”
Source: Matthew Lerichie, “What al-Bashir’s removal means for South Sudan’s fragile peace,” African Arguments, 30 April 2019. https://
africanarguments.org/2019/04/30/what-al-bashir-removal-south-sudan-fragile-peace-deal/
Sudan’s former president was central to South Sudan’s latest peace process. Elites in both countries may sense opportunity in his absence.
At the same time, Sudan’s internal turmoil is still very much ongoing. As long as this uncertainty remains unresolved, its leaders may be
unable to turn their attention to issues beyond the country’s borders. Given that Western states and international organization have already
largely backed away, this would leave South Sudan with little external direction or support.
In February and March, as the protests escalated in Khartoum, President Kiir expressed his support for al-Bashir. After al-Bashir’s
removal, however, the South Sudanese government quickly changed tack and congratulated the new military rulers. As Sudan’s leadership
continues to take shape, Kiir’s government is likely to continue offering its backing to whoever is apparently in charge.
…figures in Sudan may turn inwards as the uncertainty continues, resulting in less pressure and resources for South Sudan. This could,
in turn, allow more room for elites in South Sudan to maneuver, leading to more complications. The resulting confusion will cause further
delays in the implementation of the peace deal and, in the absence of any Sudanese or other international intervention, its possible collapse.

OE Watch | June 2019

42

AFRICA
Russia Helping to Strengthen CAR Military
OE Watch Commentary: A year after
Russia was instrumental in having the
UN partially lift its arms embargo on the
Central African Republic (CAR), Russia
is now helping the CAR strengthen its
military. As the accompanying article
from the South African website CAJNews
reports, Russia sent five military and 170
civilian instructors. A “batch” of small
arms and ammunition was also sent,
although what a “batch” consists of was
not defined.
Russian involvement in CAR started in
2017 when it supported the government
of President Faustin-Archange Touadéra.
The following year Russia helped broker
a peace deal among the country’s armed
groups. While other countries also played
a role in trying to bring peace to the warPutin meeting with CAR President Faustin-Archange Touadera.
Source: Kremlin, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/57534, CC BY 4.0
torn CAR by sending peacekeeping troops,
Russia’s involvement (including Russian military contractors) has been particularly noticeable.
Presently, the Russian instructors have established a training center in the city of Berengo. There, the CAR defense forces are being trained
in methods of combat, including how to handle weapons. To implement the training, the Russians have created a tactical field as well as another
site with an observation tower and other features which prepare for combat. So far 1,900 individuals have been trained, including machine
gunners, rifle experts, police, and gendarmes.
Furthermore, President Putin signed a decree to send 30 Russian troops to the CAR as part of the UN peacekeeping mission there,
MINUSCA. While these are welcome additions to MINUSCA, other articles have expressed concern over Russia’s role in the CAR, and have
been particularly critical of some of the opaque aspects of it. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Russia, which played a crucial role in peace-building efforts in the Central African Republic (CAR),
is strengthening the country’s defense forces.”
Source: Oman Mbiko, “Russia trains CAR defense forces,” CAJNews (South Africa), 30 April 2019. http://cajnewsafrica.com/2019/04/30/
exclusive-russia-trains-car-defence-forces/
Russia, which played a crucial role in peace-building efforts in the Central African Republic (CAR), is strengthening the country’s defense
forces.
In addition to educational facilities in Berengo, there are household facilities.
It accommodates more than 300 cadets.
As of March, seven sets of cadets have been groomed at the training centre. Some 1 900 individuals have been trained, including 128
officers.

OE Watch | June 2019

43

AFRICA
Angola and Russia Seek to Increase Ties
OE Watch Commentary: Currently only
a few Russian companies are operating
in Angola, with their involvement mostly
limited to extracting diamonds, constructing
hydroelectric dams, and activities related to
the financial sector. However, as the excerpted
accompanying article from the Pambazuka News
website explains, the two countries are looking
to expand their economic ties further, with
Angolan President João Lourenço reportedly
very interested in fostering more Russian private
investment in his country. The Angolan president
stated he wants public-private partnerships or the
creation of Angolan-Russian companies with a
focus on manufacturing, agro-industry, fishing,
energy, tourism, mining, and other sectors.
Angolan Army soldiers instruct their fellow mortarmen on coordinates as a part of their training in Russia.

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Angolan_soldiers_training_in_Russia.png, CC BY-4.0
Putin and João Lourenço met in early April for
talks, where they discussed not only trade and economics, but also regional and international matters. Draft agreements are now in the works
on commercial shipping, mutual protection of classified information, and in a sign of Russia’s growing military interest in Africa, simplified
access to Angola’s ports for Russian warships.

João Lourenço is no stranger to Moscow, having completed his military education in the Soviet Union in 1982. He offered Putin
congratulations on how the city has progressed since then, and gave Putin an award in appreciation of Putin’s long support of Angola. The
admiration was not one-sided, with Putin describing Angola as “an old and reliable partner.” On a more objective assessment, Russia’s
Ambassador to Angola from 2007 to 2012, Sergei Nenashev, described Angola as a priority for Russia’s cooperation in Africa, mentioning that
country’s huge economic potential. Indeed Angola has vast natural resources, including diamonds, oil, gold and others. However, the article
fails to mention that China is Angola’s largest trading partner, not Russia, and that a significant amount of Angola’s oil is exported to the
United States.
Cooperation between Angola and Russia dates back before either nation was in its present form, with what was then the Soviet Union
supporting the Angolan independence movement. In 1976 Angola and the USSR signed a treaty of friendship and cooperation. By 2016
annual trade between the two reached an estimated $500 million annually. Now Putin and João Lourenço are looking to increase those ties
even more. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Strengthening cooperation in trade, economy and culture, as well as current international and
regional matters were top issues in talks between President Vladimir Putin of Russia and President
João Lourenço of Angola at the Kremlin on 4 April.”
Source: Kester Kenn Klomegah, “Russia and Angola stuck between diplomatic rhetoric and business reality,” Pambazuka News, 27 April
2019. https://www.pambazuka.org/economics/russia-and-angola-stuck-between-diplomatic-rhetoric-and-business-reality-0
“Angola is a reliable and old partner. We need to consider what we need to do, without delay, to stimulate our trade and economic ties.
There are interesting fields of activity, such as the diamond industry, fisheries and space exploration. There are also cultural spheres, such as
education and the training of personnel,” Putin told the Angolan President.
But, professors Vladimir Shubin and Alexandra Archangelskaya from the Russian Academy of Sciences’ Institute for African Studies, have
argued that “both Russia and Angola still need to be more strategic in aligning their interests, and more proactive in carving out efficient
bilateral instruments and mechanisms in order to promote economic exchanges and reap the benefits of a fully-fledged partnership.”
Strengthening cooperation in trade, economy and culture, as well as current international and regional matters were top issues in talks
between President Vladimir Putin of Russia and President João Lourenço of Angola at the Kremlin on 4 April.

OE Watch | June 2019

44

AFRICA
The AU Opposes Coups, but What if Popular Protests
Back Them?
OE Watch Commentary: It is called the Lome
Declaration. Its principle, that unconstitutional changes
of government should be rejected, was basically
adopted by the African Union (AU). As the excerpted
accompanying article from the South African news site
The Conversation explains, this stance against actions
like coups is proving to be a challenge: The recent
overthrow of Sudan’s President Omar al-Bashir by the
Sudanese military was backed by the masses.
While the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance, which is the AU’s policy that
essentially formalized the Lome Declaration’s rules,
clearly opposes coups, the organization in the past
has wavered in its response to them. One of the first
incidents where this occurred was in Egypt in 2012
Egyptians protest President Morsi before his overthrow.
when President Morsi was overthrown. This AU labeled
Source: J Weeks/VOA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tahrir_Square_in_Cairo_as_night_falls_-_27-Nov-2012.jpg, Public Domain
the event a coup, condemned the Egyptian military, and
suspended Egypt from AU membership. Then, in 2014, in clear contradiction of AU rules that coup leaders should not hold political positions,
Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, who led the coup, ran for president and won. The AU, as the accompanying article describes, eventually “blinked.” In
2015 the AU reinstated Egypt’s membership, and in a demonstration of how much the AU is ignoring its own mandates, in 2019 Sisi became the
organization’s rotational head.
Zimbabwe is another example of the AU wavering with regards to its anti-coup dictum. In 2017, President Robert Mugabe, after decades
in power, was placed under house arrest by the military. Despite this action, AU membership was never revoked, and the general who led the
intervention subsequently became the country’s vice-president.
With the overthrow of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, the AU is once again confronted with the same dilemma: whether or not enforce
its own rules with regards to unconstitutional changes in a despotic government whose overthrow was backed by popular uprisings. Not
enforcing the rules risks legitimizing the use of force in political situations, whereas enforcing them could result in oppressive governments
being protected by the AU. To deal with this problem, the article suggests having an agreement regarding when the military should transition to
a civilian government following a coup, and deciding whether tail end military involvement of sustained popular protests is justified. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The events in Egypt and the subsequent AU response underscored the unique
dilemma that a combination of popular protests and military intervention pose for the
continental body’s policy against coups.”
Source: Adem K. Abebe, “Popular protests pose a conundrum for the AU’s opposition to coups,” The Conversation (South Africa), 5 May
2019. https://theconversation.com/popular-protests-pose-a-conundrum-for-the-aus-opposition-to-coups-116315
In addition, the AU standards speak about the removal of “democratically elected governments”. In practice, it never asks whether the
removed government was democratic, and does not have mechanisms to make a proper determination on the issue.
But the tail-end involvement of the military after intensive and popular protests raises questions about how this should be applied. While
there have been some hiccups and inconsistencies, the rule has allowed the AU to reject coups d’état and suspend governments from
its membership. But the recent round of popular protests that finally led to the toppling of authoritarian presidents is a reminder of the
conundrum the AU faces.
The events in Egypt and the subsequent AU response underscored the unique dilemma that a combination of popular protests and military
intervention pose for the continental body’s policy against coups.

OE Watch | June 2019

45

AFRICA
Changing Constitutions to Enshrine Authoritarianism
OE Watch Commentary: Despite the African Union’s (AU) African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance, which essentially calls for sanctions when
a government illegally amends its national constitution in order to stay in power,
numerous African nations appear to have either done, or are in the process of
doing, exactly that. As the excerpted accompanying article from the South African
Institute for Security Studies describes, the threat of AU sanctions does not appear
to be enough to stop certain countries from enshrining authoritarianism.
The most recent occurrence of this was in the Comoros. There, President Azali
Assoumani, following controversial changes to the constitution last year, was
elected for another term. He could potentially remain in office until 2029. That is
just one year shy of Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who could continue to
serve until 2030, if certain amendments are passed by the country’s parliament and
validated by a referendum.
As the article describes, Egypt and the Comoros follow a wave of earlier changes
to presidential mandates in Rwanda, Chad, Burundi, and the Republic of Congo.
These were marked by controversial referendums in which incumbents were
accused of manipulating the outcomes.
Part of the problem is the lack of a consensus within the AU as to when
amendments constitute a legitimate versus illegitimate change of a nation’s
constitution. There are efforts to clarify the issue, but meanwhile amendments
that enable presidents to continue to serve are present in the constitutions of many
African nations. These amendments may entail disqualifying political opponents,
extending the tenure of the incumbent, or other changes that lead to a less robust
democratic process.

Changes to constitutions have enabled Presidents such as Azali
Assoumani of the Comoros, pictured here, to stay in power for long
periods, placing the democratic process at risk.

Attempting to pass such amendments can lead to instability, insecurity, and/or
Source: Balde Nouhou via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Azali_Assoumani_2018.jpg, CC BY 3.0
violent clashes, as happened in Burkina Faso, the DRC, Burundi, Togo, and the
Sudan. Violent protests also occur when the people are unable to see the end of a regime, as occurred during the Arab Spring and most recently
in Sudan, with the overthrow of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir with assistance from the army.
Thus, incumbents circumventing the democratic process can lead to authoritarianism, violence, or both. As the article notes, the AU’s
response has often been reactive as opposed to proactive in these matters. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Africa is again witnessing an increased number of constitutional
amendments that allow incumbents to extend their terms and centralize
political power.”
Source: “Tampering with national constitutions is a threat to stability in Africa,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 30 April 2019.
https://issafrica.org/pscreport/psc-insights/tampering-with-national-constitutions-is-a-threat-to-stability-in-africa
Africa is again witnessing an increased number of constitutional amendments that allow incumbents to extend their terms and centralize
political power.
Yet, in many AU member states, such amendments continue and ultimately infringe on democratic principles, leading to instability and
authoritarianism. In order to prevent this, the PSC should ensure member states adopt and domesticate its legal frameworks, and adhere to
democratic standards when amending their constitutions.
The gap in the articulation of AU legal frameworks means that any attempt by citizens to remove incumbent leaders without using means
articulated in their national constitutions, can be categorised as ‘unconstitutional’. At the same time, the actions of many governments evade
the AU’s attention.
Most constitutional amendments in favour of incumbents have followed similar seemingly democratic processes that appear to garner
national consensus, mostly through referendums, but that work in favour of particular leaders and their parties.
OE Watch | June 2019

46

AFRICA
Church Attack in Burkina Faso Suggests Tactical Change
OE Watch Commentary: On 29 April, the French daily Le Parisien published the excerpted
article discussing a recent attack by jihadists in Burkina Faso. While these groups have conducted
many attacks in recent months, the article indicates that this particular attack was unique
because it was the first attack on a church in Burkina Faso since 2015. The attack killed five
worshippers, including the pastor. The article suggests that this may indicate the renewal of a past
strategy, leading to a potentially more dangerous phase of the insurgency for civilians, especially
worshippers at churches.
The article notes that pastors have often been targets for assassination since 2015, but not inside
their churches. Most of those assassinations were in the north of Burkina Faso, like this one.
However, the article reports that other attacks have extended to central Burkina Faso near the
capital, Ouagadougou, and to the east of the country in recent months. The three jihadist groups
suspected of being behind this latest church attack are (the primarily Mali-based) Jama’at Nasr
al-Islam wal Muslimin (JNIM), its Burkina Faso-based offshoot, Ansourul Islam, and the Islamic
State in Syria and Iraq (ISIS)-loyal group, Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. The attack may
even have been the result of a collaboration between those three groups.

Burkina Faso carte.

Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Burkina_Faso_carte.png,
Public Domain.

Pastors have not been the only religious leaders targeted by jihadists. The article highlights that Muslim clerics have also been killed for not
being “radical enough.” Foreign missionaries have also been killed in Burkina Faso in the past. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Although Christian and Muslim clerics have been targeted by jihadists
in the past, this is the first attack on a church since 2015.”
Source: “Burkina Faso: au moins cinq personnes tuées, dont le pasteur, dans l’attaque d’une église (Burkina Faso: At least five people killed,
including the pastor, in the attack on a church),” leparisien.fr, 29 April 2019. http://www.leparisien.fr/faits-divers/burkina-faso-au-moinscinq-personnes-tuees-dont-le-pasteur-dans-l-attaque-d-une-eglise-29-04-2019-8062521.php
A church attack in Burkina Faso, a poor country facing recurring jihadist attacks, killed five people on Sunday in Silgadji in northern
Burkina Faso. Although Christian and Muslim clerics have been targeted by jihadists in the past, this is the first attack on a church since
2015.
Burkina Faso has been confronted for the past four years by increasingly frequent and lethal attacks attributed to jihadist groups, including
Ansarul Islam, the Support Group for Islam and Muslims (JNIM) and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS). Initially concentrated in the
north of the country, these attacks have targeted the capital and other regions, including the east, and since 2015 some 350 people have died.
Attacks regularly target religious leaders, mainly in the north of the country. In mid-March, Father Joel Yougbaré, priest of Djibo, was
kidnapped by armed individuals. His corpse was found near Djibo, according to residents of the city. Several imams were also murdered by
jihadists in the north. According to security sources, they were “considered not radical enough” by jihadists or “accused of collaborating
with the authorities.”

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a marketplace
of ideas about the future of our society, work, and
conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and community
of action that continually explores the future through
collaborative partnerships and continuous dialogue
with academia and industry.

OE Watch | June 2019

47

AFRICA
Gold Mining Connections to Killings in Zamfara, Nigeria
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying passage from Nigeria’s
Pulse.ng discusses the increased violence in the northwestern Nigerian
state of Zamfara. The article pins the violence on the disorganized gold
mining industry in the state, whereby gold is smuggled out of Zamfara to
markets in nearby Togo, Benin and Niger and then further abroad, enriching
the traffickers but not the people of Zamfara. The argument goes that
the killings in Zamfara occur because the illicit gold smuggling industry
attracts traffickers linked with armed bandits and criminals in the state.
These armed bandits raid villages to steal livestock or kidnap women,
children and village leaders to ransom them back to their families. If the
ransoms are not paid, the hostages will be harmed or killed.
The article also highlights second-order effects of this violence. Because
farmers are afraid to work alone in their fields in affected areas, they
have not tended to their land. This has led to a decrease in agricultural
production, which, in turn, has led to an increase in the scarcity of food in
Zamfara.
Zamfara State Nigeria.

Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zamfara_State_Nigeria.png, CC BY SA 3.0.
Although the violence in Zamfara had attracted significant attention on social
media, according to the article, it was not until Zamfara indigenes in the Nigerian capital of Abuja protested in front of the presidential villa that
President Muhammadu Buhari took strong action. He ordered the suspension of the licenses of anyone caught gold mining in Zamfara because
of the acknowledged nexus between gold mining and armed bandits. He further directed the security forces and intelligence services to flush
out the smugglers and armed bandits. The air force has even destroyed some of the logistics bases of the bandits. The article concludes by noting
that even though the security forces are overstretched, especially as a result of combatting Boko Haram in the northeast, they are hoping to
deliver a decisive blow to all of this criminal activity in Zamfara. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Intelligence reports say there is a nexus between the illicit gold mining industry
and the killings in Zamfara.”
Source: “Here’s all you need to know about Zamfara killings,” Pulse.ng, 8 April 2019. https://www.pulse.ng/news/local/zamfarakillings-all-you-need-to-know/mbf1qrf
Gold from Zamfara is routinely smuggled out of the state to ready markets in neighboring Togo, Benin and Niger. From here, the gold finds
its way to other markets across the world, with Nigeria benefiting next to nothing from the sale; and Zamfara maintaining its status as one of
the poorest states in the country. Intelligence reports say there is a nexus between the illicit gold mining industry and the killings in Zamfara.
How many people have been killed by the bandits in Zamfara so far? It is difficult to put a figure to the killings. However, for a crisis that has
spanned all of two years, the death toll is better imagined. Hundreds have been killed in Zamfara since 2016 and hundreds have been buried
in mass graves.
The modus operandi of the bandits goes like this: they raid villages, tear down doors, drag the heads of homes from houses and hurl them
into forests. In the forests, they establish contact with the families and demand a ransom. Once this ransom doesn’t arrive on time, they
proceed to killing their victims.
After indigenes of Zamfara State who reside in Abuja stormed the presidential villa to register how displeased they are with the federal
government over the killings, President Muhammadu Buhari issued a directive suspending all mining activities in Zamfara. Buhari said he is
“constantly in touch with the security chiefs, and receives regular briefings on the situation in Zamfara and across the country.”

OE Watch | June 2019

48

AFRICA
Has Benin Suffered its First Terrorist Attack?
OE Watch Commentary: Benin is a country in coastal
West Africa that neighbors other countries such as Burkina
Faso, Niger and Nigeria that have been facing serious threats
from terrorist groups. However, Benin did not experience any
terrorist attacks on its territory until one that appears to have
occurred on 4 May. According to the accompanying passage
from French-language rfi.fr, a Beninese tour guide and two
French citizens went missing in the north of the country at the
Pendjari National Park on 4 May. The park is located along
the border with Burkina Faso, which has suffered dozens of
terrorist attacks, including kidnappings of foreigners in recent
months.
While the article indicates that both French and Burkinabe
authorities are still investigating the incident, there is reason
to be pessimistic: terrorist groups aligned with al-Qaeda
or the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) most likely
abducted them. One key clue in this assessment, according
to the article, is that someone was found dead in the park
near where the three were traveling. This was probably the
Beninese tour guide. The two French tourists were not found,
however, meaning they must have been taken captive. Until
the two of them are located, or perhaps seen in a proof-of-life
video released by a terrorist group, the French and Beninese
authorities are urging caution and refusing to make any
conclusions about the case.
According to the article, one reason why terrorist groups
may have just recently moved into Benin is that the
Burkinabe security forces have engaged in an offensive
against terrorist groups in the east of the country since
March. Therefore, the terrorist groups may have withdrawn
across the border into Benin. Benin was prepared for this
eventuality. The article notes that Burkina Faso had warned
of possible terrorist infiltration as a result of the offensive.
Considering these details, it may only be a matter of time
before it is confirmed that the two French tourists are in the
hands of a terrorist group. If somehow this is not the case
and they are alive and safe, Benin can breathe a sigh of
relief, but the threat will not go away easily. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“We are faced with something we
do not understand.”

Map of Africa showing Benin.

Source: TUBS via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benin_in_Africa_(-mini_map_-rivers).svg, CC BY-SA 3.0

Source: “Bénin: un Béninois et deux Français toujours portés disparus (Benin:
A Beninese and two Frenchmen are still missing),” rfi.fr, 5 May 2019. http://
www.rfi.fr/afrique/20190504-benin-guide-beninois-deux-francais-disparusparc-pendjari
In Benin, a Beninese tourist guide and two French nationals have been
missing in the north of the country. The group was due to return to their hotel
Wednesday night after an excursion to the Pendjari National Park, located
on the border with Burkina Faso. According to the French authorities, the
investigation is still ongoing. The search is continuing in northern Benin.
There is very little information on the precise circumstances of this
disappearance. From certain sources, a body in a state of decomposition,
who was impossible to identify, was discovered in the park. The information
has been confirmed by the Beninese authorities, but for Cotonou, this major
discovery does not allow, at this stage, the drawing of conclusions about the
fate of the three missing people.
Pendjari National Park is precisely on the border with Burkina Faso. The
country launched in mid-March a wide-reaching counter-terrorism operation
in the eastern part of its territory and, on that occasion, it informed bordering
countries about the risk of having suspected jihadists retreat to their
territories.

OE Watch | June 2019

49

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil Addresses Illegal Cigarette Traffic
OE Watch Commentary: According to regional news service O Paraná, Brazil is in the
midst of implementing yet another frontier security project on the state of Paraná bordering
Paraguay. It is well known that the Brazilian border is considered porous. Both federal and
local security services have struggled to keep up with cross-border smuggling operations
by organized crime groups with operatives on both sides of the border.
According to the article, the new, joint initiative of National Forces (a combination of
local and federal law enforcement agencies), will continue to focus on the inflow of drugs
and firearms entering Brazil from Paraguay by establishing a working group and building
up a more robust security infrastructure in the state of Paraná. However, the primary target
is the illegal cigarette trade flowing in from Paraguay. A key consideration appears to be a
realization of lost tax revenue due to Brazilians smoking smuggled cigarettes rather than
Brazilian made ones.

Brazilian Navy up-armored boat patrolling the Paraná River
near Iguacu Falls on the border with Paraguay.
Source: Dodge Billingsley

It is estimated that illegal cigarettes flowing into Brazil deny federal coffers billions of Reals in unearned tax revenue. According to a federal
study detailed in the article, there is as much as 11 billion Reals ($2.7 billion) in lost tax
revenue every year.
Cigarettes in Brazil are taxed at 80% as opposed to a 13% tax on cigarettes in
neighboring Paraguay. The article rightly points out this taxation discrepancy and implies
that part of the solution to address the problem entails evaluating “the reduction of taxation
on cigarettes manufactured in the country,” in an effort to reduce consumption of illegal
cigarettes. This could be a significant step as protectionism of industries like cigarettes
in Brazil is part of the cause of smuggling in general, as prices are simply much lower in
neighboring countries. There is just too much temptation to smuggle cigarettes and other
goods like electronics and other staples.
Receita Federal Agents at a Checkpoint in the Brazilian

While the border between the state of Parana and Paraguay is not as dense and restricted as
state of Parana.
Source: Dodge Billingsley
the Amazon border between Columbia or Venezuela, the Paraná River and Itaipu Dam just to
the north of Iguacu Falls presents a variety of challenges. Brazilian naval units that patrol the river have had to step up the armor on their patrol
boats because it is not uncommon to come under fire when pursuing illicit watercraft, or from the Paraguayan shoreline.
As the second article demonstrates, Brazilian forces were fired upon while pursuing and intercepting a boat in-bound from Paraguay that
turned out to be carrying over 1300 pounds of marijuana. While the war on the border will continue to fight the inflow of contraband including
cigarettes, a multi-pronged approach that would narrow the gap between the cost of cigarettes in Brazil and Paraguay, might help or at least slow
down the flow. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“At the end of last year a survey conducted by Ibope, commissioned by ETCO (Brazilian Institute of
Competitive Ethics) revealed that 54% of the cigarettes consumed in Brazil are of illicit origin. The survey
also revealed that last year alone, 106.2 billion cigarettes were consumed in Brazil, with 57.5 billion of
them coming from the illegal market.”
Source: “Seguranca e economia querem “fechar” a fronteira (Homeland Security seeks to “close” or tighten the border to restrict the flow of
illegal cigarettes entering Brazil),” O Paraná, 27 March 2019. https://oparana.com.br/noticia/seguranca-e-economia-querem-fechar-a-fronte
ira/?fbclid=IwAR2IQu9QyNiQeuI0coIA2lU9oP5WVI0Zk7iyKJU6jydeFlil54IW1T8Q5Es
As part of the process of confronting border crime, an important front will be focused on the creation of a working group with the mission
to evaluate the reduction of taxation on cigarettes manufactured in the country. The intention is to “reduce consumption” of foreign low
quality” cigarettes. The initiative results from the understanding that organized crime is financed by high-volume tobacco smuggling in
Brazil.
Source: “Policia Federal e Forca Nacional sao alvos de tiros no Lago de Itaipu (Federal Police and National Force come under fire on Itaipu
Lake),” O Paraná, 8 May 2019. https://oparana.com.br/noticia/policia-federal-e-forca-nacional-sao-a-tiros-alvos-de-tiros-no-lago-de-itaipu/
The boat, a steel plate vessel measuring approximately 7 meters in length and equipped with a 90 hp outboard motor, contained 658 kg of
marijuana.
OE Watch | June 2019

50

LATIN AMERICA
Military Refugees in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying reference is a 2,800 word investigative article about a unique geopolitical conundrum that the
Colombian government and nation is currently facing as a collateral result of the situation and events in neighboring Venezuela. This is a rare,
curious matter. An increasing population of military personnel from one country is taking refuge in another. Many of the Venezuelan military
refugees have aspirations of returning to Venezuela, including as a military force to fight in opposition to the regime of the PSUV [United
Socialist Party of Venezuela] ostensibly led by Nicolás Maduro. Some of the refugees are demanding that they be sustained by the Colombian
government, and some are apparently agents of the PSUV regime or perhaps Cuban intelligence. In any case, there have been numerous
challenging events, including what appears to have been a falsified murder scare within the military refugee population. How to sort that
population to determine loyalties, and what to do about unwelcome agents are difficult problems for the Colombian government. The author of
the article suggests that the Chavistas [PSUV or Cubans] hold the initiative, have great influence over events and are going to use the situation to
their advantage. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…No solutions appear close…”

Source: Carola Briceño Peña, “Militares refugiados se han convertido en bomba de tiempo para Duque y Guaidó (Military refugees have
become a time bomb for Duque and Guaidó),” Panam Post, 5 May 2019. https://es.panampost.com/carola-briceno/2019/05/05/militaresvenezolanos-refugiados-cucuta-bomba-tiempo/
“The centers for Venezuelan military and police refugees that arrived in Colombia last February in the scheme of trying to send
humanitarian aid to Venezuela have turned into a veritable time bomb that nobody knows how to deactivate….
The majority took the step motivated by a firm desire to be on the right side, so as to not lend themselves to the macabre game of blocking
medicines that so many Venezuelans need…
Nevertheless, others came over with different motives. ‘Some of the compañeros here came thinking they would be given a house, cars,
money. …
‘One has to be very careful, especially in this zone [refugee area] because here people supporting the Chavistas [PSUV regime in
Venezuela] come here easily.’ …
Moreover, the soldiers continue their refuge in hotels and every day there are new issues in those centers, which the majority want to leave
immediately. No solutions appear close and it seems that everything is going to continue the same until the Chavistas cause the problem, to
which they are ably increasing pressure, to blow up.”

Venezuelan armed forces.

Source: Cancillería del Ecuador via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Venezuelan_armed_forces.jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0

OE Watch | June 2019

51

LATIN AMERICA
Panamanians Elect Laurentino Cortizo
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 May, 66 year old Laurentino “Nito” Cortizo won the presidential elections in Panama. He is to be sworn in on
1 July. President-elect Cortizo is US-educated (Norwich University and the University of Texas). As indicated in the first accompanying report,
as Panama’s agricultural minister, Cortizo resigned “over disagreements with the Free Trade Agreement” with the United States. Cortizo is
leader of Panama’s Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD). Founded by General Omar Torrijos in 1979, the PRD is a member of the Socialist
International (as is Voluntad Popular, the Venezuelan party to which Juan Guaidó belongs). Although the PRD is also a member of the leftist
Forum of Sao Paulo, which is generally supportive of the Cuban Communist Party and the Venezuelan United Socialist Party PSUV, it is not yet
clear what stance President-elect Cortizo will take regarding the Venezuela situation when he is president. As the second accompanying article
reports, he had said during the campaign that Juan Guaidó was the President-in-Charge in Venezuela. He apparently also opined, however, that
the Venezuelan opposition should negotiate with the Maduro administration. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…‘Nito’ Cortizo…was declared winner…”
Source: Editors, “Elecciones en Panamá: quién es ‘Nito’ Cortizo, al que declaran ganador de la votación presidencial con sólo un 2% de
ventaja (Elections in Panama: who is ‘Nito’ Cortizo, who was declared winner of the presidential voting with only a 2% advantage),”
InfocifrasOnline.com and BBC Mundo, 6 May 2019. https://infocifrasonline.com/2019/05/06/elecciones-en-panama-quien-es-nito-cortizo-alque-declaran-ganador-de-la-votacion-presidencial-con-solo-un-2-de-ventaja/
“…the future Panamanian President resigned his post [as agricultural minister in 2001] over disagreements with the Free Trade Agreement
between the United States and Panama….
These were the first elections since the leaking of the Panama Papers that swept the country three years ago and that were later affected
by other huge financial scandals. For this reason the fight against corruption was one of the principal themes of discussion during the
campaign….”
Source: Editors, “Nuevo presidente de Panamá: Venezuela tiene en este momento un presidente encargado y se llama Juan Guaidó (New
Panamanian President: Venezuela has at this moment a president in charge and his name is Juan Guaidó),” lapatilla.com, 6 May 2019. https://
www.lapatilla.com/2019/05/06/nuevo-presidente-de-panama-venezuela-tiene-en-este-momento-un-presidente-encargado-y-se-llama-juanguaido/
“The political leader belonging to the Revolutionary Democratic Party, center left, assured during an interview this past February 25th,
that ‘Venezuela has at this moment a president in charge and his name is Juan Guaidó.’ He hopes that the transition in Venezuela will happen
via negotiated settlement and that they don’t close the ports.”

Laurentino “Nito” Cortizo, 2019.

Source: Alavergne25 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Laurentino_%22Nito%22_Cortizo_candidato_presidencial_2019.jpg, CC

OE Watch | June 2019

52

LATIN AMERICA
Iberia Culture War
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying reference puts into stark relief a central political confrontation alive on the Iberian
Peninsula. Not only has the migration of Muslims into Spain become a central, if not the central electoral political issue, but Barcelona has
evidently become its geographic center of gravity. According to the reportage, the city government in Barcelona, which is leftist-controlled,
has been increasingly welcoming of and deferential to Islamic expression and to Muslim immigration, while it has at the same time suppressed
traditional Catholic expression. The article highlights the platform and candidate campaign promises of the newly formed (circa 2013) political
party, Vox. According to the report, Vox is promising to remove radical Salafist clerics and shut down illegal immigration, especially Muslim.
While the Vox party is not rightist in the classical Spanish sense (it is pro-Israel, for instance), it is clearly anti-left. It promotes elements of
traditional Spanish culture and Spanish national sovereignty. This translates to not being in favor of Catalonian independence and not in favor of
Muslim immigration into Iberia. The election featured in the article is for the mayoralty of Barcelona, and the issue of how the city might deal
with the clash of cultures could not be expressed to the electorate more plainly. It is not exactly a new issue for the city, either. The Franks kicked
the Moors out of Barcelona at the beginning of the 9th Century. The struggle then, as now, is unlikely to be violence-free. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…The Vox proposal is that Barcelona cease to be a ‘sanctuary city’…”

Source: Carlos Cuesta, “Vox promete cerrar las 15 mezquitas salafistas radicales de Barcelona (Vox promises to close Barcelona’s 15 radical
Salafist mosques),” Ok Diario Madrid, 5 May 2019. https://okdiario.com/espana/vox-promete-cerrar-15-mezquitas-salafistas-radicalesbarcelona 4070972?utm_source=onesignal&utm_medium=notificacion
“This is about one of the campaign promises that the Vox [recently formed political party] congressman and candidate Ignacio Garriga will
take up….
Facing the decision of the city council to promote and publicize Ramadan, Vox wants to denounce the waste of public funds along with the
fact that ‘irresponsibly promotes immigration that has nothing to do with Catalonian or Spanish culture.’…
The Vox proposal is that Barcelona cease to be a ‘sanctuary city’ for illegal immigration and for the jihadist influx….”

ELN Rising
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying references are representative of an increasing number of reports that the Colombian guerrilla
Army of National Liberation (ELN) is gaining strength, has increased presence and impunity within Venezuelan territory, and enjoys improving
relations with both the FARC and the formal armed services controlled by the Marxist regime in Venezuela. Any potential dialog between the
ELN and the Colombian government seems to have ended when the ELN was found responsible for the January bombing of a police school in
Bogotá. The ELN, according to reportage, is marshaling strength in the Venezuela-Colombia border region, evidently in support of the defense
of the Marxist regime in Venezuela. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Dialogs [with the ELN] are at a point of death …”

Source: Editors, “El comandante de las Fuerzas Militares de Colombia denunció que casi la mitad del grupo terrorista ELN está en Venezuela (‘The
Commander of the Colombian Military Forces denounces that almost half of the ELN terrorist group is in Venezuela),” Infobae, 9 May 2019. https://www.
infobae.com/america/venezuela/2019/05/09/el-comandante-de-las-fuerzas-militares-de-colombia-denuncio-que-casi-la-mitad-del-grupo-terrorista-elnesta-en-venezuela/
“According to calculations, especially of the fronts that commit crimes in the Colombia-Venezuela border zone, that is where those structures and their
leaders stay, and we can be talking about some 1000 to 1100 men….Dialogs [with the ELN] are at a point of death since the car bomb attack committed
by the ELN this past January 17 against the Police Officers School in Bogota that left 22 dead and 66 wounded.”

Source: Matthew Bristow, “Soldados venezolanos enseñaron cómo lanzar misiles antiaéreos a rebeldes del ELN (Venezuelan soldiers show
rebels of the ELN how to launch anti-air missiles),” Infobae, 6 May 2019. https://www.infobae.com/america/venezuela/2019/05/06/soldadosvenezolanos-ensenaron-como-lanzar-misiles-antiaereos-a-rebeldes-del-eln/
“Fighters of the Army of National Liberation received instructions on the use of the IGLA ground to air missile system manufactured in Russia,
according to Luis Navarro, commander of the Colombian military forces. The Marxist force known as the ELN has used Venezuelan territory as a refuge
for a long time, and has a close ideological affinity with the socialist Maduro administration…
In an interview at an air base in Bogotá, he commented, ‘It is materiel of the Venezuelan armed forces’.

Source: Editors, “El informe de inteligencia que menciona a “El Paisa” tras alianza ELN-FARC para las elecciones de Octubre 2019 (the
intelligence report that mentions “El Paisa” in a FARC-ELN alliance for the October 2019 elections),” El Nodo, 5 May 2019. http://elnodo.
co/ELECCIONES19
“Fighters of the Army of National Liberation received instructions on the use of the IGLA ground to air missile system manufactured in Russia,
according to Luis Navarro, commander of the Colombian military forces. The Marxist force known as the ELN has used Venezuelan territory as a refuge
for a long time, and has a close ideological affinity with the socialist Maduro administration…
In an interview at an air base in Bogotá, he commented, ‘It is materiel of the Venezuelan armed forces’.

OE Watch | June 2019

53

LATIN AMERICA
Russia Steps Deeper Into the Venezuelan Battleground
by Pavel Felgenhauer
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 16, Issue 64, dated 2 May 2019.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/russia-steps-deeper-into-the-venezuelan-battleground/

OE Watch Commentary: In the early morning of April 30, opposition leader, speaker of the National Assembly and the selfproclaimed interim president of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, declared that the Venezuelan Armed Forces had abandoned the socialist
autocratic president Nicolás Maduro. Yet, Guaidó’s pronouncement was only supported by a relatively small group of armed
Venezuelan personnel who had defected to the opposition.
The acute standoff between the opposition-controlled National Assembly and the Maduro regime has continued since January
2019. On one hand, Guaidó has been recognized as interim president by the United States, most Latin American countries, the
European Union and a large portion of the Venezuelan populace. On the other, Maduro is supported by Russia, China, Cuba, Turkey,
Iran, Nicaragua, Bolivia, Mexico, and by left-wing Chavista activists in Venezuela (supporters of the left-wing political ideology
of Chavism, based on the ideas, programs and governing style of former Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez). The severe political,
economic and social crisis in Venezuela has greatly diminished the popular appeal of Chavism, but the military and security forces
have remained loyal to the Maduro regime. The attempt to remove Maduro on April 30 failed as rebel military personnel did not
attract much active support within the ranks. Clashes between pro-Guaidó protesters and security forces ensued, and at least one
protester was killed in the streets of Caracas. Nevertheless, the regime survived, and Maduro boasted about crushing the attempted
coup. The pro-Kremlin media in Moscow also cheered the outcome.
The story of the apparently futile anti-Maduro uprising is complicated. Allegedly, the uprising’s top Chavista military and regime
figures were in communication with Guaidó on organizing an orderly transfer of power, on flying Maduro into exile to Cuba and
Guaidó taking power for a brief period before calling new elections. But on April 30, something apparently went wrong, and the top
brass Chavista conspirators refused to help remove the embattled sitting president. Russia was accused of persuading Maduro to stay
and cling to power instead of fleeing to Cuba. Russian officials have denied any accusations of involvement, with sources in Moscow
implying that Guaidó acted prematurely, and the plan of regime change fell apart.
The Venezuelan opposition and its supporters have been hoping to persuade Moscow and Beijing to stop resisting regime change
in Caracas. They suggest that the best way for Russia and China to secure their considerable investments in Venezuela—primarily in
oil production—is to help organize an orderly transition of power that dismantles the bankrupt, incompetent, corrupt and unpopular
leftist autocratic regime.
At the end of March 2019, Moscow deployed a force of some 100 military personnel to Venezuela. This force is led by the chief of
staff of the Russian Land Forces (Sukhoputnye Voyska), Colonel General Vasily Tonkoshkurov, a veteran of the 1980s intervention in
Afghanistan and the Chechen wars. Until May 2018, Tonkoshkurov was the deputy chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed
Forces. The Russian embassy in Venezuela announced, “[O]ur military personnel are in no way involved in the clashes in Caracas.”
Moscow insists the Russian military contingent in Venezuela is not a fighting force, but rather a group of advisors and technical
specialists helping refurbish the Venezuelan military. The Russian contingent is also assisting in implementing the military hardware
Russia had previously sold the Chavismo regime (over $11 billion worth in all) that has been collecting dust during the Venezuelan
economic, political and social crisis.
To date, Russia has provided Venezuela with modern Su-30MK2V fighters, T-72 tanks, heavy guns, and a variety of missile and
anti-aircraft systems, including S-300VM (Antey-2500) long-range interceptors, shorter-range BuK-M2 and S-125 Pechora-2M antiaircraft missiles, as well as Smerch long-range missiles. Moscow has also provided Caracas with modern shoulder-launched Igla-S
anti-aircraft missiles.
Russian military analysts believe that with that hardware, Russian advisors and specialists can build a well-organized multi-layer
anti-aircraft and missile-defense system in Venezuela that could inflict serious damage on any US-led forces if they “dare to invade
to change the regime.” Colonel General Tonkoshkurov and his group were apparently sent to Venezuela specifically to organize,
build up and lead a comprehensive multi-service defense force ready to inflict heavy casualties and repel the Americans. This may
explain why such a high-level, combat-experienced general was sent to lead the mission in Venezuela. Moscow seems ready to take
on the US and any possible allies in Venezuela, seeing it as part of a global “geopolitical” standoff with Washington. Russia wants to
show it is ready to stand up to the challenge and possibly engage the US military in a direct military confrontation. End OE Watch
Commentary (Felgenhauer)

OE Watch | June 2019

54

LATIN AMERICA
The Antarctic Institute of Argentina and New Scientific
Discoveries
OE Watch Commentary: In mid-January, a team of 50 scientists,
investigators, mountaineers and drillers from Argentina and the United
States discovered living organisms in the deepest lake to ever be
found in the Antarctic. After this discovery, the lake was named Lake
Mercer; a body of water that does not freeze even though its average
temperature is zero degrees. The hope with Lake Mercer’s discovery
is that it will lead to additional discoveries in Antarctica with consent
and help from Argentina. The accompanying passages discuss this
discovery and the Antarctic Institute of Argentina, which promotes
exploration such as this latest one.
The first accompanying passage from Argentinian Via Pais reports
on the new discovery, noting that the scientist discovered bacterial
cells, remains of crustaceans, plants, mushrooms and other unnamed
species in Lake Mercer. The second accompanying passage from the
Antarctic Institute of Argentina discusses Argentina’s mission, vision
and values in Antarctica. As the passage discusses, the Antarctic
Institute of Argentina (IAA) is a scientific/technological organization
that is overseen by the Argentinian government. The IAA is also
an active member of the National Science and Technology Agency
of Argentina. Finally, the IAA is seen as an international pioneer in
development and studies in Antarctica. The IAA is recognized as a
Antarctica Subglacial Lakes Map.
highly respected scientific/technological organization in the Antarctic
Source: NASA Earth Observatory via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antarctica_Subglacial_Lakes_Map.png,
Public Domain.
at both the national and international level. This is because Argentina
played a leading role in creating the Antarctic Treaty, signed in 1959. In 1951, the IAA was recognized as the first international scientific
institute exclusively dedicated to studying the Antarctic. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“The expedition that led to the discovery of Lake Mercer was planned over many years.
The hope of scientists participating in the expedition was to find single cell microbes.
However, scientists were met with a spectacular surprise when they found bacterial cells,
remains of crustaceans, plants, mushrooms and other unnamed species.”
Source: “Histórico: encontraron vida en un lago inexplorado de la Antártida (Historic: Scientists Find Never-Explored Lake in the Antarctic
with Living Plants and Creatures),” Via Pais, 19 January 2019. https://viapais.com.ar/argentina/814451-historico-encontraron-vida-en-unlago-inexplorado-de-la-antartida/
The expedition that led to the discovery of Lake Mercer was planned over many years. The hope of scientists participating in the expedition
was to find single cell microbes. However, scientists were met with a spectacular surprise when they found bacterial cells, remains of
crustaceans, plants, mushrooms and other unnamed species.
Source: “Instituto Antártico de Argentina (Antarctic Institute of Argentina),” Direccion Nacional del Antártico, Updated 19 March 2019.
http://www.dna.gob.ar/instituto-ant%C3%A1rtico-argentino
Mission: In concordance with what has been set forth by the state, the role of the IAA is to define, develop, direct, control, coordinate and
release scientific and technological activities conducted in the Antarctic to countries’ that are part of the Antarctic Treaty signed in 1959.
Release of findings is positive as it promotes communication with both national and international scientific communities.
Vision: The work of the IAA is valued for its unyielding compromise to international scientific cooperation, their protection of the
environment and the continued work conducted by the government to ensure peace in the country; all of which are Antarctic Treaty pillars.
Institutional Values of the IAA: The IAA stands out as an international scientific/technological organization for some of the reasons
highlighted below:
•

Dedication, experience, and creativity in the development and promotion of science in the Antarctic

•

Flexibility and resilience in facing conditions which at times impede scientific and technological work in the Antarctic

•

A profound sense of confraternity, respect and shared work conducted with other countries’ in the Antarctic.

•

Respect for the principals and norms as laid out in the Antarctic Treaty
OE Watch | June 2019

55

LATIN AMERICA
Chile Makes Advances in Antarctic Exploration
OE Watch Commentary: The following excerpts discuss
Chile’s activities in Antarctic exploration. They highlight
the role of the Chilean military, recent successes by Chile in
Antarctica, and how Chile and Argentina are looking for ways to
improve bilateral cooperation to protect their common interests
in the southern continent.
The first accompanying passage from the Chilean Ministry
of Foreign Affairs discusses “Dirantartica,” a Directorate
responsible for planning and executing Antarctic affairs; along
with its diplomatic, legal and political roles. Dirantartica works
in conjunction with national and international organizations to
safeguard Chile’s interests in the conservation and preservation
of Antarctica. The passage credits the Chilean Armed Forces for
making it possible for scientists to conduct research in Antarctica
through the innovative work of a group known as the O’Higgins
Exploration and Rescue Section.
The O’Higgins Exploration and Rescue Section (SERO) is
part of the Chilean Army and works to develop the planning and
execution phases of exploration efforts, particularly to set up safe
passage for scientists interested in studying never seen areas and
areas that are difficult to access. As the second accompanying
passage from a paper written by the Brazilian Navy discusses,
SERO soldiers tasked to exploration missions are highly trained
to operate in harsh environments. As part of a recently concluded
mission that started in 2008 and ended in 2018, SERO was able
to set up a base camp in Plateau Laclavere, north of the Antarctic
Peninsula. The passage highlights the challenges related to
accessing this area (aerial routes proved to be too dangerous due
to rapid meteorological changes), and notes that despite these
challenges, SERO found a way to access the area by land. Now,
thanks to the diligent work of the SERO soldiers, national and
international scientists have access to the new and vast area of
Plateau Laclavere.

Plateau Laclavere, Antarctica.

Source: Apcbg via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ant-pen-map-Trinity-Peninsula.PNG, CC BY-SA 3.0

Chile and Argentina both realize for the need to enhance bilateral cooperation on the Antarctic Peninsula. As such, they began forming
interdisciplinary teams capable of conducting joint inspections of foreign bases as part of the Antarctic Treaty in 2016. The most recent
inspections were conducted at the end of February 2019 and focused on bases operated by four separate countries. The joint inspections suggest
the two countries’ willingness to abide by the Antarctic Treaty and their desire to protect Antarctica. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Plateau Laclavere is 1,000 meters above sea level and is known for its flat terrain. These two factors
present access problems as wind speed can increase up to 25 knots in a short time period which is
generally accompanied with cloudiness which reduces visibility to a few meters. This means that Plateau
Laclavere is hard to access by land but nearly impossible by air because of wind and visibility issues. It is
also the reason SERO needed to build an efficient land route to this area.”

OE Watch | June 2019

56

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Chile Makes Advances in Antarctic Exploration
Source: “Antártica (Antarctica)”, Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 12 February 2019. https://minrel.gob.cl/minrel/site/edic/base/port/
antartica.html
Dirantartica places ample focus on all aspects that pertain to the Antarctic Treaty and its signatories. In doing this, Dirantartica fully
complies with its international obligations as laid out by the Treaty to include following international guidelines and consultative norms
regarding Antarctica. Additionally, Dirantartica strictly adheres to its own Antarctic Strategic Plan (2015-2019) and collaborates with other
public entities competent in positioning Chile the Region of Magallanes and the Chilean Antarctic as the gateway to the Antarctic. Apart from
the workload Dirantartica conducts, the organization also develops yearly principal objectives; some of which are listed below:
•

Applying the National Antarctic Policy of 2017, the Antarctic Strategic Plan (2015-2019) and the coordination and execution of the
National Antarctic Program. These tasks are accomplished with the participation of the other organizations who play a role in
Antarctic matters and with the help of the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Some of these organizations include: the Chilean
Antarctic Institute (INACH), the Directorate of Borders and State Limits (DIFROL); the Ministry of National Defense, the Ministry of
the Environment, the Undersecretary of Tourism, the Undersecretary of Fisheries, and the XII Region of Magallanes, just to name a
few.

•

Prepares and coordinates with the national Antarctic delegation for their participation in international forums regarding the Antarctic
Treaty. Additionally, Dirantartica helps organizations prepare for consultative meetings with experts in addition to implementing the
decisions adopted in such instances.

•

Coordinates everything related to the Commission for the Conservation of Living Antarctic Marine Resources (CCRUMA).

•

Plays an active role in the in the Environmental Impact Operational Committee Assessment. This organization provides up-to-date
assessments on condition in Antarctica to the Ministry of the Environment.

•

Acts as the Executive Advisor to the Antarctic Policy Council and its Permanent Working Committees to include General Affairs and the
Antarctica Financial team.

•

Drafts and prepares legal regulations on issues that concern Dirantartica’s areas of expertise.

•

Conducts specific reports at the request of national authorities and solicits queries from public and private organizations related to
issues relevant to their role in Antarctica.

•

Disseminates work completed by the Chilean government to members of the Antarctic Treaty via the use of the thematic compendia,
seminars, talks and courses.

•

Coordinates and prepares documents that are entered in the annual Antarctic National archives.

Source: “Plateau Laclavere, nueva ruta para la exploración y la ciencia (Plateau Laclavere: New Route for Exploration and Science),”
Marinha.mil.br, 6 July 2018. https://www.marinha.mil.br/secirm/sites/www.marinha.mil.br.secirm/files/publicacoes/rapal/documentos/di/
DI-57%20-%20PlateauLaclavere%2C%20nueva%20ruta%20para%20la%20exploraci%C3%B3n%20y%20la%20ciencia.pdf
The O’Higgins Exploration and Rescue Section (SERO) has improved over time in terms of techniques, procedures that must be followed
to mitigate loss of personnel and equipment needed to operate in Antarctica and pave routes or move heavy ice blocks. In establishing new
terms and procedures, SERO has come up with three principal objectives in the field. The first is to support scientific research on land and
at sea while ensuring the save movement of glaciers or islands located along the coast. Second, SERO is responsible for providing logistical
support to scientists and ensuring their survival. And third, SERO aims to create to safe land routes to locations in Antarctica where
scientists are interested in exploring such as Plateau Laclavere.
The area known as Plateau Laclavere is located north of the Antarctic Peninsula. It measures 40 square kilometers and contains a mass
of glacial ice that measures approximately 350 meters from top to bottom. This area does not differ greatly from general characteristics
presented in other areas of Antarctica except for two distinct geographical characteristics. Plateau Laclavere is 1,000 meters above sea level
and is known for its flat terrain. These two factors present access problems as wind speed can increase up to 25 knots in a short time period
which is generally accompanied with cloudiness which reduces visibility to a few meters. This means that Plateau Laclavere is hard to access
by land but nearly impossible by air because of wind and visibility issues. It is also the reason SERO needed to build an efficient land route to
this area.
Source: “Chile y Argentina concluyen tercera inspección conjunta de bases extranjeras en la Antártica (Chile and Argentina Conclude Third
Joint Inspection of Foreign Bases in Antarctica),” Chilean Antarctic Institute, 7 March 2019. http://www.inach.cl/inach/?p=25869
Joint inspections of foreign bases in Antarctica conducted by Chile and Argentina aim to prepare each country to face new regulations
that will likely be included in the next iteration of the Antarctic Treaty. It also helps foreign countries operating in Antarctica to review its
Protocol on Environmental Protection. The joint procedure conducted by Chile and Argentina allows optimization of resources to be able
to exercise their central power rights granted to them through the Antarctic Treaty. Joint inspections also help to verify compliance with
obligations assumed by Consultative Parties, particularly those related to the protection of the Antarctic environment. Finally, the inspections
serve as a measure to help Chile and Argentina improve bilateral relations regarding work in Antarctica.
OE Watch | June 2019

57

LATIN AMERICA
Ecuador’s Response to Increasing Narco Flights
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying articles discuss the challenge posed by clandestine airstrips, specifically ones used for drug
smuggling with aircraft because they make detection of narco-flights difficult. As the passages note, Ecuador’s government is trying to thwart
this activity through a number of initiatives.
As the first passage discusses, Mauricio Campuzano, the Commanding General for the Ecuadorian Airforce (FAE) recently said that there
are currently over 2,000 airstrips in the country. While some of these are legal, others are not, and authorities have no control over the latter.
This comment came following the discovery of a clandestine landing strip in its early construction stages and the crash of a narco flight. In this
same passage, Campuzano discusses why detecting narco flights are difficult and what the government’s plan is to thwart or at least lessen this
activity. These include installing a new radar in Manabí, conducting ongoing studies regarding ingress and egress routes of illicit aircraft, and
the use of new helicopters to better monitor areas of remote access.
The second passage, from the Ecuador Ministry of Interior discusses an operation named “Plan Conquistador,” launched on 15 January 2019.
According to the passage, the main objective of this operation was to dismantle a cell of Ecuadorians and Mexicans who utilize aerial routes to
move drugs from Ecuador to Mexico. The results are also highlighted, and include multiple arrests and drug seizures.
Ecuadorian news source El Comercio discusses why narco-traffickers prefer Cessna planes. It notes that Cessnas are “infrequently detected
by radars or police monitoring for illicit aircraft as they can fly as low as 500 meters, turn off their navigational lights and transponders and land
on airstrips that measure 300-500 meters.” Apparently, these airstrips can be constructed in Ecuador in less than a day if necessary. The passage
also points out that once the aircraft lands in Eucador, “it is loaded with approximately 700kgs of cocaine within 7-15 minutes at which time it
departs to Mexico.” Once in Mexico, the Cessna will land on an airstrip if there is one in place. If not, “cocaine packages are thrown off the
aircraft in areas pre-coordinated with Mexican narcos.” End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“It is not easy to detect clandestine airstrips as landing strips do not require
any more than 500-600 meters to land if not less.”
Source: “En Ecuador hay más de 2.000 pistas aéreas no controladas (More than 2,000 Uncontrolled Landing Strips Located in Ecuador),” El
Universo, 6 April 2019. https://www.eluniverso.com/noticias/2019/04/05/nota/7270838/ecuador-hay-mas-2000-pistas-aereas-no-controladas
Mauricio Campuzano, the Commanding General for the Ecuadorian Airforce (FAE) reported that there are currently more than 2,000 airstrips which
authorities have no control over. He further stated that it is “not easy to detect clandestine airstrips as landing strips do not require any more than 500600 meters to land if not less. Furthermore, the landing strips may be paved roads or prepared or unprepared landing strips. The pilots responsible for
landing aircraft in these difficult conditions face complicated and risky landings”.
This statement was made following the recent discovery of an illicit airstrip under construction in El Aromo, Ecuador and shortly after, the crash of a
narco aircraft in Manabí. In response to Campuzano’s statements, Oswaldo Jarrin, Ecuador’s Defense Minister asserted the necessity to better monitor
areas where illicit aircraft enter the country. Steps mentioned by Jarrin include installing a new radar in Manabí (principal entrance point of illicit
flights), a change in mentality from “action-reaction” that needs to be replaced with a permanent and consistent study that will yield answers for the
future. As for the FAE, they are replacing their Dhruv helicopters with 3 new helicopters to include an AW 119, an MK2 and an AW 119 simple. Ecuador
will also continuing using the P3 it already has.

Source: “Desmontan red narcotraficante que operaba entre Ecuador y México (Police Dismantle Drug Trafficking Ring that Operated
between Ecuador and Mexico),” Ecuadorian Ministry of Interior, 15 January 2019. https://www.ministeriointerior.gob.ec/desmontan-rednarcotraficante-que-operaba-entre-ecuador-y-mexico/
The Ecuadorian government launched “Plan Conquistador” on January 15, 2019 in provinces to include Guayas y Santa Elena. The reason for this
operation? To dismantle a cell of Ecuadorians and Mexicans who utilize aerial routes to move drugs from Ecuador to Mexico. Reported results were
reported as follows:
•

Arrest of 11 individuals (9 Ecuadorians and 2 Mexican nationals)

•

Seizure of 373.37kgs of cocaine

Intelligence work conducted by the National Police and Anti-Narcotics Directorate 3 months before the operation verified the following information:
•

That aerial flights were occurring between Ecuador and Mexico

•

The location of seven criminal cell members in Guayaquil

•

The locations of homes utilized by Ecuadorians and Mexicans for meetings and to store drugs.

•

Vehicles used to move drugs

Source: “Entre el 2003 y el 2018, se han confiscado 17 naves con droga (Between 2003 and 2018, Authorities Confiscate 17 Aircraft Carrying
Drugs),” El Comercio, 12 March 2018. https://www.elcomercio.com/actualidad/avionetas-narcotrafico-confiscado-policia-inteligencia.html
Aircraft generally used to traffic drugs are Cessnas for multiple reasons. First, they are infrequently detected by radars or police monitoring for illicit
aircraft as they can fly as low as 500 meters, turn off their navigational lights and transponders and land on airstrips that measure 300-500 meters.
These same airstrips can be constructed in Ecuador in less than a day if necessary. Once an aircraft lands in Ecuador, it is loaded with approximately
700kgs of cocaine within 7-15 minutes at which time it departs to Mexico. Once in Mexican territory, the Cessna will land on an airstrip if there is one in
place. If not, cocaine packages are thrown off the aircraft in areas pre-coordinated with Mexican narcos.

OE Watch | June 2019

58

