community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 9
Issue #4
April 2019

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3
4
5
6
7
9
10
11
12
12
13
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Military-Industrial Journalistic Countermeasures
Russia’s Mobile and Cost-Efficient Satellite Launch Service
Russia Hedges Bets on Satellite Navigation
MIG-31 to Provide Coverage of Pacific and Arctic Region
VDV Reorganization to Include Organic Aviation
Mandatory Patriotic Training?
Complexities and Challenges of Russia’s Avangard
Hypersonic Glide Reentry Vehicle
‘Special Outsider’: Russia Joins the Race for Global
Leadership in Artificial Intelligence
Get on the Boat, Get off the Boat
Freedom of Navigation to be Tested in Arctic?
States Continue to Invest in Russian Energy
Big Ship for a Big Job
Sino-Soviet Conflict Rememberd with Concern
Small Steps in Uzbekistan’s Military Reform
Improved Officer Selection/Tracking System
Bilingual School Highlights Estonian Language Politics
Former Donbas Hero
Armenia’s “Offensive” Strategy?
Anti-Bribery Training

INDO-PACIFIC
21
22
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
31
31
32

China’s View of Hypersonic Weapons: Changing the
Dynamics of Warfare
China’s Rocket Forces Conduct Readiness Training
The Role of China’s Theater Commands
China Launches First “Intelligent” Cargo Ship
Beidou Navigation System Expansion Announced
Shanghai Embraces 5G Technology, Accelerates
Infrastructure Plans
Taiwan Announces 2019 Armed Forces Training Plan
New Chinese Two-Seat Carrier-based Fighter Enters Next
Phase of Testing
The Development of Pakistan’s JF-17 Fighter
Malaysia Arrests ISIS Militants
Southern Thai Insurgents Increase Attacks
Indonesian Women Involved in Terrorism

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
33
34
36
37
38
39
40
40
41
42
42
44

Debating a Safe Zone for Syria: The View from Turkey
A New Operational Security Issue in Turkey:
PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds
Is Russia Getting Entangled in Southwest Syria?
Iran Diverting Money from Development to Military
ISIS Continues to Infiltrate into Turkey
Perceptions of Russian Strength in Middle East
Iran: Hovercraft successfully fires cruise missiles
Forcing Iranian Military Businesses to Pay Tax
Turkey Conducts Naval Drill in Surrounding Seas
Understanding Turkey’s Energy Policy
Tensions Build between China and Turkey over Uighurs
Demographic Challenges in Egypt, Jordan and Iraq

AFRICA
45
46
47
47
48
49
50
51
52

Burundi Opposes Reductions of Its AMISOM Forces
Uganda Threatens to Quit AMISOM over Potential Force
Reductions
Malian Militant’s Proof-of-Life Video Overturns French Claims
Multinational Joint Task Force Gains Ground against Boko
Haram
Factors Giving Rise to Militant Extremism in the Sahel
Benin Worries Terrorism May Be Imported from Its Neighbors
Boko Haram Convoy Attack Undermines Election
Somalia and Egypt Agree to Cooperate on Security
Conflict and Oil Intertwined in Somalia

LATIN AMERICA
53
54
55
56
57

What Role for Brazil’s Armed Forces?
Cubans Defend Their Regime
Santa Rosa de Lima Cartel Use GoPro in Attack Against CJNG
The Hezbollah Presence in Colombia
Argentina Aims to Unify Defense Policy and Diplomacy

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 9 | Issue 4

April | 2019

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Matti Dimmick
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Maxim Starchak
Matthew Stein
Sergey Sukhankin

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.

Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter
Africa

Source: https://www.dvidshub.net/image/5127396/flintlock-2019-po-burkina-faso,
Public Domain.

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest

The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
A Senegalese special forces soldier and his spotter prepare to fire an
M240 machine gun as part of interoperability training during with
U.S. special forces soldiers during Exercise Flintlock 2019, near Po,
Burkina Faso, Feb. 21, 2019. Flintlock 2019 builds the capacity of
participating nations to support regional cooperation, security and
interoperability. (U.S. Army photo by Sgt. 1st Class Mary S.
Katzenberger).

Ihsan Gunduz

Brenda Fiegel
Alma Keshavarz

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Military-Industrial Journalistic Countermeasures
OE Watch Commentary: In November 2018, the liberal
Russian daily, Novaya Gazeta published an investigation
regarding fraud within one of Russia’s most important
weapons manufacturers, Корпорации Тактическое
Ракетное Вооружение (КТRV, or Tactical Missile
Weaponry Corporation). The article described how state
defense expenditure funds were siphoned off via various
schemes to enrich family members of the corporation’s
director. The article went on to receive much wider
publicity when opposition and anti-corruption activist,
Alexei Navalny produced a video which highlighted the
findings in the article. (see: “Russian Defense IndustryImproved Financial Accountability?,” OE Watch, January
2019).

“As a whole, we calculate the Corporation’s economic
status as sound and sufficiently stable.”

One might have presumed that following this article
there would have been organizational changes at KTRV.
Instead, two months later, as if the Novaya Gazeta article
and subsequent video had never been produced, the
pro-Kremlin, military weekly, Voyenno-Promyshlennyy
Kuryer-VPK (Military-Industrial Courier) published a
long, detailed interview with the KTRV director, where he
claims to “calculate the Corporation’s economic status as
Hypersonic Avangard Rocket produced by KTRV.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hypersonic_rocket_complex_Avangard.jpg, CC 4.0.
sound and sufficiently stable.” While the director does admit
that “there are problem issues in the Corporation,” he’s confident that “all of them, in our view, are being resolved.” The VPK article goes on
to thoroughly describe all of the many contributions which the KTRV corporation is making to the Russian defense sector (e.g. hypersonic and
cruise missiles, torpedoes, counter-torpedo protection, anti-ship missiles, mines, etc.). While the director also talks about developments in the
realm of “information countermeasures,” he makes no mention of the earlier investigation and allegations of financial malfeasance. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: Oleg Falichev, “От дозвука до гиперзвука,” [From Subsonic to Hypersonic], Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 29 January 2019.
https://vpk-news.ru/articles/47947
The domestic OPK [defense-industrial complex] is continuing to summarize the results for 2018. General Director Boris Obnosov talked
to “Voyennoye-promyshlennyy Kuryer” about what they were, and the tasks for 2019 on the eve of the 17th anniversary of the Korporatsii
“Takticheskoye raketnoye vooruzheniye” (KTRV) [Tactical Missile Weaponry Corporation].
[Falichev] – Boris Viktorovich, how was 2018 for the Corporation?
[Obnosov] – The final results of our work this year will be set out later, closer to March. That includes at the level of the Defense Ministry
and the government…. In the annual rating of the world’s largest arms producers, the KTRV rose by 12 places.
As a whole, we calculate the Corporation’s economic status as sound and sufficiently stable. There are problem issues in the Corporation, as
with any living organism, but all of them, in our view, are being resolved….
…We succeeded either in completing our signature programs, or confirming those characteristics of the VVT [arms and military equipment]
products, which are included in them.
There were successful launches of the Kh-101 cruise missile and the “Avangard” hypersonic glide vehicle, about which assuredly even the
deaf heard of the launches in the Far East…
[Falichev] – KTRV includes sufficiently independent enterprises and associations with powerful background, producing a wide catalog of
products – from torpedoes to supersonic missiles.
[Obnosov] – We have several OKR [experimental-design projects] on aviation and naval weaponry. These are various designation products:
“air-to-air,” “air-to-surface,” and “air-to-ship.” Roughly a third of them are connected with coastal systems and underwater naval weaponry.
…In 2019, we must complete more than 10 OKR, among which, as I already said, have both aviation and naval components. In this
connection we have become, generally speaking, omnivores….
…In the field of naval weaponry, nearly all classes of underwater equipment, including anti-submarine torpedoes and missiles, mine, and
mine countermeasures systems, information countermeasures systems, and counter-torpedo protection, as well as sea- and coastal-based antiship missile systems are being developed….

OE Watch | April 2019

3

EURASIA
Russia’s Mobile and Cost-Efficient Satellite Launch Service
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses Russian plans to field a low-cost rocket that
can launch small (up to 15kg) satellites into a very Low Earth Orbit (LEO) of 250-300 kilometers. This rocket is based upon the MN-300
meteorological rocket that has been modified to include a second stage booster. This system is very mobile, and can reportedly be moved by
truck, air, or rail. The article focuses on the financial benefits of such a system, including the ability to rapidly put a satellite into orbit, without
having to “piggy-back” on another (larger) rocket, which is the customary way small satellites are put into orbit. But this system also has
military uses. Small reconnaissance and communications satellites may have shorter life spans due their small sizes and close orbits, but the
ability to rapidly field small satellites on demand could be extremely valuable in crisis situations when surge capabilities are required. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Scientists of the Russian Science and Production Association ‘Tayfun’ have found a way to ensure the
rapid delivery of satellites into space. They have proposed to create a super-light space launch vehicle
based on the MN-300 meteorological rocket.”
Source: Aleksandr Bulanov, “Естественный носитель: в России создают ракету для оперативных запусков Она сможет отправлять на
орбиту спутники весом до 15 кг за три часа (A Natural Carrier: A Rocket for Expedited Launches is Being Created in Russia; It Can Send
Satellites Into Orbit Weighing up to 15 Kilograms in Three Hours),” Izvestiya, 20 February 2019. https://iz.ru/843088/aleksandr-bulanov/
estestvennyi-nositel-v-rossii-sozdaiut-raketu-dlia-operativnykh-zapuskov
Scientists of the Russian Science and Production Association “Tayfun” have found a way to ensure the rapid delivery of satellites into space.
They have proposed to create a super-light space launch vehicle based on the MN-300 meteorological rocket. It is used to send scientific
equipment into the upper layers of the atmosphere along a ballistics trajectory. “We plan to replace the scientific equipment located in the
payload section of the rocket with a second-stage engine. This will give the carrier the ability to inject a payload weighing up to 15 kilograms
into a low, near-earth orbit at an altitude of 250-300 kilometers,” noted Anatoliy Pozin, the manager of NPO “Tayfun’s” Geophysical and
Ecological Laboratory for Missile and Space Research. “And the launch platform of the MN-300 rocket and the first stage will remain
unchanged, which minimizes expenditures for modernization.”…
The new version of the rocket will fully retain the positive qualities of the MN-300. Preparation for launch will take a total of about three
hours and its transportation can be accomplished in a container installed on an ordinary truck or railroad platform. Water or aircraft
transportation versions are also available, Izvestiya was told by Yuliya Chikacheva, an engineer on the developers’ staff…
“Besides the elimination of the economic losses associated with the additional logistics and the lengthy waiting periods for a launch, its high
responsiveness will open new possibilities for rapid exchanges of small satellites in the event that they become suddenly disabled,” noted the
engineer.
The Cost of the Flight
The main shortcoming of the new rocket is the high cost of delivering 1 kilogram of payload into orbit. It is approximately $60,000. However,
this cost can be offset by individual conditions of the launch. “The cost of inserting a satellite into orbit may fluctuate significantly depending
on its characteristics, but most likely it will be about $20,000 to $30,000 a kilogram, which is at least half that of the costs cited by the NPO
‘Tayfun’ specialists,” noted Andrey Potapov, Deputy Director of the Space Center of the Skolkovskiy Institute of Science and Technology.
“Moreover, the high cost of a new rocket is fully justified by the capability of selecting the altitude of the orbit and the launch time for the
goals of the specific space mission.”…
The Scientific Side
It is assumed that the main payload for the new rocket will be scientific nano- and micro-satellites. The number of their launches has
significantly grown in recent years. In the opinion of Anatoliy Kopik, director of marketing for the “Sputniks” Company, small scientific
devices (weighing 1-2 kilograms) may be launched to a 300-kilometer low orbit for study of the earth’s lower thermosphere. At the present
time this field remains little studied since the use of meteorological rockets can rarely be used there. And it is preferred not to use large and
expensive satellites to resolve such tasks, the expert related. refused to comment to Izvestiya about NPO “Tayfun’s” new development. The
project to create the new rocket may be completed over the course of 3-4 years.

OE Watch | April 2019

4

EURASIA
Russia Hedges Bets on Satellite Navigation
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses
Russian plans to field a new terrestrial navigation system, the Sprut-N1 (Спрут-Н1). The Sprut-N1
is primarily for use by larger platforms (naval vessels, strategic air defense systems, aircraft, etc.),
and is seen as a way of improving and diversifying navigation capabilities. This diversification of
navigation capabilities is important for the Russian military, as they believe the satellite navigation
provided by systems such as GPS and GLONASS could be unavailable or severely degraded in
the event of a peer-level conflict. The diversification of navigation capabilities is also occurring
elsewhere in the Russian Armed Forces, such as even with relatively small UAVs that are using
terrain recognition technologies for this purpose. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Alternative backup channels
are vital to the military
because, as has become clear,
modern satellite navigation
systems are vulnerable to
electronic warfare devices.”

Source: Aleksey Kozachenko and Aleksey Ramm: “Когда спутник подавлен: флот получит наземную ГЛОНАСС (When Satellite Is
Jammed: Navy to Get Ground-Based GLONASS),” Izvestiya, 19 February 2019. https://iz.ru/843437/aleksei-kozachenko-aleksei-ramm/
kogda-sputnik-podavlen-flot-poluchit-nazemnuiu-glonass
A new-generation high-precision radio navigation system (RNS) -- Sprut-N1 [Спрут-Н1]-- has been created for the Navy. It will make it
possible to determine an object’s geographical position, speed, and altitude with a degree of accuracy that significantly exceeds that of data
from GLONASS or GPS. The determination of coordinates is carried out by ground-based RNS stations, which pass an encrypted signal to
ships and planes. The main advantage of the new system over satellite navigation is that the high-tech RNS signal cannot be jammed.
This year equipment for the Sprut-N1 navigation system will start to be trialed on ships of one of the Navy’s fleets, Izvestiya was told by the
Defense Ministry. In the first phase, the RNS will operate over the territory of Russia and its coastal waters. Two ground-based stations will
be deployed.
At present the Sprut-N1 is the only Russian broadband RNS with ground-based stations, and in terms of accuracy it surpasses foreign
analogues. The system comprises a series of ground-based stations for tracking and transmitting orders to a ship or plane, a receiver, and a
computer center. It is known that the system has excellent functional capabilities in terms of data transmission speed and the security of the
signal -- the precise technical parameters of the new system are being kept secret…
Alternative backup channels are vital to the military because, as has become clear, modern satellite navigation systems are vulnerable
to electronic warfare devices. At the same time, the ground-based Sprut-N1 RNS will continue operating autonomously even if an enemy
manages to jam the satellite signal in a certain area. The idea is that broadband RNS stations will become an essential means of navigational
support to ships and other vessels when an enemy is actively engaged in EW.
A modern warship sorely needs a navigation system that cannot be jammed, Izvestiya was told by Captain First Rank Sergey Batalin, former
commander of a Pacific Fleet submarine.
“Knowing your precise location in real time is very important -- it makes it possible to assume an attacking course in timely fashion or to
evade enemy strikes,” the expert reckons. “There are loads of methods of determining your location, but the most precise and quickest are
special navigational systems that automatically plot a route. It is also important that navigational data are relied on by many of the ship’s
command and control systems, including the aiming and guidance of high-precision weapons.”

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | April 2019

5

EURASIA
MIG-31 to Provide Coverage of Pacific and Arctic Region
OE Watch Commentary: The MIG-31BM is the modernized version of the MIG-31 (NATO designation “Foxhound”). It is a long-range
interceptor aircraft with anti-air, anti-ship and anti-ground capability, plus it can launch anti-satellite missiles and the Kindzhal cruise missile.
It has flown 8,000 kilometers in just over 7 hours using aerial refueling. The regiment mentioned in the accompanying excerpted article will
probably be assigned to the Naval Aviation of the Pacific Ocean Fleet. The additional assignment of MIG-31 BM aircraft to Murmansk will
provide coverage of the Northern Sea Route and vicinity. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Aleksey Kozachenko, “Сядут на Камчатке: на Дальнем Востоке развернут авиаполк МиГ-31 Сверхзвуковые
перехватчики берут под контроль Арктику и Тихоокеанский регион (They Will Land in Kamchatka: MiG-31 Aviation Regiment to be
deployed in Far East. Supersonic Interceptors to Monitor Arctic and Pacific Region),” Izvestia, 21 February 2019. https://iz.ru/847654/alekseiramm-aleksei-kozachenko/siadut-na-kamchatke-na-dalnem-vostoke-razvernut-aviapolk-mig-31
The Defense Ministry has decided in principle to deploy a new MiG-31 regiment to the Yelizovo airfield in Kamchatskiy Kray xxx. MiG31s have been well tested in the North. In 2018, a series of tactical air exercises patrolling the Arctic zone with MiG-31BMs were conducted.
The planes were also used during the Vostok-2018 maneuvers. Following the exercises, the Ministry of Defense decide to conduct permanent
patrolling of the Arctic with these fighters and to form aviation units for this purpose.
The new formation will be given the number of a famous unit -- the 865th Fighter Regiment…. According to military expert Dmitriy
Boltenkov, “this aviation unit was traditionally stationed in the east of the country and performed missions to cover the North and the Pacific
region. In 2010 the regiment was disbanded. One of its MiG-31 squadrons became part of the 317th Separate Mixed Aviation Regiment, and
all the aviation unit’s regalia were transferred there. This squadron will now provide the foundation of the revived regiment.” The 865th
Regiment holds the Order of the Red Banner of Labor -- it is the only combat aviation unit ever to have been awarded a civilian order. The
award was given for its part in dealing with the aftermath of flooding in the Blagoveshchensk area...
MiG-31s have traditionally been deployed in the North and in Kamchatka. Yelizovo airfield has already been home to a regiment armed with
this plane, according to military expert Anton Lavrov. “The advantage of the MiG-31BM is that it can monitor a vast area thanks to its high
speed, powerful radar, and long-range missiles. This makes it possible to fully cover the eastern coast and the border with the United States.
The fighter performs the role of an effective interceptor in a remote area of the country -- in this respect it is better than ordinary fighters.
Moreover, a large number of planes of this type are in storage, and it will be possible to increase the number of aviation units, if necessary.”
“The regiment could be assigned missions to escort Russian strategic bombers,” Dmitriy Boltenkov noted. “In addition, they will be able to
perform missions to cover the Kamchatka group of the submarine fleet. It will also be possible to use them as a powerful strike force in the
Pacific.”
The MiG-31BM has been chosen as the carrier of a unique Russian weapon -- the high-precision Kinzhal hypersonic aviation missile. Work
on modernizing the plane was conducted in parallel with the development of this system. With the emergence of the Kinzhal, the interceptor
acquired a new role as a strike plane. The MiG-31 takes missiles to a height of up to 25 km and a speed of 3,000 kph, then the missiles begin
their own autonomous flight. Using the Kinzhal, nuclear and conventional warheads can be delivered to a target up to 2,000 km away. In this
way the plane is able to strike enemy forces without entering the zone protected by the enemy’s air defense and missile defense system.
This year the Defense Ministry will also create a unit at the Monchegorsk airfield in Murmanskaya Oblast, where two squadrons of MiG-31
interceptors will be deployed. There are subsequent plans to expand them into a full aviation regiment.

“The advantage of the MiG31BM is that it can monitor a vast
area thanks to its high speed,
powerful radar, and long-range
missiles.”

Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM.

Source: Alex Beltyukov - RuSpotters Team [CC BY-SA 3.0 GFDL 1.2], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mikoyan-Gurevich_MiG-31BM,_Russia_-_Air_Force_AN2221622.jpg.

OE Watch | April 2019

6

EURASIA
VDV Reorganization to Include Organic Aviation
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted articles from VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer and Izvestiya discuss the subordination of the Russian
Aerospace Forces’ assets to the Airborne (VDV). Typically, Russian VDV formations
(brigades and divisions) are supported by attached army aviation brigades belonging
to the Russian Aerospace Forces (the Russian Ground Forces VDV, and Naval
Infantry currently have no manned aviation assets). In current practice, this means
that request for aviation support for the VDV are routed through the Military
District/Joint Strategic Command. As mentioned in the Voyenno-Promyshlennyy
Kuryer article, the Vostok-2018 exercise included an experiment involving the direct
assignment of an aviation brigade to a VDV maneuver brigade. Apparently this
experiment was deemed a success, as the Russians are planning to permanently assign
an army aviation brigade to the VDV around 2020-2021. Not only will the army
aviation brigade be assigned to the VDV, but this unit will be somewhat modified.
The brigade (48-50 helicopters) will reportedly have four helicopter squadrons: one
squadron of Mi-35M (HIND-E) strike helicopters, one squadron of heavy lift Mi26T2 (HALO) helicopters, and two squadrons of Mi-8AMTSh-V (HIP) combattransport helicopters. If this command and control relationship proves beneficial,
other army aviation brigades could be subordinated in a similar manner. The other
accompanying excerpt, is an interview of Airborne Troops Commander, Colonel
General Andrey Serdyukov, in Krasnaya Zvezda. It mentions some other possible
changes in the VDV, including the possibility that some VDV brigades may be
upsized into divisions in the future. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“Measures to reconstitute brigades into divisions are
regarded as just one stage in the prospective evolution and
building of the Airborne Troops.”

Airborne Troops Commander Colonel General Andrey Serdyukov .
Source: By Mil.ru, CC BY 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=70308848.

Source: Pavel Ivanov, “«Крылатая пехота» становится мобильнее Реформа: ВДВ России сделает их глобальной силой (Winged Infantry
is Becoming More Mobile: Reform of Russia’s Airborne Troops Will Make Them a Global Force),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 19
February 2019. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/48469
…Even before the start of the exercises, Airborne Troops commander Andrey Serdyukov stated that Vostok would be a validation of the new
organizational structure of Airborne Troops units and subunits. So, what was the colonel general talking about?
According to the Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, the experiment to create a new organizational structure for the Airborne Troops began in
2017. And it was done on the basis of the 31st Airborne Brigade. The main task was to radically improve the maneuverability of the brigade, in
particular, on the battlefield. To do this, it was planned to use helicopter units.
Therefore, the brigade formed two airmobile battalions. Compared to conventional airborne assault brigades they were provided with a
somewhat lighter organizational structure. Also, the mortar and antitank units were equipped with vehicles ̶ Rys and UAZ trucks.
The brigade command quickly took charge of helicopter squadrons, one combat and three military transport squadrons based on Mi8AMTSh and Mi-26 helicopters. Units are transferred from the Aerospace Forces structure. Helicopter pilots were not just attached to the
brigade command. During the experiment, they became regular units of the 31st Airborne Brigade. This made it possible to build cooperation
between personnel and pilots, as well as to teach the command to plan and manage the joint combat work of the new airmobile battalions and
helicopter squadrons…
As officially reported by the Defense Ministry, during the Vostok-2018 exercises a landing was performed by tactical assault troops as part
of the airmobile battalion of the 31st Airborne Brigade. This involved more than 40 Mi-8AMTSh helicopters, two Mi-26 heavy multirole
transport helicopters, and more than 10 Mi-24 fire support helicopters.
Trucks were delivered to the specified area on the external pylons of Mi-8 helicopters. Using the landing method, Mi-26 helicopters landed
eight all-terrain vehicles and four Rys armored vehicles equipped with Kornet antitank guided missiles, and Kord heavy machine guns.
The reform gives a new vector of development to the Airborne Troops. They are becoming more modern and responsive to current military
and political objectives. But the effectiveness of the reform is a matter of time.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2019

7

EURASIA
Continued: VDV Reorganization to Include
Organic Aviation
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Aleksey Kozachenko, Bogdan Stepovoy, and Konstantin
Valentinov: “ВДВ окрыляют: десантники получат собственную авиацию
(Airborne Troops Acquire Wings: Airborne Troopers Will Get Their Own
Aviation),” Izvestiya, 19 February 2019. https://iz.ru/847090/aleksei-rammaleksei-kozachenko-bogdan-stepovoi-konstantin-valentinov/vdv-okryliaiutdesantniki-poluchat-sobstvennuiu-aviatciiu
…Several sources in the military department have told Izvestiya that the proposal
to form one army aviation brigade in the Airborne Troops has, on the whole, been
approved. But the unit will not be created before 2020-2021: New helicopters have
to be ordered for it. According to Izvestiya’s sources, the aviation brigade will be
directly subordinate to the Airborne Troops Commander.
The aviation unit will be based in either Ryazan’, Voronezh, or Orenburg. It will
incorporate four helicopter squadrons. One will be equipped with Mi-35M strike
helicopters, and this model has not been chosen by chance: As distinct from the
Mi-28N and Ka-52 main strike helicopters, the Suprekrokodil can transport up to
seven airborne troopers. Another two squadrons will be armed with Mi-8AMTSh-V
combat transport helicopters, and the fourth with superheavy Mi-26T2 helicopters.
The creation of an army helicopter brigade in the Airborne Troops will enable
airborne subunits to operate far more efficiently and diversely, Colonel Valeriy
Yuryev, head of the Executive Committee of the Russian Airborne Troopers
Union, told Izvestiya. “Use of the Airborne Troops is currently being expanded
substantially,” Valeriy Yuryev told Izvestiya. “Airborne troopers can be used
to reinforce ground forces and also to carry out reconnaissance and sabotage
activity. In addition, under conditions of powerful air defense, it becomes the most
effective thing to transfer troops in helicopters that are practically inconspicuous
at superlow altitudes. It also should not be forgotten that for airborne troopers a
helicopter means not only transfer but also fire support.”
Some 48-50 helicopters capable of tackling combat tasks by day or by night
will be gathered together in the Airborne Troops Army Aviation Brigade. In the
Army the Mi-8 and its modifications, including the AMTSh-V, are dubbed the
Kalashnikov assault rifle among helicopters – reliable, trouble-free, hardy, and
tenacious. The Mi-8 AMTSh-V has modern ceramic armor, more powerful VK2500 engines, and new avionics and is fitted with flaps for loading and unloading
hardware instead of a hinged ramp. This modification is particularly good for
work under desert and high-mountain conditions.
Mi-26T2 heavy transport helicopters will be used to transfer armored vehicles
armed with antitank guided missile systems and large-caliber machine guns. The
machine has a flight range of 800 km, or 1,905 km with extra fuel tanks. The Mi26T can carry approximately 80 airborne troopers at a time.
Fire support will be provided by Mi-35M Superkrokodil helicopters. The brigade
can, if necessary, be promptly transferred over thousands of kilometers by military
transport aviation. All the helicopters, except the Mi-26T, are conveyed within the
most massive transport aircraft – the Il-76. The machines can be assembled and
prepared for combat application over one to two days…

Source: Alexander Tikhonov, “Десант наращивает
мобильность и мощь (Airborne Building up Mobility
and Power),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 22 February 2019.
http://redstar.ru/desant-narashhivaet-mobilnost-i-moshh/
…The airborne troops’ mobility and capacity
to regroup in short order is among their main
distinguishing factors. Andrey Nikolayevich, what
measures are scheduled for the coming years to
continue increasing the VDV’s mobility?
The Airborne Troops’ have always been a highmobility combat arm capable of very swiftly relocating
subunits over great distances, regrouping, and
deploying in any strategic sector.
In 2018 the Airborne Troops conducted an experiment
to employ a “new type” air assault formation directly
with army aviation. The formation’s participation in
the Vostok-2018 strategic maneuvers constituted the
culminating stage of the experiment. Fundamentally
new combat and maneuver capabilities on the part
of air assault subunits operating from helicopters
were demonstrated during the performance of combat
training missions…
In an interview you gave to Krasnaya Zvezda last
year you stated that the total authorized strength of
VDV personnel had increased by 48 percent since
2012. Are there plans to continue increasing the
authorized strength of the “winged guard”? Is there
a possibility that brigades will be reconstituted as
divisions?
The increase in the strength level last year has been
just one stage in the evolution and building of the
Airborne Troops. With the active support of the Supreme
Commander in Chief of the Russian Federation
Armed Forces it is planned to implement some further
measures that will be aimed at the troops’ considerable
reinforcement in the quantitative and qualitative
respects. The VDV command’s action plan stipulates
the creation within the troops of a brigade with a “new
type” organizational and manning structure, which
will acquire qualitatively different capabilities in the
performance of combat and specialized missions via its
own mobile component and increased combat potential.
Measures to reconstitute brigades into divisions are
regarded as just one stage in the prospective evolution
and building of the Airborne Troops.

OE Watch | April 2019

8

EURASIA
Mandatory Patriotic Training?
OE Watch Commentary: The Kremlin leadership continues
to place considerable emphasis upon strengthening the country’s
military awareness and sense of patriotism, particularly among
Russia’s younger generation. One of the more recent vehicles
for youth patriotic instruction is the Young Army movement,
created by Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu in mid-2016
(see: “Young Army for all Schools,” OE Watch, December
2018). The movement, which began as a voluntary, scoutingtype organization for children (8-18 years old), now appears
to be transforming into something more mandatory. As the
accompanying excerpt from the pro-business daily Kommersant
points out, participation in the movement may soon be required
of children of both active duty military officers and employees
in Russia’s military-industrial complex.
The article begins by quoting a proposal which was sent to
the leadership of the military industry complex (MIC) with the
goal of “developing the Young Army movement” within their
enterprises. The article does not describe what type of training
would be involved for the children associated with the MIC.
The excerpt also refers to an earlier article which describes a
“letter of the acting deputy commander of the Eastern Military
District with a request to take into Young Army movement
100% of the children of officers aged between 8 and 18 years
old.”
The latest directive to enlist children into the movement
may be prompted by a desire to please higher headquarters.
The excerpt includes a quote from a Kommersant source who
claims that Defense Minister Shoygu “pays great attention”
to the development of this movement and that for company
directors by “supporting this initiative means supporting him
personally.” The article goes on to point out that according to
the plans of the Ministry of Defense, “by 2020 there should be
about a million people” enrolled in the Young Army movement.
There are currently some 350,000 Russian youth enrolled.
According to its original mandate, one of the objectives of the
Young Army movement is to instill a greater sense of healthy
patriotism among Russia’s younger generation. The article
quotes a representative of the “Union of Soldiers’ Mothers
Committees of Russia,” who questions how such a directive
to enlist the children of MIC employees will be implemented,
suggesting that “the intervention of the military in children’s
structures causes concern.” If this is any indication, the
requirement that children of military officers and employees of
Russia’s MIC join the movement does not necessarily guarantee
that this goal will be met. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“According to a Kommersant source, ‘Sergey
Shoygu pays great attention to the development
of the movement, supporting this initiative
means supporting him personally.’”

Young Army cadets in Severomorsk.

Source: http://eng.mil.ru/images/upload/2015/2016-08-03_yunarmy_severomorsk-900_22.jpg, CC 4.0.

Source: Ksenia Mironova and Ivan Sinergiev, “Военным заводам заказали
Юнармию: Минобороны просит создать отделения движения на всех
предприятиях ОПК (Military Plants ordered Young Army: The Ministry of
Defense asks all defense enterprises to create a branch of the movement),”
Kommersant, 12 March 2019. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3908185
As it became known to Kommersant, detachments of the military-patriotic
movement Young Army may appear at the enterprises of the Russian
military-industrial complex. The corresponding proposal was sent to the
leadership of the defense industry complex with the goal of “developing
the Young Army movement”, the number of which, according to the plans
of the military, by 2020 there should be about a million people. Earlier,
Kommersant reported about the letter of the acting deputy commander
of the Eastern Military District with a request to take into Young Army
movement 100% of the children of officers aged between 8 and 18 years
old….
…On the plans to expand the activities of the military patriotic Young
Army movement at the enterprises of the military-industrial complex,
several sources involved in the implementation of the state defense order
told Kommersant…. According to a Kommersant source, “Sergey Shoygu
pays great attention to the development of the movement, supporting this
initiative means supporting him personally.”
Valentina Grebenik, executive secretary of the Union of Soldiers’ Mothers
Committees of Russia, believes that in this way the military is trying to
substantiate the activities of the main military and political directorate… “I
do not understand how this should be implemented…. And in general, the
intervention of the military in children’s structures causes concern,” notes
Mrs Grebenik.
In the future, the number should increase significantly: for example, on
February 26, the first deputy chief of the main military-political directorate,
General Alexei Tsygankov, said that by 9 May, the ministry predicts an
increase in the number Young Army members to reach 500,000. To this end,
the Ministry of Defense proposes to create an Young Army squad in each
school, open the houses of Young Army in each region and launch a yearround network of Young Army camps based on the branches of Patriot Park.
By the 75th anniversary of the Victory in 2020, it is planned to increase the
number of Young Army to 1 million members…

OE Watch | April 2019

9

EURASIA
Complexities and Challenges of Russia’s Avangard
Hypersonic Glide Reentry Vehicle
by Maxim Starchak
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 16, Issue 30, dated 5 March 2019.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/complexities-and-challenges-of-russias-avangard-hypersonic-glide-reentry-vehicle/

OE Watch Commentary: Late last year, President Vladimir Putin referred to the Avangard hypersonic glide reentry vehicle (RV) as a “gift”
to Russia for 2019. Clearly, the Avangard was designed, in part, to demonstrate the military-industrial power of Russia. But its development
has faced serious problems, and its future remains questionable. The Avangard, developed by MIC NPO Mashinostroyenia, is based on the
company’s 1980s-era Albatross project, which was supposed to counter the comprehensive ABM system being created by the US as part of the
Strategic Defense Initiative (popularly known as “Star Wars”). The possibility of creating a hypersonic reentry vehicle was likely discussed
during Putin’s visit to this plant in December 2002.
A Russian prototype hypersonic vehicle apparently performed a test flight as part of the Security 2004 military exercise, on February 18, 2004.
This was stated by both the then–first deputy chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, Yuri Baluevsky, and
President Putin. Speaking at a press conference, the Kremlin leader claimed these missiles systems are capable of striking ground targets across
intercontinental distances with hypersonic speed and high accuracy. The gliders are also capable of sharp, high-speed horizontal and vertical
evasive maneuvers in flight.
The first explicit mention of the Avangard (Project 4202) hypersonic RV dates back to 2007, and is referenced in “Publication No. 16” of the
Special Bureau for Design and Technology, responsible for the development of missile silos. However, the first mention of “Project 4202” in NPO
Mashinostroyenia corporate documentation does not appear until 2009. That year, then-president of Russia Dmitry Medvedev visited the plant,
apparently jump-starting the development of the Avangard.
The Soviet-era project to develop a hypersonic glide vehicle (Albatross) was only given four years. Therefore, the 3–5 years of silence between
Putin’s call for a hypersonic glide vehicle in 2002 and the initiation of the Avangard development program in 2007 or 2009 is quite striking, and
likely related to several factors. First, since Washington’s withdrawal from the ABM Treaty, Moscow continued for several years to try to reach
a new agreement to replace the Cold War–era arms control regime. The final decision on going forward with the Avangard, apparently, was
made only after Russian-US negotiations on ABM hit a wall in October 2007. Second, the Russian Ministry of Defense repeatedly added new
requirements for the hypersonic reentry vehicle.
The aforementioned documents produced by the Special Bureau for Design and Technology in 2007 suggest that a decision was made to utilize
the R-36M Voevoda missile system for the new hypersonic reentry vehicle. In the development of the missile system, it was necessary to solve
problems of stealth, guidance, maneuvering and radio waves passing through the plasma generated by the glide RV. The main problems were the
high temperature (up to 2,000 degrees Celsius) during reentry and the associated problem of controllability. It was also important to achieve a
speed of Mach 17–22. Russian arms manufacturers were unable to solve these problems between 2009 and 2015.
To date, at least ten tests of the hypersonic RV have been carried out. The first tests (in 2013–2015) either did not achieve the necessary
performance data or were unsuccessful. As a result, in 2014 there was concern that the project would be canceled. The main issues were solved
only in 2016, and newly successful tests were carried out. A year later, in 2017, before the completion of the official test program, the government
decided to start serial production. As such, the Avangard’s development process echoed that of the Bulava ballistic missile, whose serial
production began in 2008, before testing could be completed. The Bulava did not officially enter service until ten years later.
The Avangard reportedly has a length of 5.4 meters and is a multiple RV, with three independently targetable warheads, each equal to more
than two megatons of TNT. The vehicle is equipped with a thermal control system developed by NPO Nauka. It travels along a low trajectory,
at a height of 60 to 100 kilometers above the Earth, separating from the carrier and performing height and direction maneuvers up to 1,000
kilometers; it can fly several thousand kilometers to its target. According to Deputy Prime Minister Yuri Borisov, the latest test, carried out in
December 2018, confirmed the controllability of the vehicle at speeds of Mach 27.
According to the State Armament Program, two regiments in the Orenburg Region will be equipped with the Avangard system by 2027—that
equals 12 missile systems. According to the plans of the Ministry of Defense, the first regiment armed with Avangards will assume combat
duty in 2019. However, due to persistent serial production backlogs in the Russian defense-industrial sector (over the past few years, no defense
ministry plan for strategic missile systems deliveries has been entirely fulfilled, and NPO Mashinostroyenia failed to complete the State Defense
Order in 2010–2011), probably only one or two battalions will be equipped with the Avangard (2–4 missile systems).
Additionally, the start of serial production and equipping of the first Strategic Missile Forces regiment with the Avangard, does not mean this
hypersonic system is actually ready. It still must undergo a series of tests atop UR-100N and Sarmat ballistic missiles. The inventory of UR100Ns is limited, production having stopped in 1985; some of these missiles have already been retired, while a part is relegated for testing. The
long-term carrier of the Avangard will be the Sarmat, the development and production of which has also been delayed. Thus, the Russia’s muchadvertised hypersonic weapon is unlikely to reach strategic missile units for some time to come. End OE Watch Commentary (Starchak)
Source: “«Отличный подарок к Новому году»: Путин оценил новое российское оружие (An “excellent New Year’s gift: Putin
appreciated the new Russian weapons),” NTV, 26 December 2018. https://www.ntv.ru/novosti/2128800/
…The rocket launched from the Dombarovsky range near Orenburg and quickly gained altitude…In space, the unit separated from the
carrier and rushed at the intended target, the Kura range on Kamchatka, at a speed of more than 20,000 km/hour…For Russia, “Avangard” is
a deterrence weapon…
OE Watch | April 2019

10

EURASIA
‘Special Outsider’: Russia Joins the Race for Global
Leadership in Artificial Intelligence
by Sergey Sukhankin
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 16, Issue 35, dated 13 March 2019.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/special-outsider-russia-joins-the-race-for-global-leadership-in-artificial-intelligence/

OE Watch Commentary: On February 26, the industrial director of the Rostec State Corporation, Sergey Abramov, declared that work on
the fourth generation of the Ratnik future infantry combat system is underway. The system is said to include, among other advanced elements, a
soldier’s exoskeleton as well as software link ups with micro–Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) and other systems utilizing artificial intelligence
(AI). The authorities claim that such military-industrial contractors as JSC Kalashnikov, High Precision Systems and Techmash have become
Russia’s “locomotives,” driving the development and production of AI systems. Abramov concluded that “our [Russian] weaponry has always
been, currently is and will remain the best in the world—without any unnecessary meekness and illusions regarding our competitors”.
Last year, the editor-in-chief of the military magazine Arsenal Otechestva, Victor Murakhovsky, provided a fascinating assessment of the new
upgrades to the AI-supported Ratnik system. According to Murakhovsky, its strong points include:
• Increased maneuverability, which will play a particularly crucial role within the scope of para(military) operations carried out under
challenging conditions such as “forests, mountains, the Arctic zone, and urban warfare.” Specifically, the Arsenal Otechestva editor argues that
the employment of exoskeletons “will increase the current maneuverability of a soldier by two or three times” and will allow the Russian Armed
Forces to avoid the “predicaments they [Soviet forces] had to face in Afghanistan.”
• Increased precision of firepower, which will be achieved through a wide range of optical sensors (such as thermographic cameras, laser
designators, rangefinders and optic-location complexes) integrated into the new system.
• Increased level of protection, which, thanks to the exoskeleton, “will increase the level of protection by several times.”
Murakhovsky, however, points to some notable problems that might not allow the Ratnik to be used to its full potential for at least some time.
Namely, he mentions the issue of its internal battery, which can only work continuously for up to 2–3 hours without recharging. He stated that,
to be truly effective, the system needs to be able to function for at least 24 hours (ideally, 48 hours, given the difficulties of accessing a power
source in field conditions) without additional charging.
More recently, the Russian side has announced that work on PTM-5 “smart mines” equipped with AI will be launched sometime in 2019.
These mines will reportedly be capable of distinguishing between civilians and military forces rather than automatically exploding in either
case, which is meant to considerably decrease civilian casualties in conflict zones. At the same time, AI will enable the mines to “choose targets
in an independent mode”.
At the moment, however, it would be premature to share Abramov’s optimism and rush into referring to Russia’s reported achievements
in the realm of AI as a “scientific breakthrough.” Yet, two aspects nevertheless seem quite clear. First, artificial intelligence, which Russian
President Vladimir Putin explicitly referred to as a “key for achieving global leadership” has entered Russia’s “priority list.” As a result,
“scientific breakthroughs” (real or imagined) are bound to occur going forward. Second, the Russian military seems to have assumed the leading
position in the country when it comes to developing AI (both for civilian and military needs). This stems from the growing role of the Military
Innovative Technopolis ERA (MIT ERA) in the domestic defense-industrial sector. Constructed on the coast of the Black Sea (Anapa), and
expected to be fully operating by 2020, the MIT ERA industrial park prioritizes eight main research fields for its resident firms:
1. IT systems, automated-control systems, and AI;
Source: “Ростех ведет работу над экипировкой “Ратник” четвертого
2. robotic systems;
и последующих поколений (Rostec is carrying out work on equipping
“Ratnik” of the fourth and future generations),” TASS, 25 February 2019.
3. computer science, computer technology;
https://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/6157867
4. technical vision, pattern recognition;
…“Work on future generations of equipment is being carried out, we have
5. information security;
enough scientific and technical background for this…,” said Abramov…At
6. nanotechnology and nanomaterials;
present, TsNIITOCHMASH (a division of Rostec) has completed research
7. energy, technologies and life-support machines; and
work on Ratnik-3 and submitted its results to the Ministry of Defense in order
8. bioengineering, biosynthetic and biosensor technologies.
to receive recommendations and an order to conduct design work…
Another important detail pertaining to the MIT ERA is
premised on two important relationships:
• A strong link between academia and the Armed Forces. The MIT ERA is to become a highly sophisticated combination of laboratories,
engineering centers, and “open spaces” equipped with the most up-to-date equipment specifically designed for promising military scholars and
members of academia.
• A strong link between theory and practice, meant to include all stages of the product generation cycle, from idea generation to practical
limited-scale testing.
Yet, this optimism is not shared by all experts in the field. For instance, in a paper published last autumn by the Russian International Affairs
Council (RIAC), Sergey Karelov (the founder of Witology and the head of the League of Independent IT Experts) argues that “all countries, with
the exception of the [United States] and China, are outsiders in the rush for AI technologies… [E]ven such technologically developed states as
France, Germany, India and South Korea, whose technological development is incomparable with countries of the third world, are looking into
becoming AI-colonies.” In contrast, Karelov’s report pointedly names Russia a “special outsider,” which has the potential to join the rush for
global leadership as long as Russia’s industrial base is able to combine “the principle of asymmetricity with still-present intellectual traditions of
the Soviet science.” End OE Watch Commentary (Sukhankin)
OE Watch | April 2019

11

EURASIA
Get on the Boat, Get off the Boat
OE Watch Commentary: The Aleksandr Otrkovskiy is one of
three Ropucha-class large landing ships built in Poland that are in
service with the Northern Fleet. They can be loaded from fore and
aft ramps and can carry 450 tons and up to 25 standard armored
personnel carriers. The training reported on in the accompanying
excerpted article apparently included the different types of vehicles
that the 66th Naval Infantry Brigade would use, but it was not a
full-up combat load since tanks and artillery were not involved. It
takes a good deal of crew and driver skill and training to embark
and disembark vehicles quickly and efficiently. End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“In the course of the training, the BDK Aleksandr
Otrakovskiy’s crew practiced ship maneuvering and
ballasting elements while receiving and disembarking
the seaborne assault force, while the driver-mechanics
improved their skills in getting on the landing ship’s
twin-deck and getting off onto the shore.”

Source: “Large Landing Ship Aleksandr Otrakovskiy Practices Amphibious Training Tasks,” Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, 2
March 2019. https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12219776@egNews
The exercise was held in the Pechenga bay on the Kola Peninsula shore near the Liinakhamari settlement. It involved 16 BTR-80 and BTR82 AM armored personnel carriers, 12 all-wheel drive KamAZ and Ural military trucks, [tracked articulated chassis all-terrain] vehicles and
engineering equipment belonging to the Northern Fleet naval infantry, as well as some 150 naval infantry.
In the course of the training, the BDK Aleksandr Otrakovskiy’s crew practiced ship maneuvering and ballasting elements while receiving
and disembarking the seaborne assault force, while the driver-mechanics improved their skills in getting on the landing ship’s twin-deck and
getting off onto the shore.
Amphibious training is one of the core elements of the naval infantrymen’s combat training that in full measure allows to practice teamwork
and the tactics of amphibious landing on an open beach. Practicing loading military equipment aboard a landing ship from the shore is a
basic element.
After rehearsing the tasks with the naval infantry, the large landing ship Aleksandr Otrakovskiy sailed to the Northern Fleet main base –
Severomorsk.

Freedom of Navigation to be Tested in Arctic?
OE Watch Commentary: A French Navy supply vessel, the FS Rhone, sailed the Northern Sea
Route from Norway to the Aleutian Islands last summer, using the Russian Northern Fleet and Pacific
Fleet radio beacons to navigate the waters. The FS Rhone is not an ice-class vessel and Russian rescue
services reportedly were on standby (see: French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route,” OE Watch,
November 2018). Whatever coordination and permissions the French obtained before the voyage is
not readily available, but was apparently minimal; however, as the accompanying excerpted article
from Interfax reports, the Russian government would like to establish rules for using the Northern Sea
Route by “foreign military ships.” End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“In case of emergency or
complicated ice conditions,
the captains must send a
report to the nearest Russian
port or military base.”

Source: “Foreign military ships to be compelled to notify Russia about plans to travel along Northern Sea Route,” Interfax, 6 March 2019.
https://www.interfax.com
According to the newspaper Izvestia on 6 March, Russia has pledged to protect the Northern Sea Route, and the government has elaborated
rules of its use by foreign military ships…The ships will also be compelled to prevent environmental pollution. In case of emergency or
complicated ice conditions, the captains must send a report to the nearest Russian port or military base.
The newspaper noted that U.S. representatives had repeatedly called for making the Northern Sea Route a transport corridor open to all.
The latest statement of the kind was made by U.S. Coast Guard Commander Adm. Paul Zukunft in 2018.
According to Izvestia, the United States is challenging the right of any littoral country, not just Russia, to establish the rules of navigation
in the Arctic waters. They do not recognize the right of Canada to control Arctic routes either. The U.S.’ claims regarding the Northern Sea
Route date back to the Cold War. In 1964, Washington and Moscow exchanged protests after U.S. ships tried to travel along the coast without
authorization.

OE Watch | April 2019

12

EURASIA
States Continue to Invest in Russian Energy
OE Watch Commentary: The Arctic LNG 2 project is located on the eastern
side of the Gulf of Ob-an extension of the Arctic Kara Sea. It is opposite Novatek’s
original Arctic LNG project designed to exploit the vast LNG fields of the Yamal
(Gydan) Peninsula as the accompanying excerpted article from Interfax reports.
Total is a major energy giant based in France, while Mitsubishi of Japan, Kogas
of South Korea, Nuovo of Italy and Saudi Arabia have also been in talks with
Novatek. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Under the terms of the deal, Total buys
10% in Arctic LNG 2 and has an option to
increase its stake to 15% if Novatek reduces
its participation interest below 60%.”

Source: “Novatek closes sale of 10% stake in Arctic LNG 2 to Total,” Interfax, 7 March 2019. https://www.interfax.com
The Arctic LNG 2 project involves building three LNG trains at 6.6 million tons per annum each, using gravity-based structure (GBS)
platforms. [An “LNG train” is a liquefied natural gas plant’s liquefaction and purification facility. In order to transport LNG from one
country to another, its volume has to be dramatically reduced. To do this, the gas must be liquefied by refrigeration to less than -161 °C. This
refrigeration process is conducted in multiple units arranged sequentially-like a train.] The project is based on the hydrocarbon resources of
the Utrennoye field on the Gydan Peninsula.
The final investment decision on the project is expected to be made in the second half of 2019, and production at the first train of the plant
is scheduled to start in 2023. Under the terms of the deal, Total buys 10% in Arctic LNG 2 and has an option to increase its stake to 15%
if Novatek reduces its participation interest below 60%. “Literally: if we go below 60%, then [Total will additionally receive] 50% of our
reduction, but not more than 5%,” Novatek CEO Leonid Mikhelson said. Taking into account its 19.4% stake in Novatek itself and Novatek’s
plans to retain a 60% interest in Arctic LNG 2, Total’s overall stake in the project will be about 21.6%.
Prior to the deal, Novatek owned 60%of Arctic LNG 2 directly and 40% through Ekropromstroy. The company plans to sell 40% of the
project to foreign investors, which include companies from China, Japan, Thailand and Saudi Arabia.

Big Ship for a Big Job
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian military expansion in the Arctic has kept
Rosatomflot is an active participant
the Sevmorput container ship busy in the Arctic waters. Now, as the accompanying
excerpted articles from The Barents Observer report, it is hauling construction
in the large-scale Arctic hydrocarbon
material for the LNG fields off the Kara Sea. Sailing up the Dvina River to
projects.
Arkhangelsk’s port of Ekonomaya made the record books for the largest ship to
make the trip. The Sevmorput has a capacity for 30,000 tons of cargo. The halfcapacity load may be a reflection of the rather shallow draft of the Dvina. What’s next after all the construction slows down? Frozen fish is a
good bet. The Russian Arctic fishing industry has been steadily expanding and other (nonnuclear) container ships are kept busy moving the
frozen fish to market. This time of year, icebreakers are essential. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“

”

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Nuclear container ship Sevmorput sets course
for new Arctic gas field,” The Barents Observer, 6 March 2019.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/arctic-industry-and-energy/2019/03/
nuclear-container-ship-sevmorput-sets-course-new-arctic-gas-field

Source: Atle Staalesen, “Biggest ship ever makes its way up the river
to Arkhangelsk,”, The Barents Observer, 12 March 2019. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/arctic-industry-and-energy/2019/03/
biggest-ship-ever-makes-it-way-river-arkhangelsk

…It is all destined to the development of the Utrenneye natural
gas field and adjacent seaport on Gydan Peninsula, ship owner
Rosatomflot informs. A second shipment to Gydan is scheduled later
this year.

… The «Sevmorput» is the world’s only nuclear-powered container
ship…

“Rosatomflot is an active participant in the large-scale Arctic
hydrocarbon projects,” Atomflot General Director Mustafa Kashka
says. “The usage of nuclear-powered container ship «Sevmorput» in
the development of the Arctic LNG 2 shows that our successful work
experiences from the Arctic is much needed”…

The ship was built in the period 1984-1988. In 1992-2006 she was
used for transportation to ports along the Northern Sea Route. Later
she was docked at the Atomflot base in Murmansk for years without
assignments, and Rosatom was preparing to turn the ship into scrap
metal.
In 2013 it was announced that “Sevmorput” would be renovated
and put into service again…

OE Watch | April 2019

13

EURASIA
Sino-Soviet Conflict Rememberd with Concern
OE Watch Commentary: While relations today between Moscow
and Beijing are strong, 2019 marks the 50th anniversary of what is
often referred to as the Sino-Soviet border conflict. During a sevenmonth period in 1969, Soviet and Chinese forces skirmished over
ownership of a number of islands in the rivers which separated China
from the USSR. The border has since been delineated and relations
restored, but as the accompanying excerpt from the centrist-daily,
Nezavisimaya Gazeta points out, today there are increased Russian
concerns over China’s growing military prowess.
The article begins by comparing defense budgets, asserting that in
2019, China’s military expenditures will be “almost four times bigger
than the amount that Russia spends on defense.” The author traces the
increase in Chinese defense spending, pointing out that since 2000 “it
had grown almost 18-fold,” where today it amounts to $177.6 billion.
And while “the Chinese defense industry stills lags behind Russia in…
aviation and rocket engines, submarines, and new kinds of weapons,”
Russian ship sprays water cannon on Chinese fisherman on the Wasuli River (1969).
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sino-Soviet_border_conflict_May_1969.jpg, CC 3.0.
the article asserts “that the lag is shrinking rapidly.” Moreover, it appears
that China has become more of a danger to Russian arms sales, indicating that “in global arms trade, especially in the post-Soviet space, the
Middle East, Asia, and Latin America, they [Russia and China] act as competitors.”
The article concludes on a sobering note, suggesting “that with such ambitious plans and large-scale financing, China might also overtake
Russia in military strength in the future.” When referring to threats from the west, Russian military analysts insist that capabilities are more
important than intentions. Even though relations between China and Russia are good today, this article suggests that Russian analysts have
already started paying greater attention to Chinese military capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“It can be assumed that with such ambitious plans and large-scale financing, China might also overtake
Russia in military strength in the future.”
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Китай на свою оборону тратит в четыре раза больше, чем Россия Пекин к 2035 году планирует создать на
флоте шесть авианосных групп (China Spends Four Times More Than Russia on Defense: Beijing Plans to Create Six Fleet-Based Aircraft
Carrier Groups by 2035),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 5 March 2019. http://www.ng.ru/world/2019-03-05/6_7524_oborona.html
As seen from China’s 2019 draft budget, its defense expenditures in the current year will increase by 7.5 percent and amount to $177.6 billion
when expressed in dollars. This is the second-largest defense budget in the world after the United States. And it is almost four times bigger
than the amount that Russia spends on defense. China has the most numerous (more than 2 million military servicemen) military in the world.
And in combat power, this military is second only to those of the US and Russian armed forces.
The Chinese leadership does not consider the increase in military expenditures a sign of excessive militarization. The growth rate of military
expenditures in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in contemporary history is impressive; 20 years ago the PRC’s defense budget amounted
to about $10 billion. In other words, by 2019 it had grown almost 18-fold compared to the start of the century…
…According to expert estimates, the Chinese defense industry stills lags behind Russia’s in some other areas as well: aviation and rocket
engines, submarines, and new kinds of weapons. But it is emphasized that the “lag is shrinking rapidly.” And if Beijing and Moscow act as
strategic partners on the world stage, then in global arms trade, especially in the post-Soviet space, the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America,
they act as competitors…
“Chinese nuclear-powered aircraft carriers (with electromagnetic catapults) are expected to join the fleet by 2035, increasing the overall
number of aircraft carriers to at least six, though only four of them will be engaged on the front lines,” the newspaper quotes Wan Yunfei, an
expert on the PRC’s naval forces and former PLA destroyer officer, as saying. He is confident that Beijing will not be slashing the budget for
aircraft carriers despite the slowdown in economic growth and trade disagreements with the United States. It can be assumed that with such
ambitious plans and large-scale financing, China might also overtake Russia in military strength in the future.

OE Watch | April 2019

14

EURASIA
Small Steps in Uzbekistan’s Military Reform
OE Watch Commentary: President of Uzbekistan, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, has
implemented a number of significant reforms since he took power a couple of
years ago and as the accompanying excerpted article from Fergana Agency
reports, one of the latest involves the establishment of a course of military
journalism. The article reports how the course is a joint effort between the
University of Journalism and Mass Communications of Uzbekistan and
the Ministry of Defense and how prospective students for the new program
will undergo “four years of study” for a degree as well as “four month
retraining courses.” The article also notes how in addition to regular entrance
requirements, students will take part in an interview with “journalists and
officers” and that the program will include “physical training as part of a
military university program.” Additionally, the article mentions how the fourmonth refresher courses “will be taught by specialists of the press services
of the Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Emergency Situations, the Interior
Ministry and other departments.” Overall, the establishment of a military
journalism course with a civilian university is a relatively small reform,
particularly compared to the appointment of a new defense minister last month.
However, it does follow along with Mirziyoyev’s previous incremental changes
and could eventually allow for more information on the Uzbek Armed Forces
to become available. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The university and the Ministry of Defense signed a
memorandum of cooperation, including joint educational
work.”

Source: “В Узбекистане начнут воспитывать военных
журналистов (The education of military journalists will
start in Uzbekistan),” Fergana Agency, 12 March 2019.
https://fergana.agency/news/105833/
Starting with the 2019/20 academic year, a new course
will being in the University of Journalism and Mass
Communications of Uzbekistan – military journalism.
The university and the Ministry of Defense signed a
memorandum of cooperation, including joint educational
work…
Training in the specialty of “military journalism” will take
place in two steps: a bachelor’s degree, including four years
of study, and four month retraining courses. The university
will accept 20 students in the first year…Upon admission,
in addition to standard tests, applicants will go through
an interview, which will be conducted by journalists and
officers, as well as physical training as part of a military
university program…
The program has days scheduled for military training.
Lectures for refresher courses will be taught by specialists
of the press services of the Ministry of Defense, Ministry
of Emergency Situations, the Interior Ministry and other
departments…The University of Journalism and Mass
Communications was established by resolution from
President Shavkat Mirziyoyev on 24 May 2018…

Visit of the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation in Uzbekistan (2018).

Source: Mil.ru [CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Visit_of_the_Minister_of_Defense_of_the_Russian_Federation_06.jpg.

OE Watch | April 2019

15

EURASIA
Improved Officer Selection/Tracking System
OE Watch Commentary: As prestige toward military service has improved
over the past several years, Russian defense officials have become more selective
in choosing the best cadets for officer training. As the accompanying excerpt
from the pro-Kremlin daily Izvestiya points out, “as well as passing the YeGE (the
Russian equivalent to the ACT/SAT), future cadets will have to undergo special
professional selection tests in real time.” As the article explains, even if they have
high marks in the YeGE, prospective cadets will not be admitted if they do not
pass the special professional selection tests.

“The new professional selection system
will make the management of human
resources in the Armed Forces a great deal
more effective…”

These special military tests are also designed to determine “a candidate’s aptitude for particular classes of military specialism,” which are
divided into three categories: “those suited to serving in subunits directly involved in military action -- the VDV (airborne), spetsnaz, and so
forth; the second category means having administrative abilities: Such candidates may in time occupy important command posts. Those in the
third category can serve in all positions except those envisaged by the first two. In other words as technical specialists, engineers, or staff or
rear services officers.”
The article quotes a military expert who suggests this “new professional selection system will make the management of human resources in
the Armed Forces a great deal more effective.” This expert goes on to point out that “back in the nineties there was practically no selection, and
people sometimes became officers who were unsuited to military service,” which “did not reflect well on the situation in the Armed Forces.”
Another expert who supports tracking officers according to their strengths, remarks that “the Armed Forces people have always quietly divided
their fellow service personnel into officers ‘for war’ and officers ‘for peacetime,’” and that since “officer training costs the state a great deal,” it
makes sense “to use people as effectively as possible.” Ultimately, the article shows how the Russian military continues to develop policies and
procedures to strengthen its personnel system. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: Roman Kretsup, Aleksey Ramm, and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Каждому по боеспособности: Минобороны перепроверит ЕГЭ
абитуриентов (To Each According to His Abilities. Defense Ministry To Re-Test Applicants With Single State Examination Pass),” Izvestiya,
8 February 2019. https://iz.ru/842706/roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/kazhdomu-po-boesposobnosti-minoborony-pereproveritege-abiturientov
The Defense Ministry is to increase the requirements for entering military vuzes [higher educational establishments] to a major extent. As
well as passing the YeGE [Single State Examination] future cadets will have to undergo special professional selection tests in real time…
…Sources in the military department have told Izvestiya that the Defense Ministry has introduced a new system of tests for the professional
selection of service personnel: It will start to operate this year. The tests have been developed by specialists at the General Staff Military
Academy. The criteria will be used to test not only military vuz applicants: In the future they will also be applied to select candidates for
contract service. A candidate who fails to pass professional selection will not be admitted to a military vuz even if he achieves pass marks in
the YeGE and in physical training.
There are already tests for military vuz applicants. But they are mainly focused on determining a candidate’s aptitude for particular classes
of military specialism: Now there will be three rather than seven. The first category will encompass those suited to serving in subunits
directly involved in military action -- the VDV [Airborne Troops], the spetsnaz, and so forth. Suitability for the second category means having
administrative abilities: Such candidates may in time occupy important command posts. Those in the third category can serve in all positions
except those envisaged by the first two. In other words as technical specialists, engineers, or staff or rear services officers….
The new professional selection system will make the management of human resources in the Armed Forces a great deal more effective,
Aleksandr Perendzhiyev, a member of the Officers of Russia expert council and senior lecturer at the REU [Russian Economics University]
named for Plekhanov, told Izvestiya. This should help to minimize situations in which the state spends a lot of time and money on training an
officer who proves unable to serve in his specialized field because of his psychological attributes.
“There are people who are not good at paperwork, dealing with documents or analyzing information,” Aleksandr Perendzhiyev said. “It
is better for them to work with the personnel. And there are those whose psychological type does not enable them to lead. When they are
appointed to command, both the men and the discipline suffer as a result….
…Back in the nineties there was practically no selection, and people sometimes became officers who were unsuited to military service, the
expert recalls. And that did not reflect well on the situation in the Armed Forces.
“It is important to use people as effectively as possible, so any sensible system for improving the quality of the selection of future officers is
only to be welcomed,” military expert Vladislav Shurygin told Izvestiya. “Using tests to separate future officers into those capable of showing
their qualities either in combat or in command positions makes good sense. In the Armed Forces people have always quietly divided their
fellow service personnel into officers ‘ for war’ and officers ‘ for peacetime.’ It could not be said that any of them were bad. It was simply that
not everyone could show composure or take the initiative under extreme conditions. At the same time, away from frontline conditions many
such officers became, for example, excellent teachers. Officer training costs the state a great deal, so discarding such personnel is at the very
least senseless and wasteful.”
OE Watch | April 2019

16

EURASIA
Bilingual School Highlights Estonian Language Politics
OE Watch Commentary: Many of the cities in North-Eastern Estonia have a high
percentage of ethnic Russians. Kohtla-Järve is among these cities where the majority of its
inhabitants speak Russian on a daily basis and its secondary schools reflect this reality. There
is significant concern in the Estonian government that this system disadvantages students as
future Estonian citizens. In order to work in Estonia, it is necessary to possess a certificate
proving proficiency in the Estonian language and many students who are educated in Russian
or bilingual schools do not possess this proficiency. For this reason, there has been increasing
pressure for schools to provide education entirely in Estonian.
The accompanying excerpted article refers to the Estonian Education Minister, Maili Reps
of Estonia’s Centre Party, who has made the controversial decision to keep the local secondary
school partially bilingual. The incoming tenth grade class will be taught entirely in Estonian
but the upper two grades will continue to be taught in both Estonian and Russian. Even though
Reps has concerns about making the transition to Estonian-only education, she recognizes
the need for this change to happen eventually. Reps specifies that “resolute steps have to be
taken, starting at the kindergarten level, to bring all students up to standard from a young
Map of Estonia showing Kohtla-Järve location.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Estonia_-_Location_Map_(2013)_-_EST_-_
age.” The administration has hesitated to make the switch too quickly, concerned it will have a
UNOCHA.svg, CC 3.0.
negative impact on students because, “many students coming to the school will have to take on
additional Estonian ‘cramming’ lessons to bring them up to speed, on top of their already full curriculum.”
This view has not been popular among members of other parties in Estonia, such as the Reform and Isamaa parties, who have voiced support
for Estonian-only education. The article also points out that the Centre party has been criticized by others such as Erik Kalda, the editor-inchief of Põhjarannik, a local daily newspaper. Kalda says that, “Centre party machinations and interests are causing Russian youth to suffer…
as they miss out on another academic year of all-Estonian education.” As a talking point during the recent Parliamentary campaign, the results
of the election on 3 March are telling of the way Estonians think about this issue. The Reform party overwhelmingly won the elections with the
Conservative People’s Party (EKRE) and Isamaa taking the next two spots above the Centre Party. Language education in Estonia will continue
to be a contentious issue. End OE Watch Commentary (Dimmick)

“Ms Reps has already said resolute steps have to be taken, starting at the kindergarten level, to bring all
students up to standard from a young age.”
Source: Andrew Whyte, “Opinion: Kohtla-Järve school case should be cause for national concern,” ERR News, 18 February 2019. https://
news.err.ee/911396/opinion-kohtla-jarve-school-case-should-be-cause-for-national-concern
Since many students coming to the school will have to take on additional Estonian ‘’cramming’’ lessons to bring them up to speed, on top of
their already full curriculum, many will opt to go to the Russian-language upper secondary school in nearby Jõhvi instead.
Language in education is a key topic in party politics ahead of the general election on 3 March, with the Reform and Isamaa parties favoring
Estonian-only, and Centre, the Social Democratic Party (SDE) and the Conservative People’s Party of Estonia (EKRE) erring more towards
bilingual education for the time being.
Ms Reps has already said resolute steps have to be taken, starting at the kindergarten level, to bring all students up to standard from a young
age.
The Postimees opinion piece, which appeared on Sunday, entitled ‘’why aren’t we making a noise?’’ questions why there is hesitation on the
issue and why Ms Reps has not met with the local Estonian-speaking population to poll their opinion on the matter.
The piece in turn cites an article by Erik Kalda, editor-in-chief of local daily Põhjarannik, who points to the bigger picture and why Centre is
taking the stance that it is.
There are some 27,000 people in Ida Viru County whose first language is Estonian; the fact that they should feel excluded from decision
making processes on language in education, with protracted meetings and communication via official letters, should sound alarm bells, Mr
Kalda argued.
Centre party machinations and interests are causing Russian youth to suffer too, he says, as they miss out on another academic year of allEstonian education.

OE Watch | April 2019

17

EURASIA
Former Donbas Hero
OE Watch Commentary: As the armed conflict between Ukrainian and pro-Russian forces in
Ukraine’s Donbas region drags on into its fifth year, there are few signs of resolution. Some Russian
analysts now refer to the situation as a “suitcase without handles,” suggesting that determining the
region’s future political status appears intractable, and that progress toward resolving the conflict
will be difficult. The pro-Kremlin, major Russian media continue to enflame tensions by portraying
the authorities in Kiev as the sole aggressor. Nevertheless, as the brief excerpt from the liberal daily,
Novaya Gazeta indicates, the incessant Russian propaganda to support the separatists in the Donbas
region may be losing its appeal.
The article describes how an early Russian “hero” from this conflict (Igor Strelkov née Girkin) has
decided to “put up for sale a medal that he was awarded for annexing Crimea to Russia.” Strelkov
gained notoriety back in early 2014 as one of the Russian ringleaders in both Crimea’s annexation
and in sparking the armed separatist movement in the Donbas region, where he went on to serve
as “Defense Minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR).” After returning to
Moscow in late summer 2014, Strelkov helped to coordinate volunteers and donations for the proRussian forces in Donbas. However, as the article points out, Strelkov is now “out of cash and out of
favor with the Kremlin, leading him to sell a gold medal he was awarded in 2014 for his role in the
occupation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula.”
Igor Girkin (Strelkov).
Overall, the article suggests how this one time “hero” of Russia’s armed intervention against Ukraine Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Igor_Ivanovich_Strelkov_
Yekaterinburg3.JPG, CC 4.0.
should now be reduced to selling his awards to make ends meet serves as an apt metaphor. The Kremlin
and its pliant media encouraged people like Strelkov to volunteer their efforts to defend Russian interests in Ukraine. Having helped to create
an intractable situation in the Donbas region, the Kremlin now appears to ignore true believers like Strelkov. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“The Russian former commander of militants in eastern Ukraine is out of cash and out of favor with
the Kremlin, leading him to sell a gold medal he was awarded in 2014 for his role in the occupation of
Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula.”
Source: “Игорь Стрелков решил продать медаль за присоединение Крыма к России за 1 миллион рублей из-за ‘материальных
проблем’ (Igor Strelkov decided to sell his medal for the annexation of Crimea to Russia for 1 million rubles due to ‘material problems’),”
Novaya Gazeta, 9 March 2019. https://www.novayagazeta.ru/news/2019/03/09/149853-glava-dvizheniya-novorossiya-igor-strelkov-reshilprodat-medal-za-prisoedinenie-kryma-k-rossii
Former Defense Minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR), head of the Novorossia public movement Igor Strelkov
(Girkin) put up for sale a medal that he was awarded for annexing Crimea to Russia…. The starting price of the medal is 1 million rubles, the
auction will be held on April 13.
…The Russian former commander of militants in eastern Ukraine is out of cash and out of favor with the Kremlin, leading him to sell a gold
medal he was awarded in 2014 for his role in the occupation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula.
…Igor Girkin, a 48-year-old self-described Russian nationalist who goes by the nom de guerre Strelkov, says he is selling the medal because
he needs the money and has no respect for Russian President Vladimir Putin, who is depicted on the medal triumphantly wearing a laurel
wreath.

For additional background on Strelkov, see:

“Russia’s Man in New Type War-Igor Girkin.”
by Ray Finch

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/216622

OE Watch | April 2019

18

EURASIA
Armenia’s “Offensive” Strategy?
OE Watch Commentary: While the Armenian
government’s recent announcement of its acquisition
of Russian Su-30SM fighters (with an estimated
delivery of 2020) provided some insight into the direction
of Armenia’s armed forces, recent statements in the
accompanying excerpted article by Minister of Defense
David Tonoyan, offer more information on how the
government plans to continue in this area. The article,
from the Armenian news website 1in.am, reports on a
statement from Tonoyan during a radio interview that
the country’s armed forces “were not going to remain
on the defensive position.” Tonoyan also referred to the
government’s acquisition of the Su-30SMs as making “it
possible to neutralise the ambitions of the adversary.”

“Tonoyan confirmed that this implied fighter aircraft Su-30SM.”

The article also discusses how the acquisition
“symbolises changes in the defence system” of Armenia,
specifically that it is moving from a Soviet strategy to a
“Western model, which assigns an important role to air
forces.” A Russian military analyst interviewed for the
Sukhoi Su-30SM inflight.
article states that “four units of fighters are only sufficient
Source: Alex Beltyukov [CC BY-SA 3.0 GFDL 1.2], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sukhoi_Su-30SM_in_flight_2014.jpg.
to defend oneself” in reference to the reported number of
Su-30SMs that Armenia will be acquiring. He goes on to suggest that an Armenian squadron of 12 fighters “will definitely have dominance in
the air over Azerbaijan” and this highlights the lack of clarity regarding the acquisition. The initial reports on it mentioned that the Armenian
government would acquire four Su-30SMs, but there have also been reports that this number could be as high as 12 and the article notes another
statement from Tonoyan that the Armenian government “wanted to buy a squadron of multirole fighter planes.” While it could be some time
until the exact number of Su-30SMs Armenia will acquire is known, the government appears to be planning to have a full squadron of fighters.
End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
Source: Aram Sargsyan, “Армения переходит к наступательной стратегии: единственный выход – разгром противника (Armenia is
switching to an offensive strategy: the only exit – the destruction of the enemy),” 1in.am, 1 March 2019. https://ru.1in.am/1253606.html
Serious conceptual changes are taking place in Armenia’s general defence policy in view of global trends, the situation in the region, and
the conflict with Azerbaijan. Our Armed Forces are switching from defence strategy to offensive strategy. Armenian Defence Minister David
Tonoyan said on the air of the Armenian Public Broadcaster that our Armed Forces were not going to remain on the defensive position and if
the situation led to renewed combat operations against Azerbaijan, we would not hesitate. Asked whether we would launch an attack or not,
David Tonoyan replied: “Why not?”
…The defence minister spoke about strategic changes…He said that Armenia’s demographic and economic potentials made it impossible to
compete with the adversary in quantitative terms. This is precisely why we focus serious attention on quality issues and maintaining a quality
balance. Even now, the army is being supplemented with the weapons and military hardware, which will make it possible to neutralise the
ambitions of the adversary. Tonoyan confirmed that this implied fighter aircraft Su-30SM.
…He emphasised that the life of every soldier of the Armed Forces, be it those [serving] on a regular or contract basis, is more precious than
any weapon, and that if two pilots in a Su-30 fighter could carry out a combat mission hundreds of kilometres away from the front line instead
of a thousand military men, there can be no talk about the “costliness” of Su-30s…
Perhaps, it is not by chance that the defence minister is speaking about strategic changes, using the example of modern multirole fighters.
The purchase of Su-30 fighters effectively symbolises changes in the defence system of our country…many experts believe that it is time to
renounce the strategy of Soviet times, which is aimed to strengthen ground forces and the air defence system, and switch to the Western
model, which assigns an important role to air forces, including fighter aviation, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), robotics, and the
development of modern technologies…
The deputy director of the Moscow-based Centre for Political and Military Analysis Alexander Khramchikhin, considers these changes to
Armenia’s military policy as unambiguously natural, given the same factors, which the Armenian defence minister highlighted, i.e. limitations
in Armenia’s economic, financial, and human resources…According to Khramchikhin, four units of fighters are only sufficient to defend
oneself. In the presence of one squadron (12 units), Armenia will definitely have dominance in the air over Azerbaijan. However, this is not
going to seriously increase Armenia’s offensive potential…
For reference, last week, the Armenian defence minister told the Russian RIA Novosti news agency that the Defence Ministry of the Republic
of Armenia wanted to buy a squadron of multirole fighter planes.
OE Watch | April 2019

19

EURASIA
Anti-Bribery Training
OE Watch Commentary: A key component of
the Kremlin’s current narrative revolves around
the assertion that the country has overcome the
criminality and lawlessness of the 1990s. Under
President Putin’s firm leadership, the Kremlin has
been able to gain the upper hand over unscrupulous
businessmen and bureaucrats, restoring order and
discipline, allowing the country to focus on more
serious foreign threats. Even though the proKremlin media continues to repeat this assertion,
according to the accompanying excerpt from a local
Krasnodar source, Yugopolis, citing recent poll data,
Russians still label bribery and corruption as the
country’s third most pressing problem (behind rising
prices and poverty).
As a military will often reflect the values of the
country it purports to defend, it is not surprising that
the Russian military also continues to struggle with
criminality in its ranks, to include among high-level
officers. Indeed, the excerpt from a recent article in
the pro-business daily Kommersant, describes how
Lieutenant-General “Sergey Chvarkov, the former
head of the Russian Center for the Reconciliation
of the Warring Parties in Syria,” and now “deputy
head of the General Staff’s Military Academy,
[was] accused of having stolen six million rubles
over three years during the implementation of a
400-million-rouble state contract with a commercial
firm.”
In response to these corruption challenges within
the military, the excerpt from the pro-Kremlin
source, Izvestiya, points out that, “the Defense
Ministry has devised a special guide on how
to avoid taking bribes.” The article asserts that
the anti-bribery “booklet’s development was no
accident,” pointing out that the number of crimes
linked to bribe-taking [within the Ministry of
Defense] has “increased since 2016.” It quotes an
expert who asserts that “the level of general legal
culture in both society and the Army in our country
is low,” worrying that perhaps this booklet will be
“just another boilerplate response in the context of
the fight against corruption.” While today’s Kremlin
narrative remains filled with dark warnings about
external threats, the articles show how Russia’s
greatest challenges may reside closer to home. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Source: “Россияне назвали самые острые проблемы страны (Russians named
the most acute problems of the country),” Yugopolis, 27 February 2019. http://www.
yugopolis.ru/news/rossiyane-nazvali-samye-ostrye-problemy-strany-118490
Economic problems remain the most significant for the majority of the population.
This is evidenced by a survey conducted by the Levada Center on February
15–20, 2019… Thus, 62% of respondents are most concerned about rising prices,
44% - impoverishment of the population, 41% - corruption, bribery, 36% - rising
unemployment, 34% - sharp stratification into rich and poor, inequitable distribution
of income…
Source: Oleg Rubnikovich and Ivan Safronov, “Примирителя Сирии обвинили
«по ощущениям» Генералу Минобороны вменяют мошенничество как лицу
Академии Генштаба (Syrian Peacemaker Charged ‘On Feelings’: Defense Ministry
General Blamed for Fraud as Face of General Staff’s Academy),” Kommersant, 21
November 2018. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3805715
Kommersant has learnt that one of the defendants in a criminal case for fraud is
Sergey Chvarkov, the former head of the Russian Center for the Reconciliation of the
Warring Parties in Syria. The Lieutenant-General, who currently holds the post of
deputy head of the General Staff’s Military Academy, is accused of having stolen six
million rubles over three years during the implementation of a 400-million-rouble
state contract with a commercial firm.
…According to Kommersant’s information, investigators have evidence from several
witnesses who have stated that they handed over envelopes to the General, in which
“money could be felt.”
Source: Aleksey Kozachenko and Bogdan Stepovoy, “За жесты под солнцем:
Минобороны описало способы получения и виды взяток (For Gestures in the
Sunshine: The Defense Ministry Has Described Methods of Taking Bribes and Forms
of Bribery),” Izvestiya, 5 February 2019. https://iz.ru/841725/aleksei-kozachenkobogdan-stepovoi/za-zhesty-pod-solntcem-minoborony-opisalo-sposoby-polucheniia-ividy-vziatok
The Defense Ministry has devised a special guide on how to avoid taking bribes. The
practical recommendations are presented in the form of a methods guide booklet, but
they will be consolidated by a departmental [Ministry] order. The military have taken
a detailed approach to compiling the booklet: It contains a whole section devoted to
dealing safely with a potential briber….
…The booklet is an attempt by the Defense Ministry to mobilize the fight against
corruption. How effective it will be is another matter, Oleg Zherdev, the chairman of
the Gvardiya security departments’ association of lawyers, told Izvestiya.
“It will do no harm to remind military personnel one more time about their
rights and obligations,” the expert reflects. “The level of general legal culture
in both society and the Army in our country is low. The main thing is that these
recommendations should not turn into just another boilerplate response in the context
of the fight against corruption.”
The booklet’s development was no accident. The Defense Ministry reports that
the level of corruption-based criminality was successfully reduced by 12 percent in
2017-2018. However, the number of crimes linked to bribe-taking has increased since
2016. Within the overall number of corruption-based violations, this kind of crime
constitutes 48.5 percent.

“The Defense Ministry has devised a special guide on how to avoid taking bribes.”

OE Watch | April 2019

20

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s View of Hypersonic Weapons: Changing the
Dynamics of Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: China (like Russia)
has been pursing hypersonic weapons. The country
reportedly conducted seven test-flights of the DF-ZF, a
hypersonic missile delivery vehicle, which is expected
to be operational by 2020. Such missiles have clear
advantages and, as the accompanying excerpted article
from Jiefangjun Bao explains, “will open up a new arena
and a new form of military struggle.” The article discusses
how hypersonic missiles change the concept of time and
space as the speed of these weapons will allow little time
for an opponent to react. The article goes on to explain
that it will be possible to launch hypersonic missiles
from many platforms on land, at sea, in the air, and in
space. They combine the superiorities of ballistic missiles
and aircraft technology, giving them speed and flexible
maneuverability. As a result, the article states that their
employment “will completely overturn the equilibrium of
current opposing offensive and defensive systems,” and the
side that possesses them will have the strategic advantage.
End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The side with hypersonic weapons
will create a new, asymmetric, absolute
superiority in the attack, rendering
current, traditional air defense and antimissile defense systems ineffective.”

Source: Niu Yujun, “高超声速武器如何影响战争 (How Hypersonic Weapons
Affect Warfare),” Jiefangjun Bao, 14 February 2019. http://www.xinhuanet.com/
mil/2019-02/14/c_1210059534.htm
The development and use of hypersonic weapons will open up a new arena and
a new form of military struggle. Their unique combat superiority will overturn
the forms of future warfare and the shape of combat operations.
Profound change in the concept of time and space in future warfare.
Hypersonic weapons fly so fast … That speed greatly shortens an opponent’s
reaction time and the combat operations process. It upsets the opponent’s
operational tempo… They can execute fast and accurate attacks against
global targets from many platforms on land, at sea, in the air, and in space…
The boundary between air and space is completely erased. The distance
between areas is shortened. The battlefield space concept of forward and deep
deployment is blurred. “The distant horizon is right in front of your face” is truly
achieved. Battlefield distance is no longer barriers and buffers which the enemy
and friendly sides can use for support, and trading space for time will be difficult
to achieve.
Overturning of the current strategic balance in opposing systems. …
hypersonic weapons will combine the superiorities of ballistic missile and
aircraft technology. That is, they will have the combat characteristics of fast
speed and long range of ballistic missiles in flight, along with the technical
features of aircraft, namely their flexibility of maneuver and unpredictable
course. That will completely overturn the equilibrium of current opposing
offensive and defensive systems. The side with hypersonic weapons will create
a new, asymmetric, absolute superiority in the attack, rendering current,
traditional air defense and anti-missile defense systems ineffective…

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH
community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #11
November 2018

Foreign news & PersPectives oF the oPerational environment

1RL257E Krasukha-4
Electronic Warfare System
EURASIA
3
5
6
8
9
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
21
22
23

Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan Electronic Warfare
Battalions
Russian MoD Considers a “Pocket” Iskander
The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile Defense System Is
Coming!
More Muscle for the Northern Fleet
Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
Why Russians Fight in Syria
Increased Economic Strains for Russian Military Personnel
Military Benefits of the Caspian Sea Convention for Russia’s
Power Projection Capabilities
The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border
Gauging Armenian and Azerbaijani Military Exercises
Moscow Pushes Own Approaches to Cyber Security on Rest
of CSTO
Russian De-dollarization: Economic Counter-Attack?
Polish Perspective on Russian Disinformation Campaigns
Social Media Restrictions for Russian Security
NATO Arctic Exercise Draws Russian Response
French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route
Russian Coast Guard Expanding in the Arctic
India and the Arctic?
Bulgarian Fighter Aircraft Acquisition

INDO-PACIFIC
24
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Made-in-China 2025
A Look at the PLA’s Youth Aviation Programs
Recruit Training Extended for New PLA Recruits to Increase
Readiness
The Growing Face of China’s Civil-Military Integration
Initiative
Poor Training and Insufficient Personnel Hamper Chinese
Maritime Militia Development
Chinese-Nepalese Anti-Terror Training Causing Concern in
India
India Upgrades Its MiG-29s
Singapore Unites Southeast Asia to Counter Terrorism
Is It Too Late for the Maldives to Lift Itself Out From Under
China’s Hold?
Vietnam Begins Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
43
44
45
46
48

Iranian Government Details Ahvaz Terrorist Incident
Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Confirms Use of Armed
Drones in Syria
Iran to Build New Missile System?
Turkey Tests Anti-torpedo Torpedo
Turkish Naval Special Forces
The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the Middle East
Russia and China Help Egypt’s Space Industry Move
Forward
Supreme Leader’s Advisor: United States Common Enemy
of Iran and China
Turkish and Iranian Cooperation to Fight Terrorism
Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s Drilling Plan
The “Soft War” on Hezbollah

AFRICA
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Yemen’s Civil War Fails to Discourage Horn of Africa Refugees
Cameroon Prison Break Signals Rising Anglophone Insurgency
South Sudan’s Civil War Death Toll Reaches 400,000
Nigeria’s Chukwu on Cross-Border, Counter-Boko Haram
Operations
Environmental Crimes Reportedly Leading Funding Source for
Terrorists
Military Intervention for Ebola Outbreak in DRC
With Tight Budgets, South Africa’s Military Strains to Meet
Mandates
Partisanship Alleged in Promotion of Malian Generals
Will Corruption in South Sudan Torpedo Peace Plan?

LATIN AMERICA
58
59
60
60
61
62
63
64
65

A Bolsonaro Brazil and the FSP
Mexican President-Elect Plans to Extend Federal Security
Presence
Worse to Come in Venezuela
Overton Window Shift on Venezuela
Chinese Medical Aid to Venezuela
ELN and FARC Seek Sanctuary
Colombia May Return to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields
Protests Disturb Peace Commonly Associated with Costa Rica
Student Marches as a Form of Struggle

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 9
Issue #3
March 2019

Foreign news & PersPectives oF the oPerational environment

EURASIA
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Military District Reform Rumored
Private Security and the Russian National Guard
Bolstering the Russian Ground Forces, the Cossack Way
Russian Anti-Satellite Technologies as a Response to the US
Ballistic Missile Defense System
Importance of Space-Based Intelligence, Reconnaissance,
and Surveillance
Revelations of a Russian Mercenary in Syria
Controlling the Kremlin’s Narrative
Reassessment Needed of Soviet-Afghan War
Arctic Tank Modernization Continues
Have Power, Will Travel
A New Turn in Armenian-Russian Relations?
Campaign Sparks Division Between Ethnic Russians and
Estonians
Anti-Chinese Sentiment in Kyrgyzstan

INDO-PACIFIC
17
18
20
21

Chinese Views on How Artificial Intelligence Will Change
Ways to Win Wars
PLA Stratagems for Establishing Wartime Electromagnetic
Dominance: An Analysis of “The Winning Mechanisms of
Electronic Countermeasures”
China Accelerates Chip Design to Overcome Strategic
Vulnerability
Russia May Begin Purchase of Chinese-made Drones,
Engines

AFRICA
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

China Reacts to South China Sea Report
PLA Army Air Defense Brigades Now Able to Share
Information with Air Force
Report Indicates China Moving Toward Sixth-Generation
Fighter
Dedicated OPFOR Unit Helps PLAAF Improve Skills
India’s Ongoing Problems with Fighter Aircraft
Indonesia and the Philippines Investigate Jolo Cathedral
Bombing
Singapore Reports Positively on Counter-Piracy

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
29
30
32
34
35
36
37
38
39
41
42
43
45

Iranian Army Shifts from Defensive to Offensive Posture
Iran Builds Up Syrian Proxies on the Western Banks of the
Euphrates
Moscow Disapproves of Erdogan’s Plans in Syria
Iran’s Strategic Shift to China and Russia
Houthi “Re-Engineering” of Yemeni Society
Turkey’s Position on Venezuela
The UAV Threat to Turkish Security
The Latest “Houthi Drone”
Ukraine to Buy Combat Drones from Turkey
Iranian Forces Test Night Vision Cameras
IRGC Air Force Unveils New Ballistic Missile
Eastern Mediterranean Gas Forum Threatens Turkey
Privatization of Turkish Military Factory Draws Different
Reactions

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55

Russia Makes Strategic Inroads into Africa
With Russian Help, A Fragile Peace Agreement in the Central
African Republic
Is Boko Haram “in Charge” of Baga, Borno State?
Kenya’s Homegrown Terrorists
Operation Targets Purported “Katiba Serma” in Mali
Mali Releases Militant Reintegration Policy
South Africa Looks to Increase UAV Exports
As Economy Sinks, Military Discontent Rises in Zimbabwe
Kidnapping in Nigeria: An Underreported, Multifaceted,
Criminal Enterprise

LATIN AMERICA
56
56
57
58
59
60
62
63
64
65

Convoy of Armed CJNG Survey Neighborhoods in Zacatecas
The Gulf Cartel’s Armored Vehicles
Salvadorans Elect Nayib Bukele
Focus on Cuba
Germans in Bolivia
Brazil’s Migrant Problem
Paraguay Announces Plan to Reinforce Security along its
Border with Brazil
Changing Brazilian-Chinese Trade Relations?
Will Haiti Break Ties with Taiwan in 2019 and Opt for China?
Police Dismantle Largest Cocaine Processing Laboratories Ever
Discovered in Spain

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | April 2019

21

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Rocket Forces Conduct Readiness Training
OE Watch Commentary: China is testing its Rocket Forces’
combat readiness through opposition force (OPFOR) exercises
involving special forces. This February an unidentified Rocket
Force OPFOR team conducted drills in a snow-covered
mountainous part of China where temperatures reached -20 °C.
While this accompanying excerpted article is written in an
approved style meant to focus on the contributions of individuals
rather than the unit training itself, it provides some useful details.
First, it further emphasizes the importance of OPFOR training
across all Chinese services, including the Rocket Force. While
the 2nd Artillery, and its reorganized form the PLA Rocket Force
(PLARF), maintained an OPFOR training base in northeastern
China, it appears that more units are being exposed to the training
and the testing itself has become stricter. The article also suggests
that this special forces team travels around China conducting
exercises with various units, in addition to less frequent set piece
training where a unit travels to a designated training area or live
fire range.
The focus on special forces is also noteworthy. Chinese media
previously revealed the existence of the PLARF’s “Sharp Sword”
[利刃] unit, though others likely exist. There appears to have
been an increase in special forces’ participation in OPFOR
training. Special forces are considered to be a fundamental part of
Rocket Force operations both as a defense against enemy special
forces operating within Chinese territory and operating in some
capacity within enemy territory, helping to call in and evaluate
strikes.
Interestingly, the special forces team appears to draw heavily
on soldiers who have served in conventional missile launch units
elsewhere in the Rocket Force, perhaps with the mindset that the
blue force (OPFOR in China) should fully understand normal
Rocket Force doctrine. The PLA Rocket Force is an integral part
of most PLA offensive campaigns. Adding realism to exercises
and increasing the tempo the drills—especially an OPFOR
component to help launch units better prepare for threats, will
undoubtedly contribute to their operational effectiveness. End OE
Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Only when
I joined the
blue force did I
understand that
being skilled at
fighting arts isn’t
enough, especially
if a war breaks out,
you have to use
your head, and use
technology.” “PLA Rocket Force OPFOR ‘Blue Force’.”

Source: “火箭军某蓝军部队严寒条件下进行特战训练 (Rocket
Force OPFOR Carries Out Special Forces Drills in Extreme Cold),”
Xinhua, 4 February 2019. http://www.mod.gov.cn/power/2019-02/04/
content_4835817.htm
This is the account of a reporter accompanying a special operations
OPFOR element and participated in a confrontation drill in extreme cold
conditions.
Zhang Tan [张坦], commander of the special forces element said
“Rocket Force red vs blue confrontation exercises are non-contact, as is
the special forces’ sabotage operation. For this exercise, if the defending
‘red team,’ discovers the ‘blue’ special forces team they will be counted
as killed. In order to complete the sabotage mission, the team members
must develop a strong skill and extraordinary will.”
This young commander originally served with an (unidentified) “new
type” missile brigade in the Rocket Force. He was a missile launch
battalion [弹发射连] commander and served in training roles and as a
staff officer in a combat support unit. In 2016, he and his missile brigade
came [to the training area] to participate in a confrontation exercise.
As a member of the “red force,” he advised the group and made a good
account of himself.
Now he is confident in his skills and leads the “blue force” special forces
team visiting guided missile units across China to help sharpen their
skills.
Sun Jintao [孙晋涛] is a squad leader in the unit. He joined the PLA
from a military school in 2013, and is both of high character and a
skilled mixed martial artist. While skillfully operating the special combat
equipment he carried with him, he said: “Only when I joined the blue
force did I understand that being skilled at fighting arts isn’t enough,
especially if a war breaks out, you have to use your head, and use
technology.”
As soon as he finished speaking, he and his teammates exchanged a few
hand signals. In an instant, he grabbed his heavy rucksack and quickly
jumped over a hillside and moved to the front to hide.
Under a few big trees, Rong Chenglin [荣成林], dressed in a white
snowsuit, was lying motionless in the snow, blending in with the
surrounding environment. Through the special reconnaissance equipment
he carried, he observed and judged the surrounding situation and slowly
approached the target accompanied the other team members.
Rong came from the “1st Conventional Missile Brigade” [常规导弹
第一旅] (China’s first such unit established in the early 1990s). He
has traveled to the Gobi Plateau with the missile troops (for live fire
exercises) and into the jungles of the South, and has directed command
post defense operations during previous exercises.
He has totally switched roles from defense to offense like today’s
sabotage attack, becoming special forces squad leader, and writing up
a series of targeted reconnaissance tactics that have been adopted by
special forces elements…
Last year, during the Rocket Forces’ confrontation exercise, these blue
team officers and soldiers who were special in the special skills, cleverly
used the night-time conditions to quietly approach the “enemy force” and
carry out precision harassment and planting traps, inflicting losses and
hindering the enemy missile brigade.
OE Watch | April 2019

22

INDO-PACIFIC
The Role of China’s Theater Commands
OE Watch Commentary: At the end of 2015, China
kicked off a massive military transformation. Under the
new plan, expected to be complete by 2020, power was
consolidated under the Central Military Commission,
China’s Communist Party body with President Xi Jinping
as its “core.” Along with rebalancing and restructuring
the armed forces, the seven military districts were
consolidated into five theater commands, going from
an admin-intensive ground operations format to a joint
operations format.
The accompanying excerpted article, published
in Xinhua, offers some insight into the roles and
responsibilities of the new theater commands. Each theater
command is responsible for building the command system,
giving guidance to force building and management, and
facilitating well-coordinated parallel development of
military operations command and force building. They
each are the central point of the operation command
chain and play a key role in linking the forces under their
command to the higher authorities. In the new system
within China’s military transformation, everything is done
for the purpose of fighting and the theater commands
are expected to boost combat readiness with the goal of
being able to fight and win. The theater commands play
a key role in directing the building of the joint operations
command system. They also spearhead the allocation of
the different military forces, evaluate various units’ combat
and support capabilities, and organize and plan joint
operations and joint training.

“The core in the design of the theater command system lies
in giving prominence to ‘combat operations.’ Everything is
done for the purpose of fighting…”
Source: Liu Zhengyuan and Xu Haiwei, “Effectively Grasp Requirement for
the Theater Commands That Are in Charge of Military Operations Under the
New System,” Xinhua, 26 February 2019. http://www.xinhuanet.com/mil/201902/26/c_1210067723.htm
Establishing a theater command system that “integrates peacetime and wartime
functions, operates in a normalized fashion, performs specialized functions,
runs as a streamlined and efficient entity” is the pivotal part in the reform of our
military’s joint operations command system. Being a joint operations command
organ consisting of all military services’ command elements, a theater command
stands at the central point of the operation command chain, and plays a key role
in linking the forces under their command to the higher authorities….
The core in the design of the theater command system lies in giving prominence
to “combat operations”. Everything is done for the purpose of fighting…
… The theater commands perform the crucial function and the primary duty of
organizing joint operations in their respective strategic directions. In particular,
they play an irreplaceable role in directing the building of the joint operations
command system, planning the allocation of military forces, examining and
evaluating various units’ combat and support capabilities, organizing and
planning joint operations and joint training…
…A theater command’s operational requirements are upwardly linked with
the national strategy and the overall military strategy, comprised of the
requirements of various services in the theater, laterally related to force building
in various services, thus situated at a pivotal point in the generation of military
requirements…

These are just some of the roles and responsibilities of
the theater commands, as described in the article. In their
transition from administration to operations, the theater commands shape theater strategy, force deployments, capability standards and action
arrangements. Their operational requirements are linked with the country’s national strategy and overall military strategy. As these strategies
continue to evolve to maintain the pace with global trends, their roles will likely evolve. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a marketplace of ideas about the future of our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and community of action that continually explores the
future through collaborative partnerships and
continuous dialogue with academia and industry.

OE Watch | April 2019

23

INDO-PACIFIC
China Launches First “Intelligent” Cargo Ship
OE Watch Commentary: In November of 2018, China Ship News announced, in the accompanying excerpted article, that a Chinese
company had completed and tested the world’s first “intelligent” cargo ship. The ship, called Pacific Vision [明远], is a Very Large Ore Carrier,
with a maximum cargo of 400,000 metric tons. The ship is over 362 meters long and 65 meters wide. For comparison, the Vale Sohar (pictured)
is a similar 400,000-ton ore carrier.
The economic efficiency involved in bigger ships have driven cargo ships toward ever-larger sizes, with the main restrictions being those
of important transit areas like the Suez and Panama canals. Despite their size, modern container ships already have a small crew complement
compared to 50 years ago, with weather forecasting, automation and satellite navigation systems helping reduce the need for various crew
positions. “Intelligent” ship technology aims to harness sensors and satellite navigation systems to improve safety through continuous
monitoring. However, this amount of data requires deliberately-designed architectures to properly process it.
In 2017, China operated over 1000 bulk carriers—double that number if Hong Kong-registered ships are included. Remote controlled
ships have been tried before, but insufficiently smart navigation and high operating costs compared to human crews meant that projects were
abandoned. The new system should help improve safety and efficiency.
The article notes that the Chinese Ministry of Industry and Information Technology established a special program to develop “smart” ships,
with the goal to “seize the commanding heights of ship technology development, and enhance its (Chinese ship manufacturers’) international
competitiveness.” The Pacific Vision’s successful 10-day trial is another step toward that goal and while its “intelligent” systems are only
an incremental step, paired with more accurate and redundant navigation systems such as China’s expanding Beidou-3 navigation satellite
constellation, “intelligent” ships’ automatic ship-to-ship communication, collision avoidance systems and sensor data fusion point toward a
future where a large portion of sailing jobs such as bulk carriers, oil tankers, cargo ships are fully automated. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wood)

“...the study of intelligent ship technology is one of the important ways for China’s shipbuilding industry to
adjust its industrial structure, seize the commanding heights of ship technology development, and enhance
its international competitiveness…”

Vale Sohar in Nantong, China (2012).

Source: Dmitriy Lakhtikov [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vale_Sohar_in_Nantong.jpg.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2019

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China Launches First “Intelligent” Cargo Ship
Source: He Baoxin and Qian Ping, “全球首艘智能VLOC成功试航—中国智能船舶1.0新时代来临 (World’s first Smart VLOC Successfully
Completes Trial Voyage—The Era of Chinese AI Ships is Getting Closer),” China Ship News, 26 November 2018. http://chinashipnews.com.
cn/show.php?contentid=14332
On 14 November 2018, the world’s first 400,000-ton ‘intelligent’ Very Large Ore Carrier (VLOC) built by China State Shipbuilding
Corporation’s [中国船舶工业集团有限公司]Shanghai Waiguoqiao Shipbuilding Co. [ 上海外高桥造船有限公司], successfully completed
its first test voyage. Under the careful supervision of Waigaoqiao staff, the A.I. ship project team successfully overcame poor sea conditions,
complicated navigation tests. After 10 days of sea trials, the ship completed its project goals. The results of the navigation test indicates that
all functions of the intelligent systems met requirements. The test results were confirmed by the ship-owners, China Classification Society
(CCS) and DNV GL (an international standards, registration and classification society).
As China’s first intelligent ship 1.0 R&D developmental model, the ship network platform and information platforms to achieve five modular
A.I. functions including auxiliary autonomous navigation, efficient energy management, equipment operation and maintenance, ship-to-shore
integrated communication, dry cargo, and liquid cargo monitoring…
In 2016, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology set up a “Smart Ship 1.0 Special project”, bringing together the ship industry’s
top institutions [院所], AI developers, shipbuilding groups, institutions of higher learning, and so on, work together to carry out intelligent
ship research. CSSC is the project’s lead organizer…
In the course of the implementation of the Intelligent Ship Project, Waigaoqiao Shipbuilding design department saw success in designing
an integrated intelligent system with the ship, optimized the layout according to requirements, and completed more than 500 schematics.
In response to the mismatch between domestic and foreign communication equipment, Waigaoqiao Shipbuilding design Department has
organized a number of live ship and laboratory tests, focusing on the coordination of intelligent system mooring and navigation outline
finishing and intelligent equipment installation etc. Because of the asymmetry of conceptual and cognitive information between the
R&D personnel of intelligent system and the construction personnel of real ships, how to compile the outline suitable for the verification
of real ships has become a severe test for Waigaoqiao Shipbuilding and various research units. After several rounds of research,
Waigaoqiao Shipbuilding Design department finally led the implementation of the test outline that can guide production, for the actual ship
intermodulation and verification of the overall promotion of the creation of good conditions...
The smart ship achieved six major breakthroughs: First, the ship demonstrated the “platform + application” concept, with a network
information platform aggregating, processing and analyzing the ship’s sensor information in an integrated, uniform way. This reduces
redundancy and inconsistency between systems. Secondly, for the first time, the ship was able to assist with collision avoidance in the open
sea and helping to solve navigational issues. The third breakthrough was in streamlined ship-to-ship communication, which paves the way for
automatic collision avoidance programs. The fourth innovation involved intelligent monitoring of mineral cargoes’ liquefaction (when a solid
begins to act more like a liquid due to vibration). Actively monitoring the state of cargos helps resolve stability issues that may result from the
ship shaking and improves the safety of navigation. The ships’ fifth innovation was improvement in data transmission effectiveness through
better compression of ship-to-shore transmissions. The sixth and final breakthrough for the ship was the (aforementioned) recognition by
international standards organizations CSS and DNV GL.
Industry experts say that the study of intelligent ship technology is one of the important ways for China’s shipbuilding industry to adjust its
industrial structure, seize the commanding heights of ship technology development, and enhance its international competitiveness. “Intelligent
Ship 1.0 Special” Development, will be the system to enhance China’s intelligent ship design, construction, operation, maintenance,
management and other aspects of the ability, as well as the core products of the independent, safe and controllable capabilities. At the same
time, taking bulk carriers and oil tankers as application carriers, the research on related intelligent function modules and systems will lead to
the coordinated development of the whole industrial chain and enhance the comprehensive competitiveness of China’s shipbuilding industry.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download
OE Watch | April 2019

25

INDO-PACIFIC
Beidou Navigation System Expansion Announced
OE Watch Commentary: China is continuing to expand
its Beidou Navigation Satellite System, with 8-10 new
satellites expected to be added to the existing constellation
of 19 “Beidou-3” and 18 “Beidou-2.” The new satellites
are being placed in Medium Earth Orbits between 20,000
and 24,000 km, similar to those commonly used by other
navigation satellite systems including GPS, Galileo and
Glonass. Five Beidou-2 satellites are in the much higher
Geostationary orbits.

“China plans to complete the construction of the BDS-3
global system and start to provide special services by 2020.”

Chinese officials view the use of domestically produced
microchips in Beidou satellites and receiver systems as a
major milestone in the country’s push for technological selfreliance.
The accompanying excerpted article from China Military
Online notes that Beidou has been widely adopted as an
alternative to GPS and Galileo, particularly for industrial
applications. Current users have access to position data
accurate within 10 meters globally and within 5 meters in the
Asia-Pacific region, though the Chinese military has access
to a significantly more accurate encrypted signal from the
system.
北斗三号卫星 (Beidou 3rd Generation).

Source: Sprt98 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:北斗三号卫星（1：3）.jpg.
China hopes to leverage the system not only for military
applications and foreign sales but also to help drive its
own quest to develop advanced technologies such as internet of things, automation, and AI. An expanded system encompassing positioning,
navigation and timing functions, planned for completion by 2035, will have direct application to these new technologies. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

Source: “China to launch 8 to 10 Beidou navigation satellites this year,” China Military Online, 5 March 2019. http://eng.mod.gov.cn/
news/2019-03/05/content_4837262.htm
According to the China Satellite Navigation Office, Beidou Navigation Satellite System (BDS) will continue high-density global deployment,
launching 8 to 10 Beidou navigation satellites and complete all Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) satellites launch this year, in order to further
improve the constellation layout across the world, and to comprehensively enhance the service performance of BDS and improve user
experience.
Since the BDS-3 project completed the basic system and began to provide global services at the end of last year, the BDS has been operating
steadily. Through global testing and evaluation, its global positioning accuracy is better than 10 meters and in the Asia-Pacific region, it is 5
meters, which both meet the index requirements.
After years of development, BDS has formed a complete industrial chain and achieved large-scale applications in China’s transportation,
agriculture, public security, surveying and mapping industries, and other fields. This year, China will gradually increase the in-depth
innovation and integration of BDS with emerging technologies such as the Internet, big data, and artificial intelligence (AI), with a view to
promoting new integration application models and formats of the “Beidou +”.
According to statistics, the sales of basic products such as domestically-made Beidou navigation chip modules have exceed 700 million, and
the sales of domestically-made high-precision board and antenna have accounted for 30% and 90% of the domestic market respectively as of
the end of 2018…
At present, the BDS has been widely applied to various fields such as the confirmation of land rights in Indonesia, construction in Kuwait,
land surveying and mapping in Uganda, precision agriculture in Myanmar, offshore drilling in Maldives, drones in Cambodia, warehousing
and logistics in Thailand, airport timing services in Pakistan, and power inspection in Russia. The high-precision products of the BDS have
been exported to more than 90 countries and regions, and the ground-based technology and product system of the BDS are also exported
overseas…
China plans to complete the construction of the BDS-3 global system and start to provide special services by 2020. China will build a PNT
(positioning navigation and timing) system, featuring wider application, greater integration, and higher intelligence with the BDS as the core
by 2035. With stronger functions and better performance, the BDS will serve the world and benefit mankind
OE Watch | April 2019

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Shanghai Embraces 5G Technology, Accelerates
Infrastructure Plans
OE Watch Commentary: Shanghai is rushing to embrace
5G technology, the high-speed wireless communication
standard that is expected to power a new generation of dataintensive applications from robotics to mobile devices. On 6
March, China Mobile Shanghai unveiled a plan to build 5,000
ground stations as part of a scale test of 5G technology by the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.
Chinese media have previously reported that China had
772 million internet users in 2017—55.8 percent of the total
population. Nationwide, demand for faster internet and better
coverage is rising. 5G has much higher bandwidth and lower
latency compared to previous generations and is predicted to
help usher in a new digital ecosystem of connected devices
and content. China has made domestic adoption of this
technology a priority. It is also envisioned as an important
part of China’s industrial plans, with 5G tech connecting
highly autonomous factories with various parts of the
manufacturing process connected as part of the “internet of
things.”
Shanghai has a population of 26.3 million, and the initial
rollout to Hongkou District [虹口区], in north-central
Shanghai, provides a solid base to test the technology before
expanding the service to other areas. China Mobile, a stateowned enterprise and the world’s largest mobile phone
provider, is the main provider of this service, but 5G is not
just for mobile phones. As highlighted by China Mobile
Shanghai’s Chen Li in the accompanying excerpted article,
the goal is to partner with other major industries such as
transportation and manufacturing to begin developing
applications for the technology.
The Chinese government has set ambitious targets for
the percentage of 5G components produced in China, and
eventually for Chinese domination of the market. By 2020,
75 percent of 5G mobile telecommunication systems and
mobile terminals should be built in China. Chinese tech
giant Huawei is investing hundreds of millions of dollars in
the technology. While this article does not evaluate China’s
progress toward that goal, the urgency, high-level support,
and massive scope of what Chen is calling for fits into this
overall plan. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“From the perspective of national strategy, the
ubiquitous, flexible and intelligent 5G network will provide
solid support for the deep integration of cross-domain, allround and multi-level industries.”
Source: “中移动上海公司董事长：9月底上海将建成不少于5000个5G基
站 (China Mobile Shanghai Chairman: Shanghai Will Build No Less than
5000 5G Stations by the End of September),” First Financial, 6 March 2019.
https://www.yicai.com/news/100132354.html
By the end of September, Shanghai will have at least 5,000 fifth-generation
wireless network technology base stations, providing Gigabit broadband to
5.6 million home users and 3,000 buildings, setting a world-class information
infrastructure benchmark.
Chen Li [陈力], National People’s Congress representative and Party
Secretary of the China Mobile Shanghai’s Party Committee, announced
that China Mobile will complete the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology’s scale R&D test of 5G. The end-to-end function and network
performance verification will promote the contiguous 5G coverage of the main
urban areas, suburban business hotspot area and vertical industry application
area, and plan to jointly build the first “double gigabit” demonstration area
with Hongkou District [虹口区] before the end of March.
5G can provide at least ten times the peak rate of 4G, the transmission delay
of milliseconds and the connection capacity of hundreds of billions. It is a new
ecological capability that drives the innovation of the whole society and an
important breakthrough for releasing the potential of digital economy.
From the perspective of national strategy, the ubiquitous, flexible and
intelligent 5G network will provide solid support for the deep integration of
cross-domain, all-round and multi-level industries. As a key infrastructure
to promote the digital transformation of the economy and society, 5G is also
an important foundation for accelerating industrial upgrading and structural
transformation.
Chen said China Mobile Shanghai, with the “Yangtze River Delta 5G
innovation and development alliance” as a platform, working together with
the Shanghai rail bureau, other government agencies and telecom industry
leaders, speed up 5G inter-industry vertical integration and actively develop
5G applications.
Chen also suggested that plans for 5G and vertical industry integration
should be accelerated to begin work on direct applications such as connected
transportation, medical and health, and industry.

OE Watch | April 2019

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Taiwan Announces 2019 Armed Forces Training Plan
OE Watch Commentary: In February Taiwan’s Ministry
of National Defense (MND) announced the outline of
military training in 2019 as reported in the accompanying
excerpted article. Some exercises are being expanded due to
recent actions by the People’s Republic of China. In January,
Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Xi Jinping
announced that reunification is an inevitable requirement for
the historical rejuvenation of the Chinese nation and that the
Chinese government does not promise to renounce the use of
force.
According to Major General Yeh Kuo-hui, chief of the
MND’s Operations and Planning Division, this year’s Han
Kuang [漢光] exercise (Taiwan’s largest military exercise
focused on repelling an attack by mainland China) will be
held over the course of April and May. A command post
computer simulation is planned for the first phase on 22-26
April and is meant to help improve the operational decisionmaking skills for commanders at all levels. A live-fire joint
anti-landing operation is planned for 27–31 May.
The latest defense white paper and quadrennial defense
review, both published in 2017, emphasize China’s
improvements in ballistic missile strike and integrated air
operations. If effective, the People’s Liberation Army could
deal Taiwanese air bases and command centers a crushing
blow, and pave the way for an amphibious landing. Likely
as a result of these concerns, this year’s exercise will also
include combat landing and replenishment on improvised
runways by Taiwan’s Air Force.
Six sections of highway are designated for emergency
runway operations along the Sun Yat-sen National Freeway
and Pingtung provincial highway. Both highways run NorthSouth and have straight and level intervals 2,400m long
for use in wartime. Training for runway repair teams and
engineers near the sections are planned to improve the units’
ability to support the Taiwanese air force in combat.
According to the article, asymmetric warfare is the key
combat force for future Taiwan defensive operations, and
that one of the exercises will test mine-laying, sniper combat,
cyber warfare, and electronic warfare to its advantage
against a larger force. Taiwan’s small size and limited livefire ranges restricts its military’s ability to carry out realistic
training. Observers of the exercise frequently note that the
exercises are overly scripted or use unrealistic tactics meant
more for show than effectiveness. However, it appears that
the Taiwanese government is looking to retain its defensive
advantage through the renewed emphasis on joint training
and asymmetry, if it can be accompanied with realism. End
OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The annual exercise will demonstrate the ‘all-out’
defense concept [整體防衛構想] and concretely enhance
the joint strength of Taiwan’s three services.”
Source: “國防部「漢光35號演習」陸空實兵課目對外開放 (Ministry of
National Defense “Han Kuang No. 35 Exercise” Air and Ground),” MND
Military News Agency [國防部軍事新聞通訊社], 27 February 2018. https://
mna.gpwb.gov.tw/post.php?id=8&message=93230
At a press conference on February 27, Major General Ye Guohui [葉國
輝] of the MND’s Operations and Planning Division stated that this year’s
“Hanguang 35”exercise will include the National Highway No. 1 Changhua
Huatan Road for “Wartime and Runway Takeoff and Landing” drills and live
fire “Counter-Amphibious Landing” exercises at the Pingtung Manfeng firing
range. The annual exercise will demonstrate the “all-out” defense concept [
整體防衛構想] and concretely enhance the joint strength of Taiwan’s three
services.
Ye said that this year’s “Han Kuang No. 35” exercise includes plans for
a “command post computer simulation exercise” in April and “live-fire
exercise” in May. The command post simulation will be held between April
22–26. During the exercise, army will hold a 24-hour computer-assisted
command post exercise in accordance with the overall defense concept of
“conserve combat power, [achieve] victory on the coastline, annihilate the
enemy [at the shore]” to strengthen the operational decision-making of
commanders at all levels.
Ye announced the live fire component will be held from May 27–31. The Army,
Navy and Air Force will adopt a joint combat model, and the defense forces
will follow the overall defense concept and carry out 5 days and 4 nights of
joint offensive and defensive OPFOR exercises in island defense areas so that
the officers and men understand the combat mission and are familiarized with
the battlefield environment.
A “combat runway takeoff and landing” military exercise will be carried out
on May 28 from 0615 to 0735, at the National Road No. 1 Changhua Huatan
Road section; the “Joint Anti-landing Operation” live-fire exercise will be held
in May. It is planned for the 30th from 0830 to 0920 hours at the Pingtung
Manfeng Shooting Range.
Ye pointed out that the national warfare preparations took off and landed
last time in September of the Republic of China in the implementation of the
war preparations for the people. The Ministry of National Defense, in addition
to asking the air force brigade near the war preparation road to conduct
inspections every month, will also cooperate with senior engineers at regular
intervals. The runway repair and implementation of the warfare take-off and
landing drill, the purpose is to maintain several runways in the wartime can
be used, mainly in combat and inter-departmental cooperation…
Ye emphasized that in order to implement the full-scale readiness of the
Taiwan defensive operations, the national army will be pragmatic and
continue to strengthen the combat training of the troops based on the
development of the enemy’s military strength, tactics, and possible threats to
Taiwan, reviewing combat plans and researching countermeasures against the
enemy in order to enhance the overall defense force of the national army and
ensure homeland security.

OE Watch | April 2019

28

INDO-PACIFIC
New Chinese Two-Seat Carrier-based Fighter Enters
Next Phase of Testing
OE Watch Commentary: Reporting in official Chinese media
indicates that a new variant of China’s J-15 carrier-based fighter
jet is likely undergoing testing with the PLA Navy. The new
aircraft has been variously called the J-15D and J-15S. Similar
variants are typically designated S for “shuang” [双], two-seat.
Beyond the additional seat, the new variant incorporates a
number of other noteworthy features. Commenters note that
the new fighter uses two indigenously-produced WS-10A
engines. Early versions of the J-15 relied on imported Russian
engines. While some two-seat aircraft are used for training,
other details point toward the likely mission set for the new
aircraft. Most variants of the J-15 have rails on the wingtips for
weapons, but images of the new two-seater appear to include
electronic countermeasures pods similar to the Russian-designed
“Khibiny” series. China has also deployed Su-35s, Su-30s,
and J-16s (a copy of the Su-30) with similar modules. In the
accompanying excerpted article, Wei Dongxu, a frequent media
commentator on military issues, suggested that the second seat
position could be for a dedicated specialty. This might include
a role such as a weapon systems officer or electronic warfare
officer, though there is insufficient information to be certain.
The creation of a dedicated role would fit with observable
trends. Chinese military writings emphasize the importance
of electronic warfare to improving the survivability and
effectiveness of aircraft, and new jamming pods have been
shown on JH-7A fighter bombers, H-6 bombers, and even UAVs
in recent years.
The J-15 itself has faced several hurdles, including two highprofile crashes due to technical problems, and insufficiently
powerful engines. This has led to speculation that an entirely
new aircraft would be developed (possibly based on the J-31
stealth fighter). Regardless of the J-15’s final fate, creation of a
dedicated carrier-based electronic warfare variant and attendant
pilot specialties will help the PLA Navy move toward a more
modern and effective carrier aviation force. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

Source: “Two-seat J-15 fighter jet boosts carrier capability: experts,”
China Military Online, 13 December 2018. http://english.chinamil.com.cn/
view/2018-12/13/content_9377182.htm
A modified two-seat variant of the J-15 fighter jet was spotted at a Chinese
aircraft carrier training base in a recent TV program, suggesting the
carrier-based warplane is already being tested and expected to greatly
expand the carrier’s combat capability with electronic warfare equipment
that one pilot cannot manage.
The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Navy only operates the single-seat
J-15 fighter jet on the Liaoning aircraft carrier at the moment, but military
analysts predict the two-seat variant of the warplane would be able to join
the ranks within two years.
The new fighter jet, which resembles the J-15 but with a larger cockpit,
was seen parked in a hangar at an unspecified Chinese carrier-based
aircraft training base in a Sunday China Central Television (CCTV)
program.
CCTV’s website, cctv.com, published a separate report on Tuesday titled
“China’s most mysterious carrier-based fighter jet quietly appears, greatly
accelerating the pace of aircraft carrier’s combat capability,” saying the
aircraft in the program is a modified two-seat version of the J-15.
The variant might already be undergoing tests with the PLA Navy, the
cctv.com report said.
It is painted with military camouflage instead of the flight test color, which
further supports the speculation, military experts said.
Modifying the single-seat J-15 into a two-seat version can greatly increase
the combat capability of the fighter jet and the aircraft carrier, cctv.com
reported.
The new aircraft can also conduct electronic jamming missions, the report
said.
In April, photos of the variant equipped with wingtip electronic warfare
pods surfaced online, but their authenticity could not be verified.
A single pilot cannot manage to fly the jet and engage in complicated
electronic battles at the same time, Wei Dongxu, a Beijing-based military
expert, told the Global Times on Wednesday.

“The new aircraft can also conduct electronic
jamming missions…”

J-15 03.

Source: By Garudtejas7, [CC BY-SA 4.0], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:J-15_03.jpg.

OE Watch | April 2019

29

INDO-PACIFIC
The Development of Pakistan’s JF-17 Fighter
OE Watch Commentary: While the majority of attention from media in
India and Pakistan over the past several weeks reported on the recent clash
between the two countries, particularly the Indian Air Force’s strike on
Balakot on 26 February and the downing of an Indian aircraft by Pakistan a
day later, the accompanying excerpted articles report on a recent missile test
by Pakistan’s Air Force and the continuing development of the JF-17 fighter
and they provide some insight into the status of the air forces of both countries
outside of the recent clash.

“The development and production of JF-17
Block 3 are underway aimed at enhancing its
informatised warfare capability and weapons,
Chief Designer of the China-Pakistan codeveloped fighter jet, Yang Wei said.”

The article from The News International, an English-language newspaper in Pakistan, reports on the missile test and how it was “developed,
integrated and qualified solely through indigenous efforts of Pakistani scientists and engineers.” The article also discusses how work on the
latest variant of the JF-17, the “Block 3” (Pakistan’s current inventory of JF-17s are the Block 1 and 2 variants) is “underway” and that a
Chinese source is claiming it will include a “whole combat system” that will allow it to better communicate with other platforms.
The article from Zee News, an English-language news website in India, also reports on the ongoing development of the JF-17 and while
it was published before the recent clash, it notes how “the Pakistani Air Force is in the process of adding 62 JF-17 jets before India gets the
36 Rafale jets.” The article reports on the potential timeline for additional JF-17 Block 2, “by 2019,” and JF-17 Block 3, “by 2020,” and that
the Indian government “will only be getting 36 Rafale jets by 2020.” It is worth remembering that while the Rafale controversy in India has
resulted in a significant delay in the government’s efforts to acquire a multirole fighter, the deal signed with France will result in the delivery
of 36 fighters. Ultimately, the government of Pakistan appears to be making more strides than India in the development of its inventory of
fighters and with support from China, this could likely continue. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)
Source: Mariana Baabar and Muhammad Anis, “New lethal
missile tested,” The News International, 13 March 2019.
https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/443168-new-lethal-missiletested

Source: Manish Shukla, “Pakistan eyes 62 JF-17 jets from China as Rafale
dogfight continues in India,” Zee News, 7 January 2019. https://zeenews.
india.com/world/pakistan-eyes-62-jf-17-jets-from-china-as-rafale-dogfightcontinues-in-india-2168320.html

The Pakistan Air Force (PAF) and scientists achieved another
milestone on Wednesday with successful test-firing of an
indigenously-built extended range smart weapon from JF-17
multi-role fighter aircraft.

While the opposition is targeting the NDA government on the Rafal fighter
plane deal, neighbouring Pakistan is engaged in taking full advantage of
the opportunity. The Pakistani government has approached China to make
the JF-17 (Block 3) Jet fighter plane available for the Pakistani Air Force
(PAF) as soon as possible.

The successful trial has provided JF-17 Thunder with a
very potent and assured day and night capability to engage a
variety of targets with pinpoint accuracy, the PAF announced…
the weapon has been developed, integrated and qualified
solely through indigenous efforts of Pakistani scientists and
engineers…

According to the Indian Air Force (IAF) intelligence report accessed by
Zee News, the Pakistani Air Force is in the process of adding 62 JF-17 jets
before India gets the 36 Rafale jets…The Pakistani government is keen to
induct most advanced version of JF-17 series -- the new JF-17 Block-3 -- to
make its air force match its Indian counterpart.

The development and production of JF-17 Block 3 are
underway aimed at enhancing its informatised warfare
capability and weapons, Chief Designer of the China-Pakistan
co-developed fighter jet, Yang Wei said.

According to the report, Pakistan has asked Chengdu Aircraft
Corporation of China to deliver 13 JF-17 (Block 2) to Pakistani Air Force
by July 2019. They have also asked the Chinese firm to deliver the more
advanced two seater- JF-17 Block-2 jets by 2020…

…Wei Dongxu, a Beijing-based military analyst told Global
Times that the JF-17 Block 3 is likely to be fitted with an active
electronically scanned array radar, which can gather more
information in combat, enabling the fighter jet to engage from a
farther range and attack multiple targets at the same time…

According to intelligence reports, Pakistan and China are also jointly
developing JF-17 (Block-3) jets which is a fourth generation fighter jet.
Pakistani Air Force is expecting the new variants of JF-17 (Block-3) to be
delivered from 2020 which will be more powerful than the already existing
JF-17 series…

Pakistan, the main user of the JF-17, could further share
information between the fighter and other platforms taking
advantage of the whole combat system to effectively defend
against strong opponents…JF-17, or the FC-1, is a singleengine multi-role light fighter jet jointly developed by China
and Pakistan for export.

While the Indian Air Force requires a total of 126 new Medium Multi Role
Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) plane, it will only be getting 36 Rafale jets
by 2020. With Pakistan upping its efforts in getting the 62 new jets for its
air force, the Indian Air Force seems to be looking at a tough challenge
ahead…

OE Watch | April 2019

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Malaysia Arrests ISIS Militants
OE Watch Commentary: On 10 March Malaysia’s Tribunnews.
com published the accompanying excerpted article about the arrests
of seven foreign terrorism suspects in Klang Valley and Sarawak,
six of which were Egyptians and one was Tunisian. In addition, two
Malaysians were arrested for facilitating their travel into the country.
The article claims the one Tunisian was a member of the al-Qaedaaffiliated group Ansar al-Sharia Tunisia, but that group has become
defunct. This means the suspect must have been a former member
and changed his loyalty to the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),
because the article indicates he had also pledged loyalty to ISIS. The
Egyptians, in contrast, were reported in the article to be members of
the Muslim Brotherhood.
According to Malaysian security officials, the way some of
these foreigners entered Malaysia was through using false Syrian
passports. That was a vulnerability, because they succeeded in
entering the country. Other vulnerabilities that Malaysian officials
have noted is that terrorists have sought to marry sympathetic
Malaysians, which allows them to enter the country easily. Yet others
have applied for a student visa and then overstayed in order to plot
terrorist activities.

“Malaysia wants to continue to anticipate the entry
of ISIS fighters who use Malaysia as a shelter, transit,
and base for plotting attacks in third countries.”
Source: “Tingkatkan Kewaspadaan Masuknya Pejuang ISIS, Polisi
Malaysia Tangkap 9 Teroris (Increased Vigilance of ISIS Fighters,
Malaysian Police Capture 9 Terrorists),” Tribunnews.com, 10 March
2019. http://www.tribunnews.com/internasional/2019/03/10/tingkatkankewaspadaan-masuknya-pejuang-isis-polisi-malaysia-tangkap-9-teroris
Malaysian police have raised awareness about the entry of terrorist
fighters from abroad to the country. Nine terrorists have been named
including six Egyptians and one Tunisian who were arrested in the
Klang Valley and Sarawak between 2-9 February. Among two of the
22-year-olds, an Egyptian and Tunisian, the latter who is known to
have been in Ansar al-Sharia Tunisia and entered Malaysia using false
Syrian travel documents. The other five Egyptians who were arrested by
the counter-terrorist police were members of the Muslim Brotherhood
and relied on facilitators to secure accommodation, logistics and jobs,
including purchasing airplane tickets for members. Two of them are
still students of higher learning institutions in Malaysia. Also arrested
were two Malaysians who were charged with violations as terrorism
facilitators for foreign terrorists. Therefore, Malaysia wants to continue
to anticipate the entry of ISIS fighters who use Malaysia as a shelter,
transit, and base for plotting attacks in third countries.

According to the article, the foreign fighters in this case were
trying to use Malaysia as a transit point from which they would target
a third country; this probably refers to the Philippines which has seen
an increase in attacks and propaganda by ISIS-loyal militants since
2017. Malaysian officials mentioned in the article, therefore, indicate
they have been closely working with foreign intelligence agencies to
continue to monitor terrorists attempting to use the country’s territory as a transit hub or logistics base. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Southern Thai Insurgents Increase Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: On 11 March the accompanying
excerpted publication from Thailand, Khaosod English, reported
on Thai reactions to an increase in bombings by insurgents
in the decades-old conflict in the country’s southern three
provinces. In those provinces ethnic Malay Muslim Thais have
sought independence or autonomy for decades. According to
the article, the government captured a suspect who was part
of a contingent of the separatists that had been responsible for
the uptick in bombings. A total of 17 have struck the region
in recent weeks. In addition, the recent bombings reached
Phatthalung and Satun, which is the farthest north that the
insurgency has reached in the past 15 years. A Thai officer
indicated this was a response to the weaker defenses in those
two provinces as the insurgents come under pressure elsewhere.
The article also noted the historical grievances of the
insurgents. On the 110th anniversary of the pact between
Thailand (then Siam) and the British, which led to the Pattani
sultanate being split between Malaysia and Thailand, the
insurgents put up banners denouncing the pact. Other roads
were similarly defaced with graffiti marking the occasion.
The deputy of the Thai junta who returned from a visit to the
southern provinces, according to the article, dismissed that
the uptick in violence was related to elections scheduled in
Thailand on 24 March. At the same time, he claimed it was too
early to tell if the recent violence was indicative of a new trend
of escalation or whether the status quo would prevail. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“…the 17 bombings – which struck Phatthalung and
Satun provinces – were the work of separatists operating
in the neighboring border region.”
Source: “Southern Separatists Blamed for 17 Bomb Attacks,” Khaosod
English, 11 March 2019. http://www.khaosodenglish.com/news/
crimecourtscalamity/2019/03/11/southern-separatists-blamed-for-17-bombattacks/
Deputy junta chairman Prawit Wongsuwan said Monday a suspect has
been taken into custody in connection with yesterday’s bombing spree in the
southern region. Gen. Prawit did not identify the suspect, but said the 17
bombings – which struck Phatthalung and Satun provinces – were the work
of separatists operating in the neighboring border region. No one was killed
or injured in the attacks.
If Prawit’s claim is true, it marks an escalation by secessionist militants
to bring their attacks northward toward Phatthalung and Satun, which had
been mostly unaffected during the 15 years of violence. Police also reported
that banners were hung in Yala and Narathiwat denouncing the Thai state
over a 1909 treaty that partitioned the Patani sultanate between Siam and
British Malaya. Sunday marked the 110th anniversary of the pact ending the
Muslim kingdom’s independence. Some roads were likewise defaced with
graffiti reading “Patani 110.”
Speaking to reporters at Don Mueang Airport just after returning from
meetings in the two provinces, Prawit insisted the attacks had nothing to
do with any political factions. “It’s not related to politics,” the general said.
Thailand is gearing up for an election on March 24.
OE Watch | April 2019

31

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesian Women Involved in Terrorism
OE Watch Commentary: Indonesian women have increasingly been
deployed as suicide bombers in recent years. This trend is recognized in
the accompanying excerpted Indonesian language article from merdeka.
com. The article began with a discussion of a 12 March raid by the counterterrorism force, Detachment 88, of a suspected terrorist in Sumatra. What
was surprising was that the intended suspect surrendered, but his wife did
not and blew herself up along with their two children. The husband later
admitted his wife had been more exposed than him to the doctrines of the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), which explains her actions.
According to the article, Indonesian terrorism experts believe it has
been three years since Indonesian women have moved to the forefront of
radicalism in the country and that hundreds of women in the country have
adopted the idea that jihad is obligatory and are willing to become suicide
bombers. One of the causes of radicalism, according to the article, is that
when there are mass arrests of extremists, who are usually men, it serves to
radicalize their wives. One solution to deal with this trend, therefore, which
is under consideration, is to extend police monitoring to the family members
of terrorism suspects when the suspect is in custody. Furthermore, the
article notes another consideration is to provide stipends to family members
of terrorism suspects because what often happens is that other extremists
take care of the imprisoned member’s relatives while he is custody or the
relatives resort to robbery to compensate for the lost income for the family.
In addition, the article suggests that the government continue deradicalization programs and argues that a holistic approach to terrorism
would take into account religious ideology and the need to challenge the
religious interpretations of the extremist groups and their family members.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Gedung Densus 88, Polda Metrojaya.

Source: Nur Cholis [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gedung_
Densus_88,_Polda_Metrojaya_-_panoramio.jpg.

“If in the past they were in the back line, now women are on the front lines in carrying out acts of terror.”
Source: “Dulu Perempuan di Belakang, Kini di Garis Depan Lakukan Aksi Terorisme (In the past women were behind, but now at the
forefront of carrying out acts of terrorism)” merdeka.com, 14 March 2019. https://www.merdeka.com/peristiwa/pengamat-dulu-perempuan-dibelakang-kini-di-garis-depan-lakukan-aksi-terorisme.html
Suspected terrorist Husain alias Abu Hamzah in North Sumatra was arrested alive by the Detachment 88 at a raid on Tuesday. Suprisingly,
in an attempt to search his home, his wife did not want to surrender. In fact, together with his two children she decided to blow themselves up.
Abu Hamzah admitted his wife was more exposed to ISIS radicalism. So she did not want to give up and chose to blow herself up with his two
children at home before the police managed to arrest him.
A terrorism expert from UIN Jakarta, Zaki Mubarok, sees that the radical ideology of women was not new. Even in Indonesia, it has often
been found that a woman is eager to commit acts of terror. He explained in the past 3 years many women were involved in the jihadist
movement. So indeed, according to him, there has been a process of radicalization targeting women. “If in the past they were in the back line,
now women are on the front lines in carrying out acts of terror. Abu Hamzah’s wife is just one example, there are still many others,” Zaki said.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter
OE Watch | April 2019

32

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Debating a Safe Zone for Syria: The View from Turkey
OE Watch Commentary: After eight years of fighting in
Syria, it appears that the conflict has now moved to a political
platform. The actors on the ground are trying to protect
their interests and secure a say in the future of Syria through
diplomatic negotiations. One of the items debated in these
negotiations is the idea of a safe or buffer zone, stretching about
20 miles from the Turkish border into Kurdish-controlled Syrian
territory. However, there are major differences between the safe
zone that Turkey-- as a neighboring country-- envisions, and
the safe zone that non-neighboring countries to Syria envision.
Respected Turkish journalist Hediye Levent has been examining
the issue from various angles in a series of articles in her column
for Turkish daily Evrensel, known for its non-biased reporting.
It should be noted that there are still many questions to be
answered regarding the safe (or buffer) zone: Will the zone
include a no-fly zone on the Turkey-Syria border? Who would
administer the no-fly zone? Will the zone be established for a
limited time, or will it be longer-term? Who will it protect, and
against whom?
As Levent notes in the first excerpt, Turkey envisions the zone
as an area that it would control directly, and from which it can
manage Syrian Kurdish groups. She notes that “Turkey wants to
establish the buffer or safe zone against the Kurds; whereas the
U.S. wants it to protect the Kurds and U.S. allies.” Levent notes
that basically “Turkey wants part of Syria’s control to be given to
it.” The accompanying excerpted article from Bursa TV features
a quote by Turkish President Erdoğan, which explains this view:
“If there’s going to be a safe zone at our border, it should be in
our control. Because this is my border.”
In the third accompanying passage, Levent discusses the legal
challenges surrounding Turkey’s claims to a safe zone. She notes
that the presence that Turkey envisions having in Syria does
not have a legal basis. Once the conflict is over, she notes that
“Turkey will be a neighboring country who deployed military
force into Syrian territory.” This is not consistent with all the
binding statements that Turkey has made (via the Sochi and
Astana Agreements), that call for protecting Syrian territorial
integrity, as the first passage notes.

“If there’s going to be a safe zone at our border, it should
be in our control. Because this is my border.”
- Turkish President Erdoğan
Source: Hediye Levent. “Kime göre, neye göre tampon bölge? (Buffer
zone according to who and what?),” Evrensel.net, 28 February 2019.
https://www.evrensel.net/yazi/83434/kime-gore-neye-gore-tampon-bolge
Also according to reports from Turkey, the zone that Turkey wants to
establish will be closed to the Syrian army; Turkey will be the only country
with a say in it on everything from construction to education, without
giving up the Free Syrian Army; and it will be a zone from which Turkey
can manage the Syrian Kurds without the risk of a large-scale military
operation. Based on declarations from government officials and their
vision for a safe zone, it can briefly be said that Turkey wants part of
Syria’s control to be given to it.
Declarations coming from the U.S. about the safe or buffer zone are
even more confusing. According to these, the zone that the U.S. wants
to establish is different from what Turkey has in mind. The issue of the
Syrian Kurds is one issue where the two sides are on completely different
pages. Turkey wants to establish the buffer or safe zone against the Kurds;
whereas the U.S. wants it to protect the Kurds and U.S. allies...
What will happen to the issue of “protecting Syrian territorial integrity”
which Turkey has signed multiple times via the Astana and Sochi
agreements?
Source: “Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan: Güvenli bölge kontrolümüzde olmalı
(President Erdoğan: The safe zone should be in our control),” Bursatv.com.
tr, 23 February 2019. https://www.bursatv.com.tr/gundem/cumhurbaskanierdogan-guvenli-bolge-kontrolumuzde-olmali-h334908.html
President Erdoğan said, “If there’s going to be a safe zone at our border,
it should be in our control. Because this is my border. We don’t want
Europe—who is afraid of migrants-- to have a presence in Syria.”
Source: Hediye Levent, “Adana Mutabakatı çıkış yolu olabilir (The Adana
Agreement can be a way out),” Evrensel.net, 31 January 2019.
https://www.evrensel.net/yazi/83239/adana-mutabakati-cikis-yolu-olabilir
Turkey’s presence in Syria does not have a legal basis. Once the Free
Syrian Army (FSA) factor is gone, this would mean Turkey’s basis for
being in Syria is removed. Basically, once the FSA factor is removed,
Turkey will be a neighboring country who deployed military force into
Syrian territory. It should be reminded that the fighting is over, which
means that the conditions allowing Turkey to intervene into the conditions
on the ground are over. It is clear that Turkey’s argument of “Kurdish
entities and their PKK links,” which Turkey is using to intervene in Syria,
will become heightened and questioned.

On the other hand, Turkey does have a legitimate concern
about foreign terrorist fighters and the scary prospect of an “alQaeda emirate, right next door,” as she discusses in the fourth
passage. In a discussion about Idlib, which is estimated to have
almost 20,000 jihadi militants, Levent points out non-neighboring
countries to Syria (such as Germany and France) are worried
about waves of refugees and the dispersion of jihadis. In contrast,
she notes, “the city in question is on the Turkish border.” Turkey
fears the spillover effects of this jihadi, terrorist activity near
its border, including becoming a transit point for these fighters. Not only is this a huge security risk, but it also entails potentially devastating
effects on the Turkish tourism industry, which represents around 10 percent of the economy, and decreased prospects for attracting foreign
investment. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2019

33

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Debating a Safe Zone for Syria:
The View from Turkey
Source: Hediye Levent, “Vekalet savaşında ‘İdlip’e ne olacak?’ eşiği (The turning point of ‘What will happen in Idlib’ in the proxy war),”
Evrensel.com.tr, 1 November 2018. https://www.evrensel.net/yazi/82579/vekalet-savasinda-idlipe-ne-olacak-esigi
On the other hand, one can’t help but ask: On the issue of Idlib, one can understand the concerns of Germany and France who are worried
about waves of refugees and the dispersion of jihadis. But the city in question is on the Turkish border. Let’s just assume that Russia was
convinced that the situation in Idlib will be permanent, and those jihadis and militants were allowed to stay there. What will Turkey do with a
structure that could be called an al-Qaeda emirate, right next door?
Actually, regardless of whether there’s an operation against Idlib or not, the jihadis and armed groups there will continue to be Turkey’s
problem, particularly with regards to security. But what is Turkey’s long-term plan? Are they planning the gradual disposition of radical
elements in Idlib? Even in this case (i.e. without an armed operation), the jihadis will likely gradually spread to various countries including
Turkey.

For historical background on Turkey and the Syrian conflict, see:

“The Syrian Crisis from a Neighbor’s Perspective: The View from Turkey.”
by Karen Kaya

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/202242
(originally published in Military Review, March-April 2014)

A New Operational Security Issue in Turkey:
PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds
“

OE Watch Commentary: Since its launch in late 2017, the
PKK militants, by entering chat rooms, establish
online multiplayer game PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds (PUBG)
contact with Turkish soldiers — first to play and chat,
has quickly become one of the most popular mobile games in the
world. The game allows a player to add other players as “friends”
and later on to collect intelligence data such as their
and establish verbal and written contact with them via chatrooms.
locations, their units, personal information and their
Popular among Turkish military members, the online game has
become a security vulnerability. As the accompanying passages
possible operational plans.
discuss, the Turkish Armed Forces recently issued a warning notice
to its personnel, noting that members of the terrorist Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) were using the game to obtain logistical information and
intelligence about Turkish positions from soldiers.

”

According the first passage by Turkish security analyst Metin Gürcan, the directive was primarily for the Turkish Armed Forces and
Gendarmerie Command units tasked with combating terrorism in the field. It said the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) in Turkey and the
People’s Protection Units (YPG) in northern Syria have been communicating via the game. In addition, the directive also instructs units to
ban the game as a counterintelligence measure, given that the players’ positions are identified in the game’s locations/region section. Gürcan
explains that, “PKK militants, by entering chat rooms, establish contact with Turkish soldiers — first to play and chat, and later on to collect
intelligence data such as their locations, their units, personal information and their possible operational plans.”
The second accompanying passage from a Turkish newspaper also discusses that a report was sent to all Turkish Gendarmerie Commands
on 20 February 2019. The report noted that PKK members were using the app to obtain location intelligence from the soldiers, through contact
established in chat-rooms after they would “friend” the soldiers. The PKK would then use this information to plan or avoid operations. They
would also use the game to communicate with other PKK members without being detected.
The issue relates to the use of smartphones while on duty, an issue that many other militaries are grappling with. Gürcan notes that in
October, the Russian army introduced restrictions on smartphone use and banned soldiers from sharing content on the internet — including
selfies. Gürcan notes that the Turkish army is also considering a smartphone ban for active-duty soldiers. Currently, he notes that Turkish
conscripts are not allowed to use smartphones. They are only allowed to use simple phones in their barracks, and only at specified times.
However, he notes that there are no restrictions on smartphone use for contract sergeants, noncommissioned officers and officers while on duty.
As Gürcan discusses, the issue also relates to a debate on how to balance information security, counterintelligence measures without
depleting troop morale due to loss of contact with families and loved ones. He notes that, “In today’s combat conditions, when soldiers’
contacts with their families and loved ones are broken as a counterintelligence measure, morale and motivation can rapidly decline.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Kaya)
(continued)
OE Watch | April 2019

34

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: A New Operational Security Issue in Turkey:
PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds
Source: Metin Gürcan, “Cyberization means it’s not your daddy’s war anymore,”
Al-Monitor.com, 8 March 2019. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2019/03/
turkey-syria-cyber-war-between-kurdish-militants-soldiers.html#ixzz5iDzlJXEJ
The directive was primarily for the Turkish Armed Forces and Gendarmerie Command
units tasked with combating terror in the field. It said the Kurdistan Workers Party
(PKK) in Turkey and the PKK-affiliated People’s Protection Units (YPG) in northern
Syria have been communicating via the game Playerunknown’s Battlegrounds.
The Turkish notice pointed out that in PUBG’s locations/region section, players’
positions are identified. PKK militants, by entering chat rooms, establish contact with
Turkish soldiers — first to play and chat, and later on to collect intelligence data such as
their locations, their units, personal information and their possible operational plans.
The directive also instructs units to ban these games as a counterintelligence measure.
...To prevent intelligence leaks, TSK conscripts are not allowed to use smartphones.
They are only allowed to use simple phones in their barracks, at specified times.
These simple phones can hold only seven military cell numbers, keeping conscript
communications under control.
There are no restrictions on smartphone use for contract sergeants, noncommissioned
officers and officers while on duty. It’s prohibited to use smartphones in critical posts
and during operations, yet this rule is not strictly applied.
So, obviously, Turkish soldiers serving at critical bases in Turkey or northern Syria
spend their free time playing with their smartphones when there is internet access.
...Players can organize tournaments in which they can establish voice contacts. This is
the point where PKK/YPG militants jump into the equation. They frequently participate
in these PUBG tournaments organized by Turkish soldiers.
...We know that in October, the Russian army introduced restrictions on smartphone use
and banned soldiers from sharing content on the internet — including selfies.
...Senior sources told Al-Monitor the Turkish army is also considering a smartphone
ban for active-duty soldiers. Sources said the army is trying to find a way to balance
information security, counterintelligence measures and ways of boosting combat troops’
morale. In today’s combat conditions, when soldiers’ contacts with their families and
loved ones are broken as a counterintelligence measure, morale and motivation can
rapidly decline.
In the era of cyberization of armed conflicts, the TSK, like all other armies, has to work
hard to strike this sensitive equilibrium in its fight against terror.

Source: “PKK’lıların “PUBG” oyunu (The PKK’s
‘PUBG’ game),” Haberturk.com.tr, 1 March
2019. https://www.haberturk.com/pkk-lilarinpugb-oyunu-2389570
The Gendarmarie has identified that PKK
members send directives to group members via
a popular internet war game called “PUBG
mobile” to avoid getting caught. The new report
regarding the PKK’s new communication system
was sent to the local gendarmerie commands.
...The Kilis Town Gendarmerie Command
deciphered the group’s tactic. The report
deciphering the PKK’s new communication
method was sent to all Gendarmerie Commands
on 20 February 2019.
...The Hakkari Town Gendarmerie Command
wrote, “It has been determined that the terror
organizations PKK/PYD/YPG have been utilizing
... PUBG...[a] mobile game app that has 400
million users worldwide to communicate among
each other and to avoid detection and operations
against them. It has been determined that the
group members give and receive directives from
within the mobile game, and that within the
location-region selection part of the game, they
identify locations [of Turkish soldiers]. It has
been reported that within the regions that the
terror group is active, they establish contact with
security personnel on duty in those regions; and
then within the chatrooms part of the game, they
try to gather intelligence information about their
personnel information, what institution they work
for and any intelligence about their agency. It
was recommended to keep this in mind in counterintelligence efforts.

Scenes from PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds.

Source: Whelsko via Flickr.com, www.flickr.com/photos/whelsko/, https://www.flickr.com/photos/whelsko/28914015537, Public Domain.

OE Watch | April 2019

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Is Russia Getting Entangled in Southwest Syria?
OE Watch Commentary: After retaking Daraa Province
last summer, the Syrian government and its Russian backers
hoped that former rebels and other military-age males would
help kickstart stabilization efforts by joining a regional branch
of the “5th Corps,” a Russian-led formation through which
“reconciled” armed rebels are brought under the command
of the Syrian Armed Forces. A string of assassinations that
began in early 2019 and has mostly targeted reconciled
commanders from Daraa, however, hints that the province is
becoming a semi-anarchic site of competition between and
among Syrian security agencies, Iranian-backed militias,
and recalcitrant rebels. The accompanying excerpted articles
describe these dynamics and the challenges they pose for
Russia.
The first two accompanying excerpts, one from al-Araby
al-Jadid and the other from al-Modon, claim there is a growing
presence of Iranian-backed forces in Syria’s southwest. These
forces, according to the articles, are under “strict orders” to
conceal their identities and avoid mixing with local residents;
they fly Syrian flags over their checkpoints and facilities, dress
in Syrian military fatigues and even carry Syrian military ID
cards. The deception is purportedly aimed in part at Russian
forces, given Moscow’s pledge to prevent Iranian forces from
digging in near the border with Israel.
The clandestine presence of Iranian-backed forces is hardly
Russia’s only problem in Syria’s southwest. According to the
third accompanying excerpt, also from al-Araby al-Jadid,
the government’s return to Daraa has unleashed a turf war
between various security agencies, with local media reporting
widespread instances of arbitrary detentions and the prevention
of IDPs from returning home. Living conditions are, for many,
worse than they were under rebel control, leading some local
residents to openly resist the reconciliations. A group calling
itself the “Popular Resistance” has taken credit for various
hit-and-run attacks, including the one on the alleged Hezbollah
position mentioned above. In a rebellious neighborhood of the
provincial capital Daraa, where the only formal government
security presence consists of occasional patrols by Russian
military police, anti-government protests broke out in early
March.
As the third excerpt notes, many residents in reconciled
communities see Russia as the only party that can resolve their
problems, even though Russia does not have the capacity to
do so. According to the article, Russian officers are routinely
manipulated by Syrian government agents, who feed their
Russian counterparts “false information” and make promises
that go unfulfilled. They do so with an awareness of “the
Russians’ inability to follow up on every single detail” and
their lack of experience “in dealing with local issues.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Most of the time Russian officers are manipulated by
regime officers...”
Source:
‫  تواجد جديد لـ”حزب الله” بالسويداء وتوسع يف جنوب سورية‬
Rayan Mohammed. “New Hezbollah Presence in Suweida and Expansion in
Southern Syria,” al-Araby al-Jadid. 28 January 2019. https://goo.gl/RmiJpD
It appears that Hezbollah and Iranian groups are redeploying in southern
Syria, first of all with the goal of having a presence near the Syrian occupied
Golan Heights and second to avoid the danger of Israeli strikes. They are
especially doing so in Suweida Province and its environs, which is majority
Druze.
The movements of these militias in southern Syria, from Suweida to Daraa
to Quneitra, is taking place despite all the talk about a Russian-Israeli
international agreement to clear the area adjacent to the occupied Syrian
Golan of any Iranian or Lebanese Hezbollah presence at a depth of 80 to
100 kilometers…
“Hezbollah and Iranian militias are present in Daraa and Quneitra. They
are not visible as in Damascus, for example, since they do not raise flags or
chant slogans that identify their sect…”
… the reason Hezbollah and Iranian militias cannot be noticed in southern
Syria is the strong orders they were given to conceal their identities. They
wear military uniforms like those of the regular military and they have even
been provided with military ID cards. They are forbidden from mixing with
and speaking to people, so no one finds out they are not Syrian.
Source:
‫ املقاومة الشعبية تستهدف مقرا ً لـحزب الله‬:‫درعا‬
“Daraa: Popular Resistance Targets Hezbollah Base,” al-Modon, 6 February
2019. https://goo.gl/mcUidj
The video shows a checkpoint with the Syrian flag flying above, in order
to conceal the Hezbollah facility. This is a new strategy being used by Iran
and its militias in the south, in order to prevent being targeted or disclosing
their location. Russia has tried to prevent the presence of Iranian militias
near the border with the occupied Golan, and Russia previously sent its
military police to Tel Hara to strengthen its presence there, after a visit by
leaders of Iranian-backed militias in October 2018. Several checkpoints
in the villages of Nahta, Dael and Mahja have been recently targeted with
light and medium weapons, without any casualties. Activists believe these
attacks are a new Russian message to Iranian militias seeking to further
expand in the region and recruit local residents. They do not discount the
possibility of “reconciliation factions” backed by Russia carrying out the
attacks with tacit agreement from Russia, in order to combat the danger of
Iranian militias and hold up their pledge to protect the security of Israel and
Jordan…
Amidst a Russian-Iranian disagreement on dividing the gains and extending
their influence in the region, a disagreement which may develop into a
long-term conflict in the near future, and amidst calls by local residents to
continue the revolution until its goals are met, the one thing that remains
firm is the chaos and instability in Daraa and its negative effects on the lives
of people, which warns of more attacks and assassinations.

(continued)
OE Watch | April 2019

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Is Russia Getting Entangled in Southwest Syria?
Source:
”‫ احتواء رويس ألهايل درعا أم إليران ومليشياتها؟‬:”‫الفيلق السادس‬
Adnan Ahmed. “The 6th Corps: Russian Containment of Daraa’s Residents or of Iran and its Militias?” al-Araby al-Jadid, 1 March 2019.
https://goo.gl/drGBTk
Last February 19, the spokesman for the Russian Reconciliation Center, Colonel Igor Federov, said that the people of Daraa are resorting
to Russians to solve many of their affairs, which they cannot address themselves, including knowing the whereabouts of their relatives
and problems relating to residency, housing and real-estate. Naturally, even if Russia has authority over the regime, it does not have the
experience that the regime and the Iranians have in dealing with local issues. It also does not have sufficient staffing to deal with such tasks.
Most of the time Russian officers are manipulated by regime officers who present them with false information or put off things they promise
to do, relying on the Russians’ inability to follow up on every single detail. In the meantime, the regime’s security agencies compete to
regain their former influence in any way possible, including assassinations which often target members of prominent families and for which
they accuse members of other prominent families, with the goal of stirring up tribal and familial disputes in the province and making that
particular security service the one to resolve the dispute, in order to increase their influence in the province.

Iran Diverting Money from Development to Military
OE Watch Commentary: President Hassan Rouhani, whose
administration is now approaching its sixth anniversary, has repeatedly
increased the Iranian military budget. According to the accompanying
excerpted article from Tasnim News, an outlet close to the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Iranian government may soon increase
its military budget by raiding the National Development Fund. The
article suggests that the Iranian parliament has agreed to withdrawal
around $2.7 billion from the fund and will direct $1.7 billion of it to
the Iranian military. If Iranian budget statistics are taken at face value,
this would represent more than a ten percent supplement to the current
budget. The parliament would allocate the remaining billion dollars
for a variety of sectors. Beyond that excerpted in the accompanying
translation, the article provides additional funding for Iranian state
television and film, water (potable and for irrigation) and various
academic programming.

“…1.5 billion euros to strengthen the defense base.”

The justification for the diversion from the National Development
Fund lies in the government’s desire to fulfill the sixth development plan,
which itself was approved by the Supreme Leader. Article 106 of the
development plan demanded the strengthening of national defense.

The Iranian government appears prepared to increase spending on the military.
Pictured is one of Iran’s Fateh-class submarines.
Source: Defa News, http://www.defanews.ir/sites/default/files/NAME-A-971128-1030_6.jpg.

The notion of a national development fund, much like other regional states’ sovereign wealth fund, is to invest in the future and expand and
diversify a government’s wealth. That the Iranian government now withdraws money from its fund suggests that international sanctions are
impacting the Iranian economy and that the Iranian government is increasingly looking for new ways to fund its current operations. Given
the reality of power inside Iran and the influence of both the Supreme Leader and Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, utilizing the National
Development Fund to supplement the budget seems more realistic in the short-term than taxing properties linked to Iran’s most influential power
centers. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Majles 1.5 Milliard Euro baraye Taghvit Beneyeh Defa’-ye Etesas Dad (The Majlis allocated 1.5 billion euros),” Tasnim News, 24
February 2019. https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1397/12/05/1954812
According to the parliamentary correspondent of the Tasnim News Agency, at the public meeting of the Islamic Consultative Assembly on
Sunday evening [24 February], the legislature passed two supplementary notes and four budget bills that authorized the government to
withdrawal 2.375 billion euro [$2.674 billion] from the 2019-2020 development fund in the form of foreign exchange and with the government’s
guarantee, and it is determined that these resources will be expended subject to the following decisions:
-

Up to 150 million euros for pressurized water and modern irrigation schemes

-

Up to 150 million euros for watershed and aquaculture

-

Up to 100 million to counteract the destruction effect of pollutants and their impact on powergrids.

-

Up to 1.5 billion euros to strengthen the defense base in fulfillment of Article 106 of the 6th Development Plan.

-

Up to 40 million euros for laboratory and workshop equipment for the universities of the ministry of science…
OE Watch | April 2019

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
ISIS Continues to Infiltrate into Turkey
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey remains as a transit country
for the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham (ISIS) members en route
to Europe. How many of those ISIS members who manage to sneak
into Turkey make their journey to European countries is unknown.
However, one thing is certain: ISIS is about to surrender its last
stronghold, Baghouz in eastern Syria, to the Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF). Despite increasing its border security in some areas by
building hundreds of miles of border wall, ISIS militants manage to
infiltrate into Turkey with the help of smugglers. The accompanying
excerpted passage from Al-Monitor, a news website with analysts
from the Middle East, provides insight into the infiltration of ISIS
members into Turkey.
The article, written by a well-respected Turkish journalist closely
monitoring developments in Syria, states that while the Turkish
government claims “no country can match Turkey’s efforts to
combat” ISIS militants, the fact is ISIS militants continue to sneak
into Turkey. Turkish officials have been more lenient towards ISIS
suspects as a significant number of detainees are released without
conducting thorough investigations. At times, Turkey has allowed
ISIS suspects to walk free without bringing charges against them.
The author states that between 2012 and 2015, Turkey had a “free
passage policy” on its border. However, it has recently increased
security operations, especially against suspected ISIS members.
While the numbers of ISIS suspects who have been apprehended by
Turkish officials in recent months have significantly increased, as
noted by the article, many question the seriousness and adequacy
of these anti-ISIS operations. Moreover, Turkish officials’ efforts
to cluster all groups that it classifies as terrorist organizations, such
as the Gulen Movement, Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), Syrian
Democratic Union (PYD) and its armed wing the People’s Protection
Unit (YPG), together show the weight Ankara has given to the threat
ISIS poses.
The article further notes that many ISIS networks and cells
remain active in Turkey (see: “Radicalization and “ISIS Networks”
in Turkey,” OE Watch, October 2018). Turkish Interior Minister
Suleyman Soylu has previously stated that tens of thousands of
individuals from a number of countries had been banned from
entering Turkey and that several thousand people had been extradited
for involvement with terrorist groups. According to the Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights (SOHR), at least 85 families linked
to ISIS “have sneaked into Turkey” going first through the Kurdish
and Turkish controlled areas in Syria “in the past two months, paying
smugglers large sums of [money] between $10,000 and $50,000.” As
the author points out, Turkey seems to be the first destination for ISIS
foreign fighters who manage to escape from Syria. There is evidence
that some ISIS fighters have undergone surgery in Turkey to change
their appearance so as not to be detected as they make their way to
European countries. While ISIS is about to lose its territorial control
in the Middle East, several indicators suggest it will remain as a
threat and likely engage in acts of violence, especially in European
countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

“Turkey stands out as a major crossroad in
the accounts of IS members captured in various
countries.”
Source: Fehim Tastekin, “IS militants continue to sneak into Turkey
despite measures,” Al-Monitor, 1 March 2019. https://www.almonitor.com/pulse/originals/2019/02/turkey-syria-isis-militants-tryto-infiltrate-turkish-border.html#ixzz5hvDnOGq4
Besieged in its last holdout in Baghouz, eastern Syria, the Islamic
State (IS) has reached the end of the road in terms of territorial
control, with Turkey standing out as an escape route for fleeing
militants. Despite measures the authorities take, the militants sustain
their efforts to sneak into Turkey and head to other countries after
staying for a while…
Turkey has long been under fire for turning a blind eye to IS at
its borders, failing to enforce enough measures and failing to
properly prosecute IS members, letting many suspects walk free.
Turkish officials respond angrily to such criticism. According to the
government, no country can match Turkey’s efforts to combat the
radical group.
After the 2012-2015 period, when Turkish borders were highly
porous due to what amounted to a “ free passage” policy, security
operations targeting IS have notably increased in Turkey in recent
years…
Many observers, however, see Turkey’s efforts against IS as
inadequate and not serious, given how Ankara waters the issue
down by jumbling it together with other groups it considers to be
terrorist organizations…
Most of the questioning stems from a widespread impression that
IS suspects are easily released. It is a widely held conviction that
IS members enjoy lenient treatment in Turkey, not to be found
anywhere else in the world…
The number of IS-related detentions in Turkey is no doubt
impressive, but many detainees are subsequently released due to
shallow investigations…
IS’ logistical networks and cells remain active despite the
hundreds-kilometer-long border walls that Turkey erected in recent
years against illegal crossings from Syria. The Syrian Observatory
for Human Rights (SOHR) reports that at least 85 IS-linked families
have sneaked into Turkey in the past two months, paying smugglers
large sums of between $10,000 and $50,000. According to SOHR,
the smugglers take the escapees through territory held by the
Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) first and then through
the Turkish-controlled Operation Euphrates Shield region.
Turkey stands out as a major crossroad in the accounts of IS
members captured in various countries, from Tunisia to Britain.
Interviews with 18 IS captives held by the YPG, conducted by the
International Center for the Study of Violent Extremism, indicate
that Turkey has been central to the organization’s activities.

OE Watch | April 2019

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Perceptions of Russian Strength in Middle East
OE Watch Commentary: Arabic-language media
continues to be bullish in its appraisal of Russian influence
in the Middle East. The prevalent view is highlighted in the
first accompanying article, written by a former member
of the Palestinian National Authority who served as its
information minister and ambassador to Russia and Egypt.
Writing in al-Sharq al-Awsat, a Saudi daily with wide
distribution throughout the region, he notes that Russia has
made itself an essential player in the region by maintaining
cordial relations with and providing weapons systems to
any interested country in the region, while at the same time
establishing itself as the main powerbroker in Syria. As a
result, he believes that Russia will soon become involved in
negotiations between Israel and its Syrian and Palestinian
neighbors, though the specifics of that involvement are not yet
clear.

“Russia can be relied upon to resolve the Libyan crisis by
virtue of its neutrality…”
Source:
‫  الروس يقرتبون‬
Nabil Amr. “The Russians are Approaching,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 10 March
2019. https://goo.gl/uYzWmo
Russia’s intelligent diplomacy succeeded in making it natural and necessary
for all Middle Eastern countries to have relationships with it. Its trade
expanded with all the countries of the region, even its adversaries, and it
liberated its arms from the constraints of ideology and the demands of the
Cold War, finding its way to most armies without barriers or conditions. The
most important achievement has been in terms of the influence it has achieved
in Syria...
It is too early to conclude the extent of the Russian role and its specific impact
in this area [Israel-Palestine], but it can be said that the Russians are coming.

Arabic-language media stories have of recent also touted
Russia’s purported ability to resolve the Yemen and Libya
conflicts. The second accompanying excerpt originates
from the Yemeni news site Akhbar al-Yom. It claims that
“Yemeni political circles” believe that Iran and Oman
intend to help Russia “establish a foothold” to end the war
in Yemen. The third excerpt, from Egypt’s semi-official alAhram, quotes Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, son of the former
Libyan dictator, as believing that Russia holds the key to
solving the Libyan conflict, given its neutrality and good
relations with all parties. The original source for the article
is an interview with a political advisor to Saif al-Islam
Gaddafi, published in the Arabic-language website of
Russia’s RT and subsequently picked up by several media
sources from the region, including al-Ahram.

Source:
‫  إيران و ُعامن ميهدان لتدخل روسيا يف اليمن نتيجة عدم الحسم‬
“Iran and Oman Pave the Way for Russian Intervention in Yemen,” Akhbar
al-Yom, 19 February 2019. http://akhbaralyom-ye.net/news_details.
php?sid=109213

If one is to believe the fourth accompanying excerpt,
Russia’s regional strength has led three Arab countries (Libya,
Sudan, Egypt) to request hosting Russian military bases in
their territory. The claim, which was carried by a handful of
Arabic-language media sources, including the Qatari daily
al-Sharq and the Arabic-language website for Turkey’s
Anadolu Agency, originates from a Russian-language
website and was first published in Arabic by Sputnik,
Russia’s other main Arabic-language media outlet.

Saif al-Islam, the son of the late Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, stressed
that Russia can be relied upon to resolve the Libyan crisis by virtue of its
neutrality. “What we want from Russia and others is to help the Libyans get
out of their crisis, stabilize the country and unify their institutions,” he said.

Yemeni political circles considered the bilateral talks between the Sultanate
of Oman and Russia to be part of the Iranian-Omani plans through which the
three countries seek to establish a foothold for Russia in Yemen.
The political circles said that for more than a year and a half, Oman, Iran and
Russia have been looking at this seriously, especially since the war in Yemen
has dragged on and in light of the coalition’s difficulty to end the coup and help
government forces decisively end the conflict.
Source:
‫ نراهن عىل روسيا لحل األزمة الليبية‬:‫سيف اإلسالم القذاىف‬
“Saif al-Islam Gaddafi: We are Counting on Russia to Resolve the Libyan
Crisis,” al-Ahram, 15 February 2019. http://www.ahram.org.eg/NewsQ/696224.
aspx

Source:
‫منها دول عربية‬...‫سبع دول تعلن استعدادها لنرش قواعد روسية عىل أراضيها‬
“Seven Countries Announce their Readiness to Host Russian Bases, Including
Arab Countries,” Sputnik, 5 February 2019. https://goo.gl/sywQNX
State governments from across the world, from South-East Asia to South
America, have confirmed that they are ready to host Russian naval and land
bases on their territory.

These articles demonstrate how the perception of Russia
as the Middle East’s new powerbroker remains prevalent in
According to the Tsar Grad website, some suggested that Russia use all of the
mainstream Arabic-language media. Although not dependent
on it, this narrative is reinforced by Russia’s Arabic-language infrastructure for its flights.
media outlets. The Arabic-language operations of Sputnik
and RT have emerged as fundamental tools for the Russian government to continually and cheaply bolster the perception of itself as the new
dominant player in regional affairs. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

OE Watch | April 2019

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Hovercraft successfully fires cruise missiles
OE Watch Commentary: The Persian Gulf is both shallow—less than 300
feet at its deepest point—and narrow. Its various islands—Farsi, Abu Musa, the
Tonbs, and others—each exert territorial waters, narrowing international sea
lanes even more.
Iran has utilized various strategies to operate in such restricted waters. In
1987 and 1988, for example, it utilized both land-based anti-ship missiles and
mines. Iranian attacks on and interference with international shipping led the
Reagan administration to reflag tankers and the US Navy to engage in escort
operations. After the Iranian navy tried to confront the US during Operation
Praying Mantis in 1988, a move which proved disastrous for both the Iranian
navy and air force, Iranian tactics shifted toward the asymmetrical: the
Iranian navy switched to speed boats which would swarm an adversaries’
much larger and more advanced ships and, in theory, cause enough damage to
cause opponents’ home audiences to question the value of their deployment.

“The hovercraft…launched a surface-tosurface cruise missile.”
Source: “Shelik Mushak-e Kruz Sateh beh Sateh az
Havehnav dar Razmayesh ‘Velayat-97’ (Shooting
Surface-to-Surface Cruise Missiles froom a Hovercraft
during the Velayat-97 Military Exercises),” Fars News
Agency, 23 February 2019. https://www.farsnews.com/
news/13971204000658/
According to the Fars News Agency defense correspondent,
who was quoting the public relations unit of the Islamic
Republic of Iran Navy, on the second day of the third
phase of the Velayat-97 exercises, the hovercraft of the
Islamic Republic of Iran Navy Aviation unit, in addition to
performing the intrinsic mission of fast delivering forces in
various operational areas, launched a surface-to-surface
cruise missile. The missile successfully hit a distant target.
In recent years, hovercraft units have been equipped with
missile systems that can play an important role in opposing
the enemy.

Over the last several years, however, the Iranian navy has increasingly
embraced hovercraft (see: “Iran Unveils New Hovercraft,” OE Watch, March
2015). The accompanying excerpted article from the Fars News Agency, a
media outlet close to the military, reports that during Iran’s annual military
exercises, its hovercraft successfully fired cruise missiles. Previously, the
Iranian press has reported that hovercraft have successfully supported
helicopter operations. While such reports suggest that the Iranian military
considers hovercraft a platform for a variety of missions, the article suggests
its main function remains the rapid delivery of troops. In all likelihood, Iran will utilize its hovercraft not only in the Persian Gulf to rotate
troops between various islands, but also Iran’s northern Indian Ocean coast, where terrain makes road transport difficult between its two major
Indian Ocean ports, Jask and Chahbahar. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Forcing Iranian Military Businesses to Pay Tax
“

OE Watch Commentary: Within the Islamic Republic of Iran, as in China,
…corporations under the Armed Forces…are
Thailand, and Egypt, the military has outsized influence on the economy.
required to pay their tax.
Historically, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) entered the civilian
economy after the end of the Iran-Iraq War in 1988 in order to maintain an
Source: “Mu’assasat-e Ghayr Dawlati Mokalaf beh Perdakht
independent financial base; it has since grown its share in the economy to
Maliyat (NGOs are Required to Pay Taxes),” Aftab-e Yazd,
between 25 and 40 percent. In addition, many revolutionary foundations
23 February 2019. http://aftabeyazd.ir/?newsid=130801
(bonyads) connected to Iran’s senior religious leadership are reported to have
amassed hundreds of millions, if not billions of dollars.
The government predicted a total budget of 407 trillion
tomans [$97 billion] in the next year’s budget, with part of
The accompanying excerpted article from Aftab-e Yazd, a newspaper
this coming from revenues that consist of taxes and other
affiliated with the Islamic Republic’s reformist faction, reports that the Iranian
income. In fact, this figure is expected to be 208 trillion
government is prepared to tax private NGOs and other institutions which are
tomans and, of this, 153 trillion tomans are from revenues.
controlled by both the military and the Supreme Leader. While this seems
This prediction is in the budget bill that many of the
unlikely to come to pass, the budget figure proposed represents twice Iran’s
institutions and NGOs which have an important role in the
current budget. That authorities in Tehran could double Iran’s budget by
Iranian economy but were exempt from tax. But, yesterday,
taxing such properties highlights how expansive the clerical leadership and
the parliament finally came to the aid of the government after
military’s business holdings have become and bureaucratic frustration at the
a lot of criticism from experts and, as approved by the law,
presence of so much non-taxable property. The proposal also highlights the
the Imam Reza Shrine and certain subsidiary institutes and
competitive disadvantage suffered by many other Iranian businesses who
corporations under the Armed Forces and the Executive
must pay significant tax while their competitors remain exempt. Over time,
Headquarters of Imam’s Directive…are required to pay their
this has diminished the importance of the private sector in favor of the semitax to the treasury.
governmental sector. The budgetary problems compound when businesses

”

connected to the military and religious authorities purchase private sector
competitors and then remove their properties and profits from the tax base. End
OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

OE Watch | April 2019

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey Conducts Naval Drill in Surrounding Seas
OE Watch Commentary: On 27 February 2019 the Turkish
military launched its largest ever naval exercise named “The Blue
Homeland” as tensions have escalated in the Eastern Mediterranean,
Aegean and Black Seas, all of which surround Turkey. The exercise
will simultaneously take place in the aforementioned seas over an
area of 300,000 square miles with the participation of 103 warships,
naval patrol planes, helicopters and thousands of military personnel.
The accompanying excerpted articles argue the aim of the exercise
is to showcase the warfighting capabilities and strength of Turkey’s
military and naval power.

“The Blue Homeland is not merely an exercise
codename; it is a geopolitical concept that manifests
Ankara’s political-military agenda [for] the coming
decade.”
Source: Dr. Can Kasapoglu, “‘The Blue Homeland’: Turkey’s
largest naval drill,” Anadolu Ajansı, 27 February 2019. https://www.
aa.com.tr/en/analysis/-the-blue-homeland-turkey-s-largest-navaldrill/1404267

The article from Anadolu Ajansı states The Blue Homeland is
not just an exercise, but a geopolitical concept that is an expression
of control over its territorial waters and the Turkish Navy’s power
capabilities with new and domestically made ships, unmanned
aerial vehicles (including the ANKA and Bayraktar TB-2) and other
weapon systems. The article makes three points. First, the exercise
will project Turkish military and naval power as tensions increase
over territorial waters. Second, the Turkish Navy will likely adopt
a more active role in “energy geopolitic[al] competition.” Third, the
sustainability of the demonstration of naval power depends on the
success of Turkey’s domestic defense industry. The article provides
more detailed accounts of the closely related first and third points.
The article highlights that the Turkish Navy has transformed into
a more powerful force with its domestically made warships. This
includes the construction of a multipurpose amphibious assault
ship, the TCG Anadolu, which will reportedly be configured as a
mini-aircraft carrier. Also, Turkey’s Ada-class, MILGEM project
has delivered domestic corvettes with the capabilities of surface
combatants. This project is likely to deliver additional ships with
anti-submarine warfare and high-seas patrol capabilities. As the
article notes, “Turkey is heavily investing in its naval capabilities,”
and The Blue Homeland exercises will provide an opportunity to
see the Turkish Navy’s strength and the ability to coordinate “joint
operations capacity with other branches” of its military.

The Turkish Navy is set to conduct massive drills called “Mavi
Vatan” – “the Blue Homeland” -- between Feb. 27 and March 8.
For the first time in the Republic’s history, Turkey’s military will
test its warfighting capabilities in the Black Sea, Aegean Sea, and
Mediterranean at the same time. The Blue Homeland is not merely
an exercise codename; it is also a geopolitical concept that manifests
Ankara’s political-military agenda [for] the coming decade.

The second article is an interview conducted with retired Admiral
Cem Gürdeniz. Admiral Gürdeniz states that this exercise affirms
Turkey as a maritime power and how the eastern Mediterranean is
the “center of gravity of the drill,” since this area poses “the biggest
geopolitical challenges.” While the retired Admiral does not consider
this drill as a message to Turkey’s enemies, he notes that Turkey is
demonstrating its stance in the Eastern Mediterranean, especially
against those countries Turkey perceives as posing threats to its
interests.

‘The Blue Homeland naval drill shows Turkey has become a
maritime power,’ says a retired admiral… Cem Gürdeniz, who is the
father of the name ‘Blue Homeland.’

The third article, from Turkish daily Milliyet, is written as a
response to criticism that The Blue Homeland sends a threatening
message to Turkey’s neighboring countries. It states that it
intends to bring stability to the region and it has been conducted
in accordance with NATO’s mission. Turkey and Greece have a
mutual understanding about this drill, with the Turkish government
informing its Greek counterparts about the drill to build trust
between both countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

The Blue Homeland is centered on a trilateral basis. First, the
concept has a pronounced power projection aspect… Second,
this understanding adopts a more active role for the Turkish Navy
in energy geopolitics competition, coercive efforts, and naval
diplomacy. Third and finally, the sustainability of the concept depends
on maintaining the uptrend in Turkey’s domestic defense industry.
Overall, Turkey is heavily investing in its naval capabilities not
only for defending its territorial waters, but also for protecting the
country’s sea lines of communication (SloC) and building power
projection capacity. Therefore, The Blue Homeland exercises offer a
good opportunity to monitor the Turkish Navy’s improving outlook, as
well as its joint operations capacity with other branches.
Source: Barçın Yinanç, “Blue Homeland ‘shows Turkey has become
a maritime power,’” Hurryet Daily News, 4 March 2019. http://www.
hurriyetdailynews.com/blue-homeland-shows-turkey-has-become-amaritime-power-141624

‘We have our own domestic defense industry satisfying most of our
defense needs,’…
The center of gravity of the drill is the eastern Mediterranean, as it
harbors the biggest geopolitical challenges…
Source: “Mavi Vatan-2019 Taktik Tatbikatı bir tehdit değil (Blue
Homeland-2019 Tactical Exercises is not a threat)” Milliyet, 28
February 2019. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/mavi-vatan-2019-taktiktatbikati-gundem-2835116/
The Blue Homeland-2019 tactical exercise is, contrary to what has
been reported in some foreign media, not an activity that aims to
threaten neighboring countries. The exercise aims to contribute to the
security and stability of Turkey in the region and to NATO’s common
goals. Within the scope of a confidence-building measure, the drill
also was announced with mutual declarations between Turkey and
Greece.
OE Watch | April 2019

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Understanding Turkey’s Energy Policy
OE Watch Commentary: In recent years Turkey has worked
towards increasing and diversifying its energy supplies. While
doing that, it has tried to decrease its energy dependence on other
countries, especially Russia. The accompanying excerpted article
from the pro-government think tank Seta Foundation analyzes
Turkey’s energy policy in a series of questions.
The article starts with the scope of Turkey’s energy and mining
policy. As the article states, the foundation of Turkey’s national
energy and mining policy relies on three strategies, including
producing energy domestically, ensuring the security of energy
supply, and the “formation of a foreseeable energy market.”
Turkey strives to ensure all energy sources and equipment is
domestic.
The second, third and fourth questions address the issues of
renewable energy, domestic energy production and increasing
the usage of domestic resources respectively. The author refers
to renewables such as wind, solar and geothermal as domestic
energy sources. Turkey has realized the potential of renewable
energy in possibly helping to expand its economy. In 2018, nearly
half of the energy production was sourced domestically. The
author states that Turkey aims to reduce its dependence on foreign
energy sources by focusing on domestic energy production and
that one way to increase this is to focus on renewable energy
production. Despite having rich renewable energy resources and
the climate to facilitate them, Turkey lacks sufficient technical
infrastructure to adequately harness renewable energy production.
As the article points out, if Turkey’s goal is to increase renewable
energy production and reduce its energy dependence, it has to
address how it is going to produce adequate equipment such as
solar panels and wind turbines domestically. Also, it has to find
ways to provide technical training to create a workforce to work
in renewable energy production. End OE Watch Commentary
(Gunduz)

“Turkey has rich potential in renewable energy
sources, which are often referred to as domestic and
national energy resources.”
Source: Ismail Kavaz, “5 Soru: Türkiye’nin Milli Energy Serüveni (5
Questions: Turkey’s National Energy Adventure),” Seta Foundation, 6
February 2019. https://www.setav.org/5-soru-turkiyenin-milli-enerjiseruveni/
1. What is the scope of Turkey’s National Energy and Mining Policy?
The National Energy and Mining Policy is built around three
foundational strategies. The first of these is domestication, the second is
ensuring the security of energy supply and the third is the formation of a
foreseeable energy market…
2. What is the usage ratio of domestic energy sources in Turkey’s
energy production?
Turkey has rich potential in renewable energy sources, which are
often referred to as domestic and national energy resources. Recently
an important level of acceleration has been achieved to realize this
potential and make the production and use of renewable energy a
significant part of the economy. Wind, solar, and geothermal energy are
among the foremost domestic and national energy resources for Turkey.
3. Why is domestic energy production important?
…To reduce this foreign dependency, the search for alternative energy
resources has intensified in recent years. Accordingly, the shift towards
domestic and renewable energy resources in Turkey continues to grow…
4. What is being done to increase the use of domestic resources?
While Turkey is a rich country with respect to its potential for
renewable energy sources, it currently falls short of adequately
reflecting this fact in its energy production. One of the main obstacles in
this field is technological insufficiency…

Tensions Build between China and Turkey over Uighurs
OE Watch Commentary: Once a champion of the rights of Uighurs, a Turkic ethnic group primarily living in the Xinjiang region of China,
the Turkish government has refrained from issuing any statements regarding their recent treatment by the Chinese government. However, on 9
February 2019, a spokesperson of the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), Hami Aksoy, broke the Turkish government’s silence on this
issue. The accompanying excerpted statement from the MFA and two articles written by Turkish columnists shed light on why Ankara broke its
silence and how this might impact Turkish-Chinese relations.
The MFA statement called upon Chinese authorities “to respect the fundamental human rights of Uighur Turks and to close the internment
camps.” The statement went on saying China’s systematic assimilationist policy towards the Uighur Turks and reintroduction of internment
camps are a “great shame for humanity.” It continued by stating “we expect this legitimate response to be taken into account by the Chinese
authorities.” The statement also called upon the UN secretary-general to take action to end this tragedy. This unexpected statement came after
reports circulated on social media announcing the death of Uighur folk musician Abdurehim Heyit in a Chinese prison.
The article from the Turkish daily Milliyet analyzes the MFA statement. While the statement was welcomed by politicians and civil society
organizations, it created a divide in previously positive Turkish-Chinese bilateral relations. The reason for the statement seems to be domestic
politics. Maintaining good relations and cooperation with China is one of the policy priorities for Turkish diplomacy, and Turkish diplomats will
face challenges as they work to fix bilateral relations in the coming days. (continued)

“The reintroduction of internment camps… and the policy of systematic assimilation against Uighur Turks
carried out by the authorities of China is a great shame for humanity.”
(continued)
OE Watch | April 2019

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Tensions Build between China and Turkey
over Uighurs
The final accompanying article is written by respected Turkish
journalist Semih Idiz for al-Monitor. The author states that Turkey’s
statement condemning Chinese treatment of Uighur minority in
China surprised many. Turkey has remained silent in the past several
years over China’s treatment of Uighurs because it wants to maintain
good relations with China as its relations with the West deteriorate.
The Chinese Embassy in Ankara responded to the MFA’s statement
two days later, calling Mr. “Heyit’s death and the treatment of
Uighurs ‘groundless and distorted’” by releasing a video of Mr. Heyit
showing he is still alive. The article states that Turkish columnist
Murat Bardakci called the MFA statement a “major diplomatic
gaffe” and a failure on Turkish officials to verify the death of Mr.
Heyit before issuing an official statement. Bardakci continued saying
such statements that are not based on verifiable facts raise questions
regarding the seriousness of the Turkish government. Turkish
government spokesperson Omer Celik tried to reel in the statement
by saying that Ankara respects China’s territorial integrity and
understands China’s concerns over its security.
Idiz states that the reason behind the MFA’s statement was the
government’s effort to appeal to nationalist voters on the eve of
elections in Turkey on 31 March 2019. The author further states
that despite the recent friction between Turkey and China, the
expectations are that relations will go back to normal. However,
China’s decision to close its consulate in Izmir, supposedly a gateway
of China’s One Belt One Road Initiative to Europe, seems to concern
Turkish officials. China also issued a travel warning for its citizens
traveling to Turkey and recently arrested four Turkish businessmen
on charges of tax evasion. While the situation continues to play out,
the articles show how this is one area where the governments of
Turkey and China diverge. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: “Dışişleri Bakanlığı Sözcüsü Hami Aksoy’un Uygur
Türklerine Yönelik Ağır İnsan Hakları İhlalleri ve Halk Ozanı
Abdurrehim Heyit’in Vefatı Hakkındaki Soruya Cevabı (The
response of the Spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to a
question regarding gross human rights violation perpetrated against
Uighur Turks and the death of folk poet Abdurrehim Heyit),” www.
mfa.gov.tr, 9 February 2019. http://www.mfa.gov.tr/sc_-06_-uygurturklerine-yonelik-agir-insan-haklari-ihlalleri-ve-abdurrehim-heyitin-vefati-hk.tr.mfa
The reintroduction of internment camps in the 21st century and the
policy of systematic assimilation against the Uighur Turks carried out
by the authorities of China is a great shame for humanity.
We expressed our views on the tragedy in the Xinjiang region to the
Chinese authorities at all levels…We expect this legitimate response
to be taken into account by the Chinese authorities.
On this occasion, we invite the Chinese authorities to respect
the fundamental human rights of Uighur Turks and to close the
internment camps
Source: Sami Kohen, “Çin ile sorun (Problem with China),” Milliyet,
12 February 2019. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/yazarlar/sami-kohen/
cin-ile-sorun-2826201/
A statement by the Turkish Foreign Ministry last Saturday revealed
an unexpected discrepancy with China…
Ankara’s outburst regarding Abdurrehim Heyit’s fate… has created
a problem in Turkish-Chinese relations that had been going very
well.
…It is clear that this is related to domestic politics as well as to the
principle stance.

Source: Semih Idiz, “Will Uighurs upend Turkey-China relations?” Al-Monitor, 22 February 2019. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2019/02/turkey-unexpected-outburst-against-china-uighurs.html
Turkey’s scorching condemnation of China on Feb. 9 over the treatment of the Turkic Uighur minority in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous
Region caught many… by surprise…
…questions have been raised about the timing of Ankara’s harsh statement and the true reasons behind it…
Beijing responded immediately by uploading a video of Heyit showing him to be alive…
The Chinese Embassy in Ankara responded officially to Aksoy on Feb. 11 with a statement calling the allegations regarding Heyit’s death and
the treatment of Uighurs “groundless and distorted.”…
…the video represents an embarrassment for Ankara, which appears now to have jumped the gun, as noted by Murat Bardakci… Bardakci
called Aksoy’s statement on Heyit’s alleged death a “major diplomatic gaffe, made hastily on the basis of hearsay over social media, and
without any effort to verify the facts.”
…government spokesman Omer Celik chose his words carefully to avoid escalating the situation.
Celik also asserted “Ankara’s respect for China’s territorial integrity” and for “Beijing’s need to provide for its security.”…
The shared concern is that this latest and unexpected outburst against China may turn out to be a “one-shot affair” because it has more to
do with Turkey’s local elections in March than the plight of the Uighurs…
Erdogan needs a strong turnout for his Justice and Development Party (AKP) in the March elections to further consolidate his hold on
power. Many see Ankara’s latest attack on China as an attempt to please the AKP’s religious and nationalist bases.
Despite the recent heated exchanges between Ankara and Beijing, the general expectation is that ties will return to the status quo in light of
broader interests that neither side can afford to endanger.

OE Watch | April 2019

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Demographic Challenges in Egypt, Jordan and Iraq
“

OE Watch Commentary: Despite a regional decline in growth rates over the past five
…the population of Egypt will reach
years, growing populations continue to be a major challenge in several Arab countries. In
119.753 million by 2030…
Egypt, President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi has been warning about it for over a year, and has
begun describing it as one of Egypt’s two main challenges of the moment (terrorism is
the other). The latest Egyptian government estimates, released in March 2019 and noted in the accompanying excerpt from al-Youm al-Sabaa,
foresee the country’s population rising to approximately 120 million in 2030, nearly double what it was in the early 1990s. Because the vast
majority of the population (around 95 percent) is concentrated along the narrow Nile River valley and its delta, continued high growth rates
carry additional challenges with regard to water and land management. The Egyptian government is now embarking on a campaign to convince
prospective parents dreaming of large families that “Two is Enough.” The highest fertility rates are in rural and semi-rural areas, where largefamily traditions and religious conservatism make family planning a difficult sell.

”

In Jordan, home to one of the region’s best-educated populations, government-led family planning campaigns have met with similar resistance,
as the accompanying excerpt from al-Araby al-Jadid notes. Nonetheless, Jordan’s fertility rate has dropped from 3.5 to 2.7 over the past five
years. This leveling, though, has been offset by a massive influx of Syrian refugees, estimated to be around 1.3 million. Jordan’s population is
now thought to be slightly over 10 million, nearly double what it was in 2000. Fertility rates are higher among Syrian refugees than the rest of
the population, and the article lists several projections of Syrian refugee numbers in the future. The highest estimate, which assumes that the
refugees do not return home, forecasts their numbers rising to 2.7 million by 2040.
Iraq, as the third accompanying excerpt notes, has one of the world’s highest population growth rates. The median Iraqi is 20 years old (by
comparison the median age in the United States is 38) and the average Iraqi mother bears 4.2 children, highest in the Arab world. According to
the article, starting in 2023 “Iraq will annually release one million unqualified graduates into the overcrowded labor market.” Examining the
country’s 2019 budget, the article’s author, an Iraqi intellectual, paints a dire picture: “Iraq is practically draining its financial capabilities and
reserves with the debt system amid population growth, pressure on services, security threats, a widening corruption network and inflation.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)
Source:
2030 ‫ مليون نسمة عام‬119.7 ‫ توقعات بوصول سكان مرص لـ‬:‫  اإلحصاء‬
Heba Hossam. “CAPMAS: Egyptian Population Expected to reach 119.7 million in 2030,”
al-Youm al-Sabaa, 5 March 2019. https://goo.gl/m8TqYB
The Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) predicted that
the population of Egypt will reach 119.753 million by 2030, according to the mid-range
projection based on the population of mid-2017 totaling 95.455 million. It expects that the
population will grow to 153.688 million by 2052.
Source:
‫  حلم تنظيم األرسة يف األردن‬
Anwar al-Zaydat. “The Dream of Family Planning in Jordan,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 24
February 2019. https://goo.gl/4zLXPD
Iraq Population Pyramid.

Source: CIA Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/
iz.html, Public Domain.

Jordan’s population grew by 256,000 in 2018, with a population growth rate of 5.3 per
cent, according to the Statistical Yearbook 2018 issued by the Department of Statistics,
bringing the total population (estimated) to 10 million and 309,000.
Since the establishment of the Higher Population Council in Jordan in 2002, successive
governments have been seeking to disseminate plans and ideas of family planning, in light
of the population growth that is not compatible with economic growth, in parallel with
the focus on family health issues. However, these efforts collided with the ideas of some
rejectionist groups…

Egypt Population Pyramid.

Source: CIA Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/eg.html,
Public Domain.

According to the Population and Family Health Survey of 2017-2018, the total fertility
rate in the 15-49 age group declined from 3.5 children per woman in 2012 to 2.7 children
in 2017 - 2018… There is a clear impact of refugees on the population in terms of numbers
and fertility, as the fertility rate of Syrian refugees is of 4 children… The High Population
Council expects that the number of Syrian refugees in the country to reach 2.7 million by
2040 if the population growth rate of the Syrians stabilizes at 2.9% in the next 22 years
and if the refugees do not return. This is one of 6 projections made by the council in a
document issued regarding refugees.

Source:
‫ موارد مستنزفة ملستقبل غامض‬:2019 ‫اقتصاد العراق‬
Safa Khalaf. “Iraqi Economy in 2019: Resource Depletion for an Unclear Future!” al-Safir, 18 February 2019. https://goo.gl/CbyNZM
Under the weight of indebtedness and the decline in growth and the dependence on a single source of national income (oil), Iraq is practically
draining its financial capabilities and reserves with the debt system amid population growth, pressure on services, security threats, a
widening corruption network and inflation… Iraq’s population growth is almost the highest in the world today with one million births a year.
Starting in 2023, Iraq will annually release one million unqualified graduates into the overcrowded labor market...
OE Watch | April 2019

44

AFRICA
Burundi Opposes Reductions of Its AMISOM Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past eleven years,
despite having deployed nearly 22,000 troops from five
countries, the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM)
still has not fully subdued al Shabaab. While true that
the terrorist group has lost ground and has been pushed
out of Mogadishu, it still controls significant amounts of
territory and has conducted attacks in the capital (often
involving suicide bombers), which attest to its ability to still
conduct operations. Against this backdrop of AMISOM
struggling to defeat al Shabaab, or at least attempting to
prepare the Somali National Army to continue the fight,
the accompanying excerpted article from The East African
discusses the politics and potential perils of AMISOM’s
withdrawal from Somalia.
Approximately one quarter of AMISOM’s strength is
provided by the Burundi contingent, whose 5,400 soldiers
Burundian soldiers marching during an awards ceremony at the former Somali Military Academy
are exceeded only by Uganda’s 6,200. Last December, the
in Mogadishu. Burundi’s President Pierre Nkurunziza opposes AMISOM’s intended reduction of
African Union Peace Support Operations Division decided
1,000 soldiers from the Burundi contingent.
Source: AMISOM/FLICKR/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2016_28_Burundi_Rotation-4_(27274040756).jpg, Public Domain
that the February 2019 round of cuts, consisting of 1,000
soldiers, would come solely from the Burundian forces,
causing Burundi President Pierre Nkurunziza to complain that his country was being unfairly targeted, and that any drawdown should be
spread proportionately across all troop-contributing countries. The article mentions many believe President Nkurunziza’s opposition to the
substantial cuts his forces would bear is because his impoverished country presently makes $72 million a year for contributing soldiers.
Two reasons are given for the force reduction being solely from the Burundian contingent, although it is possible there are other explanations
Burundi was targeted. First is that AMISOM is struggling in part because it does not have enough equipment, and because the Burundi
contingent had relatively low levels of equipment, it was the most vulnerable to be cut. The second reason for the cut is the EU, which funds a
large part of AMISOM, was getting back at Burundi for its poor human rights record.
Whatever the reason for this drawdown being only from Burundi, the larger picture is that many are worried a decrease in boots on the
ground from any AMISOM contingent, with al Shabaab not defeated, could have catastrophic consequences for Somalia. With questions
regarding the ability of present day Somali forces to completely take over the defense of their own country, many are encouraging AMISOM to
rethink its withdrawal timetable. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“A hasty withdrawal is, however, fraught with risk for what has been achieved so far because Al Shabaab is
in hibernation; it is not dead.”
Source: “Don’t cut and run; Al Shabaab isn’t dead,” The East African, 2 March 2019. https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/oped/editorial/
Amisom-withdrawal-Al-Shabaab-not-dead/434752-5006550-i7ssub/index.html
One of the reasons Amisom has given for its failure to rout Al Shabaab is that the peacekeepers have been short of “ force multipliers” –
military parlance for equipment such as attack helicopters and other offensive weapons that would enhance their ability to take the fight to the
enemy. This is because the EU and other donors have been unwilling to take on the additional cost.
A hasty withdrawal is, however, fraught with risk for what has been achieved so far because Al Shabaab is in hibernation; it is not dead.
Burundi President Pierre Nkurunziza has not hidden his feeling that the European Union, a key sponsor of Amisom, was unfairly targeting
his country.

OE Watch | April 2019

45

AFRICA
Uganda Threatens to Quit AMISOM over
Potential Force Reductions
OE Watch Commentary: First to threaten a pullout of
his country’s troops from the African Union Mission to
Somalia (AMISOM) over decreased funding was President
Pierre Nkurunziza of Burundi. Now, as the accompanying
excerpted article from The East African notes, President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda is sounding a similar alarm…
no Ugandan troops if it is forced to scale down from the
over 6,000 it presently has in Somalia.

“President Yoweri Museveni (of Uganda) has threatened to
withdraw his country’s forces from the peacekeeping mission
in Somalia if the United Nations insists on reducing the
number of troops on the mission...”

While the article does not mention it, AMISOM
receives money from several sources, including the UN
and EU. However, that funding has been both irregular
and declining, and in 2017 the UN Security Council, in
Resolution 2372, proposed a phased drawdown of the
peacekeepers, with the final ones leaving by 2020.
Museveni, whose country supplies the largest number of
troops to AMISOM, has claimed he will withdraw all of
them if even just one Ugandan soldier is cut from the rolls.
He also claims that the UN Security Council’s move was
a “total lack of seriousness” with regards to flushing out al
Shabaab, and indeed, Uganda and other troop-contributing
countries have called for an increase in peacekeepers, not a
decrease.
Uganda Contingent Commander Brig. Sam Kavuma greets Ugandan soldiers during a 2015

With al Shabaab frequently taking over territory vacated
ceremony to receive new troops as they rotate into Somalia. Presently Uganda has the largest
contingent of soldiers in AMISOM.
by AMISOM troops, and with a great deal of uncertainty
Source: AMISOM/FLICKR/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2015_06_17_AMISOM_UPDF_Rotation-9_(18268451464).jpg, Public Domain.
as to whether the Somali National Army will be ready to
assume complete or near complete responsibility for their country’s defense by 2020, the question has arisen as to whether or not AMISOM will
have a change of heart regarding its proposed troop reductions, or at least the timetable to do so. For now, however, AMISOM plans to continue
with its drawdown, and as the article notes, should Uganda and Burundi pull out even earlier than 2020, it would serve as an added advantage
for al Shabaab to rebuild, recruit and restructure. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Jonathan Kamoga, “Uganda joins chorus to quit Amisom over cuts,” The East African, 10 March 2019. https://www.theeastafrican.
co.ke/news/ea/Uganda-joins-chorus-to-quit-Amisom-over-cuts/4552908-5016974-1qyn4sz/index.html
President Yoweri Museveni has threatened to withdraw his country’s forces from the peacekeeping mission in Somalia if the United Nations
insists on reducing the number of troops on the mission.
“Because the numbers are small, we are only in urban centres and streets while Al Shabaab is taking over the countryside,” he said.
Burundi’s threat was triggered by an announcement by the AU that it would cut 1,000 troops by February 28, 2019, in line with the new
Amisom operations blueprint known as the Concept of Operations (ConOps). Under ConOps, some operating bases are to be reconfigured
and others closed as troop numbers fall.
Mr Museveni, while addressing a high-level meeting of ministers in charge of refugees in the Great Lakes Region in Kampala on Thursday,
said the Security Council’s move was a “total lack of seriousness” to the task of flushing Al Shabaab out.

OE Watch | April 2019

46

AFRICA
Malian Militant’s Proof-of-Life Video Overturns
French Claims
OE Watch Commentary: On 12 March, the French language publication
Jeune Afrique published the accompanying excerpted article confirming
claims from France and Mali that one of the most prominent jihadist
leaders in Mali, Amadou Kufa, is, in fact, not dead despite previous reports.
According to the article, France had originally declared him dead after
a night raid in November 2018. It was considered significant because
30 fighters were reportedly with him and he was second to only Tuareg
jihadist leader, Iyad ag Ghaly; both of them are loyal to al-Qaeda. Thus,
it was expected that his death would weaken the group military and
demoralize his fighters.
However, according to the article, Kufa looked perfectly healthy in a
new propaganda video, undermining claims that he was even injured. The
article noted that France assessed the video and determined it was “likely”
Kufa in the video. This admission came also after assurances by a Malian
General that Kufa died of his injuries.
Despite the setback for France and Mali that Kufa is still alive and
apparently well, the article also notes that Yahya Abu al-Hammam,
another major al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) leader, was
killed in Mali in February. A Tunisian al-Qaeda leader, Abu Iyad alTunisi, was killed at around the same time and around the same city,
Timbuktu, as Yahya Abu al-Hammam. Therefore, there appears to be an
increase in intelligence gathering about jihadist hideouts in Mali, allowing
for successful counter-terrorism operations. This article nevertheless
demonstrates that Kufa remains elusive and both France and Mali consider
it important to ensure that he is captured or killed. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

“It is likely that the radical Fulani preacher
Amadou Kufa, an important jihadist leader is
still alive…”
Source: “Mali : ‘vraisemblable’ que le chef jihadiste Amadou
Kufa soit encore en vie, selon l’état-major français (Mali:
‘probable’ that jihadist leader Amadou Kufa is still alive,
according to French staff),” Jeune Afrique, 12 March 2019.
https://www.jeuneafrique.com/747881/politique/malivraisemblable-que-le-chef-jihadiste-koufa-soit-encore-en-vieselon-letat-major-francais/
It is likely that the radical Fulani preacher Amadou Kufa,
an important jihadist leader, is still alive, while Bamako and
Paris said he was dead since late November, according to
French staff. On November 23, France and Mali announced
the death in a French military operation of Amadou Kufa and
about thirty members of his group, which belongs to the jihadist
alliance “Group of support to Islam and to Muslims “(JNIM),
led by the Malian Touareg Iyad Ag Ghaly. But a man presented
as Amadou Kufa recently appeared in a video about which
the Malian and French authorities examined its authenticity.
According to the conclusions of Paris, “it is likely that it is
him” and so he is still alive, said the spokesman of the French
General Staff, Colonel Patrik Steiger.

Multinational Joint Task Force Gains Ground against Boko Haram
OE Watch Commentary: On 11 March, the accompanying excerpted
French-language article on koaci.com highlighted the sites of the latest
Boko Haram battles in the Lake Chad region. The most significant
detail in the article was that the Multinational Joint Force (known by
the acronym “FMM” in French and “MNJTF” in English) killed more
than 40 Boko Haram members in a roughly three-day period before the
article was published. Less than three months earlier, the MNJTF base in
Baga, Borno was overrun by Boko Haram, so this appears to represent
a turnaround for the MNJTF. An obvious boost to the war effort against
Boko Haram was also the entrance of around 500 Chadian troops into
Boko Haram’s area of operations in Borno State, Nigeria to combat the
group.
As the article mentions, not all of the ongoing fighting is in Nigeria, as
27 of the Boko Haram members killed were in Gueskerou, southeastern
Niger, where they attacked a military base of Niger and were repelled by
the MNJTF. The article also mentions 23 Boko Haram members being
killed and one being captured in Abadam, Nigeria, which straddles the
border with Niger.
The article acknowledges Boko Haram has been weakened by the
MNJTF, whose troops hail from Nigeria, Niger, Chad, Cameroon, and
Benin, but the group continues to carry out attacks in Nigeria and Niger
on a regular basis. Amid recent reports of infighting and internal dissent
among the leaders of Boko Haram, the current phase of the counterinsurgency may nevertheless create an opportunity to further cause the
group to weaken from without and within. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“Though weakened by a multinational force that
includes troops from Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon,
Chad and Benin, the Islamists in Boko Haram still
continue to carry out deadly attacks in northeastern
Nigeria and Niger on a regular basis.”
Source: “Lac Tchad, 40 Boko Haram abattus par la force
multinationale (Lake Chad, 40 Boko Haram shot by multinational
force),” koaci.com, 11 March 2019. http://koaci.com/niger-tchadboko-haram-abattus-force-multinationale-128692.html
40 members of Boko Haram have been neutralized by the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) fighting the Nigerian
Islamist sect in the Lake Chad Basin since Friday. Multinational
force positions were targeted by Islamists from Boko Haram
in Gueskerou, Niger, resulting in clashes. In a statement, the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) announced that it
had killed at least 27 terrorists. New fighting took place around
Abadam, Nigeria where 23 Islamists were shot dead. A jihadist was
captured. Though Weakened by a multinational force that includes
troops from Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, Chad and Benin, the
Islamists in Boko Haram still continue to carry out deadly attacks
in northeastern Nigeria and Niger on a regular basis.
OE Watch | April 2019

47

AFRICA
Factors Giving Rise to Militant Extremism in the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: In looking at West Africa,
two regions may both suffer from underdevelopment,
marginalization, and inequality, but whereas one may see the
rise of militant extremists, the other may not. Examining this
seeming paradox, the accompanying excerpted article from the
IRIN news agency, itself a synthesis based on 19 other articles,
reveals several additional factors that must be considered
when not only trying to determine whether or not there will be
militant extremism, but also, should that militancy come to be,
what methods are most effective at countering it.

“There is little to suggest that providing aid reduces the
incidence of terrorism or the likelihood of people joining
jihadist causes.”

While militancy may arise among the poorly educated
members of a community who are economically
disenfranchised, it can also occur among the literate, wealthy
individuals of a society. Thus, as the article describes, there
are multiple paths to militant extremism, with an individual’s
decision to join fundamentally an emotional one, albeit
frequently within a context of limited options. Peer pressure,
community identity, and the impact of personal trauma and
humiliation – such as may occur at the hands of security forces
– all play significant roles in influencing that choice.
Interestingly, although women are often depicted as coerced,
Map illustrating the Sahel region of Africa.
Source: Munion [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_the_Sahel.png.
and indeed an unknown number are, there are also those who
serve as active members of violent militant groups. As the article notes, not all women are “just wives or cannon fodder.”
The article also states that there is a tendency to minimize the role of ideology in favor of more rational explanations such as poverty
and underdevelopment. However, that is a mistake, for the power of faith is quite significant. Martyrdom, even though many jihadists only
have a relatively limited knowledge of their religion, still exerts a strong pull. It should also be remembered that certain areas, such as rural
northeastern Nigeria where Boko Haram has been centered, are very conservative, and the idea that Westernization, with its liberal ways, is evil
can readily take root.
To counter this militancy, government forces often adopt tactics that are counterproductive, using blunt force and collective punishment
against villagers. The result is that these frequently fuel, rather than stop, the rise of militant extremism. Other interventions, such as attempting
to reintegrate former rebel fighters back into society, often suffer from poor implementation, such as not providing the community enough
notice and support to allow the program to be successful.
Perhaps the article’s most striking finding is that there is little evidence that providing aid reduces either the likelihood of terrorism or of
people joining extremist causes. Thus, until more research is done, the path forward with regards to using aid to reduce terrorism is uncertain.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Obo Anyadike, “Countering Militancy in the Sahel,” IRIN, March 2019. https://www.irinnews.org/in-depth/countering-militancysahel
Violent jihadism continues to gain ground in West Africa, ramping up humanitarian needs in a region where 18.5 million people already
require aid.
There is no consensus on what violent extremism is, much less how to combat it. Those working in the countering/preventing violent
extremism industry, also known as P/CVE, believe it is distinct from the “hard” militarized approach of counter-terrorism – and some aid
agencies have been happy to take P/CVE money as part of their “human development” programming.
Evidence is scarce that P/CVE approaches have successfully reduced extremism. There is little to suggest that providing aid reduces the
incidence of terrorism or the likelihood of people joining jihadist causes.
And there is also a gender dimension that is rarely explored. We seem to automatically regard female jihadists as somehow coerced. But
women are also active members of insurgent movements, not just wives or cannon fodder.

OE Watch | April 2019

48

AFRICA
Benin Worries Terrorism May Be Imported
from Its Neighbors
OE Watch Commentary: Because of its neighbors,
the small West African nation of Benin is potentially
facing big problems. As the accompanying excerpted
article from the South African Institute for Security
Studies explains, three of the four countries it abuts
- Nigeria, Niger, and Burkina Faso - harbor violent
extremists. With porous borders as well as endemic
poverty, it is feared that Benin could also become
home to terrorist groups.

“Surrounded by countries grappling with violent extremism,
Benin needs to reduce its vulnerabilities at community level.”

Cross-border ethnic and family ties, as the article
describes, result in many communities viewing the
border in their region not as a barrier but instead a
territorial continuum, to be readily and easily crossed
to see relatives and friends as well as conduct trade.
Such a situation makes it difficult for Benin to draw
“hard” borders and enforce them. Additionally, based
on observations of other countries, it is known that
violent extremists tend to settle in areas like this. With
many of Benin’s border areas being both relatively
ungoverned and poor, it is feared these could serve as
a welcome invitation to terrorist groups.
Beninese soldiers, such as the ones pictured here training, are being called upon to help prevent terrorist

Compounding the situation even further is the
groups from neighboring countries establish themselves in Benin.
Source: Jad Sleiman, U.S. Marine Corps/Wikimedia Commons, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benin_Armed_Forces#/media/File:Beninese_Army_soldiers_taking_part_in_live_fire_
exercise_at_Bemb%C3%A8r%C3%A8k%C3%A8_2009-06-16.jpg, Public Domain.
W-Arly-Pendjari Complex Benin shares with Burkina
Faso and Niger. Extremist groups have used parts of
this large forest and wildlife preserve as fallback bases as well as a place to earn money through poaching.
Benin’s armed forces have been preparing for the potential threat of terrorist groups entering their country. In December 2018, in the northern
town of Ségbana, 1,050 members of the army, air force, and navy conducted an anti-terrorism operation called Ma Kon-Hin. It ended with the
military building latrines and providing health care for the local populace. Additionally, in January of this year, the country hosted a meeting
with several other West African nations to discuss their common security challenges.
The presence of risk factors – porous borders, ungoverned spaces, poverty, and marginalized people – do not, as the article relates, definitely
mean extremist groups in neighboring countries will gain a foothold in Benin. However, because there is concern they may try, Benin is
looking for ways to be less inviting as well as to respond forcibly should it need to do so. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Michael Matongbada, “Can Benin Protect Itself from terrorism in the Region,” Institute for Security Studies, 8 Mar 2019. https://
issafrica.org/iss-today/can-benin-protect-itself-from-terrorism-in-the-region
Surrounded by countries grappling with violent extremism, Benin needs to reduce its vulnerabilities at community level.
In January this year, Benin hosted the fourth meeting of the Accra Initiative in Cotonou. The initiative enables participating countries –
Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo – to discuss common security challenges and responses. Under the theme ‘sharing
information as a weapon’, the meeting was attended by ministers and security and intelligence officials from these countries, as well as Mali
and Niger.
Actions to prevent extremist threats in Benin should consider these kinds of local conflicts, particularly those related to the management
of land resources and national parks. Mediation or support to people who feel victimized should be offered, and community consultations
carried out.

OE Watch | April 2019

49

AFRICA
Boko Haram Convoy Attack Undermines Election
OE Watch Commentary: On 23 February Nigeria held presidential elections
that were considered successful, notwithstanding a one-week postponement,
and some allegations of misconduct in the administering of the elections. While
Muhammadu Buhari won the election, his party’s governor in Borno State,
Kashim Shettima, was embroiled in controversy after the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS)-loyal faction of Boko Haram attacked his convoy near Maiduguri in
the week before the election. According to the accompanying excerpted article
from Nigeria’s The Guardian, the attack brought to light significant flaws in the
management of security in the region.
Based on interviews with survivors, the article found the convoy included around
100 vehicles, but only the latter half of the convoy was targeted; the governor
himself was in the front half of the convoy so he was not directly affected by the
attack. Those attacked, however, included security officers, politicians and their
family members, the press and some civilians. One of the problems the convoy
faced, according to the article, was that the road was not smooth, which prevented
the vehicles from a quick escape. Moreover, sand dunes surrounded the road, which
made it difficult to drive away once the convoy came under attack. There were also
some issues with permissions because the convoy generally would not travel that
late at night, but under pressure from the governor the military fatefully let it pass
checkpoints.

Source: “Survivors narrate ordeal after Boko Haram
attacked Shettima’s convoy,” The Guardian, 15 February
2019. https://guardian.ng/news/survivors-narrate-ordealafter-boko-haram-attacked-shettimas-convoy/
Boko Haram terrorists attacked the convoy of Governor
Kashim Shettima of Borno State, killing four persons
and abducting dozens of people along Dikwa-Ngala
road at about 6:35p.m. The governor was in the convoy
of about 100 vehicles, when the insurgents attacked the
second half of vehicles heading to Gambouru-Ngala for
a campaign rally. The second batch, numbering over 50,
were conveying security personnel, politicians, women
and top government officials, before insurgents struck at
Logoma village. As the travelers scampered for safety,
eight vehicles were also seized by the insurgents, along
with the abduction of over three dozens into the bush.
Muhammadu Abubakar, another survivor, told The
Guardian that a Civilian JTF member was shot in the
head, including a soldier and three civilians. A Gajibo
military source also said, “There were 10 vehicles
carrying over 100 people that were trapped and
stranded after the multiple attacks,” adding that the
security situation was brought under control up to the
time the governor returned to Maiduguri.

The article also indicates that casualties were greater than the government
initially admitted. Several civilian vigilantes and district heads, for example, were
killed while dozens of other members of the convoy are suspected of having been
kidnapped. A number of vehicles were also stolen and destroyed. Survivors had
to walk a long distance to a nearby military base for safety until they could return to Maiduguri. The attack therefore, clearly put a stain on an
otherwise imperfect but passable election season and demonstrated that key roads in northeastern Nigeria remain under threat from the militants.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“There were 10 vehicles carrying over 100 people that were trapped and
stranded after the multiple attacks.”

Nigerian Army Boko Haram demonstration.

Source: Public domain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nigerian_Army_Boko_Haram_demonstration.jpg.

OE Watch | April 2019

50

AFRICA
Somalia and Egypt Agree to Cooperate on Security
OE Watch Commentary: With concerns over shared threats, Egypt and Somalia,
as the accompanying excerpted article from the Somalia news site Shabelle Media
relates, signed a memorandum of understanding on 1 March to help strengthen
security cooperation between them; their main goal being to weaken terrorist
groups that threaten both nations. Besides the two countries exchanging intelligence
information, Egypt will also share its counterterrorism expertise with Somalia as
well as help train Somali security personnel. Additionally, as part of Egypt’s overall
strategy for the region, it will increase its economic cooperation with Somalia to
increase the latter’s stability.
A driving force behind this cooperation is concern, particularly on Egypt’s part,
that unrest in the Horn of Africa could threaten ships wishing to navigate through the
Gulf of Aden and into or from the Red Sea. This in turn would adversely impact the
Suez Canal. As Egypt depends on the canal for a significant amount of revenue, any
potential to disrupt shipping through it is a major worry for Cairo.
Egypt already has a naval presence near the Bab el Mandeb Strait, which is the
narrow passageway between Yemen on the Arabian Peninsula, and Djibouti and
Eritrea, both situated in the Horn of Africa. Additionally, it has agreed with Sudan,
whose long coast forms a significant portion of the Red Sea’s western bank, to
increase maritime cooperation. Thus, the memorandum of understanding with
Somalia, which borders the Gulf of Aden, is a continuation of Egypt’s intent to protect
Red Sea shipping. Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry went so far as to say
“Somalia’s security is an essential part of Egypt’s national security.”
Both countries are presently battling terrorists. Somalia is struggling with al
Shabaab, while Egypt is fighting the Islamic State and al-Qaeda- aligned groups.
There is an additional concern that terrorists fleeing Syria could find their way to
Africa, compounding counterterrorism efforts. Egypt presently holds the rotating
presidency of the African Union, and is pledging to lead the continent to greater
stability. Its memorandum of understanding with Somalia appears to be one step in
helping it to meet that pledge. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

Trouble off the coast of Somalia, in the Gulf of Aden, could adversely
impact Suez Canal traffic.
Source: Eric Gaba/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Red_Sea_topographic_map-en.jpg, CC
BY-SA 4.0.

“Somalia’s security is an essential part of Egypt’s national security.”
Source: “Egypt, Somalia bolster security coordination amid Suez Canal fears,” Shabelle Media Network, 10 March 2019. https://radioshabelle.
com/egypt-somalia-bolster-security-coordination-amid-suez-canal-fears/
Egypt, Shoukry said, would continue to back the Somali economy and push development in the Horn of Africa country. “Somalia’s security is
an essential part of Egypt’s national security,” he said.
There is concern that unrest in the Horn of Africa could threaten navigation in the southern entrance of the Red Sea, possibly affecting
access to Egypt’s Suez Canal.
Egypt’s concern, security analysts say, is that terrorist groups in other African countries, including Somalia and Nigeria, will join militants
in North Africa, particularly Libya, in a broad strategy to foment unrest in Africa.
“Al-Shabab has already started staging attacks in Somalia’s neighboring countries,” Okasha said. “Egyptian authorities are closely
monitoring these developments.

OE Watch | April 2019

51

AFRICA
Conflict and Oil Intertwined in Somalia
OE Watch Commentary: Amidst the many difficulties
plaguing Somalia, including a government struggling to
maintain national unity and terrorist attacks carried out by al
Shabaab, comes a finding that could either be an opportunity
for the country to lift itself up from where it is mired or yet
one more problem that will further complicate the nation’s
plight. As the accompanying excerpted article from South
Africa’s Institute for Security Studies points out, that finding
is oil, or in the words of the Norwegian seismic company
Spectrum Geo exploring off the coast, “the scent of oil.”

“Somalia has enough problems as it is. Now the resource
curse, so fatal to many other African countries, appears to
be raising its ugly head.”

It appears there are significant gas deposits off the East
African coast, and indeed Mozambique and Tanzania are
searching for markets for their extensive reserves. Somalia
also has large gas deposits, but particularly notable for the
geologists is the likelihood that it also has oil. Should the
geologists be right, and the oil fields developed, the revenue
could fund schools, hospitals, road construction, and other
projects that could help lift large numbers of Somalis out of
poverty. However, there is also the “resource curse,” known
to so many other resource-rich African nations, where corrupt
government officials and elites squander the money for
themselves. With Somalia noted for its corruption and lack
A Kenyan soldier with AMISOM examines a car destroyed by a Kenyan Air Force missile strike
of transparency, it is feared a sudden influx of petro funds
during an operation to dislodge al Shabaab from Kismayo, Somalia. While Kenyan soldiers serve in
Somalia, the two countries are arguing over potential oil discoveries off the East African coast.
could further undermine the country’s fragile democracy as
Source: MISOM/Wikimedia Commons/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AMISOM_Kismayo_Advance_25_(8049966250).jpg, Public Domain.
well as aggravate problems with neighboring countries.
Already there are tensions with Somalia’s southern neighbor, Kenya, which accuses Somalia of attempting to sell four offshore oil blocks
whose ownership is contested. Somalia claims it was simply a marketing exercise, and that it is awaiting a decision from the International
Court of Justice on whether the territory falls within Somali or Kenyan borders. While the competing claims may be settled on whether the
court follows Article 15 of the 1982 Convention of the Law of the Sea, which, briefly, sets the maritime boundaries as being perpendicular
from the point where the landward boundary of adjacent countries meets the coast, the issue is complicated by arguments over the colonial-era
boundaries between the two.
There is yet another complication… Kenya is supplying troops to AMISOM to combat al Shabaab. While some Somalis accuse Kenya of
being in Somalia for its own interests, including economic ones, Kenya has suffered heavy casualties since it invaded Somalia in 2011 in
response to al Shabaab killing tourists at a Kenyan beach resort on the Somali border. Thus, Kenya and Somalia have security and economic
relationships, albeit sometimes quite fraught. In the long run, oil may yet help Somalia. However, it has yet to be extracted from the ground and
already there are arguments over it. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: Peter Fabricius, “Is the Scent of Oil a Solution for Somalia,” Institute for Security Studies, 1 March 2019. https://issafrica.org/isstoday/is-the-scent-of-oil-a-solution-for-somalia
Kenya recalled its ambassador and expelled Somalia’s. Kenya’s foreign affairs cabinet secretary Monica Juma told journalists that Somalia
was ‘deliberately misleading’ prospective investors by offering to sell four offshore oil blocks in an area of the sea that was subject to court
proceedings to resolve an ownership dispute between the two countries.
Kenya seems keener on settling the dispute bilaterally than through the ICJ.
Somalia has enough problems as it is. Now the resource curse, so fatal to many other African countries, appears to be raising its ugly head.
On the military front, Mogadishu isn’t winning the war against al-Shabaab. And now the African Union (AU) has reluctantly decided to
downsize the AU Mission in Somalia, its force that has prevented al-Shabaab from overrunning the country.

OE Watch | April 2019

52

LATIN AMERICA
What Role for Brazil’s Armed Forces?
OE Watch Commentary: The Brazilian armed forces
have been scrutinized in the press lately. It is well known
that President Bolsonaro, a former junior officer in the
army, is fully supportive of a strong military and has made
numerous statements throughout his history as a politician,
including a recent speech he gave to navy personnel at their
base in Rio where he stated that “democracy and freedom,
only exist when their respective Armed Forces so wants
or affirms,” as recounted in the accompanying excerpted
article from O Globo.
The reaction of indignation in various Brazilian media
to Bolsonaro’s statement is partially a residue effect of
the former military dictatorship that ruled the country
from 1964-1985. There are few Brazilians that recall
this period with fondness. It was a time of great stress
on Brazil, democratic norms were under siege and
human rights violated—people simply disappeared and
many were tortured including then political activist, and
former Brazilian President, Dilma Rousseff. Numerous
congressmen disparaged Bolsonaro’s statement and some
called for denunciation and clarification as the O Globo
article also notes.
Today, the armed forces are not the same institutions they
were in 1964, nor is Brazil the same country. Many in the
military are keenly aware of the armed forces’ negative
historical legacy and if anything, many in Brazil believe
that the army would restrict itself to barracks, rather than
get deeply involved again in politics. In another O Globo
article the same day, military general Otávio Rêgo Barros,
now working in the new government, defended the role of
the military in Brazil’s civil society recalling the teachings
of political scientist Samuel Huntington.
This battle over the military’s place in the new
government has been brewing. In late November 2018 the
Brazilian newspaper Correio Braziliense featured a lengthy
and instructive interview with former career soldier and
then future Defense Minister, General Fernando Azevedo e
Silva, outlining what the relationship between the military
and the new government would be. The interview may have
been a response to an interview published only days earlier
by Chief of the Army, General Eduardo Villas Bôas, where
he claimed that Bolsonaro “does not represent the return of
the military to politics, but there is a risk of politicization of
the barracks.”
Whatever the future, the role of the military in modern
Brazil is not likely to be independent of the current security
situation. The country is dealing with chronic organized
crime, corruption at the highest levels, a porous border and
smuggling of every kind from non-state actors, like narcotraffickers on the frontier and organized crime syndicates
that permeate all the major cities across Brazil. It is hard to
say whether it is a majority or minority, but there are many
in Brazil that feel like the military has to be part of the
solution. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“Commander of the Army, Eduardo Villas Bôas, said that
[President] Bolsonaro does not represent the return of the
military to politics, but there is a risk of politicization of the
barracks.”
Source: “Congressistas criticam declaração de Bolsonaro sobre papel das Forças
Armadas (Members of Congress criticize Bolsonaro’s statement on the role
of the Armed Forces),” O Globo, 7 March 2019. https://oglobo.globo.com/
brasil/congressistas-criticam-declaracao-de-bolsonaro-sobre-papel-das-forcasarmadas-23505834
…“The mission will be fulfilled alongside the good people of our Brazil, those who
love the homeland, those who respect the family, those who want to engage with
countries that have an ideology similar to ours, those who love democracy. And
that, democracy and freedom, only exist when their respective Armed Forces so
wants or affirms.”…
…the role of the Armed Forces is very well defined in the Federal Constitution,
and the Armed Forces have recently shown commitment to democracy, unlike the
President of the Republic, who has always shown a deep contempt for democracy.
This threat that he seeks to make with this speech, that democracy and freedom can
be usurped by the Brazilian people, does not correspond to what the Armed Forces
thinks or what the people think…
Source: “Ao lado de generais, Bolsonaro defende fala sobre militares e
democracia (Bolsonaro and generals defend statement about military and
democracy),” O Globo, 7 March 2019. https://oglobo.globo.com/brasil/ao-ladode-generais-bolsonaro-defende-fala-sobre-militares-democracia-23506293
“Objective civilian control, advocated by Samuel Huntington, advocates that
the Armed Forces should be the strength of this civilian control. Naturally, the
Brazilian Armed Forces already do so, because they strongly defend democracy.”
Source: “A política não está e não vai entrar nos quartéis”, afirma futuro
ministro (The policy is not and will not enter the barracks”, says future
minister),” Correio Braziliense, 25 November 2018. https://www.
correiobraziliense.com.br/app/noticia/politica/2018/11/25/interna_
politica,721383/a-politica-nao-esta-e-nao-vai-entrar-nos-quarteis-afirma.shtml
…(Defense Minister) Azevedo e Silva says he believes that the protagonism of the
military in the Bolsonaro administration does not present any risk of attrition for
the Armed Forces. “Those in the active component will continue with the same
missions, those who will serve in the government will act as [public] servants.
There are no risks…” Earlier this month, in an interview with Folha de S.Paulo,
Commander of the Army, Eduardo Villas Bôas, said that [President] Bolsonaro
does not represent the return of the military to politics, but there is a risk of
politicization of the barracks. “I do not see that risk. We have long been focused on
our end-activity. The policy is not and will not enter the barracks,” said Azevedo e
Silva…
…“From 2004, our primary regulations were laid out in the National Defense
Policy, the National Defense Strategy and the Defense White Paper. This has given
a normative sense in the armed forces what each should do, how each should
carry out its mandate, and what is the priority of each institution. Otherwise,
the portfolios, programs and projects of each branch of the armed forces are
determined according to the needs of the country. Any country that wants to be
strong must have a strong and adequate Armed Force.”…
OE Watch | April 2019

53

LATIN AMERICA
Cubans Defend Their Regime
OE Watch Commentary: Whereas not very long ago the
central role of the Cuban dictatorship in Venezuela was a
whispered topic, it is now more and more openly discussed
in the region. In the accompanying excerpted reference from
La Linterna Azul, the author opines that the situation should
not be compared to the take-downs of dictators in the past in
other countries and that getting rid of Maduro will not solve
the problem. The reference from Venezuela al Día is a fairly
long article that offers a number of data points concerning
the Cuban military presence in Venezuela. It references a
2017 article from Foresightcuba to note that the reportage
is recent. It then goes on to mention some calculations,
including a suggestion that the Cuban presence may far
exceed the approximately 20,000 that seems a popular figure.
The reference from the YouTube channel of Testigo Directo
is a somewhat sensational presentation in which news
correspondent Karla Salcedo interviews analyst Sebastiana
Barráez, who asserts that Cuban intelligence infiltrated the
Venezuelan opposition in order to break it up (keep it from
Santiago de Cuba - José Marti Mausoleum, Changing of the Guard.
unifying). She opines that it worked, too, suggesting that the
Source: PRA [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Santiago_de_Cuba_-_Garde_au_
Mausol%C3%A9e_Jos%C3%A9_Marti.JPG.
arrests of 123 military members for conspiracy and related
crimes were a product of the infiltration of Cuban agents into opposition parties. Salcedo also interviewed former Defense Minister Enrique
Ochoa Antich, who highlighted the indoctrination of Venezuelan militia members in Cuba. The Salcedo report was aired before international
efforts to have humanitarian aid enter Venezuela on 23 February, but it correctly anticipated the application of violence by the regime to stop
it, including use of irregular formations. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…we are dealing with the removal of three (3) armies of occupation…”
Source: Gerdailor Alvarado “No es la salida
de un dictador (This is not the departure
of a dictator),” La Linterna Azul, 25
February 2019. http://www.lalinternaazul.
info/2019/02/25/no-es-la-salida-de-undictador/
“Here we are dealing with the removal of
three (3) armies of occupation. Remember
that in Venezuela there are 22,000 Cubans
who came to control the country with
Chavist consent...Remember that in the
countryside there are possibly 20,000
members of the Colombian FARC and ELN
that have no place to go…
Remember that in Margarita and the East
of the country there is a large although
unknown number of Hezbollah that also
do not have an immediate way of leaving
safely…This is the removal of a dictator
mixed with the removal of a concealed
invasion by the government of the country
itself for 20 years…”

Source: Josephina Blanco and Duamig, “Pruebas de
la presencia militar cubana en las Fuerzas Armadas
venezolanas (Proof of Cuban military presence
in Venezuela’s armed forces),” Venezuela al Día,
21 February 2019. http://www.venezuelaaldia.
com/2019/02/21/pruebas-la-presencia-militar-cubana-lasfuerzas-armadas-venezolanas1456/
“An unofficial piece of information published in
Foresightcuba [http://foresightcuba.com/ejercitocubano-en-venezuela/] – that is dedicated to presenting
statistics about the island-, counts the military presence
in Cuba as follows: 4,500 infantry men organized in eight
battalions of 500 troops each, plus a battalion in Fuerte
Tiuna [pentagon equivalent]; two brigadier generals…4
colonels…8 lieutenant colonels…6 naval captains… and
25 junior officer….
The CEOFANB [Strategic Operational Command of the
Armed Force] informed [September 2018] of the presence
in the country of the Black Wasps, the premier elite
force in the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba (FAR).
The objective was military exercises on the Colombian
border.”

Source: Karla Salcedo Flores,
“Inteligencia cubana estaría
dominando a Venezuela:
investigación - Testigo Directo
HD, (Cuban Intelligence
is dominating Venezuela:
Investigation – ‘Direct
Witness’),” Testigo Directo/
YouTube, 15 February 2019.
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=FiPDf3Sh7gM
“Did they really copy the Cuban
model in Venezuela? Let’s
look at it. The student [Hugo
Chávez] learned from Fidel
Castro. What many people don’t
know is that Nicolas Maduro
was ideologically educated in
Cuba….The owners of Venezuela
[have been] Fidel Castro and
Raul Castro by way of the Cuban
G2, who are those directing the
military in Venezuela.”

OE Watch | April 2019

54

LATIN AMERICA
Santa Rosa de Lima Cartel Use GoPro in Attack
Against CJNG
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 February, the Santa Rosa de Lima
Cartel (CSRL) launched an attack against rival cartel, Jalisco Nueva
Generación Cártel (CJNG). According to the accompanying excerpted
article from Mexico-based news Vanguardia, CSRL members killed
five alleged CJNG members in 90 seconds. The attack occurred in
the municipality of Valle de Santiago, in the state of Guanajuato. The
article states that the group of assailants were sent by José Antonio
Yepes (aka “El Marro”), the leader of CSRL.
In another excerpted article by RadioFórmula, the attack happened
at an auto body shop over disputed oil territory between the two rival
cartels. A CSRL member recorded the attack on a GoPro camera
attached to his body. The 1:32 minute-long video shows the assailants
shooting the alleged CJNG members while they assault the building
and ramming into wooden wall/locked doors with a pick-up truck to
gain additional entry into it. The recording shows two trucks arriving
at the auto body shop with men wearing tactical vests and using
military grade assault rifles. The article cites journalist Humberto
Padgett as stating that one of the assailants appears to be using a
“next generation Heckler and Koch sub-machine gun.” The video was
posted on CSRL social media, which was then picked up by Mexicobased news outlets. End OE Watch Commentary (Keshavarz and
Bunker)

“While the leader is opening fire, he is also

coordinating the operation in the field with great
control over the details.”
CSRL attack GoPro footage.
Source: CSRL social media via Radio Formula.

Source: “Cártel Santa Rosa de Lima defunde video de sangrienta
ejecución a miembros del Cártel Jalisco Nueva Generación (The
Santa Rosa de Lima Cartel posted a video executing members of the
Jalisco New Generation Cartel),” Vanguardia, 26 February 2019.
https://vanguardia.com.mx/articulo/cartel-santa-rosa-de-lima-difundevideo-de-sangrienta-ejecucion-miembros-del-cartel-jalisco
“Led by a man with presumed military training, he tells one of his men
to cover him. While the leader is opening fire, he is also coordinating
the operation in the field with great control over the details.”

Source: “Cártel del ‘Marro’ difunde VIDEO de sangrienta ejecución
a miembros del CJNG (‘Marro’s Cartel posted a video executing
members of CJNG),” RadioFórmula, 26 February 2019. https://www.
radioformula.com.mx/noticias/mexico/20190226/cartel-del-marrodifunde-video-de-sangrienta-ejecucion-a-miembros-del-cjng/
“In the recording, trucks arrive at the business with a number of
men in black caps and tactical vests, military grade assault rifles, and
next-generation ‘Heckler and Koch’ submachine gun, according to
journalist Humberto Padgett.”

OE Watch | April 2019

55

LATIN AMERICA
The Hezbollah Presence in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted articles discuss Hezbollah’s growing presence
not only in Latin America, but particularly in Colombia. The article from L’indro examines Hezbollah’s
principal objectives in Colombia, some of which include drug trafficking, the sale and export of stolen
vehicles, money laundering and training grounds for new recruits. The article also notes how Hezbollah
sends a portion of its earnings to Beirut, via European banks, and invests the rest in Colombia. The article
from Red Mas also reports on Hezbollah in Colombia and notes other aspects of how the group operates in
the country, including additional criminal schemes. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)
Source: “Hezbollah in America Latina:
l’infiltrazione perfetta (Hezbollah and its
Perfect Infiltration in Latin America),” L’indro,
21 November 2018. https://www.lindro.it/
hezbollah-in-america-latina-linfiltrazioneperfetta/
…As for the recruitment process, it has been
facilitated in Colombia where 40,000 Muslims
currently reside and conversion to Islam
has increased by 40% over the last 15 years.
Colombia is also home to five mosques and 10
Islamic cultural centers. As for illicit earnings
generated by Hezbollah in Colombia, 80% of
funds are channeled through European banks and
back to Beirut. The remaining 20% is re-invested
in Colombia…

“Hezbollah is utilizing
social media to recruit
new members in
Colombia.”

Source: “Hezbollah tendría estructura clandestina en Colombia (Hezbollah Maintains
Clandestine Structure in Colombia),” Red Mas, 9 April 2018. http://www.redmas.com.co/
internacional/hezbollah-estructura-clandestina-colombia/
Hezbollah is carrying out illegal activities in Colombia under a clandestine structure
they call the External Security Organization (ESO). Within the country, Hezbollah
generates illicit funds by orchestrating scams involving banks and their clients and
creating autonomous societies (better known as an LLCs in the United States) to export
contraband clothing to Panama and coal to Lebanon. This information was uncovered
during an investigation carried out by Colombian national police over the course of
three years. This investigation further confirmed Hezbollah presence in Colombia
and aided authorities in identifying that the group maintains key operational bases in
Barranquilla, Cartagena and Maico. ESO members are brought into Colombia utilizing
false documentation provided by Venezuela or the FARC. As for recruitment, Hezbollah
is utilizing social media to recruit new members in Colombia. On these sites, they target
individuals who are sympathetic to Hezbollah ideology. After sympathizers are identified,
Hezbollah tracks potential recruits and attempts to indoctrinate and convert them to
Islam.

Barranquilla, Colombia.

Source: De --F3rn4nd0 06:21, 27 March 2007 (UTC) - Trabajo propio, CC BY 2.5, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1848518.

OE Watch | April 2019

56

LATIN AMERICA
Argentina Aims to Unify Defense Policy and Diplomacy
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted
article from Infobae discusses how Argentina is working
on implementing a plan that President Mauricio Macri and
his team have aimed for since his inauguration: to unify
defense policies and diplomacy. In doing so, Macri has
changed both personnel and the names associated with
their jobs. One example of this is the removal of Horacio
Chighizola as the Minister of Defense and replacing him
with Paola Di Chiaro as the Secretary of Military Strategy.
In short, the change will also allow for a new power
structure under which the president will play a more critical
role in controlling how the Argentinian Armed Forces with
work with the Foreign Ministry to make strategic decisions
that will protect the country.
As outlined in the article, there are three principal realms
that aim to unify the armed forces and foreign policy: the
South Atlantic, Argentina’s northern border, and cyberspace. In the South Atlantic, the country will work with
multiple countries to explore Antarctica and secure strategic
Argentina’s Ministry of Defense.
resources. Along the northern border, Argentina will join
Source: Aleksandrs Timofejev, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ministerio_de_la_defensa_-_panoramio.jpg, CC 3.0.
forces with other countries that have already formulated
plans to fight drug trafficking and terrorist activities. And in cyber-space, Argentina will follow the lead of the United States and Brazil, as both
currently adhere to cyber-space guidelines in which the military works to thwart attacks carried out by other military organizations and state
intelligence agencies. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“In modernizing the Armed Forces and maximizing security along the norther border, Argentina is
looking to provide added logistics support to the military so that they can fight against drug trafficking and
terrorism.”
Source: “A partir de los últimos cambios, el Gobierno busca unificar las tareas de Defensa con la Cancillería (Recent Changes Indicate
that the Goverment is Looking to Unify Defense Policy and Diplomacy),” Infobae, 27 February 2019. https://www.infobae.com/
politica/2019/02/27/a-partir-de-los-ultimos-cambios-el-gobierno-busca-unificar-las-tareas-de-defensa-con-la-cancilleria/
President Mauricio Macri of Argentina has appointed new personnel (Horacio Chighizola removed with Paola Di Chiaro as his replacement) to
strategic defense positions in an attempt forge defense policy and diplomacy. To make this happen, Di Chiaro is already working on putting together
a team involving academics, diplomats and experts in military affairs. These individuals will be responsible for carrying out Macri’s plan which he
initially presented in June 2018 as part of his new National Defense Policy Directive. Regions/sectors in which Macri will begin to forge defense
policy and diplomacy are outlined below:
South Atlantic: Argentina’s 2019 plan for the South Atlantic is to strengthen military patrols while simultaneously placing a greater emphasis
on scientific work in Antarctica. In doing these things, Argentina will work closely with countries to include the United States, Brazil, Russia and
England. In Antarctica specifically, the South American nation with increase cooperation with England to increase scientific work and on new
ways to protect the environment. A government official stated the following regarding Brazil, “There was also a diplomatic exchange with Brazil to
advance common defense issues which resulted in the creation of new training courses and joint patrols”. This is because the South Atlantic is a
strategic exploration zone for Argentina to secure resources for the future and for its future positioning in Antarctica so that the country can further
coordinate scientific work with other countries.
Northern Border: In modernizing the Armed Forces and maximizing security along the norther border, Argentina is looking to provide added
logistics support to the military so that they can fight against drug trafficking and terrorism. In terms of diplomacy, Argentina realizes they cannot
carry out this fight alone and is looking to coordinate with the United States, Brazil and Israel to prosecute individuals conducting illegal activities;
especially in the tri-border region where drug trafficking and Hezbollah activity run rampant.
Cyber-Space: The plan to modernize the military in cyber-space started last year when Argentina purchased software designed to combat this
phenomenon. In developing its strategy, Argentina has divided its protection plan into two areas; cyber-defense and cyber-security. However, the
South American nation has also thought of unifying roles as Brazil and the United States have done. This is because key leaders realize that cyberspace attacks are conducted by outside military organizations and state intelligence agencies and that military involvement is imperative to thwart
both cyber defense and security issues.
OE Watch | April 2019

57

