community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 9
Issue #2
February 2019

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3
5

6
7
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Radios in the Russian Ground Forces
Northern Fleet Will Receive Automated C&C System
Integrating Air, Land and Sea
The Inflatable Sentry
The S-350 Vityaz Air Defense System
Bigger is Better: The T-80BVM Tank Modernization
The Power Struggle for Control of Russia’s Arctic
The Arctic Will Have Prominent Role in 2019 OperationalStrategic Exercise “Center”
Preparation for the 2019 Army International Games
Cossacks – Hybrid Defense Forces
Update on Military Church Construction
Systemic Challenges to Raising Military Morale
Flawed ‘Strategic Partnership’: Putin’s Optimism on China
Faces Harsh Reality
Russia-Belarus Open Disagreement Reflects Complexities
in Moscow-Minsk Relations
Azerbaijan Purchases More Belarusian Equipment
Central Asia’s Security Cooperation Initiatives
Regarding French “Yellow Vests” Protests

INDO-PACIFIC
21
23
25
27
28
29
30
32
33
35
37
38
39

Chinese Military Launches Largest-Ever Joint Logistics
Exercise
Luo Yuan Describes an Asymmetric Approach to Weaken
the United States
Military-Civil Fusion Cooperation in China Grows in the
Field of Logistics
Chinese Military Completes Release of New Set of Military
Training Regulations
China Defends Xinjiang Program
Is Pakistan Acquiring Russian Tanks?
Russia to Deploy Additional Anti-Ship Missile Batteries
Near Japan by 2020
New Chinese Air-Independent Propulsion SystemEquipped Submarines
New Milestones in the Modernization of the Philippine
Navy
Japan Considers Sales of Air-Defense Radar to Philippines
Musings of a Maute Militant in Mindanao
Waiting for Thailand’s Long-Awaited Election
Indonesia “Preventive” Counter-Terrorism Arrests

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
40
41
42
44
45
46
48
49

“Psychological War” along the Israeli-Lebanese Border
Cleric Speaks on Iran’s Foreign Militias
Turkey’s Fight against ISIS
Turkey: Debating a Post-US Syria
Increased Saudi Focus on the Red Sea
A Turkish Military Base in the Red Sea
Security Challenges in the Black Sea
Turkey to Stay in Afghanistan until 2021

50
51
52
53
54

IRGC: Iran Can Extend Ballistic Missile Range
Turkey to Create Space Agency
Iran’s Army Aviation Gets UAV Unit
Turkey to Sell ATAK Helicopters to the Philippines
Chinese Military and Commercial Cooperation with Tunisia

AFRICA
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

Anger in Sudan: Large Protests Against al-Bashir Regime
Africa: Trouble Spots to Watch in 2019
Can Businessmen Bring Peace in Gao, Mali?
Chinese Weapons in Rwanda
Political Uncertainty Persists Following Coup Attempt in Gabon
Will Cameroon Grant Clemency to Anglophone Separatists?
Kenya Now Has a Coast Guard
Nigerian NGO Targets Amnesty International
DRC Ebola Outbreak Now Second Worst in History

LATIN AMERICA
64
65
66
67
69
70

Who’s Who at Maduro’s Inauguration
Russia Provides Financial, Military and Political Support to
Venezuela
Brazil on a New Course
New Brazilian President Declares Reset with Indigenous People
and Lands
Five Wars in Colombia?
Argentina and Paraguay Collaborate Locally and
Internationally to Target Hezbollah Money Laundering

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment

Volume 9 | Issue 2

February | 2019

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Geoff Demarest
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Alla Hurska
Greg Sarafian
Matthew Stein

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Горная подготовка морских пехотинцев Северного флота
(Mining training for the Northern Fleet marines).
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, https://мультимедиа.минобороны.рф/
multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=61881@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gunduz
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Dodge Billingsley
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

		
Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Matthew Stein

Design Editor

Lucas Winter

EURASIA
Radios in the Russian Ground Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Military communications in the Russian Ground Forces have come a long way from simple audio and
visual methods for transmitting combat command-and-control orders to advanced multichannel automated systems that provide real-time
communication with fixed and mobile facilities at practically unlimited range. In practice, this has meant the Russian Ground Forces’ once
notoriously unreliable communications (especially at the tactical level) have been much improved. In terms of organizational structure, the
radio communication system of the Russian Ground Forces can be provisionally divided into two main parts. The first is High Frequency (HF)
systems that operate using the principles of ionospheric radio wave propagation that have transmitters of 500 Watts or more. These systems are
designed to provide long-range, over-the-horizon communications for operational and strategic level control.
Although the Ground Forces do have satellite communication capabilities, HF appears to be the primary means of over-the-horizon
communications. These radios currently consist of several large families. The R-161 Poisk family was widely fielded in the 1980-1990s, and
has since been replaced by the R-166 Artek family, which was developed in the late 1990s. The accompanying excerpted article, from the 12
December 2018 edition of Krasnaya Zvezda, discusses the next generation of the Russian Ground Forces’ long range, over-the-horizon radios for
operational and strategic level control, the R-176 Antey family. Among other technological innovations, the R-176 Antey family, is reportedly
a Software Defined Radio (SDR), meaning a radio that is primarily manipulated through software instead of hardware such as mixers, filters,
modulators/demodulators, etc. These types of radios are capable of receiving and transmitting different waveforms based solely on the software
used, instead of requiring physical modifications of hardware.
The second main part of the Ground Forces’ communications consists of low-power mobile, portable, or transportable VHF/UHF radio
communication systems that have power up to 100 Watts, which are used for tactical purposes. Currently, the R-168 Akveduk, Russia’s fifth
generation tactical radio system, is the primary tactical radio in service with the Ground Forces, Airborne, and Naval Infantry. These radios,
widely fielded in the late 2000s, provide capabilities for digital data transmission and resilience against jamming. Although the R-168 Akveduk
was a major advancement over the previous Arbalet series, the Akveduk man-portable radios were too bulky for convenient dismounted use.
The accompanying excerpted article from the 19 October 2018 edition of Krasnaya Zvezda, is by Colonel General Khalil Arslanov, Chief of
the Russian Federation Armed Forces Communications Directorate, and Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces. Colonel General Arslanov lays out the architecture and future of the military communications, and concludes by describing Russia’s
sixth generation of tactical radios, the R-187 Azart family. Aside from other advancements, the R-187 is also an SDR radio that has digital data
transmission, encryption, and electronic warfare resilience capabilities. Unlike the R-168 Akveduk family that consists of over 20 different
radios, the Azart family has only three radios: the Azart-P (4km), Azart-N (12km), and Azart-BM (40km). The first reports of the R-187 Azart
entering service began in 2012, and has reportedly been used in the Crimea, Eastern Ukraine, and Syria. Interestingly, the Russians have
reportedly already fielded a UAV-based repeater to extend the range of the system. Although the R-166 and R-168s are still the predominant
operational and tactical communication systems in the Russian Ground Forces, the fielding of the R-176 and R-187s will significantly enhance
Russian command and control (mission command) capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“In contemporary warfare, the role of information, telecommunication, and automated systems is
growing, and the means and methods for using them to achieve victory are improving constantly. This
makes demands on troop command and control, and consequently the communication system, more
stringent.”

LEFT: Радиостанция Р-166-0,5 (R-166-0,5 radiostation), RIGHT: Портативная радиостанция Р-187П1 Азарт (R-187P1 Azart radio).
Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/27OMSBr/i-6JMFxrn/A (left), https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/4th-Kantemirovskaya-Tank-Division-Open-Day-Part2/ (right),
CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0).

(continued)

OE Watch | February 2019

3

EURASIA
Continued: Radios in the Russian Ground Forces
Source: Colonel General Khalil Arslanov, “На острие технического прогресса (On the Cutting Edge of Technical Progress),” Krasnaya
Zvezda, 19 October 2018. http://redstar.ru/na-ostrie-tehnicheskogo-progressa
One of the top-priority tasks in the military communication realm is the creation and deployment of a unified automated digital
communication system. At the same time, a key role in increasing the efficiency of troop usage and enabling the combat potential of
armaments to the maximum extent possible is played by the Russian Federation Armed Forces’ communication system, which is being built
based on the latest science and technology achievements in the field of information and telecommunication technologies. An analysis of the
wars and military conflicts of modern times argues that conflicting parties employ advanced developments in the armament realm broadly and
without delay. In contemporary warfare, the role of information, telecommunication, and automated systems is growing, and the means and
methods for using them to achieve victory are improving constantly. This makes demands on troop command and control, and consequently
the communication system, more stringent.
One of the top-priority building missions in the military communication realm is the creation and deployment of the Russian Federation
Armed Forces’ unified automated digital communication system (OATsSS) [объединённой автоматизированной цифровой системы связи
(ОАЦСС)] based on the use of the latest domestic developments in the field of state-of-the-art digital satellite, radio, radio relay, and
tropospheric communication resources, as well as digital information sharing systems employing fiber optic technologies. Serious attention
is being devoted to defining unified operating principles for the Russian Federation Armed Forces’ unified automated digital communication
system, its protection and security. Automated communication control system elements are under development for command posts of all
levels…
The realization of new types of communication services requires a fundamentally different approach to communication system building.
Within the framework of scientific research and experimental design work conducted by Russian Defense Ministry scientific research
organizations, principles have been developed for employing advanced communication systems, military communication equipment prototypes
using wireless broadband access to communication system resources, software-defined radios, and highly mobile subscriber access to
communication system resources…
At the same time, radio communication resources play a key role in providing for the command and control of subunits on the battlefield.
First and foremost, we are talking about sixth-generation radio sets that allow building increased-capacity cognitive radio communication
networks and under conditions of organized and unforeseen interference. Such devices allow for organizing “one-to-one” radio
communication in automatic and automated modes with all means and methods for conducting combat. Moreover, they include a continuous
automatic radio relay mode that allows for establishing long-distance radio communication during subunit operations in mountainous and
rugged terrain without using additional equipment.
Source: Yuriy Avdeyev, “Радио сможет самообучаться (The Radio Will Be Able To Self-Learn),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 12 December 2018.
http://redstar.ru/radio-smozhet-samoobuchatsya/
The R-176 Antey system (Р-176 «Антей») includes field and fixed products for the organization of short-wave communication, which are
designed to work as part of Ground Troops communication nodes at the operational and strategic control levels. They provide communication
channels to the officials of control points and provide automatic and automated transmission of data, telephone, and telegraph information
in the face of interference at distances of several thousand kilometers. The system includes nodal receiving and transmitting hardware,
autonomous radio stations, and fixed receiving and transmitting systems. In addition, in order to ensure a complete standardized line of
radio facilities, the concern initiated a deep modernization of the serial radio station R-166-0.5 for use in command and control. As a result of
the work done, the radio facilities of the Antey system are expected to be used at all levels of Armed Forces management, from brigade to the
General Staff…
Specialists note that all system elements are built on a modern technological base. They are based on Tishina SDR [software defined
radio] modems, which together with the developed special software implement automatic adaptation to the current conditions of radio
communication. Due to this, as well as a set of technical solutions, it is possible to form a set of products that function as a single system and
provide a high level of automation…
According to experts, the Antey system will make it possible to significantly improve the efficiency of military short-wave radio lines when
subjected to deliberate enemy interference. It has a good chance of becoming a standardized interbranch and interdepartmental means for
organizing radio communication in field and fixed conditions…Among other things, the innovation has good prospects for entering the export
market, where there is a great demand for such communication equipment.
Speaking about further improvement of the existing fixed system of decameter radio communication [high frequency/HF], it should be noted
that one of the main directions is the creation of its automated network covering the entire territory of Russia and providing fixed protected
and unprotected facilities of Russian Federation Armed Forces ground, sea, and air echelons with mainline radio channels of required
stability and capacity in various operating conditions.
There will be changes also to tactical level control radio equipment. Now, as they say, it is near the finish line, namely at the stages of
preliminary and state tests there is development of a number of sixth-generation radio station systems. They include mobile, portable, and
transportable equipment that make it possible to build self-organizing and self-restoring radio networks with dynamic routing and automatic
retransmission of traffic for the troops. Portable equipment from one of these systems has been supplied on a mass basis for some years to
brigades and divisions of the Russian Federation Armed Forces…
OE Watch | February 2019

4

EURASIA
Northern Fleet Will Receive Automated C&C System
Integrating Air, Land and Sea
OE Watch Commentary: The Soviet Union and, later, Russia made
Presently, the Northern Fleet is saturated
serious efforts to develop an operational-level reconnaissance strike complex
which could identify and destroy threat targets in near-real time. There were
with state-of-the-art reconnaissance systems.
significant difficulties in integrating air and ground reconnaissance to develop
a comprehensive intelligence picture and targeting matrix. Russia has now realized that capability at the tactical and operational level and is
expanding this to also integrate naval surface intelligence into the comprehensive, common display as the accompanying excerpted article reports.
Artificial intelligence will process data and recommend systems to eliminate threats across the vast Arctic. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“

”

Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Aleksey Ramm, “Холодный интеллект: военные накроют Арктику сплошным полем наблюдения (Cold
Intellect: Military personnel will cover the Arctic with a solid surveillance field),” Izvestia, 21 December 2018. https://iz.ru/823286/aleksandrkruglov-aleksei-ramm/kholodnyi-intellekt-voennye-nakroiut-arktiku-sploshnym-polem-nabliudeniia
Ministry of Defense spokesmen …stated that the effectiveness of the advanced automated command and control system is being tested jointly
with representatives …of the defense industry. They plan to transfer the system to the Northern Fleet in 2019.
Presently, the Northern Fleet is saturated with state-of-the-art reconnaissance systems. Navy, ground forces, and air force formations have
their own command and control systems, where information, which is received from their own systems, is accumulated. Lack of cross-service
integration does not permit the full realization of their potential.
Now all weapon systems will receive centralized command and control. They will receive information from the Fleet’s combat ships,
Naval Aviation aircraft, radio-technical and radar sites, unmanned aerial vehicles, and airborne early warning and control aircraft. The
intelligence information will converge and will be processed in real time with the use of artificial intelligence. Its mission is to determine
possible enemy operations and to transmit potential decisions to commanders.
All of the information will converge at the combat information post and will be displayed on a special screen. All ground-based, airborne,
and naval surface targets, and, in the future, the situation on the “underwater” front – information about enemy submarines and unmanned
submersibles will arrive from sonar stations - will be plotted on the screen in real time. The system will instantaneously determine the type
of detected targets, the threat level, speed, altitude, and direction of movement. If necessary, the C&C system will issue target designations.
It will permit the establishment of the continuous exchange of information among all of the users, which will provide the capability to
instantaneously react to a change in the combat situation.
Now a commander of any level will obtain a complete picture of enemy operations and recommendations for their destruction. That
information will permit the adoption of a precise and effective decision at all command and control levels. And it will also help rationally
assign subordinate men and equipment. For example, if necessary it could send additional ships to an area to provide security of navigation
in the water areas of the Northern Maritime Route. The system could also expeditiously make decisions about the employment of strike
weapons, including cruise missiles.
That system is needed not only in wartime but also in peacetime, taking into account the enormous expanses, which one needs to monitor
in the Arctic Russian Federation Admiral Selivanov, the former Chief of the RF Navy Main Staff, stated that “The experiments on the
introduction of a similar system were conducted approximately 30 years ago. It was initially called the air and naval situation illumination
system. That C&C system is urgently needed in the Northern Fleet. We have to track enormous expanses in this region. This year a new
mission has appeared – monitoring the Northern Maritime Route”.
The Northern Maritime Route – is the shortest route between Russia’s European portion and the Far East. It has been defined by Russian
Federation law as Russia’s historically developed national single transportation line of communications in the Arctic. Foreign military ships
will be able to sail along the Northern Maritime Route only after the notification of Russian authorities.

Reconnaissance-in-Force Russian Style
By Lester W. Grau

“Integrated fires, rapid detect-destroy systems and the controlled, merciless
onslaught of smaller robot tanks and assault vehicles may rip through robust
defenses to determine the true nature of the defense and prepare the main attack
to totally dismantle it. To the Russian way of thinking, the reconnaissance-inforce remains a viable method of tactical intelligence. Learning how to employ it
optimally is the current challenge.”
This paper was originally published in Armor journal’s Winter-Spring 2018 edition.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/230764
OE Watch | February 2019

5

EURASIA
The Inflatable Sentry
OE Watch Commentary: In 2016, the Russian Ministry
of Defense reactivated the “Lighter-Than-Air Systems
Department” in the Aerospace Forces and adopted a
lighter-than-air systems technology development concept:
the “Dirigibles, Aerostats, and Air Balloons until 2025”
(дирижаблей, аэростатов и воздушных шаров до
2025 года). The purpose of this was not only to develop
a replacement for the 1950s era lighter-than-air systems
currently used by the Aerospace Forces for traditional
purposes, such as air and missile defense, and scientific
research, but also to develop new balloons, dirigibles, and
aerostats to support new Aerospace Forces’ missions. The
Russians consider lighter-than-air systems as an alternative
to unmanned aerial vehicles because their payload capacity
is an order of magnitude greater, and their loiter time can
be measured in terms of days instead of hours. This loiter
capability is so great that they are often referred to as “static
reconnaissance systems” (статичными разведчиками).
Most discussions of new Russian lighter-than-air systems
involve systems for air and missile defense, but the
accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya discusses the
AKV-05 aerostat, a system intended to provide persistent
surveillance of the ground. The AKV-05 system consists of
a ground control post mounted on an all-terrain vehicle, a
tethered aerostat, a towed electromechanical winch for the
aerostat, and a mobile gas replenishment unit. The AKV-05
aerostat is a 50 cubic-meter helium balloon that maintains an
operational altitude of 300 to 1,000 meters with equipment
weighing up to 16 kg. The AKV-05 is equipped with an
onboard computer that can automatically adjust altitude
and remain fixed on position at wind speeds of 15 m/s (with
gusts of 25 m/s). In its standard configuration, the AKV05’s maximum flight time is 75 hours, during which it can
provide round-the-clock electro-optical video surveillance,
including with a thermal imager. In good weather conditions,
the electro-optical system can reportedly read license plates
at an altitude of 300 meters and range of two kilometers,
and can spot objects within a 10-km radius. If proven
successful, the AKV-05 aerostat could enhance Russia’s
Reconnaissance-Fire System (разведивательнфая-огновая
система), especially for security purposes such as Russia
is now engaging in Syria. Not only is the AKV-05 seen as
a targeting asset, but it is also being considered for use as
a radar platform, communications (retransmission), signals
intercept, electronic warfare, and weather purposes. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Aleksey Ramm, “Надувной часовой:
важные военные объекты будут охранять аэростаты (The Inflatable Sentry:
Aerostats to Guard Important Military Sites),” Izvestiya, 14 December 2018.
https://iz.ru/815399/aleksandr-kruglov-aleksei-ramm/naduvnoi-chasovoivazhnye-voennye-obekty-budut-okhraniat-aerostaty
The armed forces are to receive a new generation of tethered aerostats. The
official name of these complexes is AKV-05. They have been tested in Syria,
at the Humaymim airbase and during the liberation of Palmyra. The plan is
to use the aerostats with video surveillance and thermal imaging devices for
guarding important military facilities. The first batch will cost the military
120 million rubles [$1,739,703]. According to experts, they will be versatile
platforms for hi-tech surveillance systems…
AKV-05s are currently being tested in Syria, where they are in active use to
guard and monitor the environs of the Humaymim airbase. In 2016 they were
in the sky above Palmyra, watching the operation to liberate the city. All data
from the aerostats were being transmitted in real time to the National State
Defense Management Center…
The plan is to fit other equipment to the aerostats in the future, including
radars, communication, signals intercept, and electronic warfare devices,
and target acquisition. The aerostat can serve as a weather station, a
communications relay, or a radar station capable of detecting a target within a
radius of 200 km.
Aerostats are relatively inexpensive and memories of them were prompted
by the emergence of hi-tech miniaturized intelligence-gathering systems,
military expert Vadim Kozyulin explained to Izvestiya. “An aerostat can lift
technologically advanced surveillance gear to high altitudes and make it much
more effective,” he said. “These complexes are fitted with a colossal number of
detectors and sensors that watch what is happening on the ground. In ‘defense’
mode it has a powerful database with a detailed map of the terrain which is
updated in real time. Any kind of change -- for example, a vehicle leaving,
people moving around, or any kind of work beginning -- triggers the data
processing program.” Artificial intelligence monitors the situation, analyses
changes, and flags up any kind of suspicious trend. This enables prompt
detection of threats, Kozyulin said.
The use of aerostats for communications was tried out during the USSR’s war
in Afghanistan, and they were found to extend the range of radio traffic to four
or five times that of ground-based devices. Modern technologies and materials
have made aerostats safer to use. Among their advantages are the ability to
remain over a single location for an extended period and the high quality of the
signals they transmit. Aerostats enable communications in places where it is
impossible to lay cables or rapidly deploy a network of mobile communication
hubs -- for example, in mountains or the Arctic tundra. These complexes are
much cheaper than ground-based assets, of which a vastly greater number are
needed for signals coverage of the same area.

“The plan is to fit other equipment to the aerostats in the future, including radars, communication, signals
intercept, and electronic warfare devices, and target acquisition. The aerostat can serve as a weather
station, a communications relay, or a radar station capable of detecting a target within a radius of 200
km.”

OE Watch | February 2019

6

EURASIA
The S-350 Vityaz Air Defense System
OE Watch Commentary: The S-350 Vityaz air defense system is the result
of a joint Russia-South Korean venture that consists of a 50K6E command post
(capable of servicing up to eight launchers), 50N6E multifunctional radar, and
the 50P6E launcher (with 12 missiles). Although the S-350 lacks the range of
the S-400, its capability to fire three missile types: the 9M96E2 (120km), the
9M96E (60km), and the 9M100 (10km), provide a significant advantage over
the S-400, mainly that the S-350 does not require a short-range system such as
a close range Pantsir-S1 or Tor missile system to protect it from cruise missiles
and other “close” threats.
The S-350 is reportedly a more capable system than the S-300 and foreign
counterparts because of: the superiority of the 50N6E X-band multifunctional
radar; the automation of target detection, targets tracking, and missile launch
systems; the increased number of simultaneously tracked targets and increased
rate of fire for repulsing mass cruise missiles strikes, other offensive air
weapons (including UAVs), and precision munitions; improved operating
characteristics that decrease maintenance issues and provide increased
reliability. In general, the S-350 is purported to have greater capabilities, but
lower operating costs than the S-300 and foreign counterparts.
The accompanying excerpted article from Gazeta.Ru discusses how the
S-350 will replace the S-300 and Buk-M1-2 in the Russian Aerospace Forces. In
addition, as with other air defense systems, the S-350 will be fielded in a naval
variant (the ship-borne Poliment-Redut) to reduce costs through economies
of scale. If the S-350 Vityaz meets expectations, this joint Russia-South
Korean venture could be successful not only as a domestic weapon system
to supplement the S-400 and eventually S-500, but also as an export item for
countries wishing to upgrade their air defense capabilities. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“...the state tests of the S-350 Vityaz mobile complex,
which should arrive to replace the S-300 and Buk-M1-2,
are being conducted right now.”

Source: Rafael Fakhrutdinov: “Российские военные
получат новейший зенитный комплекс «Витязь» (The
Russian Military Will Get the Latest ‘Vityaz’ Air Defense
Complex),” Gazeta.Ru, 30 December 2018. https://www.
gazeta.ru/army/2018/12/30/12114157.shtml
The new S-350 “Vityaz” air defense missile complex will
arrive in the Russian Aerospace Forces inventory next year,
the Russian Ministry of Defense Information and Mass
Communications Department reported. Besides this, the
RF VKS will obtain approximately 10 sets of Pantsir-S air
defense missile-gun complexes and S-400s…
“Conversations about the development of nonstrategic
missile defense system (NPRO) have already been conducted
for a long time, furthermore, the state tests of the S-350
Vityaz mobile complex, which should arrive to replace the
S-300 and Buk-M1-2, are being conducted right now”.
For example, one launcher of this complex transports
12 missile interceptors, despite the fact that the S-300 has
a total of four. What is more, Vityaz will have a greater
number of channels, which permit it to fire at more targets
simultaneously. But we need to point out that, if necessary,
one can also accommodate the launchers on ordinary
trucks with the possibility of their camouflage”, the expert
indicated.
And, in the analyst’s words, camouflaging them as ordinary
cargo motor vehicles will permit the NPRO complexes to
be inconspicuous for the probable enemy’s reconnaissance
systems, “whose spies can hypothetically stroll along the
streets of Russian cities”…

Air Defence System “Vityaz” (english “Knight”).

Source: By Zumlik - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=31998885.

OE Watch | February 2019

7

EURASIA
Bigger is Better: The T-80BVM Tank Modernization
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
excerpted article from Svobodnaya Pressa discusses
the armor-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot
tracer (APFSDS-T) 3BM60 Svinets-2 round that
upgraded T-80BV tanks will now be capable of
firing (after the upgrade the tank will be referred
to as a T-80BVM). The Svinets-2’s core consists of
depleted uranium and tungsten, and is reportedly
capable of penetrating up to 830mm of rolled
homogeneous armor (RHA). In comparison,
Svobodnaya Pressa states that a similar round for
the American М829А1 Abrams penetrates up to 700
mm, the М829А2 Abrams 750 mm, and the М829А3
Abrams 770 mm. Apparently, the kinetic energy
of these rounds is very important, the Russians are
keen to get longer and heavier rounds into tank
barrels. The Svinets-2 is reportedly 740mm long but
the new Armata tank has a similar 125mm gun that
is capable of firing a 1000mm long shell capable of
piercing 900-1000mm of RHA. It appears likely that
if the Armata is fielded, it may be equipped with a
152mm cannon to facilitate larger and much heavier
rounds, including barrel-launched antitank guided
missiles (ATGMs), as the Russians may be reaching
the capability limits of their 125mm tank guns in
terms of RHA penetration.

Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Т-80БВ: «Реактивный» танк получил урановые
снаряды (The T-80BV: ‘Jet’ Tank Provided with Uranium Shells),” Svobodnaya
Pressa, 23 December 2018. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/219941/

The accompanying interview of Major General
Sergey Kisel, Commander of the 1st Guards Tank
Army, published in Krasnaya Zvezda, sheds some
light on how he and likely most of the Russian
Ground Forces see the differences between the T-72,
T-80, and T-90, as all three platforms are evidently
found within the 1st Guards Tank Army. In terms
of modernization, the T-80BV, T-72B3, and T-90A
are all apparently perceived to be at roughly the
same level of modernization and combat capability.
Although the T-80 has been criticized due to its
gas guzzling turbine engine, there are specific uses
for it. The T-80 was designed to be a high-speed
“breakthrough tank” on the battlefield and it also
could be Russia’s tank for the arctic region, as the
turbine engine is less problematic in cold weather
conditions than more conventional diesel engines.
End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Meanwhile, their power was at variance with tank guns. The increase in quality was
achieved by increasing projectile length to 740 mm. The ammunition turned out to be
promising since the loading machinery in the country’s then tanks could only work
with smaller length ammunition. But new guns with the appropriate machinery, that
were adapted for the new ammunition, were soon created for new modifications of
T-90A and T-72B3 tanks. The initial velocity of the Svinets-2 core was 1750 meters
per second and mass was 4.6 kg. The American М829А3 had a projectile velocity
of 1675 meters per second and mass of 4.9 kg. For the T-80 tank to be able to use
nonstandard length armor-piercing subcaliber projectiles, its latest modification was
equipped with a new 2A46M-4 gun.

The upgraded Russian T-80BVM tank was provided with the capability to employ gun
ammunition using depleted uranium, according to the Russian Federation Defense
Ministry. This is the armor-piercing fin-stabilized subcaliber 3BM60 Svinets-2
projectile, the core of which is made of depleted uranium with added tungsten to give
hardness. Such shells are called “crowbars” and are used in almost all countries in
which there is a tank-manufacturing industry.
When choosing uranium as a material for the production of “crowbars,” its
radioactive properties are not taken into account. The value of this material lies, first,
in its large specific mass, which is equal to 19 grams per cubic centimeter. This is
much higher than the specific weight not only of iron, 7.9 grams per cubic centimeter,
but also of lead, 11.3 grams per cubic centimeter.
According to the laws of elementary physics, a higher mass projectile has greater
kinetic energy. An additional quality is achieved due to the fact that the “crowbar”
has a significantly smaller diameter than the caliber of the gun. Due to this, the
air resistance in flight is reduced and there is a smaller drop in speed. The armorpiercing ability increases correspondingly.
The modernized T-80 tank also uses the Svinets-1 subcaliber projectile in which
the core is made of tungsten carbide. It is able to pierce 700-740 mm homogeneous
(single-composition) armor at a distance of 2 kilometers. With the Svinets-2 this
feature reaches 800-830 mm. For comparison, the American М829А1 subcaliber
projectile can pierce up to 700 mm homogeneous armor, the М829А2 750 mm, and the
М829А3 770 mm… Second, uranium is a pyrophoric material. Once inside a tank, the
“crowbar” shatters into tiny fragments that self-ignite, causing a fire. That is, another
striking factor is added…

Currently the tank ammunition designers are increasing the power of “crowbars” by
creating the new fin-stabilized armor-piercing subcaliber Vakuum projectile for the
T-14 Armata tank. This tank uses the 2А82М gun, which is a new gun for this range of
tanks. The length of the projectile reaches 1000 mm. According to reports, it should
pierce 900-1000 mm of homogeneous armor.
All the above ammunition is used for 125 mm caliber, and the American ones 120 mm
smoothbore guns. However, Uralvagonzavod is working on the creation of a second
modification of the T-14. This will use the 2A83 152 mm caliber gun…

“The upgraded Russian T-80BVM tank was provided with the capability to employ gun ammunition using
depleted uranium.”

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2019

8

EURASIA
Continued: Bigger is Better: The T-80BVM
Tank Modernization
Source: Viktor Khudoleyev, “По заветам первогвардейцев (According to the First Guardsmen),” Krasnaya Zvezda, 14 December 2018.
http://redstar.ru/po-zavetam-pervogvardejtsev/
What is the 1st Guards Tank Army like today? What tasks does it face?
[Kisel] The army incorporates motorized rifle, tank, artillery, surface-to-air missile, and missile formations and military units, including
the celebrated Tamanskaya Motorized Rifle Division and Kantemirovskaya Tank Division. Today, in terms of combat composition, these are
unique formations, unequaled in the Ground Forces in terms of combat potential…
With what are the army’s formations and units equipped? Which modern models of armament and military hardware are coming into
military formations now?
Today the 1st Tank Army is fully supplied with modern models of fighting vehicles developed by our engineers. There are modernized T-72B3
tanks with reinforced protection equipped with the latest multichannel thermal imaging sight, a ballistic calculator, an improved armament
stabilizer, an automatic target tracker, and other innovations. Their electronics make it possible significantly to enhance the accuracy of
hitting targets. Our main battle tank, the T-72B3, possesses sufficient specifications to detect and destroy any enemy on the battlefield. The
T-72B3 is a reliable tank. It differs from foreign models in that it is far smaller – which makes it less vulnerable. At the same time it has a
faster rate of fire and possesses good marching capabilities. We also have subunits with T-90 tanks that differ fundamentally from other
vehicles in terms of the degree of protection for the crew, the long firing range, and more powerful engine.
T-80BV and T-80U tanks, which have gotten a good name for themselves, remain in the arsenal. The armament system on the T-80BV is
the same as on the T-72B3 and the T-90. A special feature of the T-80BV is that this tank is capable of operating at low temperatures. Its gas
turbine engine, whose design does not provide for a cooling liquid, is undemanding in frosts. The T-80BV and the T-80U are distinguished by
unique marching specifications and are capable of covering large distances in a short space of time. The T-80 was originally developed as a
breakthrough tank and can reach a speed of 90 kph…
Recently digital technologies, automated control systems, UAVs, and robotized systems have been actively introduced in the Armed
Forces. How is this affecting modern tank combat?
The technologies, including digital technologies, that are now in the service of our Armed Forces, including the 1st Guards Tank Army,
predetermine the success of combat and ensure the enemy’s total defeat.
The introduction of increasingly complex technical systems requires constant raising of the servicemen’s level of knowledge and combat
training. Thus, a tankman is obliged to have thorough knowledge of hardware, ballistics, and the special features of modern combined-arms
combat, which has become exponentially more complex in recent decades. Today demands are made of a tank commander that at one time
were made of commanders of large subunits.

Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2018-Demonstration-part-1/i-PGvmxT6/A, CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0).

OE Watch | February 2019

9

EURASIA
The Power Struggle for Control of Russia’s Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: A Russian state corporation is a non-commercial, non-profit
organization, established by Russian federal law and directly owned by the state. Rosatom
was established in 2007 as Russia’s leading energy production and development organization.
Rosatom took over the assets and powers of the Federal Atomic Energy Agency. With over 350
enterprises, Rosatom is Russia’s largest electrical energy generation company and is deeply
involved in scientific research, the development and construction of domestic and foreign nuclear
power generation plants, Russian nuclear weapons, nonnuclear energy development, nuclear
medicine, and even super computer production and software design. Key to the accompanying
excerpted article, it also owns the world’s only nuclear-powered icebreaker fleet. The Ministry of
Transport has lost control of Arctic shipping in a power struggle and now Rosatom will control
the shipping routes, budget monies and ability to input or draft proposals on state policy for the
Arctic including development and infrastructure. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The company that employs
more than 250,000 people
and engages in a multitude of
activities related to nuclear
power development and
production is now formally
Russia’s management authority
for the Northern Sea Route.”

Source: Atle Staalesen, “It’s a law - Russian Arctic shipping to be regulated by Rosatom,” The Barents Observer, 2 January 2019.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/arctic/2019/01/its-law-russian-arctic-shipping-be-regulated-rosatom
Rosatom has officially been granted the leading role in the development of the vast Russian Arctic. The company that employs more than
250,000 people and engages in a multitude of activities related to nuclear power development and production is now formally Russia’s
management authority for the Northern Sea Route.
The law was adopted by the State Duma on the 11th December and signed by Vladimir Putin on the 28th. The new legislation comes as
Russian Arctic shipping is rapidly increasing. In 2018, about 18 million tons of cargo was transported on the sea route-an increase of almost
70 percent from 2017. And more is to come. According to Vladimir Putin’s so-called May Decrees on top national priorities, shipping on the
Northern Sea Route will reach 80 million tons by year 2024.
Rosatom’s new powers in the Arctic include development and operational responsibilities for shipping, as well as infrastructure and sea ports
along the northern Russian coast. The responsibilities of the Northern Sea Route Administration, which … operated under the Ministry of
Transport, will be transferred to Rosatom.
Putin …, in early 2017, made it clear that a coordinating government agency for the Northern Sea Route was needed. A battle between
Rosatom and the Ministry of Transport followed. In December 2017, it became clear that the nuclear power company had won that fight.

Vladimir Putin With Director General of State Atomic Energy Corporation Rosatom Alexei Likhachev.

Source: Kremlin.ru [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0) or CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56946.

OE Watch | February 2019

10

EURASIA
The Arctic Will Have Prominent Role in 2019
Operational-Strategic Exercise “Center”
OE Watch Commentary: The Central
Operational Strategic Command (and Military
District) borders Central Asia and China in
the south, the Arctic in the north, the Eastern
Operational Strategic Command in the east and
the Western Operational Command in the west.
Its ground forces are deployed along Russia’s
southern border. Every year, Russia rotates its
major strategic exercise among the Southern
(Kavkaz), Western (Zapad), Eastern (Vostok), and
Central (Tsentr) Military Districts. This year, it
is the Central Military District’s turn in August
and September, according to the accompanying
excerpt from Izvestia. Although the exercise will
focus on the Central Military District, it will
be a nationwide exercise and possibly involve
Chinese and Central Asian participation. The
Arctic borders the Central Military District and the
Northern Fleet Operational Strategic Command
has conducted several significant exercises on its
Arctic territory. The Northern Fleet Operational
Strategic Command will play a major role with its
14th Army Corps, Aerospace Forces and Fleet.
The 200th Separate Coastal Motorized Rifle
Brigade and the 80th Arctic Separate Motorized
Rifle Brigade will evidently disembark and
maneuver on the Novaya Zemlya Archipelago.
The 61st Naval Infantry Brigade and the Northern
Fleet’s Tactical Group (based on the New Siberian
Islands Archipelago) will probably conduct
amphibious landings in the New Siberian Islands
Archipelago. Part of the Pacific Fleet, which
controls the eastern entrance to the Northern
Maritime Route, will probably join the Northern
Fleet in Arctic naval maneuvers.
What will likely be missing from these
maneuvers is Russia’s sole aircraft carrier. In late
October 2018, the Admiral Kuznetsov was leaving
dry dock in Murmansk when its floating dry dock
sank and a 70-ton crane fell onto the vessel and
punched a four-by-five meter hole into its deck.
The Swedish-built dry dock is the only Russian
dry dock that can handle the Admiral Kuznetsov.
How long it will take to salvage and repair the
330-meter long dry dock is unknown, but a year is
a conservative guess. The Admiral Kuznetsov was
undergoing extensive rebuild and modernization
which was scheduled for completion in 2021. The
accident has put the carrier bilge repairs on hold
for at least six months and how long this accident
will delay repairs of the carrier completion is
guesswork. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Tsentr-2019 Exercises will also prove a large-scale inspection
of the effectiveness of the Armed Forces Arctic Grouping.”
Source: Aleksandr Kruglov and Aleksey Ramm, “В Арктике будет жарко: войска
испытают Крайним Севером (It Will Be Hot in the Arctic: The Troops Are Being
Tested by the Far North),” Izvestia, 18 December 2018. https://iz.ru/822691/aleksandrkruglov-aleksei-ramm/v-arktike-budet-zharko-voiska-ispytaiut-krainim-severom
A Ministry of Defense spokesman stated that the Tsentr-2019 Strategic Exercises will
occur in August-September of next year. Several important exercise phases will occur in
the Arctic Region on the territory from Novaya Zemlya to the Novosibirsk Islands. The
infrastructure for the maneuvers is being prepared right now. Port and mooring areas
are being built for troop redeployment.
The manpower of the Northern Operational-Strategic Command will be involved in
the exercises to the maximum extent possible. Two arctic motorized rifle brigades will
“fight” at full strength. The ground forces will have to operate under difficult climactic
conditions. They will pay special attention to the accomplishment of tactical missions
and also to rear services and maintenance support in the Arctic.
The defense of the Northern Maritime Route is a priority and its defense should be
rehearsed during the exercises.
According to Military Historian Dmitriy Boltenkov, “Pacific Fleet forces will certainly
participate. Northern Fleet forces passed through the Bering Strait into the Pacific
Ocean and participated in the maneuvers at the Vostok-2018 Exercises. It is possible
that Pacific Fleet ships will conduct a ‘return visit’ to the northern seas next year. Air
Defense forces will deploy and bomber aviation will mass. The arctic motorized riflemen
and naval infantry will be on alert and load onto ships so they can rehearse offensive
and defensive combat in the Polar Region.”
The maneuvers will verify the capabilities of the armored vehicles, which have been
specially developed for the region. Tor-M2DT and Pantsir-SA air defense systems,
MT-LBV and BTR-82A armored vehicles, the T-80BV tank, and the Toros fire support
and escort armored vehicle will be exercised. The DT-10PM and DT-30PM all-terrain
vehicles will demonstrate their capabilities.
Northern Fleet ships, nuclear submarines, and Naval Aviation will participate in the
exercises, as will coastal forces, including Bastion anti-shipping missile systems.
The Tsentr-2019 Exercises will also prove a large-scale inspection of the effectiveness of
the Armed Forces Arctic Grouping. According to Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy:
“A full-fledged air, naval surface, and underwater situation monitoring system has
been created in the Arctic. We need to maintain this system in a combat ready state.
The grouping’s strategic mission is to guarantee the security of navigation along the
Northern Maritime Route. Control of this area also permits us to efficiently conduct
the regrouping of the Navy’s forces and to redeploy ships from the Northern Fleet to the
Pacific Fleet and back along the shortest route. That regrouping was already conducted
this year during the Vostok-2018 maneuvers.”
The exercise is also a test of the aerospace defense system and the coordination between
the ground grouping and the Navy. Special Operations Forces and Naval Infantry will
play a very important role in the exercises. According to Military Expert Vladislav
Shurygin, the arctic summer is challenging… It is extremely difficult to move along
the tundra because, having been freed from the ice, it is transformed into a continuous
swamp. “It is impossible to involve a major ground grouping in these exercises…but
they don’t fight using divisions and armies in the Arctic. Summer and the beginning of
fall – is the most favorable time for the Navy because the waters of the coastal sea will be
ice free”…
OE Watch | February 2019

11

EURASIA
Preparation for the 2019 Army International Games
OE Watch Commentary: While the major events will
not take place until August 2019, Russian defense officials
have already started the planning and preparation for
one event, the actual competition for the annual Army
International Games. As the accompanying excerpt from
the military news source Krasnaya Zvezda points out,
one new event this year, the “Sayansk March [which]
involves competitions of mountain subunits under winter
conditions…will be held at a different time – from 1821 February 2019.” This will be the fifth iteration of
these international military games, and as the Russian
military official quoted in the article acclaims, “thirty-two
different competitions in 10 states are planned in 2019,” to
include using training ranges for the first time in “India,
Uzbekistan, and Mongolia.”
Besides the Sayansk March race, new competitions in
2019 will include the Cavalry Marathon, Hazard Area, and
Pole Star events. The article points out that the Cavalry
Logo for the Army International Games.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://mil.ru/et/news/more.htm?id=12159407@egNews&_print=true, CC 4.0.
Marathon will include “mounted elements,” the Hazard
Area- “a contest for the best emergency-rescue unit,”
and the Pole Star, which “will be held in Belarus” will be designed around competition performing “missions…after dark.” Another change
for 2019 games includes an expanded number of events for women, including “the Tank Biathlon, True Friend, and Military-Medical Relay
competitions.” The article points out that women will “compete not with the men, naturally, but among themselves in a separate category.” The
Russian Ministry of Defense has “invited 85 countries to take part in the 2019 games,” though a final headcount is not yet available (in 2018,
military representatives from 32 countries participated). End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Lieutenant-General Ivan Buvaltsev announced that the Russian Defense Ministry had invited 85
countries to take part in the 2019 games.”
Source: Marina Shcherbakova, “АрМИ-2019: подготовка уже началась (ArMI-2019: Preparations Have Already Begun),” Krasnaya Zvezda,
21 December 2018. http://redstar.ru/armi-2019-podgotovka-uzhe-nachalas/?attempt=1
The Army International Games 2019 1st International Planning Conference has been held in the Patriot Congress and Exhibition Center….
The locations, times, and particular features of the competitions and also the requirements of the arms, military and special equipment, and
missiles and munitions employed at the games were conveyed to the participants.
Opening the conference, Lieutenant-General Ivan Buvaltsev noted first of all the growing popularity of the Army International Games, to
which the expansion of their geography, specifically, testifies. “Thirty-two competitions in 10 states are planned in 2019,” he announced,
pointing out for comparison that 28 competitions in seven states were held in 2018.
Increasingly new countries are expressing a wish and readiness to hold this competition or the other on their territory. The organizers of the
games are meeting them half-way, and competitions will in the future be held for the first time in India, Uzbekistan, and Mongolia….
The Cavalry Marathon is a new competition…There will be four new competitions in 2019 altogether. Aside from the Cavalry Marathon,
these are Hazard Area, Sayansk March, and Pole Star.
The name Cavlary Marathon speaks for itself – mounted elements will be taking part. Hazard Area is a contest for the best emergencyrescue unit… Sayansk March involves competitions of mountain subunits under winter conditions. They will be held in Krasnoyarskiy Kray
at the range facility of the Yergaki Mounting-Training Center. August on the territory of Russia is not suitable for winter conditions, naturally,
Sayansk March is the sole international competition which will be held at a different time – from 18-21 February 2019.
The timeframe of all the other competitions remains unchanged – from 3-19 August. The competition of Pole Star special units will be held in
Belarus. There’s nothing surprising in the name, which was proposed by the organizers: for special forces on missions frequently after dark it
is this celestial luminary in the northern hemisphere which helps get one’s bearings….
Lieutenant-General Ivan Buvaltsev announced that the Russian Defense Ministry had invited 85 countries to take part in the 2019 games….
In addition, the chief of the RF Armed Forces Main Combat-Training Directorate, announced some distinguishing features of ArMI-2019. One
such is that contests of women’s teams also are planned in the Tank Biathlon, True Friend, and Military-Medical Relay competitions. They are
to compete not with the men, naturally, but among themselves in a separate category….

OE Watch | February 2019

12

EURASIA
Cossacks – Hybrid Defense Forces
OE Watch Commentary: Raising military awareness,
readiness and patriotism remain key objectives of the
Kremlin’s domestic strategy. With their long history
of protecting the frontiers of the Russian state, the
Cossacks have responded well to this increased focus
on militarism and the need to protect the Russian
state. The accompanying excerpt from the official
news agency TASS, describes a recent initiative at an
“assembly of the All-Russian Cossack Society,” where
members “considered the creation of a single Cossack
army.” According to the excerpt, President Putin sent a
congratulatory telegram to the assembly, asserting that
“the Cossacks are not only reviving, but are becoming a
more significant constructive, creative force.”
The accompanying excerpt from the military weekly,
Voenno-Promyshlenniy Kyrier (Military-Industrial
Courier) describes the “creative” ways these Cossack
forces might be used. The author of the article, military
expert K. Sivkov, begins by claiming that “the structure
and combat composition of the Armed Forces of the
Russian Federation are still focused primarily on the
conduct of classical wars, which significantly reduces the
possibility of repelling hybrid aggression.” According to
Sivkov, to handle these hybrid threats, Russia needs to
“introduce irregular special forces (IS), into our Armed
Forces.” Sivkov goes on to divide these “irregular special
forces” into “irregular defense forces (IDF) and active
irregular forces (AIF)” whereby the IDF are “intended
for solving problems on the territory of Russia,” while the
AIF would focus on missions “outside Russia’s borders.”
Cossacks would fall into the IDF category.
Sivkov stresses that these Cossack forces “as far as
possible, should be linked, at least at a strategic level, to
the actions of regular troops, especially when conducting
special operations. That is, to be actually under a single
command.” He suggests that IDF forces like the Cossacks
be entrusted with “a wide range of tasks of territorial
defense and counteraction to irregular aggression, for
the solution of which the involvement of regular troops is
either inexpedient or impossible.”
Even with the advent of Russia’s new National Guard,
over the past few years, Cossack forces have proven
valuable in helping to disperse opposition rallies within
Russia. Just as unidentified Russian forces have been
used to handle missions “outside Russia’s borders,” the
Kremlin will likely continue to develop plans whereby
“hybrid” Cossack forces are used to crush dissent
and maintain stability within Russia. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“Such a structure of irregular troops actually means the
re-establishment of a real Cossack force in Russia - a specific
warrior people who will become a reliable support of the
state and government in the most critical conditions.”
Source: “Путин: казачество в России становится значимой конструктивной и
созидательной силой (Putin: the Cossacks in Russia are becoming a significant
constructive and creative force),” TASS, 27 November 2018. https://tass.ru/
obschestvo/5839261
President Vladimir Putin sent greetings to the participants and guests of the
constituent assembly of the All-Russian Cossack Society…. “Today, thanks to the
initiative, active position of public organizations, volunteers and caring citizens,
the support of the authorities and the Russian Orthodox Church, the Cossacks
are not only reviving, but are becoming a more significant constructive, creative
force,” the telegram says.
…Earlier it was reported that for the first time in history, Russian Cossacks
would create an All-Russian Cossack society, which would coordinate the work
of the Cossacks throughout Russia. Representatives of all 11 registered Cossack
troops of Russia will gather in Moscow on November 27 to participate in the
second big round (gathering representatives of various Cossack troops to make
an important decision) to consider the creation of a single Cossack army. The
army will be headed by an ataman appointed by the president of Russia….
Source: Konstantin Sivkov, “Атаманы диверсий (Atamans of sabotage),”
Voenno-Promyshlenniy Kyrier, 10 December 2018. https://vpk-news.ru/
articles/46915
…The structure and combat composition of the Armed Forces of the Russian
Federation is still focused primarily on the conduct of classical wars, which
significantly reduces the possibility of repelling hybrid aggression. It is necessary
to improve the appearance of our armed forces in such a way that they can be
effectively used in various forms of modern wars….
…This should be a special ‘army,’ designed to conduct an irregular armed
struggle, irregular special forces (IS), which should be introduced into our
Armed Forces in addition to the existing general-purpose forces and strategic
deterrence.
…The experience of the wars of the beginning of the 21st century shows that
irregular combat can be used both for offensive and for defense. Accordingly,
in the structure of IS should be highlighted the main elements that differ in
the objectives of the application and the specifics of the struggle. Namely: the
irregular defense forces (IDF) and active irregular forces (AIF). The first are
intended for solving problems on the territory of Russia, the second, outside its
borders.
…But at the same time, as far as possible, they should be linked, at least at
a strategic level, to the actions of regular troops, especially when conducting
special operations. That is, to be actually under a single command. This means
that such a specific component should appear in the structure of the armed forces
of Russia.
…It is advisable for the IDF to entrust the solution of a wide range of tasks of
territorial defense and counteraction to irregular aggression, for the solution of
which the involvement of regular troops is either inexpedient or impossible….
…Such a structure of irregular troops actually means the re-establishment of
a real Cossack force in Russia - a specific warrior people who will become a
reliable support of the state and government in the most critical conditions….
OE Watch | February 2019

13

EURASIA
Update on Military Church Construction
OE Watch Commentary: As previously reported, the Russian Ministry
of Defense (MoD) is in the midst of constructing a huge Orthodox church
dedicated to the military on the grounds of Patriot Park (Kubinka), located
just outside of Moscow (see: “Constructing Military Ideology,” OE Watch,
October 2018). According to the church’s website (see: https://hram.mil.ru/)
nearly two billion rubles have already been collected and preliminary work
on its construction has begun.
As the accompanying excerpt from the official news agency TASS
points out, the church, constructed “exclusively on voluntary donations”
is planned to be completed by “the 75th anniversary of the Victory in the
Great Patriotic War,” 9 May 2020. The excerpt also clarifies a statement
made by Defense Minister Shoigu who had earlier announced that “captured
German technology of World War II will be melted down to create the steps
of the main temple.” However, instead of smelting “unique and historically
valuable weapons…only elements of the Wehrmacht’s captured weapons
Three-dimensional concept of the Main Cathedral of the Russian Armed Forces.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://mil.ru/mcis/news/more.htm?id=12206176@egNews, CC 4.0.
stored in the Armed Forces warehouses will be used.”

“

The construction of the temple will be carried
“Voluntary” funding for the construction of this church has also come
under some scrutiny. According to the accompanying excerpt from a
out exclusively on voluntary donations.
regional news source in Khabarovsk, local “commanders were ordered to
collect amounts from their subordinates…even from those military personnel who profess a different faith.” The required “voluntary” donations
were reportedly small (500 rubles or $8), but as the article points out, “when you multiply it by the number of servicemen, you get an impressive
amount.”

”

In constructing this new military temple, the Russian leadership continues to combine the centerpiece of its current ideology (the victory in the
Great Patriotic War) with more traditional beliefs and practices. At this point, it is not altogether clear how these elements will mix and what this
new structure will offer. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)
Source: “Минобороны рассказало, какую технику вермахта
используют для ступеней главного Храма ВС РФ (The Ministry of
Defense told which Wehrmacht equipment is being used for the steps of
the main Temple of the RF Armed Forces),” TASS, 28 December 2018.
https://tass.ru/armiya-i-opk/5961209
The Ministry of Defense of Russia will not use unique and historically
valuable weapons of the Wehrmacht during the construction of the main
church of the Russian Armed Forces. The official representative of the
military department, Igor Konashenkov, told reporters on Friday.
“For the smelting of individual components (steps, etc.) for the main
church of the Armed Forces in honor of the Victory in the Great Patriotic
War, only elements of the Wehrmacht’s captured weapons stored in the
Armed Forces warehouses will be used,” said Konashenkov. He said
that we are talking about ammunition, small arms, as well as individual
elements of artillery and armored weapons. According to the official
representative of the Ministry of Defense, there is no unique, historical or
military value in the listed samples….
Earlier, Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu at a meeting of the Public
Council of the Ministry of Defense said that the captured German
technology of World War II will be melted down to make the steps of
the main temple of the Russian Armed Forces, which is being built in
Moscow Kubinka…. The main temple of the Armed Forces of the Russian
Federation will be erected by the 75th anniversary of the Victory in the
Great Patriotic War, 9 May 2020…. The construction of the temple will be
carried out exclusively on voluntary donations.

Source: Marina Emel’yanova, “Хабаровских военнослужащих
заставляют жертвовать на строительство храма (Khabarovsk
military forced to sacrifice the construction of temple),”
dvhab.ru, 12 December 2018. https://www.dvnovosti.ru/
khab/2018/12/14/92369/
Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu initiated the
construction of a temple of the Russian Armed Forces. Funds for
the construction should be raised through donations, but money
is being demanded forcibly from the Khabarovsk military….
Donations from military personnel for the construction of
the main church of the Armed Forces should be exclusively
voluntary, said Sergey Shoigu. But the project is so ambitious
that it is difficult to imagine how you can raise money for it…. at
first, they really tried to collect donations for all this, but then,
apparently, they decided to accelerate.
“Money has been collected for several months already - they
volunteered at will. But this week, all branch commanders
were ordered to collect amounts from their subordinates, and
according to the lists of names. This applies even to those
military personnel who profess a different faith. The amount
is small, but forced donations are wrong. It’s impossible to
refuse…,” said a Khabarovsk soldier who wished to remain
anonymous.
Gather from each Khabarovsk soldier- 500 rubles. The amount
is really small, but when you multiply it by the number of
servicemen, you get an impressive amount.

OE Watch | February 2019

14

EURASIA
Systemic Challenges to Raising Military Morale
OE Watch Commentary: Current Kremlin propaganda,
directed at both the domestic and foreign audience, portrays
a positive image of the modern Russian soldier, as one fully
prepared to defend the country’s interests. To reinforce
military discipline and morale, the Kremlin recently
resurrected the Main Military-Political Directorate (GVPU)
of the Armed Forces (see: “Constructing Military Ideology,”
OE Watch, October 2018). In an extended interview in the
weekly Voenno-Promyshlenniy Kyrier (Military-Industrial
Courier), retired Colonel Viktor Baranets (who once also
served in the Soviet-Russian Military-Political Directorate
and who now hosts a popular radio program dealing with
military issues) shares his opinions on the current state
of morale within the Russian armed forces. Some of his
observations are revealing.
Baranets begins by talking about the need to counter
Western propaganda, which is allegedly designed “to
manipulate the brains of our servicemen, to sow doubt
about the correctness of the political course of the country’s
leadership.” He claims that this was one of the primary
reasons behind the “creation of the GVPU on a new basis.”
However, according to Baranets, the current challenge stems
from the fact that “today the state system is largely unjust.”
He suggests that “we will not raise patriotism, if the people
have little borscht on their plate.” He rhetorically asks, “why
should I protect Abramovich’s oil rigs and shed blood for
the oligarchs, if my mother, who has worked as a nurse for
50 years, has a minimal pension?” He goes on to assert that
today’s pol-mil officer cannot merely avoid these questions,
but rather must explain to the soldier that the country remains
in a difficult state of transition, and that there is a difference
between love of country and love for the current economic
and political situation.
Baranets sees the lack of a formal state ideology as the
major problem facing the new GVPU. Since the Russian
constitution forbids such an ideology, GVPU workers will
be unable to “deal with military-political problems.” He
concludes the interview with a number of recommendations,
one of which asserts that to better develop ideology within
the armed forces, all military media “should become an
instrument of the Main Military Political Directorate,”
rather than remaining independent of this directorate.
Under Baranets’ model, the Russian military would “have a
department that would protect servicemen from the flood of
lies and slander from abroad.”
To help maintain military high morale, the Russian military
has reintroduced political-military officers and the GVPU.
However, as Baranets suggests, without systemic changes
to the political and economic structure of the Russian state,
this new directorate may prove ineffective. End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“To educate the younger generation on the basis of
patriotism is good. But we will not raise patriotism, if the
people have little borscht on their plate.”
Source: Viktor Baranets and Oleg Falichev, “Солдатская правда (Soldier’s
Truth),” Voenno-Promyshlenniy Kyrier (VPK), 25 December 2018. https://
vpk-news.ru/articles/47252
…I’m not talking about the fact that Western propaganda is trying in
every way to handle the brains of our servicemen, to sow doubt about the
correctness of the political course of the country’s leadership. A paradoxical
situation has arisen. Almost every day we tell from TV screens about the
superiority of our weapons, the new look of the army, the growth of its
professionalism, exercises and training, the performance of combat missions
in Syria ... But do we know the mood of the soldiers themselves, sergeants
and officers, their morale and political state? That is, we deal with iron things
seriously, but then we hardly know nothing about the soul of the soldier….
…When the Ministry of Defense of Russia realized that this spiritual sphere
fell out of sight, then it was decided to create a new GVPU on a new basis.
In the era of the information war unleashed against Russia, this is especially
important.
…Imagine a situation where private Ivanov approaches the commander
and says: why should I protect Abramovich’s oil rigs and shed blood for
the oligarchs, if my mother, who has worked as a nurse for 50 years, has a
pension at the subsistence minimum? From such questions you cannot not
wave away. And we need to work with the soldiers with an understanding
of how and why we find ourselves in the current historical condition. Yes,
today the state system is largely unjust, but each of us has a Motherland,
our beloved Motherland, as the poet said, which must be defended, whoever
stands behind you - Abramovich or a veteran of World War II….
…I have an ambiguous attitude towards the new structure - the Main
Military-Political Department. Why? The GVPU should deal with militarypolitical problems in the military and at the same time rely on state ideology.
But this is not allowed by the main law of the country - the Constitution. So,
we are trying to build the GVPU... in the sand….
…To educate the younger generation on the basis of patriotism is good. But
we will not raise patriotism, if the people have little borscht on their plate.
Soldiers will ask pol-mil workers, why such a gap between the rich and the
poor? Why in this immensely resource-rich country, are there 20 million
destitute? These soldiers’ questions must be answered truthfully… A mil-pol
worker must honestly say that after the collapse of the USSR, we have been
going through a difficult time. On the one hand, we proclaimed a social state,
on the other - in fact, we ended up in oligarchic capitalism….
…I think that the military press should become an instrument of the Main
Military Political Directorate. Because ideology is not developed by the press
service, but by the military-political structure of the defense department.
Secondly, the structure of the Defense Ministry of the Russian Federation
does not have a department that would protect servicemen from the flood of
lies and slander from abroad…. counter-propaganda should become one of
the most important areas of work….

OE Watch | February 2019

15

EURASIA
Flawed ‘Strategic Partnership’: Putin’s Optimism on
China Faces Harsh Reality
by Alla Hurska
Republished in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol. 15, Issue 175, dated 12 December 2018, Edited for the OE Watch.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/flawed-strategic-partnership-putins-optimism-on-china-faces-harsh-reality/

OE Watch Commentary: During the annual VTB Capital Investment Forum “Russia Calling!” on November 28, President Vladimir Putin
called the frictions between Beijing and Washington a “window of opportunity” for Russia to achieve a qualitatively new level of bilateral
economic relations with China. The following day, Beijing hosted the First Russian-Chinese Energy Business Forum, which boosted Russia’s
confidence in its status as China’s key partner in terms of energy-related deals. Russia’s vision of its role vis-à-vis China was perhaps best
expressed by President Putin on November 15, during his meeting with Prime Minister Li Keqiang in Singapore, on the sidelines of the East
Asia Summit: “Relations between Russia and China are now creating a strong basis for a privileged strategic partnership.” These positive
sentiments toward China are fully shared by mainstream Russian policymakers and experts. A reading of pro-Kremlin sources would suggest
that Russia’s much-desired “turn to the East” has been a complete success. The reality, however, appears to be more complicated and less
unequivocal.
When assessing the state of Sino-Russian economic cooperation between 2015 and 2018, authoritative Russian sources note that, in 2015,
Russia (for whom China was the leading trade partner) found itself only in 15th position among China’s trade partners. By 2018, Russia still
had not entered the top ten list. Whereas, “in spite of growing frictions, Chinese-American trade hit a new record level [that year], increasing to
$414.2 billion.”
The second set of problems boils down to the fact that, despite the encouraging rhetoric, China is cooperating with Russia only in those
areas that Beijing itself deems beneficial and potentially lucrative. As noted by Yuri Zaitsev from the Gaidar Institute, China is well aware
of the economic sanctions imposed on Russia and their effect. But “China is willing to invest in the Russian economy only under certain
circumstances,” he argued, noting that this provides Beijing with leverage to “impose its interest on Moscow.”
Particularly troubling, from the Russian point of view, has been the news that Chinese banks are unwilling to support investments in Russia
due to the growing risks for potential investors. Namely, the Central Bank of the Russian Federation has reported “problems with Chinese
commercial banks stemming from economic sanctions imposed by third parties.” As explained by Vladimir Danilov, the representative of
Russia’s Central Bank in Beijing, “some Chinese banks are construing counter-Russian sanctions in an extremely broad manner.” Danilov noted
that for the moment this does not threaten bilateral monetary operations; “yet, a certain amount of difficulty is present.”
This assessment was presented in a much less benign light by Skymax managing partner Igor Shibanov, who pointed out the longevity and
growing complexity of the problem. Specifically, Shibanov said that the predicament became evident approximately one and a half years ago,
when Chinese financial institutions started to become far less enthusiastic when it came to dealing with Russian customers. For instance, he
noted that “it is still possible to open up a company, but it is impossible to set up a bank account [in China] with a Russian passport. If the
director is a Russian citizen—you are out of options… [I]n one bank, they informed us that, ‘You have one week to withdraw your money and
close down the account.’ We tried to explain that we have big contracts here, asked for at least a month—a week was what we received in the
end.” Shibanov also said that, at some Chinese banks (not only on the mainland, but in Hong Kong as well), they were told that the institution
had received clear instructions not to allow any financial operations by Russian passport holders. At other banks, such as the China Merchant
Bank, his clients were asked to “take the money, close their accounts, go, and never come back.”
The despondent picture worsened further when Russian sources started to report that Chinese companies have not only slowed down investing
in the real sector of the Russian economy, but, following the example of Western countries, began to actively withdraw their financial capital.
Specifically, in January–June 2018, Chinese investors withdrew more than $1 billion. As a result, the total share of Chinese investments in
Russia is now less than 1 percent of the overall investments flow. In comparison, the share of Chinese investments in Russia is 49 times lower
than that of Cyprus and 6 times less than Germany. On top of that, such major and sought-after projects as the idea to sell a share of the Russian
state-owned oil giant Rosneft to China’s CEFC, or construction of a high-speed “Eurasia” railroad (Beijing–Moscow–Berlin) have suffered a
sound defeat.
It now appears that Russia’s much-hailed “turn to the East,” seen in Moscow as an antidote to Western sanctions and international isolation, is
gradually demonstrating its profound weaknesses. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurska)

“Almost all of outflow was connected with an immediate reduction of its presence in Russia: 92 percent of
the amount ($921 million) was taken directly taken out from the capital of Russian companies.”
Source: “Китай объявил России инвестиционный бойкот (China announced an investment boycott of Russia),” Finanz.ru, 5 December
2018. https://www.finanz.ru/novosti/aktsii/kitay-obyavil-rossii-investicionny-boykot-1027783124
…In the first half of the year, Chinese investors took out $1.005 billion and their total investment dropped to $3.184 billion. Almost all of outflow
was connected with an immediate reduction of its presence in Russia: 92 percent of the amount ($921 million) was taken directly taken out from the
capital of Russian companies…
OE Watch | February 2019

16

EURASIA
Russia-Belarus Open Disagreement Reflects
Complexities in Moscow-Minsk Relations
OE Watch Commentary: At a December
2018 summit of the Eurasian Economic
Union – currently consisting of five former
Soviet Republics – President Lukashenko
of Belarus launched into an unexpectedly
open and direct questioning of energy
policy with Russian President Putin. While
Lukashenko specifically underscored the
seeming unfairness in the price Belarus
pays for Russian natural gas at the meeting,
oil represents another point of contention
between the two states. Russia’s so-called
“tax maneuver” – Moscow’s decision
to lower the export tax on its oil over
the next six years – is expected to lead
to a significant decrease in Belarusian
revenues, as Minsk would be required to
stop charging export tax as well (Belarus
is a major transit state for Russian oil).
The accompanying excerpted article from
Pravda provides some additional context.
At a follow-on bilateral meeting on 25
December in Moscow, the Kremlin’s
published, brief transcript of the opening
statements revealed a more amicable tone;
however, lingering issues persist between
the two states.

“President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko made a statement that
under the pretext of deep integration, Moscow wants to include his
country within the Russian Federation.”

Vladimir Putin on Friendly Match of National Hockey Stars. Ice arena “Bolshoy”, Sochi, 4 Jan 2014. - With Aleksandr
Lukashenko, Viacheslav Fetisov and Valeri Kamensky.

Source: Kremlin.ru [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0) or CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)], https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fetisov_Lukashenko_
Putin_Kamensky_Sochi_4_January_2014.jpg.

Source: “Будет ли Россия присоединять Белоруссию (Will Russia annex Belarus),” Pravda, 17
Notwithstanding a series of agreements
December 2018. https://www.pravda.ru/world/formerussr/belorussia/17-12-2018/1402767-0/
(e.g., the Union Treaty) signed by Minsk
President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko made a statement that under the pretext of deep
and Moscow in the late 1990s that aimed
integration, Moscow wants to include his country within the Russian Federation…The crux of
at closer integration, President Lukashenko the conflict is that [President] Putin, [Prime Minister] Medvedev, and [Deputy Prime Minister]
(in power since 1994) has endeavored to
Kozak are firmly broadcasting “between the lines” to the President of Belarus that no benefits
maintain an independent foreign policy
and unique offers will come until Belarus begins to integrate deeper into the Russian economy,
and overall sovereignty of Belarus. Minsk
and Lukashenko does not want to betray [Belarusian] sovereignty for a barrel of oil…
plays an important regional diplomatic
role within the framework of the ongoing
conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine, periodically hosting meetings of representatives (“working subgroups”) of the Trilateral Contact Group
(made up of Ukraine, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation, or OSCE). Minsk also participates directly in the OSCE’s
Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) to Ukraine, with eight personnel deployed (per SMM statistics, as of 24 December 2018).
Regarding defense matters with Russia, Belarus has regularly participated in expansive Russian military exercises, such as Zapad (“West”)
2017 and Zapad 2013. As well, Belarusian and Russian servicemen train together in regular exercises of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), along with military representatives of the other CSTO members – Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. Yet,
despite Moscow’s stated intent in 2013 to establish a Russian air base within Belarus – which had followed a 2009 air defense agreement – this
has not yet come to fruition. Moreover, President Lukashenko in late 2018 specifically noted that there was no need for such basing.
Lukashenko has of late tacitly encouraged an increase in Belarusian language usage, though the great majority of Belarusian citizens utilize
Russian as their language of choice (both are official languages in Belarus), and Lukashenko delivered his first formal address in Belarusian in
2014. Whether this, in concert with other recent trends, reveals a legitimate sovereignty concern of the longstanding ruler – especially in the
aftermath of the Ukrainian crisis – remains to be seen. Lukashenko has also increased his engagement with the EU and even recently softened
his tone toward the US, to some effect: the release of Belarusian political prisoners in August 2015 led the (Council of the) EU to temporarily
suspend most sanctions then directed against Minsk. Current sanctions (“restrictive measures”) expire on 28 February 2019. Against the
backdrop of these developments, it is evident that a Russian-Belarusian bilateral relationship that once seemed to be quite automatic, has for
some time now appeared to be more convoluted. End OE Watch Commentary (Sarafian)
OE Watch | February 2019

17

EURASIA
Azerbaijan Purchases More Belarusian Equipment
OE Watch Commentary: The government of Azerbaijan’s
purchases of weapons and equipment from Belarus has drawn
increased attention over the past couple of years. The accompanying
excerpted article reports on another recent Azerbaijani acquisition
from Belarus, while also providing a look at areas in which Azerbaijan
is looking to increase its capabilities and additional context to the
Azerbaijan-Belarus security cooperation partnership. The article
comes from AZE.az, a pro-government source in Azerbaijan, and it
reports how Azerbaijani forces put “the Belarusian electronic warfare
system ‘Groza-S’ [Thunderstorm] developed by KB Radar” into
service last year.

Belarus

The expert interviewed for the article claims that the system is
“capable of not only interrupting the UAV communication but also
Azerbaijan
the satellite communication with the operator.” The title of the article
is worth noting, claiming that “Azerbaijan purchased a ‘killer’ of
Armenian unmanned aerial vehicles.” Armenian forces reportedly
have around a dozen unmanned aerial vehicles and utilize them in
a reconnaissance role. The expert goes on to note how international
sales of military equipment sometimes include conditions that
Location of Azerbaijan and Belarus.
“certain electronic applications and firmware should be installed in
Source: Turkish Flame [Public domain], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Azerbaijan_Belarus_Locator.png.
the equipment, which in case of a need allows the manufacturer to
block the operation of the system” and that “Belarus does not have any claims to anybody in the international arena and that is why it provides
the buyers of its weaponry guarantees that there will not be such applications that would be able to interfere with the operation of the military
equipment.” This is worth noting in light of a 2017 incident in Azerbaijan involving a UAV from the Israeli Aeronautics Defense Systems, which
resulted in the Israeli government suspending the export license of that company (see: “Israel’s Investigation Into a UAV Strike on the Armenian
Army,” OE Watch, October 2017). As the government of Azerbaijan continues to acquire new weapons and equipment, the partners it looks to do
business with might be just as important as the systems themselves. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Belarus does not have any claims to anybody in the international arena and that is why it provides the

buyers of its weaponry guarantees that there will not be such applications that would be able to interfere
with the operation of the military equipment.”
Source: Bakhram Batiyev, “Азербайджан купил в Беларуси «убийцу» армянских беспилотников (Azerbaijan purchased a “killer”
of Armenian unmanned aerial vehicles in Belarus),” AZE.az, 10 January 2019. https://aze.az/azerbaydzhan-kupil-v-belarusi-ubiytsuarmyanskikh.html
…the clear indication of the new phase of strengthening the Azerbaijani Army -- its reinforcement with precision and high quality weaponry
and equipment that the head of state mentioned -- can be considered the electronic warfare (EW) equipment and unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) jammers…
In 2018, the Azerbaijani Army operationally deployed the Belarusian electronic warfare system “Groza-S” [Thunderstorm] developed by
KB Radar…The “Groza-S” system is mounted on a self-propelled vehicle chassis. This is a jamming station and part of the electronic warfare
system. P-934UM2 “Groza-S” is similar to P-934UM and RP-378AM but it provides higher speeds for detecting the sources and higher
accuracy in determining the direction of the movement and generating signals for digital interference and positioning and blinding radio
communication circuits with either pre-programmed tuning of operating frequency or simultaneously with 16 radio circuits working on fixed
frequencies. It takes no more than 10 minutes for deployment of the station after positioning.
…prominent Belarusian military expert Aleksander Alesin noted that “Groza-S” is one of the most modern systems of electronic warfare,
capable of not only interrupting the UAV communication but also the satellite communication with the operator.
…Belarus offers prices that are significantly lower than what other countries offer. In addition, Belarus can guarantee the absence of
electronic bugging in the system. Now modern systems and military equipment are sold on condition that certain electronic applications and
firmware should be installed in the equipment, which in case of a need allows the manufacturer to block the operation of the system. This
is done in order to avoid the undesirable use of this or other types of the weapons, for example, against a friendly country or its interests.
Belarus does not have any claims to anybody in the international arena and that is why it provides the buyers of its weaponry guarantees that
there will not be such applications that would be able to interfere with the operation of the military equipment, Alesin said.
…The thing is that there is a trusting relationship formed between the presidents of our countries. Azerbaijan has long been closely
cooperating with the Belarusian military industrial complex and we know that some time ago, Minsk supplied Baku with air defense systems
and last year it delivered “Polonez” [MLRS]…
OE Watch | February 2019

18

EURASIA
Central Asia’s Security Cooperation Initiatives
OE Watch Commentary: Reports from Central Asia on security
cooperation largely focus on activities involving armed forces of the region
working with Russia, NATO members, and China, among a few other
partners. While Central Asian media consider this security cooperation
important for the development of their respective militaries and for
maintaining relations with the aforementioned partners, the accompanying
excerpted articles demonstrate how activities between governments in the
region has become more common as relations between governments has
improved (see: “The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border,” OE
Watch, November 2018).
The article from Asia-Plus, a news website with a focus on Tajikistan,
reports on a recent agreement in which the Kazakh government will provide
Tajikistan with military equipment. The article notes how “Kazakhstan
previously provided assistance with mine detectors, chemical detection
devices, stretchers, and water tanks among other things” and that the
recent agreement “provides for training Tajik officers in military schools in
Kazakhstan.” The article from Sarbaz, a Kazakhstan Ministry of Defense
publication, provides a report on developments within the Kazakh armed
forces in 2018, including how “special forces units of Kazakhstan and the
Kyrgyz Republic participated in the tactical-special exercise ‘Aňyraqai’.”
Security cooperation like this may not receive much attention in the region,
much less internationally, but it is worth continuing to watch if governments
in the region continue to improve relations between each other as they have
over the past couple of years. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Kazakhstan previously provided assistance with mine
detectors, chemical detection devices, stretchers, and
water tanks among other things.”

Source: Avaz Yuldashev, “Казахстан в очередной раз окажет
Таджикистану военно-техническую помощь (Kazakhstan
will again render military-technical assistance to Tajikistan),”
Asia-Plus, 28 December 2018. https://news.tj/ru/news/
tajikistan/security/20181228/kazahstan-v-ocherednoi-razokazhet-tadzhikistanu-voenno-tehnicheskuyu-pomotsh
…the governments of the two countries signed an agreement
on the rendering of free military-technical assistance to
Tajikistan, the press service of the Defense Ministry of
Kazakhstan reports…Astana and Dushanbe will later agree
on a list of military property to be transferred. Kazakhstan
previously provided assistance with mine detectors, chemical
detection devices, stretchers, and water tanks among other
things…the agreement (also) provides for training Tajik officers
in military schools in Kazakhstan.
Source: Oksana Sotskaya, “Итоги боевой подготовки ВС РК
2018 года (The results of combat training of the Armed Forces
of the Republic of Kazakhstan in 2018),” Sarbaz, 28 December
2018. https://sarbaz.kz/ru/army/itogi-boevoy-podgotovki-vsrk-2018-goda--183612110/
…Soldiers of special forces units of Kazakhstan and the
Kyrgyz Republic participated in the tactical-special exercise
“Aňyraqai”…As a result of the six day joint exercise, all
objectives were achieved…more than 300 service members
took part…

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign militaries.
While this activity gained attention, it has not
been collectively compiled. A compilation of this
activity can serve as a guide for current and future
military and security involvement in Central Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | February 2019

19

EURASIA
Regarding French “Yellow Vests” Protests
OE Watch Commentary: The riots that broke
out in France last year received attention from a
number of sources, including commentary from
Eduardo Mackenzie, a highly regarded editorialist
who opined then that Macron’s policies were likely
to incur more of the same protests down the road.
So far, his prediction appears to be proving correct,
with the protests continuing. The accompanying
excerpted references include a piece by Eduardo
Mackenzie, along with two other references, which
together are representative of widespread interest in
the protests throughout the Spanish-speaking world.
As evidenced in the second accompanying
reference, the protesters have seemingly reached
a level of organizational sustainability. They
confidently claim they will be showing up to protest
every week for the coming year, in spite of the
physical crackdown by the Macron administration.
The third accompanying reference may reflect
European leftist support of the yellow vests. The
article concentrates on a differential in the way
protesters are being prosecuted in Paris versus the
rest of the country (more rapid prosecution in the
capital), but does not hazard to editorialize why.
The far left seems ambivalent -- to not want to
remain on the sidelines during a popular protest
against government authorities, but at the same
time apprehensive about the consequences of their
support to what seems to be a mostly nationalist
ideological flavoring.
Placing the riots in longer historical context,
the accompanying image is of a riot in Clichy, an
industrial suburb of Paris. It is a renowned depiction
of the 1891 economic riots there, not the ones in
1937 or 2005, or numerous smaller before, after
and in-between. Some of them had geostrategic
consequences, some not so much. The consequences
of the current riots is unknown; however, the
protest may be turning into the existential test of the
Macron government. In turn, such a form of French
government failure would logically be a major
blow to the prestige and prospects of the European
Union as an organizational entity. The next French
elections could see a more divided internationalist
left and a better consolidated nationalist right.
Macron had floated the notion of a European army.
That idea seems to be sinking, and those yellow
vests are not life jackets for it. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“It is a symptom of a profound
social malaise.”

1 May 1891 - Riot at Clichy.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:1ermai1891.jpg, Public Domain.

Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Francia: El octavo round contra Macron (France: the
eighth round against Macron),” IFM Noticias, 8 January 2019. https://ifmnoticias.com/
francia-el-octavo-round-contra-macron/
“Emmanuel Macron does not want to admit that political violence is not going to stop
the yellow vests…It is a symptom of a profound social malaise long in the making and
that demands practical fundamental political answers that the government to date has
been incapable of formulating….The chief executive proposes carrying out a ‘great
debate’ in order to know what the aspirations are …It is unknown how this ‘debate’
will work…the dialog has small chance of calming the immense popular quarrel...
Prime Minister Edouard Philippe promises more technical measures: he announces the
deployment of 80,000 troops in France, 5000 of which in Paris, and that his services
will make a file of individuals who will be prohibited from demonstrating.”
Source: “Protestas en Francia: Miles de chalecos amarillos salen a las calles de Francia
por octava semana consecutive (Protests in France: Thousands of yellow vests go onto
the streets of France for the eighth consecutive week),” Público España and Europa
Press, 5 January 2019. https://www.publico.es/internacional/protestas-francia-mileschalecos-amarillos-salen-calles-francia-octava-semana-consecutiva.html
“…We are going to be here demonstrating every Saturday during all of 2019. We
are going to assure that the citizens recover power…In spite of the decline in the
mobilization in Paris, in other large cities the ‘yellow vests’ movement continues having
ample effect, although for the moment disturbances have not been produced, as in
former occasions…Since the beginning of the protests, more than 1500 demonstrators
have been wounded, 53 of them gravely, and almost 1100 police have been left injured.
Ten persons have also died, principally in accidents related to the barricades and
breaks in the roadways…”
Source: “‘Chalecos amarillos’: el número de detenidos asciende ya a 5.339 personas
segun datos oficiales (‘Yellow Vests’: According to official data, the number of arrests
has now risen to 5, 339 persons),” Movimiento Politico de Resistencia, 8 January 2019.
https://movimientopoliticoderesistencia.blogspot.com/2019/01/chalecos-amarillos-elnumero-de.html
“In less than two months, from the beginning of the mobilization the 17th of November,
the demonstrations of the ‘yellow vests’ 5,339 police arrests have taken place in France,
according to an accounting of the Ministry of Justice…The juridical responses that
have followed the arrests has shown a significant difference in treatment between Paris
and the provinces.”
OE Watch | February 2019

20

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Military Launches Largest-Ever Joint
Logistics Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: In December, the People’s Liberation Army held “Joint Logistics Force 2018B” (联勤力量2018B), its largest-ever
joint logistics exercise, involving 37 PLA units and civilian companies scattered across five provinces and two municipality-level cities. A video
report on the exercise shown during December 19 edition of Military Report, a regular program on Chinese state television, outlined the purpose
and some of the missions undertaken as part of the exercise. The Chinese military is improving its ability to rapidly mobilize units to move
intra-regionally, resupply forces engaged in combat—particularly air defense forces—and to evacuate and treat casualties. A component of the
exercise highlighted across Chinese media coverage was cooperation with civilian companies for logistical support.
China’s package delivery industry is well developed, due to the explosion in demand from the growth of e-commerce, and PLA logisticians
are well aware of the benefits such civilian supply networks could provide in a conflict. On 23 October 2017, the PLA Air Force’s Logistics
Department signed Strategic Cooperation agreements (战略合作协议) with China Railway Express, China Post Express, SF Express, Deppon
Logistics, and JD Logistics. These are massive companies with networks of warehouses and fleets of planes. JD Logistics, for example, is part of
China’s largest online marketplace.
Video of the December logistics exercise showed SF Express using one of its transport jets to move cargo for the PLA. Deppon Logistics,
another commercial transport company, was shown providing ground transport support. Civilian companies working together with military units
refueled transport aircraft (such as the Y-8) and used drones to locate simulated casualties.
At lower levels, local civilian companies’ facilities can also play a role. Video of the exercise showed gasoline pumping lines set up on highway
access roads to allow several trucks in a convoy to fill up simultaneously. Presumably, these have been set up at multiple points so that supplies
can be moved by road without needing to stop for long periods and wait in line. Previous reporting (see: “Local Companies Provide Logistics
Support During PLA Joint Exercise,” OE Watch, December 2018) indicated that similar set up have been used partnering with civilian gas
stations. This type of “military-local” (军地) cooperation falls under the broader framework of Military-Civil Fusion (军民融合; also translated
as Civil-Military Integration), a major focus area for Chinese military modernization and capability improvement plans.
The exercise not only tested military-local cooperation, but also between military services (particularly the Air Force and Army) and acted as
a test of China’s reforms of its military logistics system. In September 2016, the Joint Logistic Support Force (联勤保障部队) was created under
the Central Military Command to replace the General Logistics Department.
Reporters for the PLA’s official newspaper, as noted in the accompanying excerpted article, observed a component of the exercise under
the Zhengzhou Joint Service Center, in the capital of Henan Province in Central China. Zhengzhou is home to one of the PLA’s five Joint
Logistic Support Centers (联勤保障中心), one for each of China’s five theater commands (战区). These are subordinate to the Joint Logistic
Support Base (武汉联勤保障基地) in Wuhan, Hubei province. Their joint nature means that they must be ready to resupply all of China’s
military services and respond to enemy attacks. Chinese state television also showed what appear to be missile containers being brought out of
hardened underground facilities. Another component included simulated cratering of runways and repairs by logistics support force and air force
personnel.
One of the PLA’s main modernization goals is the “achievement of essential mechanization by 2020.” These exercises are a useful reminder
that for the PLA mechanization is not simply about moving from motorized infantry to mechanized units, but also mechanization and
informatization of its logistics support system. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

A Shaanxi Y-8 transport at Zhuhai Airshow 2012.

Source: Alert5 [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shaanxi_Y-8.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

(continued)
21

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Chinese Military Launches Largest-Ever Joint
Logistics Exercise
“Since the reform of the joint logistics force, the Zhengzhou Joint Service Center has accelerated the
upgrading of the joint security system and promoted the security model from the military’s independent
guarantee to the military integration guarantee.”
Source: “Military Report (《军事报道》),” CCTV, 19 December 2018. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WV5FRXa9HnA
Yesterday “Joint Logistics Force 2018B” [联勤力量2018B], the largest exercise since the establishment of the Joint Logistics Support Force
was simultaneously launched across five provinces and two municipalities and involving 37 military and civilian forces.
This exercise focused on urban air defense and cross-regional support operations. Field medical teams drawn from the Central Theater
Command General Hospital began by departing an airport in Hubei [Province] in an Air Force transport aircraft. Mobile support forces
were also transported by railway and trucks to predetermined assembly areas. Field gas stations, and medical and food maintenance supply
points were jointly set up by the military and local companies in expressway service areas to replenish troops transiting between regions. In
the command center, the commander used a joint command situational awareness system to direct the exercise in real time. Following the
mission instructions. the senior staff for ordnance, supply, transportation etc, issued orders to the participating troops
Ding Shichao [丁士超], a Logistics staff officer said: “It was issued to the troops in a list-based manner. On the one hand, it reduced the
working hours of the staff officers of the organs. In addition, the troops saw it at a glance and knew who and where to protect them.”
During the drill, our air defense units were attacked by the enemy, equipment was damaged and the support personnel immediately deployed
to provide equipment radar equipment and ground-to-air missiles to the air defense units. The repair team and the air force station jointly
repaired the airport runway, and the fuel supply team quickly refueled military transport aircraft…
Zhao Xiaoguang [赵晓光], representative of a civilian logistics company said: “After receiving the requirements, we needed to coordinate
our crews’ mission schedules, as well with the air field to [receive cargo] and then rapidly transport it.
In order to explore the military integration security system, the participating forces also mobilized local suppliers, logistics, catering,
firefighting and other forces to build a rapid replenishment chain for military and civilian integration, regional integrated replenishment
network, and serial cooperation zones.
Source: “37支军地力量异地同步探索联训联保新模式 (37 Dispersed Military and Civilian Forces Simultaneously Begin Testing a
New Model of Joint Training and Logistics Support),” PLA Daily, 29 December 2018. http://www.mod.gov.cn/mobilization/2018-12/29/
content_4833175.htm
The airport oil support team and the air force station jointly fueled the aircraft, and the local logistics companies and the joint logistics force
jointly opened the supply station. The field medical center used drones and all-terrain ambulances to search for the wounded... 37 military
forces were synchronized Exploring a new mode of joint military and military integration in the wartime.
Since the reform of the joint logistics force, the Zhengzhou Joint Service Center has accelerated the upgrading of the joint security system
and promoted the security model from the military’s independent guarantee to the military integration guarantee. The center adopts the
method of “base guarantee and mobile security linkage, joint logistics and service, military and local integration” to carry out joint training
and joint insurance, covering “safety, supply, rescue, transportation, repair, prevention” and other protection categories. Force support
capabilities.
The center actively researches and explores the military-civilian integration guarantee model of “backbone in the army, the main body is
in the people”, mobilizes local logistics, catering, fire fighting and other forces to participate in the protection, and builds a rapid supply
chain and regional integration of “ funding, transportation and supply”. The supply network and the joint defense cooperation zone have
accumulated experience for mobilizing local forces to participate in joint logistics support during wartime.

OE Watch | February 2019

22

INDO-PACIFIC
Luo Yuan Describes an Asymmetric Approach
to Weaken the United States
OE Watch Commentary: Retired Major General Luo Yuan, who is regarded as a key figure among China’s “military hawks” due to his
hardline opinions against the United States and US allies, gave a speech underpinned by classic Chinese military thinking during the recent
2018 Military Industry Awards Ceremony and Innovation Summit. In his speech, Luo, who currently serves as the executive vice president and
secretary general of the China Strategic Culture Promotion Association, offered, as he put it, insight from “the angle of national strategy, using
methods of formal logic.” In his speech, Luo talks about some of the changes he has seen in the United States under the current administration.
He talks about the “America First” policy, how the United States now views China as “the chief threat to its security” and “its primary
competitor,” the use of “competition strategy” to replace an “engagement strategy,” and a “change in nuclear strategy” to name a few. Luo goes
on to describe the United States as having “a kind of strategic anxiety,” which he states is because “China has already developed into the world’s
number two power,” and therefore the United States believes “China is going to surpass them.”
Luo argues that China is not advocating for a trade war. However, “if the United States wants to fight,” China “will fight to the end.” He goes
on to describe five asymmetrical measures to combat U.S. strengths. First, the United States relies on its military as “a pillar of the nation.”
Therefore, he states that China should strengthen the building of its own national defense power in such a way that does not merely catch up
and that China must “develop what our opponent fears.” It should attack US strength. An example is in the development of the DF-21 and DF26 missiles, known as aircraft carrier killers. Luo explains that “if we sink one aircraft carrier, the United States loses 5,000 men. If we sink
two… they lose 10,000.” Therefore, rather than trying to catch up to the United States by building an equal number of aircraft carriers, having
the missiles is more effective because they are developed “from the angle of the United States’ weak spot.” Second, since the United States
views the US dollar as one of its pillars, China must diversify the international finance system by internationalizing the RMB. Third, since the
United States relies on talent as one of its pillars, China should continue to develop its own high-tech industry with independent intellectual
property rights. Fourth, since votes are important in the choosing of US leaders, China should attack industries that can impact the outcome of
future elections. For example, agricultural states and the manufacturing and commerce industries have been Trump supporters. If China strikes
at soybeans first, of which 62 percent are exported to China, it will hit Iowa especially hard. Iowa is “a state that supported Trump in the 2016
election.” Finally, Luo argues that if the United States wants to see China as an enemy, China can temper itself into an “impenetrable enemy,”
then create new friendships, “until your enemies are more and more while your friends grow fewer and fewer.”
Luo, who has hundreds of thousands of followers on Sina Weibo, a popular social media platform, frequently appears on national television
and is likely influential within the military. His outspoken, hawkish nature on past events has raised concerns both domestically and
internationally. His thinking is in line with ancient Chinese military strategies and philosophies, such as the 36 Stratagems, which describes
cunning tactics that can be used in war and politics, and Sun Tzu’s Art of War. Chinese strategy teaches using a more asymmetrical approach
to attack the enemy. As Luo explains, China “should use strengths to attack the enemy’s weaknesses… attack what the enemy fears! Where the
enemy is soft, we develop!” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“If we first attend to our own matters and develop China, then we will find ourselves in an invincible
position, and no one shall get the best of us.”
- Deng Xiaoping

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2019

23

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Luo Yuan Describes an Asymmetric Approach
to Weaken the United States
Source: Luo Yuan, “在2018军工榜颁奖典礼与创新峰会上的演讲 (Speech at the 2018 Military Industry Awards Ceremony and Innovation
Summit),” Sina.com, 23 December 2018. http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:vunMQieQ8eYJ:blog.sina.com.cn/s/
blog_549c1d970102yl42.html+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us
The first major change is that the United States has now formally written “America First” into its “United States National Security Strategy.”
… The second major change is that the United States has now taken China both as the chief threat to its security, and as its primary
competitor. … The third major change is that the United States’ Trump administration is currently using “competition strategy” to replace
the “engagement strategy” of the Obama era. … The fourth major change is the replacement of the “Asia Pacific Rebalancing Strategy” with
the “Indo-Pacific Strategy.” … The fifth major change is that Trump has already replaced an “automatic spending cuts plan” with “Restoring
American Military Power.” …The sixth major change is one that we must be even more cautious toward—it is a change in nuclear strategy.
I have had multiple discussions with many experts who are researching the United States issue, with the conclusion that from top to bottom,
the United States has a kind of strategic anxiety. … It is because China has already developed into the world’s number two power, and this
naturally causes anxiety for the number one.
This is what the Central Government has been saying. We do not advocate for a trade war, but we also do not fear fighting one. If the United
States wants to fight, we will fight to the end. But, this fight also has two choices. The first choice is a “symmetrical counterattack.” If you
fine us 50 billion US$, we will fine you 50 billion US$. … What is the advantage of this? We have seized the moral commanding point. But, the
United States cannot be hurt this way.
The second choice is an “asymmetrical counterattack.” I support making an “asymmetrical attack.” Just as our soldiers fight, we should use
strengths to attack the enemy’s weaknesses. We attack what the enemy fears! Where the enemy is soft, we develop!
Today, I want to ask the chief engineers and experts sitting here, what is it that the United States fears? … In understanding the strengths
of the enemy, we must also know his weakness. You cannot always be comparing height and strength. In this way, the enemy will drag us
down…. What are the United States’ strengths? I believe that the United States has five major pillars of the nation:
The first is that the United States relies on military as a pillar of the nation. Without strong military power, the United States could not have
become a powerful country. Therefore, we must strengthen the building of our national defense power. … I personally believe that we cannot
just catch up and surpass in a straight line. We must swerve to pass. That is to say, we must develop what our opponent fears. Currently, the
United States has 11 aircraft carriers. Do we need to develop 12 aircraft carriers before we can contend with the United States? I believe that
this way of thinking is wrong. We cannot deal with an arms race. … We currently have DF-21 and DF-26 missiles. These are aircraft carrier
killers. If we sink one aircraft carrier, the United States loses five thousand men. If we sink two aircraft carriers, they lose ten thousand. Does
the United States not fear this? Therefore, our military industrial chief engineers must consider development from the angle of the United
States’ weak spot.
The second is that the United States relies on the US dollar as a pillar of the nation. …We must internationalize the RMB.
The third is that the United States relies on talent as a pillar of the nation. … I believe that this trade war is essentially a contest of
technology and talent. That is why as soon as the trade war broke out, Chairman Xi quickly adopted three major measures: first, the
convening of the National Technology Conference; second, a meeting between the Supreme People’s Court and the Supreme People’s
Procuratorate; and third, an inspection of high tech industry…. Now, we need to tighten our belts again and join in anger against the enemy to
develop our own high-tech industry with independent intellectual property rights.
The fourth is that the United States depends on votes as a pillar of the nation. If politicians in the United States have no votes, then they
cannot stay in power. Where are Trump’s votes? They are in agricultural states and the manufacturing and commerce industries. Therefore,
we first strike at soybeans; 62% of United States soybeans for export are exported to China. This accounts for 34.39% of Chinese soybean
imports. A penalty on United States soybeans will hit Iowa especially hard, a state that supported Trump in the 2016 election. …
The fifth is that the United States relies on making enemies as a pillar of the nation. … Do you not want to see us as an enemy? Then we
will temper ourselves into an impenetrable “enemy;” then, we will create new friendships, until your enemies are more and more while your
friends grow fewer and fewer.
This year is the 40th anniversary of the Reform and Opening Up. We cherish greatly the memory of the advocate and chief designer of the
Reform and Opening Up, Comrade Deng Xiaoping. Comrade Deng Xiaoping had a famous saying which I have borne in mind even until
today. Today, let us all revisit these words of mutual encouragement, as I use them for the closing of my speech: “If we first attend to our own
matters and develop China, then we will find ourselves in an invincible position, and no one shall get the best of us.”

OE Watch | February 2019

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Military-Civil Fusion Cooperation in China
Grows in the Field of Logistics
OE Watch Commentary: This accompanying excerpted article gives an
overview of recent agreements signed between private Chinese package delivery
and transport companies and the Chinese military. While international carriers,
such as DHL and Fed Ex have a major presence in China, domestic companies (e.g.
Amazon.cn, Taobao, Alibaba and JD.com) have grown rapidly as demand for online
shopping has risen. These are large companies that in some cases have hundreds of
thousands of employees (China Post employs over 800,000 for example) and operate
thousands of vehicles.
The growth of these industries is creating capabilities that the PLA is eager to
exploit during wartime. Since 2017, when the Law of the People’s Republic of China
on National Defense Transportation was enacted, the number of these agreements
has risen dramatically. In particular, the PLA Air Force and Navy have embraced
the potential of using civilian companies to augment their transport and resupply
capabilities. The Navy has used civilian ships to move anti-ship units from the coast
to islands, and as the article highlights, the Naval Academy is now using civilian
transports.
The strategic cooperation agreement signed between the PLA Air Force and
China Railway Express, Post Express, SF Express and Bandung Huayu to provide
services for Air Force Logistics in particular is significant, and is on display in
recent exercises. These agreements also formalize cooperation with logistics-related
state-owned enterprises like China Post Group Corporation, China’s official post
service. However, the article notes that legal and regulatory authorities needed to
make this type of cooperation more effective need to be developed. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wood)

1986

2019

FOREIGN MILITARY STUDIES OFFICE:

OVER 30 YEARS OF FOREIGN PERSPECTIVES OF THE OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2019

25

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Military-Civil Fusion Cooperation in China
Grows in the Field of Logistics
“With the rising homogenization of the private transportation industry, these companies have begun
transforming into comprehensive logistics service providers, and are committed to creating an integrated
logistics solution, which provides a good entry point for military-civilian fusion.”
Source: “中铁物流携手海军 军民融合成发展新机遇 (China Railway Logistics Joins Hands With Navy, Developing New Opportunities for
Military-Civil Fusion),” E-Business Paper, 12 December 2018. http://www.cecss.com/index.aspx?cat_code=qyxw&article_id=56871
On December 12th, the People’s Liberation Army Navy Naval Academy in Dalian (Liaoning Province) decided to cooperate with China
Railway Logistics Group [中铁物流集团] on the “equipment supply point” project. The two partners will build a fast, efficient and accurate
military-civilian fusion equipment supply system to provide the Academy with military supplies.
In fact, in order to ensure the smooth progress of the project, the two sides carried out careful preparations around the project in the early
stage of cooperation. At the same time, according to specific requirements, in terms of the confidentiality of personnel, equipment and data,
both parties have also made a series of safeguard measures through technical and management means.
In 2015, Xi Jinping first proposed to raise the development of military-civilian fusion to the status of China’s national strategy. Currently, the
pattern of all-factor, multi-domain and high-efficiency military and civilian fusion development is step by step taking shape in China. At the
same time, due to the explosive growth of China’s private express delivery and logistics companies, the competition between these companies
has become increasingly fierce. With the rising homogenization of the industry, these companies have begun transforming into comprehensive
logistics service providers, and are committed to creating an integrated logistics solution, which provides a good entry point for militarycivilian fusion.
China’s military-civilian fusion work in the field of military logistics began [in 2017]. The Law of the People’s Republic of China on National
Defense Transportation [《中华人民共和国国防交通法》], which was implemented on January 1, 2017, put forward the requirement that the
state should rely on large and medium-sized transportation enterprises as the main support, organize the construction of strategic delivery
support forces, enhance strategic delivery capabilities, and provides effective support for delivery companies to organize long-distance,
large-scale defense transportation.
In June 2017, the relevant departments of the Air Force signed a 100-year strategic cooperation agreement with China Railway Express [中
铁快运], Post Express [邮政速运], SF Express [顺丰速运] and Wanlong Huayu [万隆华宇] to provide services for Air Force Logistics. This
is also the first time that the Air Force has effectively integrated civilian logistics companies for support.
On October 23 of the same year, the Air Force Logistics Department of the People’s Liberation Army signed the “Air Force Logistics-Civilian
Logistics Military-Civil Fusion Strategic Cooperation Agreement” [《空军后勤物流军民融合战略合作协议》] with five logistics companies
including China Post Express Logistics Co., Ltd., China Railway Express Co., Ltd., SF Group, Deppon Logistics and Jingdong Logistics.” The
Air Force granted these companies the “Air Force Logistics-Civilian Logistics Military-Civil Fusion Strategic Cooperation Organization”
qualification license. Over the next five years, the military and civilian companies will work closely together on 23 projects across 8 areas of
logistics.
…It is worth mentioning that SF Express long ago established a special logistics business department. The group has successively
undertaken military-civilian fusion projects such as equipment and parts loading and delivery and medicine transport. YTO Express Group
Co [圆通] (a delivery service company) also set up the “Aviation Logistics Research Institute” [航空物流研究院] in 2016 with the Civil
Aviation Management Institute. One of the [institutes’] major research topics is the implementation of the national strategy of “military-civil
fusion” for express delivery, logistics and aviation business fields.
However, currently the Chinese military has only achieved low-level integration of local third-party logistics resources, and both the military
and the civilians are still in need of strengthening in all aspects of cooperation. Additionally, the government also needs to further establish
and improve the Military-Civilian Fusion-related laws and regulations to improve local logistics participation in military logistics, and
provide legal support for the integration of logistics, and development of military-civilian fusion.

OE Watch | February 2019

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Military Completes Release of New Set
of Military Training Regulations
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese media, including
the accompanying excerpted article from Xinhua,
have reported that the latest set of the PLA’s Outline
of Military Training and Evaluation (OMTE, 军事训
练大纲) has “essentially been completed.” The large
number of new regulations are meant to dramatically
increase realism in training. According to the PLA’s
self-assessment, the lack of supporting laws and
regulations (including training) has been a major barrier
to its modernization. The issue of updated training
guidelines, manuals and regulations is an attempt to
comprehensively address these issues.

Source: “我军新军事训练大纲主题工程基本完成 (The Majority of Our
Military’s New Training Program is Basically Completed),” Xinhua, 3 January
2019. http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2019-01/03/c_1123942829.htm
The second set of more than 900 new military training regulations across
the entire PLA have been officially released after strict testing, and will be
implemented on 1 January 2019. This marks the completion of the majority of our
military’s new military training program.
Revising a new military training program is a major task in creating training
content and standardized system that is compatible with the requirements of
modern warfare. A foundational goal [of the regulations] is creating training
program that is in-line with national law. The first set of more than 700 new
military training outlines for our military was officially issued in January 2018,
providing important regulations for military training in the new era. In the
past year, the entire army has increased the realism of its military training in
accordance with the first set of new syllabuses, setting the stage for military
training in the new era

A major part of the plan behind the rollout of the
updated OMTE was the Central Military Commission
(CMC) gaining a better understanding the actual needs
of units and then exercising its authority, through
organizations like the CMC Training and Administration
Department (军委训练管理部), to standardize appropriate training and ensure that the regulations are followed.

The goal is for the new training regulations to be integrated into all aspects of China’s defense modernization program. In particular, this
is meant to overcome the previous disconnect between the education provided by training institutions (new soldier training centers, flight
academies, navy colleges, etc.) and what soldiers need to know for their jobs in front line units. The new guidelines for the PLA Air Force,
for example, have strongly emphasized “acting on one’s own” [自主], greater freedom on the part of pilots or unit commanders to determine
the correct course of action. Reporting on the OMTE describe them as up-to-date, reflective of the requirements of “actual combat” [实战],
new enemy capabilities, or changes within the PLA’s own technological capabilities. Greater emphasis has also been placed on training in
unconventional and specialized fields (special forces, information support, electronic warfare, long-distance training for surface and submarine
ships, etc.).
The roll-out of a joint command structure, supplanting the previous Army-centric system, has required a top-to-bottom change in procedures.
Combined-arms and joint training is frequently mentioned. Older inefficient management and training practices are being scrapped, and where
possible, the communications between branches and services streamlined. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Revising a new military training program is a major task in creating training content and standardized
system that is compatible with the requirements of modern warfare.”

PLAAF Sukhoi Su-30 at Lipetsk-2.

Source: Dmitriy Pichugin, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PLAAF_Sukhoi_Su-30_at_Lipetsk-2_(modified).jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

27

INDO-PACIFIC
China Defends Xinjiang Program
OE Watch Commentary: On 24 December the
Chinese language publication huanqiu.com published
the accompanying excerpted article, which presented
a Chinese perspective on its increasingly controversial
political reeducation program targeting Uighurs in its
Xinjiang region. The article refers to statements by the
Foreign Ministry spokesperson about the issue. She first
blamed Western media for sensationalizing the news
and not using credible sources to discuss the situation
in Xinjiang. She also suggested that the program is not
targeted only at Uighurs or Muslims, despite the fact that
they seem to only “train” people from that demographic
group.
Responding to allegations that China was using an
inflated threat of terrorism to justify the camps, the
spokesperson asserted that China does not link terrorism
to any particular religion. She also further justified
the program by noting that in the last 24 months there
were no instances of terrorism in Xinjiang. In addition,
she mentioned measures that Western countries had
taken in response to the threat of terrorism, such as
the millions of cameras in London and vast array of
surveillance equipment used by the police in New York,
to demonstrate that China’s measures were comparable.
It is also notable that China deems the camp program
to be successful enough that the spokesperson indicated
the possibility for China to engage in exchanges about
the program with other countries that are also dealing
with terrorism. Her statement concluded by emphasizing
the overarching prioritization of Xinjiang strategically,
namely that China will continue to ensure the region
is secure and stable so economic development can
continue. Evidently, that will come at a cost for Xinjiang’s
inhabitants who will be entered into the camps as part
of the government fulfilling that apparent objective. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“I would also like to point out that the
counter-terrorism stabilization and deradicalization measures adopted by the
Xinjiang Autonomous Region government
to maintain security and stability are a
useful, effective and positive method of
preventive counter-terrorism.”

Minaret close to Id Kah mosque, Kashgar (Kashi), Xinjiang.
Source: CC BY-SA 2.5 es, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=431868.

Source: “外媒称中国新疆加大对穆斯林的监视、拘留和同化行动 外
交部回应 (Foreign media claimed that China’s Xinjiang has increased its
surveillance, detention and assimilation of Muslims, with Foreign Ministry
Responding),” huanqiu.com, 24 December 2018. http://world.huanqiu.com/
exclusive/2018-12/13888814.html
On December 24, 2018, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying hosted
a regular press conference, some of which was recorded. I want to point out that
on the issue of Xinjiang, some Western media have played a disgraceful role in
sensationalizing the news recently. They are often based on hearsay. Considering
the recent exaggeration of some Western media, I think it is necessary to
emphasize a few more points/ First, the Chinese government’s consistent position
is to oppose linking terrorism to any particular nation or religion. Second, the
Uighurs are one of China’s 56 ethnic groups. The vast majority of Uighurs live
in harmony with the other 55 ethnic groups in China. Third, for some people
influenced by terrorism and extreme thoughts the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous
Region government is helping them to learn language, law, and skills to eliminate
terrorism and religious extremism.
Results have proved that the impact of anti-terrorism measures taken by Xinjiang
in the past two years have been outstanding and positive. In the past few years,
various types of terrorism incidents occurred frequently in Xinjiang, but now
there have been no cases of terrorism for 24 consecutive months, and the sense of
security of the people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang has been greatly improved.
The placement of monitoring facilities is a common practice adopted by countries
to maintain safety and stability.
Finally, I would also like to point out that the counter-terrorism stabilization
and de-radicalization measures adopted by the Xinjiang Autonomous Region
government to maintain security and stability are a useful, effective and positive
method of preventative counter-terrorism. We are willing to strengthen exchanges
of experience in this area with other countries that are also facing terrorism and
extreme ideological threats to constantly improve.

OE Watch | February 2019

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Is Pakistan Acquiring Russian Tanks?
OE Watch Commentary: As the security cooperation
between the governments of Pakistan and Russia
continues to take shape there have been questions about
how close the relationship could be alongside Russia’s
interest in maintaining good relations with India. The
accompanying excerpted articles report on the Pakistani
government’s interest in acquiring T-90 tanks from
Russia and they help gauge the reaction to it in India and
what Pakistan looks to get out of it.

Source: Manash Pratim Bhuyan, “Pakistan procuring 600 battle tanks from
Russia to strengthen capability along border with India,” Live Mint, 30 December
2018. https://www.livemint.com/Politics/11fDdo391n5H63VR4b3j4N/Pakistanprocuring-600-battle-tanks-from-Russia-to-strengthe.html

The article from Live Mint, an English-language
newspaper in India, mentions the possible acquisition
of “close to 600 battle tanks including T-90 tanks from
Russia,” but also notes how the overall plan is to “procure
at least 360 battle tanks globally besides producing 220
tanks indigenously with help from China.” Additionally,
the article states that the Pakistani government is “in
the process of inducting Chinese VT-4 tanks as well as
Oplod-P tanks from Ukraine” and reports on how much
of the armed forces’ inventory of tanks are Chinese
and Ukrainian. The article also mentions how Indian
forces have been conducting “counter-terror operations”
in Jammu and Kashmir, while the “Pakistan Army
was fast reducing its gap with Indian forces in fighting
a conventional war.” While the article does not cite a
specific source for this report, the article from Quwa,
a news website focusing on defense issues in Pakistan,
provides some background on the possible acquisition of
T-90s.

The sources said Pakistan was eyeing to buy from Russia a batch of T-90 battle
tanks- the mainstays of the armoured regiments of the Indian Army, and that
the move reflects Islamabad’s intent to forge a deeper defence engagement with
Moscow…The sources said as part of the mega plan to significantly revamp its
armoured fleet by 2025, Pakistan has decided to procure at least 360 battle tanks
globally besides producing 220 tanks indigenously with help from China.

The Quwa article, published in April 2018, mentions
that Pakistan’s Ministry of Defense “was clear in stating
that talks are in play and that announcements will be
made once they are completed,” in reference to when a
deal would be made. A new minister of defense, Pervez
Khattack, assumed duties in August 2018, but the issue
of funding does not appear to have changed, which the
article notes “has been one of the major constraining
factors” of acquiring the T-90s. The article also mentions
that the Pakistani government has been looking for “an
off-the-shelf MBT” and that this plan “has the T-90 in
the running” for possible acquisition. There has been no
official announcement from the government of Pakistan
on acquiring Russian T-90s, just the unnamed source
noted in the recent Live Mint article. It is unknown if,
or when, Pakistan’s acquisition of tanks will take place,
but the timeline between the announcement in April and
the December article is worth noting. In October, the
Indian government signed a deal to purchase Russian
S-400 missile systems, worth an estimated $5 billion.
The Indian government is likely concerned over Pakistan
acquiring T-90 tanks from Russia, but it does not appear
to have had a major impact on Indian-Russian security
cooperation. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

…Pakistan has drawn up an ambitious plan to procure close to 600 battle tanks
including T-90 tanks from Russia, primarily to bolster its combat prowess along
the border with India, military and intelligence sources said Sunday.
…Apart from battle tanks, Pakistan Army is also procuring 245 150mm SP Mike10 guns from Italy out of which it has already received 120 guns.

Pakistan Army’s move to enhance its armoured corps comes at a time when the
Line of Actual Control in Jammu and Kashmir has witnessed growing hostilities
in the last one year…But, when the Indian Army is focused on counter-terror
operations, the Pakistan Army was fast reducing its gap with Indian forces in
fighting a conventional war, the intelligence sources said.
Besides eyeing to procure T-90 tanks, Pakistan Army is also in the process of
inducting Chinese VT-4 tanks as well as Oplod-P tanks from Ukraine, the sources
said. Trials for both Oplod and VT-4 tanks have already been conducted by the
Pakistan Army.
At present, Pakistan is learnt to have around 17 units of Chinese origin T-59
and T69 tanks, which comprise 30% of its total tank strength, the sources said. It
also has 12 regiments of Al-Zarar tanks, which makes 20% of the tank fleet while
Ukrain origin T-80-UD and T-85-UD as well as upgraded version of T-59 tanks
comprise the rest 50% tank fleet…
Source: Bilal Khan, “Pakistani Defence Minister: talking to Russia for Su-35, T-90
tanks and air defence systems,” Quwa, 8 April 2018. https://quwa.org/2018/04/08/
pakistani-defence-minister-talking-to-russia-for-su-35-t-90-tanks-and-air-defencesystems/
On 05 April, Pakistan’s Minister of Defence (MoD) Khurram Dastgir Khan told
the Russian News Agency RIA Novosti that talks were underway with Russia
for the procurement of air defence systems, the Sukhoi Su-35 Flanker-E and
potentially the T-90 main battle tanks (MBT).
Khan did not provide a timeline as to when these negotiations are expected to
reach fruition, but the MoD was clear in stating that talks are in play and that
announcements will be made once they are completed…
Regarding the T-90 MBT, Khan outlined that Pakistan was “interested in
T-90 tanks” and that it would “not be a one-time purchase, but a long-term
commitment.”…Pakistan and Russia had formally begun building bilateral defence
relations following a memorandum-of-understanding (MoU) in November 2014…
However, the Pakistani MoD’s statements underline the objective to recapitalize
its conventional warfare capabilities…Unfortunately, a continual lack of funding
has been one of the major constraining factors to such procurement. Thus, the
supplier’s willingness to extend a line-of-credit or loan to kick-start programs is
of importance to Pakistan…Khan was also aware to highlight that an off-the-shelf
MBT – which now apparently has the T-90 in the running – would be a long-term
and multi-batch purchase.

“Besides eyeing to procure T-90 tanks, Pakistan Army is also in the process of inducting Chinese VT-4
tanks as well as Oplod-P tanks from Ukraine.”
OE Watch | February 2019

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Russia to Deploy Additional Anti-Ship Missile
Batteries Near Japan by 2020
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying excerpted article, Russian defense plans indicate that more anti-ship “Bastion” and
“Bal” missiles will be deployed to the Kuril Islands, a disputed area between Russia and Japan. While Bastion missiles were previously deployed
to Etorofu and Kunashiri in 2016, the plan expands the number of islands with anti-ship missiles to six.
Deploying the anti-ship missiles helps ensure the security of the Sea of Okhotsk, one of Russia’s two strategic “bastions” for its nuclear-missile
equipped submarines, by ensuring that any enemy anti-submarine warfare ships would come under threat. A notional deployment of these
systems on the largest and most habitable islands and Kamchatka (see map) would provide adequate coverage of the Kuril island chain and the
straits leading into the Sea of Okhotsk.
Japan has purchased Aegis-ashore anti-missile systems and F-35 fighter jets from the United States and is modernizing its legacy fighter
fleet to be capable of using modern long-range cruise missiles. Greater US presence in the Indo-Pacific area of operations—combined with
a modernizing Japanese Self Defense Forces, may mean that concern for the continuing security of its bastions is a consideration behind the
deployments.
However, an important background to this development is the improvement in Russo-Japanese relations. After World War II, the Soviet Union
seized two islands in southern Kuril Islands. Russian President Vladimir Putin and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe have been in talks to
resolve the territorial dispute and are expected to meet later in January. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2019

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Russia to Deploy Additional Anti-Ship Missile
Batteries Near Japan by 2020
“Experts say the increasing military importance of the two islands will make their return to Japan even
more difficult.”
Source: “Russia eyes missile defense buildup on disputed isles near Hokkaido,” Kyodo, 30 December 2018. https://www.japantimes.
co.jp/?post_type=news&p=1668692
Moscow is planning to boost its missile defense capabilities, including on disputed isles off Hokkaido, by 2020, an internal Russian
government document showed Sunday, in a move likely to hurt the two nations’ efforts to step up talks on concluding a postwar peace treaty.
The plan indicates Russia places strategic importance on the islands in defending the Sea of Okhotsk and its nuclear force stronghold as well
as countering the increasing U.S. military presence in the area to address a threat by North Korea.
Japan and Russia are looking to push ahead with peace treaty talks as Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Russian President Vladimir Putin
agreed in November to accelerate negotiations.
A Russian government source said the document obtained by Kyodo News was drawn up sometime after this summer. It remains unknown
whether the plan was approved by Putin. Russian media recently reported on the envisioned military buildup in the area…
According to the document, new shore-to-ship missiles systems called the Bastion, with a range of more than 300 kilometers (over 180 miles),
and the Bal, with a range of over 130 km (over 80 miles), will be deployed on six islands and on the Kamchatka Peninsula.
Missile systems were deployed in 2016 on Etorofu and Kunashiri, two of the four islands and islets off Hokkaido that are claimed by Japan.
The two islands, along with Shikotan and the Habomai islet group, are called the Northern Territories in Japan and the Southern Kurils in
Russia. The former Soviet Union seized them following Japan’s surrender at the end of World War II in 1945.
Part of Hokkaido and the disputed islands will fall within the range of the missile defense systems.
According to the plan, missiles will not be deployed on Shikotan or the Habomai islets, whose return by the then-Soviet Union was mentioned
in a 1956 declaration. Abe and Putin agreed in a meeting in November to advance negotiations on a peace treaty based on the declaration…
Russia has constructed four barracks for troops on Etorofu and Kunashiri, triggering a protest from Japan earlier this month. Experts say
the increasing military importance of the two islands will make their return to Japan even more difficult.
Moscow has also expressed concern over Tokyo’s plan to deploy the U.S.-developed Aegis Ashore missile defense system, saying it will be
difficult to conclude a peace treaty unless Japan explains its future security policy.

In foreground two models of 3K55 Bastion, in background three models of 3K60 Bal, Army 2018.

Source: Boevaya mashina [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Models_3K55_Bastion_Armia2018.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

31

INDO-PACIFIC
New Chinese Air-Independent Propulsion
System-Equipped Submarines
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese
media have reported that a PLA Navy
unit equipped with submarines have been
upgraded to use air independent propulsion
(AIP) systems. Video (see: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=NXwKliE8uVc) of the
AIP-equipped unit in a separate news report
appears to show Daxie Island, likely making
this unit part of the 22nd Submarine Zhidui
[支队]. The unit appears to have a mix of
older Type 039A and newer Yuan Type
039B/Cs with more hydrodynamic sails.
The Chinese navy has long valued the
asymmetric advantages of submarines, and
made their development a priority, soon
after the founding of the PLA. Military
writings and observed training indicate
that Chinese submarines’ responsibilities
include infiltration of enemy sea lanes and
port areas, laying sea mines and hunting for
enemy ships. However, as China’s submarine
force aged, and the technological capabilities
of its regional competitors increased, the
likely survivability of Chinese submarines
declined. As of early 2018, China had 48
diesel electric submarines and of these,
almost half were outdated Ming (Type 035)
and Song (Type 039) classes.
However, according to this accompanying
excerpted article, the successful introduction
of this new system will dramatically
increase the capabilities of new submarines.
As noted by a military commentator, AIP
systems allow diesel electric to travel
longer-distances underwater and increase the
submarines chances of successfully reaching
their target areas undetected. Despite the
expense, AIP’s tactical advantages, along
with their likely responsibilities within the
First Island Chain stretching from Japan to
the Philippines, likely make the system a
worthwhile investment even compared to
nuclear attack submarines capable of longer
distances. End OE Watch Commentary
(Wood)

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Mike Mullen visits the Chinese People’s Liberation Army-Navy submarine
Yuan at the Zhoushan Naval Base in China on July 13, 2011.

Source: DoD photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Chad J. McNeeley/Released - Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from Washington D.C, United States [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese_Type_041_submarine.jpg.

Source: “我军AIP潜艇部队破多项纪录 专家解读技术优势 (Our Military’s AIP Submarine
Force Broke Several Records, Experts Explain its Technical Advantages),” Science &
Technology Daily, 17 December 2018. http://www.81.cn/2018zt/2018-12/17/content_9380143.
htm
Recently, the first Air-Independent Propulsion (AIP) submarine-equipped unit [in the
PLA] has set many naval records including the farthest distance sailed by a conventional
submarine, the deepest dive, and successfully sank target ships at the extremes of its weapons’
capabilities, which has attracted widespread attention.
Conventional submarines generally use a diesel engine and an electric motor to provide
power while charging the battery while sailing or snorkeling. When sailing underwater, they
use an electric motor for propulsion. However, diesel engines rely on air for combustion.
Therefore, after the battery charge is depleted underwater, the submarine must surface, or
use rechargeable batteries. Therefore, the conventionally powered submarine have limited
underwater sailing time of between 10 and 100 hours. Because it must surface at regular
intervals, which decreases its ability to remain undetected.
When equipped with the AIP system, the conventional power submarine does not need to
obtain oxygen from the air when charging, and can be charged underwater. AIP submarines
are characterized by their long battery life, good concealment and excellent quieting ability. It
also enhances the ability to strike without warning and is regarded as a major technological
breakthrough in global submarine development.
Military commentator Zhang Haixiong added: “AIP submarines are the second-most
capable underwater attack capability after nuclear submarines. Nuclear submarines have
stronger combat capability, but are more expensive. It is more suitable for some medium-sized
maritime countries. The AIP submarine is the future development direction of conventional
submarines.”

“When equipped with the AIP system, the conventional power submarine does not need to obtain oxygen
from the air when charging, and can be charged underwater.”
OE Watch | February 2019

32

INDO-PACIFIC
New Milestones in the Modernization
of the Philippine Navy
OE Watch Commentary: Philippines officials are calling 2018 a “banner year” for the modernization of the Philippine Navy. The
accompanying excerpted article, published by the Philippine News Agency, offers an overview of some of the navy’s benchmarks reached over
the past year. In short, according to the article, the navy officially entered the missile age and demonstrated an ability to sail beyond its territorial
waters. On 21 November 2018, the navy’s formal entry to the missile age was marked by the firing of two newly-acquired Rafael Advanced
Defense Ltd. Spike-ER (extended range) surface-to-surface missiles from three multi-purpose assault crafts (MPAC) reportedly constructed by
Subic-based Propmech Corporation. Despite rough seas, guided through modern technology, both hit their targets. The Spike-ER system arrived
in the Philippines in April 2018 and, having a range of eight kilometers, is the country’s first missile weapon capable of penetrating 39 inches of
rolled homogeneous armor.
The MPACs are high-speed naval craft capable of exceeding 40 knots. Their missions can include patrol and fire support for troops. They
can be armed with missiles, and machine guns, including remote controlled .50 caliber machine guns that are ideal for anti-piracy missions.
The Philippine Navy currently has only nine MPACs, with another three expected to arrive over the next 12 months; however, according to
Vice Admiral Robert Empedrad, the navy’s flag officer in command, another 42 would be optimal to enhance the navy’s capabilities through
swarming tactics, which would enable it to engage larger, more capable ships that pose a threat.
The Philippine Navy also plans to acquire at least two Pohang-class frigates, donated by South Korea, beginning in 2020, and at least two
Agusta Westland AW-159 “Wildcat” anti-submarine helicopters, which will be based aboard the frigates, by the first quarter of 2019. The frigates
will be equipped with a primary and secondary gun system, sensors and torpedoes, and sensors for anti-air operations and the helicopters will
have the capability to detect and engage underwater targets.
Paralleling its acquisitions, the Philippine Navy has been extending its reach by participating in overseas deployments and port visits. For
example, for the first time ever, two ships participated in the annual RIMPAC exercises, held in Hawaii, and the ASEAN-China Maritime
Exercise in Zhangjiang, in Guandong Province. It also made history by making a port visit to Vladivostok, Russia. While these milestones may
appear to be insignificant in comparison with more advanced military powers, they are significant for the Philippines and indicate the country is
moving in a new direction. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Missile-armed MPAC Mk. III attack boats during a live fire demonstration involving the launching of Spike-ER missiles in November 2018.
Source: Philippine Navy Recruitment [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MPACMk3_LiveFireExercise2018.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

(continued)
33

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: New Milestones in the Modernization
of the Philippine Navy
“Empedrad, meanwhile, said missile-armed MPACs can be utilized to defend Philippine waters through
the so-called ‘swarming tactic’, where these craft will be committed to engage larger and more capable
ships posing a threat to the country’s waters.”
Source: Priam Nepomuceno, “PH Navy Expands Presence with Missile, Blue Water Capability,” Philippine News Agency, 24 December 2018.
http://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1056803
The [Philippine Navy] PN’s formal entry to the missile age took place off Lamao Point, Limay, Bataan last Nov. 21, when three of its multipurpose assault craft (MPACs) fired the newly-acquired and installed Rafael Advanced Defense Ltd. Spike-ER (extended range) surface-tosurface missile during a capability demonstration witnessed by Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana and Navy flag-officer-in-command Vice
Admiral Robert Empedrad. During the exercise, the MPACs fired two Spike-ER missile rounds, which hit two surface targets. The said craft
also utilized remote-controlled .50 caliber machine guns to neutralize another target.
The MPACs were constructed by the Subic-based Propmech Corporation and activated on May 22, 2017.
The Spike-ER system, which arrived in the country last April, is the PN’s first missile weapon capable of penetrating 1,000-mm (39 inches) of
rolled homogeneous armor and has a range of eight kilometers.
Empedrad, meanwhile, said missile-armed MPACs can be utilized to defend Philippine waters through the so-called “swarming tactic”,
where these craft will be committed to engage larger and more capable ships posing a threat to the country’s waters.
The PN chief added that the Navy needs an additional 42 MPACs to further enhance its capabilities to defend the country’s waters.
“Based on our matrix, dapat magkaroon tayo ng (we should have) 42 of these type of vessels, (the) MPACs. (We only have) nine, (with
another) three coming over next year with the same missile capability. So kung sabay-sabay gumalaw yan (If these ships will operate
simultaneously), when we are under siege, I think this will do harm to any threat whether internal or external,” Empedrad said last Nov. 21
aboard the strategic sealift vessel BRP Davao Del Sur.
MPACs are high-speed naval craft capable of speeds in excess of 40 knots and can be utilized for a variety of naval missions like patrol and
fire support missions for troops.
It can also be armed with machine guns, missiles and a variety of other weapons.
In the same briefing, Lorenzana said the Spike-ER missile system acquisition will be followed by big-ticket items like frigates and corvettes,
which will also be armed with more powerful and longer-range missiles.
“The Pohang-class frigate from ROK will also be delivered by next year equipped with a better weapons system that the Navy can already
use as it prepares for the delivery of the two purposely-built frigates starting 2020,” he stressed.
The Pohang-class frigate is equipped with a primary and secondary gun system, sensors and torpedoes for anti-submarine as well as
sensors for anti-air operations, Zata disclosed.
For the first time in its history, two PN ships, the BRP Davao Del Sur and BRP Andres Bonifacio (FF-17), joined this year’s “Rim of the
Pacific” (RIMPAC) exercises, which took place in Hawaii on June 27 and ended Aug. 2.
Aside from RIMPAC, the Navy made history with BRP Tarlac (LD-601) making the first-ever port visit of a Filipino warship to Vladivostok,
Russia.
Another Navy milestone, in terms of overseas deployment, is the participation of BRP Dagupan City (LC-551) and the 200-man contingent
aboard her in the first-ever ASEAN-China Maritime Exercise (ACMEX) that took place in Zhanjiang in Guangdong, China last Oct. 21 to 28.
With the pending arrival of the Navy’s first two AgustaWestland AW-159 “Wildcat” anti-submarine helicopters by the first quarter of 2019, the
PN will now have the capability to detect and engage underwater targets.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter
OE Watch | February 2019

34

INDO-PACIFIC
Japan Considers Sales of Air-Defense Radar to Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying
excerpted article from Nikkei Asian Review, the Japanese
government is in talks with the Philippines regarding a sale of
Mitsubishi Electric’s FPS-3 air defense radar system to improve
Philippine air domain awareness. Japan had previously discussed
selling radars to help cover the Philippines southern border with
Indonesia in an effort to combat piracy.
The Philippine Armed Forces are undergoing a widespread
modernization program meant to comprehensively upgrade
their capabilities across all services. In June of 2018, President
Duterte approved Horizon 2 of the Revised Armed Forces of the
Philippines Modernization Program (RAFPMP), which covers
2018-2022. The Philippines has allocated $5.75 billion to the
effort.
The Philippine Air Forces’ modernization strategy “Flight
Plan 2028,” adopted under former President Benigno Aquino III,
singled out the Philippines’ antiquated Intelligence Surveillance
and Reconnaissance (ISR) system. In particular, its air-defense
radars dated to the 1960s, and do not provide adequate coverage
of the islands. Current Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte
appears to have continued the plan. In addition to 12 FA-50 fighter
jets purchased from South Korea, the Philippines has purchased
Cessna 208B Grand Caraban ISR aircraft and Scan Eagle
unmanned aerial vehicles. Japan has also donated five Beechcraft
TC-90 maritime surveillance aircraft. Such aircraft can only work
effectively if responding to cuing from early warning radars.
The article notes that the radars would cost between $8.87
million and $17.7 million. The Japanese government sees such
sales not only as an economic benefit, but also as part of its goal
of strengthening the defense capabilities of countries surrounding
China. In addition to pitching sales to Thailand and Australia,
the Japanese government has laid the groundwork for closer
defense cooperation with India, including co-development and
exploration of dual-use technologies. India also plans to purchase
the ShinMaywa US-2 amphibious SAR aircraft from Japan. End
OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

Source: “Philippines sounded out by Japan on air-defense radar,” Nikkei
Asian Review, 8 December 2018. https://asia.nikkei.com/Economy/
Philippines-sounded-out-by-Japan-on-air-defense-radar
Japan is considering selling air defense radar technology to the
Philippines in what would be its first export of defense equipment since
ending a nearly 50-year ban in 2014.
Tokyo is sounding out the Philippines about buying an upgraded model
of the Mitsubishi Electric-made FPS-3 air defense radar system, which
Japan’s Air Self-Defense Force has used since 1991 in missile defense
and monitoring airspace incursions. Tokyo has already begun offering
technical information on the system to Manila.
Japan’s thinking goes that upgrading the less-than-cutting-edge radar to
meet the Philippines’ needs will keep costs down, helping it win orders.
The price is expected to be between 1 billion yen and 2 billion yen ($8.87
million and $17.7 million). Manila has also approached the U.S. and
Israel on the matter, according to a source connected to the Japanese
government, and may decide as early as the start of next year.
Japan’s defense cooperation with the Philippines, which had centered on
joint military exercises, has expanded into defense equipment in recent
years. In March, Japan’s Maritime Self-Defense Force donated TC-90
trainer craft to the Philippine navy. And Japan agreed in June to grant
parts for multi-mission UH-1H helicopters formerly used by the Ground
Self-Defense Force to the Philippine air force.
The two sides are interested in partnering on maritime security as China
continues to build up its military presence in the South China Sea, a vital
sea lane for goods and energy shipments for both Tokyo and Manila…
Japan essentially banned arms exports for decades until April 2014,
when the cabinet laid out basic rules letting the country transfer
defense equipment and technology and participate in international
joint development under certain conditions, such as when it contributes
to Japan’s security. Selling the radars to the Philippines was judged
appropriate because it would further bilateral defense cooperation.
Tokyo has not yet sold any defense equipment under the new rules.
Japan sought to build submarines for export to Australia, but lost the deal
to France in 2016. An effort to sell P-1 patrol jets to the U.K. also fell
through, and Japan lost a bid to supply radar for the Thai air force to a
Spanish company.

“The two sides are interested in partnering on maritime security as China continues to build up its
military presence in the South China Sea.”
China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2019

35

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Japan Considers Sales of Air-Defense Radar
to Philippines

OE Watch | February 2019

36

INDO-PACIFIC
Musings of a Maute Militant in Mindanao
OE Watch Commentary: In 2017, the
city of Marawi in Mindanao, the Philippines,
erupted in violence when Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS)-aligned militants invaded
and succeeded in holding the city for several
months. The militants were referred to locally
as the Maute Group, because their leaders
were two brothers with the last name Maute.
However, little was known about the militants
themselves. For the accompanying excerpted
12 December article, however, Deutsche Welle
interviewed a Maute Group militant, which
provided unique insights on the worldview of
the young militant.
The militant stated he was 17-years old
when he was recruited and that he received
a financial bonus of over $100 for joining,
which he gave to his parents, who appreciated
the money due to their poverty. On a cultural
level, the parents were also proud to send
their son off to a “liberation struggle,” as
the majority Muslim Marawi region has
a history of rebelling against the majority
Christian government in the Philippines and
the European colonizers in past centuries. In
fact, according to the article, many Muslims
in Marawi view the country’s rulers in
Manila as imperialists themselves. Indeed,
the militant believed the government was
purposely settling Christians in Marawi so
they would outnumber Muslims and that
an Islamic State was a solution to the city’s
myriad problems.

“There is a long tradition of Muslim families to send sons off to join
the ‘liberation struggle’ in the south of the Philippines.”

Marawi Ground Zero.

Source: Philippine Information Agency [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Marawi_Ground_Zero.jpg.

Source: “Terror threat lingers in Philippines despite Marawi victory,” Deutsche Welle, 12
December 2018. https://m.dw.com/en/terror-threat-lingers-in-philippines-despite-marawivictory/a-46783576
More than a year after the heaviest urban fighting in the Philippines since World War II,
the historic center of Marawi, the country’s largest Muslim city on the southern island
of Mindanao, remains sealed off. Abdul was 17 years old when he was recruited by local
Islamist insurgents. He gave his parents the bonus he received for enlisting: 7000 pesos, the
equivalent of about 120 euros. Mom and Dad were proud of him as this is a lot of money in
this impoverished region. Plus, there is a long tradition of Muslim families to send sons off to
join the “liberation struggle” in the south of the Philippines.

Although the militant did not have prior
combat experience, he was brought to the
There’s a prevailing sense of injustice here, dating back to the Spanish colonizers who
jungle to engage in training in guns and
introduced Christianity in the 16th century and subjected the local indigenous and Muslim
knives. He was also a given a monthly salary
population to their “pacification” campaign. Then came the United States, briefly followed
for the first time and would watch ISIS videos by Japanese forces in the 20th century. And today there are the so-called “imperialists” in
with his co-fighters that they would obtain on
the capital, Manila, up north. Abdul is convinced the vast majority of Filipino politicians are
the Telegram app. According to the militant,
corrupt and dishonest. He also believes the government is sending “Christian settlers” to
the raid on Marawi occurred soon after
Mindanao to squeeze out Muslims like him. The dream of an Islamic state became his panacea
Abu Sayyaf members entered the area near
against unemployment, poverty and anger.
Marawi. However, when the fighting broke
out, he was visiting his family. He therefore stayed in the city and served mostly as a spy on military positions for the Maute Group. The article
thus provided a unique perspective on the way local and global factors merged to influence young Muslims in Marawi to support the fight
against the government. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

OE Watch | February 2019

37

INDO-PACIFIC
Waiting for Thailand’s Long-Awaited Election
OE Watch Commentary: Ever since a 2014 military coup in
Thailand deposed the government of Yingluck Shinawatra, the
ruling junta has promised to hold an election for prime minister.
However, planned elections have been postponed a number of
times while the junta struggles to maintain control over the
country.
Rumors that the next poll, scheduled for 24 February, will
not likely take place, prompted some frustrated citizens to
take to the streets in protest, according to the first excerpted
article, published by Channel News Asia. Critics have accused
the junta of manipulating the system to maintain power. For
example, according to the Channel News Asia article, a new
constitution authored by the military “dilutes the power of
elected governments and embeds (the military’s) role in politics
and policy for the next 20 years.”
The second article, published by the Nikkei Asian Review,
bring some clarity to a somewhat confusing issue by describing
several important “things to know” leading up to the long
awaited election. First, the planned 24 February election is
now in doubt. According to the article, as of 4 January the
commission had still not finalized the date. Meanwhile, in
September, King Maha Vajiralongkorn endorsed two bills
requiring a general election to take place. The law came into
effect on 11 December. According to the constitution, the junta
must hold the vote within 150 days from the time the law takes
effect. Therefore, the election could be pushed to early May.
Second, the King’s coronation is scheduled to take place 4-6
May. A coronation could take weeks to plan, which could give
the junta an excuse to further postpone the election. Third,
Thailand has a history of its elections being followed by unrest
and coups and there are questions if the country can break this
cycle.
Since embracing its constitutional monarchy in 1932, the
country has endured more than 20 coups, including several
failed ones, as the article explains. Some of the problems are
the result of economic weakness and inequalities. Fourth, there
are three main (party) contenders for the election. The Palang
Pracharat is pro-junta. The Pheu Thai is comprised of supporters
of ousted Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra and his sister/
successor, Yingluck (who was ousted in 2014). The Democrat
Party, formed in 1946, is the country’s oldest operating political
party and has long been at the center of Thai politics; however,
they have never defeated Thaksin’s party. Nevertheless,
as currently reflected in Thai media there continues to be
speculation and uncertainty regarding the election. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

Source: “Thai Protesters Urge Military to Honour February Election
Date,” Channel News Asia, 7 January 2019. https://www.channelnewsasia.
com/news/asia/thai-protesters-urge-military-to-honour-february-electiondate-11092706
Thailand’s King Maha Vajiralongkorn has yet to sign a decree which
allows the Election Commission to announce an official date, raising
concerns that the polls will be delayed.
Fresh doubts emerged after the Royal Household Bureau announced the
king had set his coronation on May 4-6, more than two and a half years
after the death of his revered father.Protesters gathered on Sunday at Bangkok’s Victory Monument, wielding
signs saying “Delay No More” and portraying junta leader Prayut ChanO-Cha as a lying Pinocchio with a long nose.
The government has until May 9, 2019 to hold elections, according to a
bill endorsed by the king in September.
But critics say the new military-authored constitution dilutes the power of
elected governments and embeds its role in politics and policy for the next
20 years.
Source: Masayuki Yuda, “5 Things to Know About Thailand’s LongAwaited Election,” Nikkei Asian Review, 4 January 2019. https://asia.
nikkei.com/Politics/Turbulent-Thailand/5-things-to-know-about-Thailands-long-awaited-election
Why is it (the planned general election) so important?
This vote will test Thailand’s ability to return to a stable democracy after
nearly five years of military rule. The question is whether the kingdom
can break the cycle of elections, followed by civil unrest and a coup. Since
Thailand embraced a constitutional monarchy in 1932 it has had more than
20 coups, including several failed ones.
Who are the main contenders?
There are three main political forces in Thailand: the Palang Pracharat
Party, the Pheu Thai Party and the Democrat Party.
Palang Pracharat is pro-junta. Most of the junta’s cabinet members who
wish to pursue a political career will gravitate to it…
Pheu Thai is home to supporters of ousted Prime Minister Thaksin
Shinawatra and his sister and successor, Yingluck, who was also removed
in a coup.
The Democrat Party is led by former Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva. It
was formed in 1946 and is the country’s oldest operating political party.
The Democrats have been at the center of Thai politics for a long time but
they have never defeated Thaksin’s forces…
The junta’s order in November to redraw electoral districts led to
complaints of gerrymandering, but it is unclear whether the change will
favor pro-junta forces.
The three-horse race is likely to end with no party holding a majority,
even with votes from smaller affiliates.

“Since Thailand embraced a constitutional monarchy in 1932 it has had more than 20 coups, including
several failed ones.”
OE Watch | February 2019

38

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia “Preventive” Counter-Terrorism Arrests
OE Watch Commentary: On 19 December Indonesia’s Tribun News published the
accompanying excerpted Indonesian-language article about the efforts undertaken
by the national police to defend against terrorist attacks ahead of Christmas and New
Year. According to the article, the police were so concerned about terrorist threats that
they engaged in preventative arrests. The national police chief, for example, indicated
that 21 suspected terrorists who were arrested in seven different regions of the country
were not directly involved planning attacks before those two holidays. Nevertheless,
the primary purpose of the arrests was to ensure the public that there would not be
terrorist attacks over the holidays. It was, therefore, a confidence-building measure.
The article also noted the reason for heightened concern from the public about
terrorism. On 13 May, there were bombings at churches in Surabaya carried out
by a family of six (two parents with their children) on motorcycles who detonated
explosives and killed more than 10 people. While the article did not state the specifics
about the 21 individuals arrested, it did mention that two of them had been in Syria.
They would have been among over 200 Indonesians who traveled to Syria to fight. The
fact that the family who bombed the churches in Surabaya in May had also been in
Syria has raised the threat level about other returnees from Syria, which was already
high even before those attacks. Nevertheless, it appears that the police believe they
obtained their desired end result due to the fact that Christmas and the New Year
passed without incident. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Source: “Jelang Natal dan Tahun Baru, Kapolri Sebut
21 Orang Terduga Teroris Diamankan dengan judul
(Ahead of Christmas and New Year, the National
Police Chief Announces 21 Suspected Terrorists
Detained),” Tribun News, 19 December 2018. http://
www.tribunnews.com/nasional/2018/12/19/jelangnatal-dan-tahun-baru-kapolri-sebut-21-orang-terdugateroris-diamankan
Before Christmas and New Year, the National Police
managed to secure and arrest 21 suspected terrorists
from 7 different regions. This was stated by National
Police Chief General Tito Karnavian after a meeting
in preparation for security ahead of Christmas and
New Year. He claimed the arrests of 21 suspected
terrorists were not directly related to the threat of
terror on Christmas and New Year. However, this
effort was carried out as a preventive measure
for terrorism. The four-star general is concerned
about terrorism, like what happened in the church
in Surabaya, East Java, on May 13, 2018. “We take
steps that we consider to be potential to ensure that
the community believes that terror attacks will not
exist,” he explained.

“We take steps that we consider to be potential to ensure that the public believes that terror attacks will
not exist.”

Bahasa Indonesia: indahnya natal.

Source: Harry.r.sumartono [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Di_jakarta.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
“Psychological War” along the Israeli-Lebanese Border
OE Watch Commentary: Israel’s “Northern Shield”
operation, launched in early December 2018 to destroy
cross-border tunnels dug by Hezbollah, is being
interpreted by the Lebanese group’s supporters as
a “psychological war” that Hezbollah can win. The
accompanying excerpts from pro-Hezbollah media
sources provide additional details on this perspective.
The first passage, from an article written by a
Lebanese academic for the website of the proHezbollah news channel al-Mayadeen, chastises “some
Lebanese and Arab journalists” for doing Israel’s
work, whether wittingly or not, by reacting with alarm
to the operations and claiming that Israel is capable
of launching a major war. In fact, the author claims,
“[Hezbollah] is stronger than before while Israel is
weaker than before” and “[Israel’s] domestic front is
unprepared for war.” Those describing Northern Shield
as a serious and alarming development, the author
believes, are contributing to “the psychological war
against us” (for more background, see: “The ‘Soft
War’ on Hezbollah,” OE Watch, November 2018).
As noted in the second passage, from the proHezbollah daily newspaper al-Akhbar, “Northern
Shield” has played out heavily on social media, in
particular Facebook and Twitter. The article’s author, a
Lebanese journalist, describes a “methodical war” that
includes “large groups” employed by Israel to “engage,
infiltrate and converse with [Hezbollah] supporters,”
in order to gather intelligence and undermine domestic
popular support. Hezbollah supporters must be cautious
on social media, the author warns, to avoid “providing
the enemy with information ‘on a golden plate’,”
whether intentionally or not. Hezbollah has in fact been
successful in countering Israel’s “psychological war,”
he argues, beginning with the group’s “smart silence”
aimed at “draw[ing] the enemy’s curiosity without
providing information.” At the same time, Hezbollah
supporters have been “working steadfastly and precisely
to provoke the enemy and influence it,” whether by
circulating close-up photographs of Israeli soldiers
stationed along the border or by taking advantage of
the Israeli Army’s state of high alert and overreaction
when confronted with routine Lebanese Army patrols,
the sound of digging, or farmers working nearby. These
are vulnerabilities that can be exploited, the author
contends, and it is important “to move from defense
to offense, in order to exhaust the adversary.” In a nod
to the asymmetries of information-age psychological
warfare, the author concludes as follows: “The enemy
employs propaganda wars professionally. There is
nothing missing for us to engage in a similar type of
warfare employing all the capabilities at our disposal.”
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…the most precise and professional of psychological wars…”
Source:
‫ َمن يقوم بها؟ وما الهدف؟‬:‫  الحرب النفسية عىل لبنان‬
Leila Nicolas. “The psychological war on Lebanon: Who is conducting it? What is the
goal?” al-Mayadeen, 12 December 2018. https://goo.gl/89gtEG
Hezbollah’s professional way of dealing with the issue was notable, consisting of
a constructive ambiguity policy and photographing of Israeli in various positions.
Weapons were also seized from Israeli soldiers on the border with Lebanon, in what
is the most precise and professional of psychological wars…
In this context, the alarmism with which some Lebanese and Arab journalists have
treated this issue is notable. They have engaged in psychological warfare to the
enemy’s benefit, calling for “taking care of Lebanon” and ridiculing all who say
Israel is unable to launch a war. They call on the people to “not be drawn in by the
illusion that Israel is unable to launch a war.” Whether with good or bad intentions,
they do marketing for the enemy and contribute to the psychological war against us…
These people overlook the truth, which is that the Resistance today is stronger than
before while Israel is weaker than before. The enemy’s internal front is unprepared
for war, and the situation following the Syrian war is different than it was before.
Source:
‫  الحرب النفس ّية جمهور املقاومة جاهز؟‬
Ayman Mohammed Bashir. “The psychological war: Are Resistance supporters
ready?” al-Akhbar, 12 December 2018. https://al-akhbar.com/Media_Tv/263041
Since the Israeli enemy’s announcement that it had launched the “Northern
Shield” operation to look for “cross-border tunnels” that Hezbollah could use in an
upcoming war, the Israeli media’s methodical war against the Resistance, and in its
Arabic manifestation tweets by the Israeli military’s spokesman, Avichay Adraee, has
not stopped…
… the enemy amasses huge amounts of information on Resistance supporters
through social media platforms. The enemy studies, analyzes and uses the
information in its war. Whether knowingly or not, Resistance supporters provide
the enemy with information “on a golden plate.” It is no secret that the enemy
employs large groups to work on Twitter and Facebook, including Adraee’s personal
accounts. The aim is to directly engage, infiltrate and converse with Resistance
supporters…
… al-Manar Channel’s correspondent, Ali Shuaib, managed to launch a one-man
war, annoying the Israeli Army by posting pictures mocking them. Adraee was forced
to respond to them. Nonetheless, the solution at times lies in “smart silence,” which
draws the enemy’s curiosity without providing information to the adversary, as in the
case of a response…
The other party is disturbed when listening to the sound of digging, and they fire in
the air when a routine Lebanese Army patrol drives by. They also fear the movement
of farmers or planting of trees along the border. All movements large and small are
taken into consideration. In short, their war can be turned against them…
These types of wars require defensive capabilities to match military operations. Is it
important in them to move from defense to offense, in order to exhaust the adversary.
This requires the other party to have sufficient information on the enemy, its culture,
and the nature of his thinking, to translate them into effective tools in the context of
battle…
We ourselves should not err in our understanding of psychological warfare,
including the electronic type, and its consequences…
The enemy employs propaganda wars professionally. There is nothing missing for us
to engage in a similar type of warfare employing all the capabilities at our disposal.

OE Watch | February 2019

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Cleric Speaks on Iran’s Foreign Militias
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian press
increasingly covers tension between the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and President
Hassan Rouhani. While the Western media
sometimes paints this as a conflict between hardline
and reformist factions, both parties are absolutely
committed to the ideals of Ayatollah Khomeini’s
1979 Islamic Revolution; rather, their dispute often
revolves around tactics or power.

“We are the foremost power in the region.”

In the accompanying excerpted article, from a
news outlet affiliated with the IRGC, Ali Shirazi, the
Iranian Supreme Leader’s special representative to
the Qods Force, pens an open letter to Rouhani. The
general thrust of his essay is to criticize Rouhani
for compromises and diplomacy with the West. He
castigates Rouhani for compromising revolutionary
values in order to negotiate with the West on such
issues as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
The Zeynabiyun flag unveiled at the Jamkaran mosque in Qom.
the Financial Action Task Force (see: “Accepting
Source: Jamkaran.ir, http://cdn.jamkaran.ir/main/2017/05/Y2A0460-580x350.jpg.
FATF is Absolutely Forbidden,” OE Watch, August
2018), and the Counter Terrorism Finance agreements. Iran continues to object to the latter two agreements in part, if not in whole, because of
restrictions it would impose on groups like Hezbollah and Hamas which the United States and other Western countries designate as terrorist
groups, but which the Iranian government sponsors as resistance movements.
Perhaps the most important aspect of Shirazi’s letter, however, is his embrace and endorsement of various militias, not only Lebanese
Hezbollah which the IRGC helped found, but also Ansarallah, the main Houthi military group in Yemen. Iranian diplomats sympathize with the
Houthi cause in Yemen, but are careful to deny direct links; Shirazi appears—not for the first time—unconcerned about such diplomatic nuance.
In addition, Shirazi claims that Iran finds strength and influence in other groups, such as the religious, pro-Iranian “Haydariyun” in Iraq as well
as the Popular Mobilization Forces, many of which remain under Iranian command and control in Iraq. Shirazi also talks about the Zeynabiyun
and the Liwa Fatemiyoun, two groups fighting in Syria whose members, respectively, are drawn from Pakistan and Afghanistan, as being under
general Iranian control. That he sees the proliferation of these groups as a sign of Iranian strength suggests the creation and deployment of proxy
groups remains a key component of IRGC’s strategy. That Shirazi represents the supreme leader suggests that Ali Khamenei also backs the
proxy group strategy.
Lastly, Shirazi cites Iranian progress in developing missiles and drones as a sign of its technical prowess and ability. Curiously, he uses public
statements by a retired Israeli missile expert to support his claims. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)
Source: “Sokhani Samimaneh ba Ra’is Dawlati Davazdahom (A Friendly Talk about the President of the Twelfth Government),” Tasnim
News, 8 December 2018. https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1397/09/17/1893881
Mr. President! Despite all the tricks, schemes, sanctions, threats, and the battles and brutal acts of the enemies, today we are on the verge
of the 40th anniversary of the victory of the Islamic Revolution of Iran. The people are brave and faithful and adhere to the line of the Imam
and the Guardianship. We have intelligence, top-notch youth who are neither afraid nor hopeless. In terms of military, ground, air and naval
equipment, we are the foremost power in the region. Because of faith, courage, and sacrifice, we have missiles, advanced submarines, and
unmanned drones.
Mr. President! Today, Iran enjoys the support of Hizbullah, Ansar Allah, the Popular Mobilization Forces, the Haydariyun, the Zeynabiyun,
the [Liwa] Fatemiyoun, Syria’s homeland defense [force] and the power of the Palestinian Mujahedin.”
Mr. President! Uzi Rubin, the former head of the Israeli Missile Defense Organization, said Iranian missiles were examples of good
engineering, and said, “Iran has gained these successes despite sanctions.” He added, “On technical grounds, I respect the people who have
done these things.”

OE Watch | February 2019

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Fight against ISIS
OE Watch Commentary: According to a statement by Turkish President
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey will fight to put an end to the existence of ISIS in
Syria despite concerns from some Turks over taking on this new task. However,
Turkey has not revealed how it plans to fight against the remaining ISIS elements.
The accompanying excerpted article from Anadolu Ajansı provides information
regarding the existence of ISIS in eastern Syria while the article from Turkey’s
Hurriyet Daily News sheds light on how Turkey will fight against ISIS.

“The long-term resistance of terrorist
elements does not seem possible due to the
superior firepower and moral superiority of
the Turkish Armed Forces.”

The Anadolu Ajansı article states that ISIS still controls the territory between Hajin and Baghus, the districts of Abu Kamal in Deir ez-Zor
province. Also, ISIS is present east of Homs and in the deserts of western Deir ez-Zor, but the presence in these territories is rather in cell
structures. The author argues that the ISIS will not be able to resist the fire power of the Turkish Armed Forces for long in these territories
when Turkey starts operations in Syria. Therefore, ISIS will probably evacuate its fighters from Syria to Iraq. The article claims that Turkey has
tremendous experience in fighting terrorism and that it will prevail against ISIS in a short period of time.
According to the Hurriyet Daily News article, Turkish President Erdogan said Turkey “can perfectly eliminate all terrorists in the east of
Syria” as it did in mid-2016 through Operation Euphrates Shield. Additionally, Turkish Defense Minister Hulusi Akar noted on 1 January 2019
that “The Turkish Armed Forces have now taken a task and the responsibility in the fight” against ISIS. The author suggests two options to fight
ISIS. First, for Turkey to fight ISIS in Syria will require ground and air operations nearly 250 miles into Syrian territory and the article notes that
Russia has already assured Turkey that the Syrian air defense system will not intercept Turkey’s aircrafts. Also, for a successful operation, actors
involved in the Syrian conflict must assure Turkey about any possible confrontations with Syrian regime forces and the People’s Protection Units
or YPG, a Kurdish armed group in Syria waging war on ISIS. Second, having Iraq take on the responsibility to fight ISIS, since the remnants
of ISIS fighters in Syria are close to Iraqi border. The article mentions there is a possibility that Turkish authorities may discuss this option with
Iraqi President Barham Salih during his visit to Turkey.
Both articles acknowledge the complexity of fighting ISIS in Syria and they caution the Turkish government to involve all actors in Syria while
taking on this responsibility. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Turkish soldiers with their vehicles conduct patrol on outside Manbij, Syria.

Source: Türk Silahlı Kuvvetleri (VOA) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turkish_soldiers_conduct_patrol_on_outside_Manbij,_Syria.jpg.

(continued)
OE Watch | February 2019

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkey’s Fight against ISIS
Source: Kutluhan Görücü, “Fırat’ın doğusundaki DEAŞ varlığı (Existence of ISIS in the Eastern Euphrates),” Anadolu Ajansı, 31 December
2018. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/firatin-dogusundaki-deas-varligi/1352881
Today…the territory under the control of ISIS is between Hajin and Baghus. Besides this region, it is known that there is a presence of ISIS in
the east of Homs and in the deserts of western Deir ez-Zor. However, the presence of the organization in this region can be characterized as
being in the form of cells due to desert conditions rather than in settlements.
ISIS staged attacks several times in the city of al-Tabqah in al-Raqqa province. It can be said that ISIS is also present in this region. After alRaqqa, the region that suffered the biggest attacks is the suburb of Deir ez-Zor and ISIS is still strong there.
How the fight against ISIS will be conducted is not clear yet and it has not been shared with public…
The long-term resistance of terrorist elements does not seem possible due to the superior firepower and moral superiority of the Turkish
Armed Forces…
In fact, ISIS can use the chaotic environment to evacuate its members to Iraq or use the Iraqi-Syrian border for logistics and replenishing its
needs. As a matter of fact, the main motivation of the leadership of this organization is to focus on Iraq…
Turkey has gained experience in the fight against ISIS with carrying out operations like Euphrates Shield inside and outside of Turkey. It is
likely that this experience and capability will be reflected in the field to achieve results in a short time.
Source: Serkan Demirtaş, “How will Turkey fight against ISIL?,” Hurriyet Daily News, 2 January 2019. http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/
opinion/serkan-demirtas/how-will-turkey-fight-against-isil-140182
ISIL has started to lose influence and territories after dozens of countries, under the leadership of the U.S., launched a global campaign
against it.
Erdoğan had assured the U.S. president that Turkey can perfectly eliminate all terrorists in the east of Syria…
Turkey is now entrusted with the task of wiping ISIL remnants out from the east of Syria. Turkey’s Defense Minister Hulusi Akar, who is the
former chief of General Staff, confirmed this new task of the Turkish army. In a statement on Jan. 1, he said, “The Turkish Armed Forces have
now taken a task and the responsibility in the fight against Daesh as a result of a conversation between our president and Mr. Trump. We will
efficiently fulfill this duty in the coming days,” using the Arabic acronym for ISIL.
There is no discussion over Turkey’s determination in fighting against ISIL, but the question is how it will be held…
Clearing this area from ISIL would surely require ground and air operations. If Turkey is to do this, it has to deploy thousands of troops and
requires military equipment into an area around 400 kilometers away from the Turkish border. It has also been clarified by the Russians that
its aircrafts will not be intercepted by the Syrian air defense system. Plus, all relevant actors should assure Turkey that neither the YPG nor
the Syrian army will be on its way to Abu Kamal.
…One other option would be to let Iraq engage in the fight against ISIL. The territories being controlled by ISIL are very close to the Iraqi
border… It would be no surprise if Erdoğan and Iraqi President Barham Salih also discussed the need to fully eradicate ISIL in the region
during the latter’s visit to Ankara in the coming days.
… Turkey will surely continue its close coordination with all relevant parties, mostly the U.S. and Russia, on how to secure its potential fight
against ISIL.

Books on guerrilla war are seldom written from the tactical
perspective and from the guerrilla’s perspective. Fangs of the Lone
Wolf: is an exception. These are the stories of low-level guerrilla
combat as told by the survivors. They cover fighting from the cities
of Grozny and Argun to the villages of Bamut and Serzhen-yurt, and
finally the hills, river valleys and mountains that make up so much
of Chechnya. Dodge Billingsley, the primary author was embedded
with Chechen guerrilla forces after the first war, so he knows the
country, the culture, the key actors and the conflict. Yet, as a Western
outsider, he is able to maintain perspective and objectivity. Fangs
of the Lone Wolf provides a unique insight into what is becoming
modern and future war.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download

OE Watch | February 2019

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey: Debating a Post-US Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The prospect of a US withdrawal
from Syria has generally been welcomed in Turkey. However,
it has also ignited a debate on some of the strategic and tactical
challenges that Turkey may face in the aftermath of such a
withdrawal. The accompanying articles from the Turkish press
provide insight into this debate.
The first accompanying article features a quote by Turkish
Presidential Spokesperson and the Chief Advisor to the
President, Ibrahim Kalın. Kalın expresses that they are
“pleased” with the withdrawal decision but raises questions
such as “what kind of structure will be left behind; what will
happen to the heavy weapons that have been deployed, and
[what will be] the fate of American military bases and logistics
centers.” The concern is that the heavy weapons that have
been deployed may fall into the hands of the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) or other actors, eventually finding
their way into Turkey, or worse, those weapons may be used
to attack Turkey. Similarly, there is concern that the US
bases will be taken over by forces belonging to the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units (YPG)-- a Kurdish group that Turkey
considers to be an extension of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party
(PKK)-- a terrorist group with whom Turkey has a long and
painful history.
The second passage is from a radio interview with Soli Özel,
a respected international relations expert. Özel points out that
the pressure on ISIS will be lifted, and discusses the risk of a
power vacuum emerging with the US withdrawal. He describes
this as being similar to the power vacuum that emerged in Iraq
after the US withdrawal from the region in December 2011.
Just as that withdrawal had raised concerns in Turkey about
Iraq’s territorial integrity in the long run, this withdrawal is
raising concerns about Syrian territorial integrity. Specifically,
the concern is that the power vacuum creates a risk that
remnants of ISIS forces will become proxies for outside powers
to meddle in Syria’s internal affairs, eventually leading to a
de-facto partitioning of Syria, with the Syrian Kurds in the
northeast ending up with their autonomous region. For Turkey,
preserving Syrian territorial integrity is a key interest and
priority for the long-term.
The third passage, written by a highly respected former
Turkish Ambassador to the US, Faruk Loğoğlu, discusses some
of the geopolitical challenges that Turkey may face. He notes
that the decision actually “increases Turkey’s burden in Syria.”
With a US departure, he points out that the different interests of
Russia, Iran and Turkey, will only be highlighted, and Turkey
will be in a tougher spot, given its differing priorities with
Russia and Iran. Namely, Turkey’s priority of preventing a
Kurdish autonomous region along its borders is not shared by
Russia or Iran. From Turkey’s perspective, this would create
more problems in the long run. (For background, see Karen
Kaya, “The Syrian Crisis from a Neighbor’s Perspective:
The View from Turkey,” https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/202242). End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“We are pleased with ... Trump’s decision to withdraw
[from Syria], but it needs to be clarified as to what kind of
structure will be left behind, what will happen to the heavy
weapons that have been deployed, [and what will be] the
fate of American military bases and logistics centers.”

İbrahim Kalın, Presidential Spokesperson and Special Adviser to the President of Turkey.

Source: Republic of Turkey Presidency via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%C4%B0brahim_Kalin.jpg, Türkiye Cumhuriyeti
Cumhurbaskanlıgı [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons.

Source: “Turkey asks US to hand over military bases in Syria,” Hurriyet
Daily News, 8 January 2019. http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkeyasks-us-to-hand-over-military-bases-in-syria-140358
[Turkish Presidential Spokesperson Ibrahim Kalın:] We are pleased with
[President] Trump’s decision to withdraw [from Syria], but it needs to be
clarified as to what kind of structure will be left behind, what will happen
to the heavy weapons that have been deployed, [and what will be] the fate
of American military bases and logistics centers.
Source: “Soli Özel: ABD Suriye’den çekilmesi anafora yol açacak (Soli
Özel: The US withdrawal from Syria will lead to a vacuum),” Bidebunuizle
Show on RS FM, 21 December 2018. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jrAmdf3PiaE
The pressure on ISIS will be lifted... The same kind of power vacuum that
emerged in Iraq when the US withdrew in December 2011 will emerge
in northern Syria. ... From Turkey’s perspective, entering this power
vacuum... can lead to a dangerous situation... Also, the US forces have
some military equipment and bases there that will be available to PYDYPG in the absence of the US.
Source: Faruk Loğoğlu, “2019’da Türk dış politikasını bekleyenler!
(Things to expect in Turkish foreign policy in 2019!),” Gazete Duvar, 1
January 2019. https://www.gazeteduvar.com.tr/forum/2019/01/01/2019daturk-dis-politikasini-bekleyenler/
The US decision to withdraw its troops from Syria has not decreased
Turkey’s burden, on the contrary, it has increased it.... Following the
US decision to withdraw its troops, the developments on the ground
will be dependent on the cooperation between Turkey-Russia-Iran. The
differences in the interests and priorities of these three actors ... will be
greater than their common denominators due to reasons related to the US
absence on the ground...
OE Watch | February 2019

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Increased Saudi Focus on the Red Sea
OE Watch Commentary: In October 2017, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of
Saudi Arabia announced a massive project to build a futuristic city from scratch along
the Red Sea’s Gulf of Aqaba coastline. Called NEOM, the semi-autonomous, high-tech
utopia would include Saudi, Egyptian and Jordanian land. A self-declared “aspirational
society,” NEOM is according to its own website “The world’s most ambitious project”
(see: https://www.neom.com/). The ambitions were tempered in October 2018, when key
investors, advisers and experts quit the project following the killing of Saudi journalist
Jamal Khashoggi. As reported by the Financial Times, the Saudi crown prince himself told
a visiting business delegation that after that “no one will invest [in the project] for years.”

“…Saudi Arabia’s security,
strategic, and political depth…”

Not all of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea projects are this ambitious or aspirational, at least on
paper. In mid-December 2018, the kingdom hosted the foreign ministers of most Red Sea
littoral states to discuss the formation of a new security alliance, to be called “The Council
of Red Sea States.” The meeting was followed up in early 2019 by “Red Wave-1,” a joint
Saudi-Egyptian naval and special forces exercise on the Red Sea, which reportedly also
involved forces from Jordan, Djibouti, Sudan, and the Saudi-backed Yemeni government.
The proposed security alliance would serve many purposes, according to local media
reports. Along with establishing a security regime to ensure trade flows in and out of the
Red Sea, the new alliance would broadly seek to contain the growing influence of “the
Turkey-Qatar-Iran ‘Axis of Evil’” in the area, as stated in the first accompanying excerpt,
from the mainstream Egyptian daily al-Masry al-Youm. Researchers and commentators
cited in the second excerpt, from the Arabic-language website of Germany’s Deutsche
Welle, argue that the alliance sends a message to the West about Saudi Arabia’s need to
act independently and establish a durable security alliance of its own. The eastern shores
of the Red Sea, per one of the commentators, is finally getting the attention it deserves
given that it represents “Saudi Arabia’s security, strategic, and political depth.” The
third accompanying passage, from the Qatari daily al-Araby al-Jadid, is unsurprisingly
pessimistic on the alliance’s prospects, given “fears” that it will be used as “a tool to
normalize relations with Israel,” which is also a Red Sea littoral state. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

Topographic map in English of the Red Sea.

Source: Eric Gaba (Sting - fr:Sting) [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Red_Sea_topographic_map-en.jpg.

Source:
‫ اإلعالن عن «كيان البحر األحمر» بسبب تهديدات إيران وتركيا‬:‫خرباء‬
Samer Ibrahim. “Experts: The ‘Red Sea entity’ announcement due to ‘Iranian and Turkish threats’,” al-Masry al-Youm, 12 December 2018.
https://www.almasryalyoum.com/news/details/1350684
According to experts in African affairs, the Yemen war and the instability in the Bab al-Mandab Straits during the war, Gulf concerns
regarding oil and global trade flows, meddling by the “Turkey-Qatar-Iran” Axis of Evil in the Red Sea, and the absence of a true security
regime in this area, are the true reasons for “establishing the Red Sea entity.”
Source:
‫زواج السياسة واالقتصاد لكرس طوق العزلة؟‬..‫  السعودية والبحر األحمر‬
“Saudi and the Red Sea… Marriage of politics and economics to break the isolation?” Deutsche Welle Arabic, 13 December 2018. https://goo.gl/
Gr8rTG
According to Dr. Ghassan al-Attiya… “Riyadh undoubtedly needs to restructure its accounts and reduce its reliance on the United States,
thus sending the West a message that it has alternatives after the failure of the Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council”…
According to Saudi journalist and political analyst Ahmed Adnan, Saudi Arabia has a problem in the Red Sea, and “this area has over
previous decade not been given true interest, especially the eastern shores of the Red Sea, which in fact represent Saudi Arabia’s security,
strategic, and political depth. This new organization is mean to fulfill these needs and requirements”…
Source:
‫ أهداف سعودية وإماراتية‬...‫  مجلس دول البحر األحمر‬
“‘Red Sea States Council’… Saudi and Emirati goals,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 12 December 2018. https://goo.gl/vBzs4s
… amidst a lack of clarity regarding the true goals of this council and fears that it will be a tool to normalize relations with Israel in the
future, given that Israel itself is a Red Sea littoral state… those fears come in light of Tel Aviv’s directives to open up to Africa and some
Arab countries, amidst talk of secret meetings previously held between Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Arab leaders, on the
one hand, and first-time visits to Israel by leaders of African countries such as Chad. This also includes official statements by the [Israeli]
occupation state on its willingness to travel to Arab capitals, as when Netanyahu visited Oman last month.

OE Watch | February 2019

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
A Turkish Military Base in the Red Sea
“

OE Watch Commentary: Suakin Island of Sudan could be Turkey’s
While Turkey has become a force for ensuring
third military base abroad after it established bases in Qatar and Somalia.
During his visit to Sudan in December 2017, Turkish President Recep
peace and prosperity of the people in the region,
Tayyip Erdoğan reportedly asked Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir
[it] will assume geopolitical supremacy with a
to lease Suakin Island in the Red Sea to Turkey. At the time, President
Erdoğan rejected the claims that Turkey might establish a military base on
military base on Suakin Island.
the island; however, now Turkey is not hiding the fact that it is establishing
a military base there. The accompanying excerpted articles, one from the
pro-government newspaper Yeni Akit and the other from state-owned Anadolu Ajansı highlight what Turkey might achieve by establishing a
military base in the Red Sea.

”

According to the Yeni Akit article, even though it is intended to be a naval base, it will also be supported by the Turkish Land and Air
Forces. The article states that with this military base, Turkey will contribute to the balance of power against other countries such as Egypt, the
United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Iran, who have each established a presence in the Red Sea, Gulf of Aden and Indian Ocean. Turkey’s
establishment of a military base on Suakin Island has especially affected relations between Egypt and Sudan. Egypt already reinforced its
military base in Eritrea, which neighbors Sudan, with more troops. The article argues that Turkey will assume geopolitical supremacy by
establishing this military base and will become an influential power in the Red Sea.
During the recent visit to the island, Turkish Minister of National Defense, Hulusi Akar, brought with him the Chief of General Staff and
the President of the Turkish Cooperation and Coordination Agency (TIKA). TIKA was founded in 1992 to implement Turkish foreign policy
priorities in Turkic countries that have cultural and language ties to Turkey in Central Asia. However, in recent years it has expanded its work to
restore Ottoman heritage in the Balkans and elsewhere. The presence of TIKA indicates Turkey may not only establishing a military base, but
also engaged in restoring the island’s Ottoman heritage, as the island was an Ottoman forward outpost in the Red Sea.
According to the article from Anadolu Ajansı, Saudi Arabia announced a new alliance with Jordan, Egypt, Djibouti, Somalia, and Sudan
to curb the influence of Iran, Turkey, and Qatar in the Red Sea. Turkey has worked to expand its influence in the Horn of Africa since 2002.
Turkish President Erdogan has made several trips to the region and has signed bilateral agreements with countries in the Horn of Africa,
including Somalia and Sudan. As a result, Turkey has established a military base in Somalia and most recently Sudan has allocated Suakin island
to Turkey to establish a military base. The article notes how Suakin Island is located right across from Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, and that ultimately,
“Turkey’s rapprochement with these regional countries and Qatar” as well as the establishment of the base on Suakin Island, “worry Saudi
Arabia.” End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Suakin, Sudan, ruins of egypt national bank (2008).

Source: Bertramz [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Suakin,national_bank.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

(continued)
46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: A Turkish Military Base in the Red Sea
Source: “Türkiye askeri üs kuruyor (Turkey to establish military base),” Yeni Akit, 13 November 2018. https://www.yeniakit.com.tr/haber/
turkiye-askeri-us-kuruyor-543984.html
The place where the TAF [Turkish Armed Forces] is establishing a base on Suakin Isand [and] which was allocated to Turkey during
President Erdoğan’s visit to Sudan was determined. During President Erdoğan’s visit to Sudan, it was determined that the TAF would
establish a base on Suakin Island...
…While the TAF is expected to establish a naval base on the island, it will include land and air forces as well. Land forces will assume duties
on the island with the support of Naval and Air Forces elements.
With the Suakin Base, Turkey will become a counterbalance in the axis of Egypt, the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Iran from the Mediterranean to
the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean.
This move… will create a secure and peaceful sea route in the Gulf of Aden. While Turkey has become a force for ensuring peace and
prosperity of the people in the region, [it] will assume geopolitical supremacy with a military base on Suakin Island.
Last week, the Minister of National Defense Hulusi Akar inspected the work in Suakin Island as part of his visits to Libya, Sudan and
Somalia. Akar’s delegation included the Chief of General Staff Yaşar Güler, representatives from the Turkish Armed Forces and Foreign
Ministry, and the TİKA [Turkish Cooperation and Coordination Agency] President Serdar Çam.
Source: Dr. Necmettin Acar, “Kızıldenizde jeopolitik kamplaşma (Geopolitical alliances in Red Sea),”Anadolu Ajansı, 18 December 2018.
https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/kizildenizde-jeopolitik-kamplasma/1342043
On 11 December [2018] international news agencies announced that Saudi Arabia formed a new alliance in the Red Sea region with five
other countries (Jordan, Egypt, Djibouti, Somalia, and Sudan). Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir said this new alliance was formed
to protect Saudi Arabia and its neighboring countries interests, to create synergy among regional countries to prevent outside influence to
protect the stability of the region…
…the main objective of this alliance is to create a geopolitical supremacy favoring Saudi Arabia and to curtail Iran, Turkey and Qatar’s
influence on the region…
…since the beginning of 2000s, the Red Sea region has become a region where Turkey, Iran, and Qatar have influence… [Therefore,] Saudi
has decided to take measures against Turkey, Iran, and Qatar…
Turkey’s interest in the region has been in four areas including political, economic, social, and cultural… President Erdogan’s visits to 30
African countries since 2002 has played a role in establishing relations especially with countries in the Horn of Africa… The important gains
from [building] these relations are Turkey opening a military base in Somalia and Sudan’s allocation of Suakin Island to Turkey. Suakin
Island in terms of its location in the Red Sea is located across from the city Jeddah… Turkey’s rapprochement with these regional countries
and Qatar and establishing a military base on Suakin Island worry Saudi Arabia…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
http://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil

The Mad Scientist Laboratory blog is a marketplace of ideas about the future of our society, work, and conflict.
Mad Scientist is a TRADOC initiative and community of action that continually explores the
future through collaborative partnerships and
continuous dialogue with academia and industry.

OE Watch | February 2019

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Security Challenges in the Black Sea
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian annexation of Crimea
in March 2014 has impacted the balance of power in the Black Sea
in Russia’s favor as its coastal line along the Black Sea grew from
almost 300 miles to nearly 750 miles. Russia plans to add 15 to 18
vessels to its Black Sea Fleet by 2020. The littoral states of the Black
Sea (despite three out of six of them being NATO members, including
Turkey, Bulgaria and Romania) have not been able to form a unified
stance to counterbalance Russian ambitions in the Black Sea. The
accompanying excerpted article from Sigma Insight Turkey, a website
with an independent group of Turkish experts, provides a detailed
account of the security challenges in the Black Sea and the threat that
Russia poses.
The article outlines the following security challenges in the Black
Sea. First, the authors believe that the Turkish government’s status
quo policy “proved to be untenable after Russian illegal annexation
of Crimea.” Second, the poor relations and dynamics “among the six
littoral states complicates the emergence of a viable maritime security
framework necessary to meet common challenges.” For example,
Russia decreased “Ukraine’s share of growth in Black Sea shipments
and is poised to challenge other littoral states by strengthening its
competitiveness by military means.” Bulgaria is worried a disruption
to maritime trade routes will affect its imports and exports in the
Black Sea, as it accounts for about 80 percent of its trade. Third,
Russia’s influence and intimidation impacts the behavior and relations
among the littoral states. As Bulgaria worries about the increasing
risk of disruption to trade routes, it has also been intimidated by
Russia to refrain from joining any regional security organizations.
The authors state that it is highly likely that Russia may “increase its
influence over the Bosporus and Dardanelles.” Additionally, Russia
“seeks to foster mistrust and division among Romania, Bulgaria and
Turkey in order to preclude them from acting in concert or forging
a strong NATO flank.” While NATO’s Black Sea littoral states lack
well-defined contingency plans and well-equipped armed forces to
counter Russian aggression, the authors point out how Turkey is the
only country in the region with fully “developed anti-submarine
warfare” capabilities. Therefore, as the article states, NATO “remains
vulnerable” against Russian aggression in this region.
The article provides suggestions regarding how to address these
security challenges in the Black Sea. First, NATO should make a
“common security threat assessment” for the region to address the
vulnerabilities of each country against Russia. Second, economic
development that would increase the prosperity of the regional
states will help shield them from Russian disinformation, political
penetration and populist appeals. Finally, the authors note how the
littoral states could learn from the experiences and cooperation of the
Baltic States and Scandinavian countries to deter Russia from posing
threats to the region. End OE Watch Commentary (Gunduz)

Source: Dr. Reyhan Sahin Allahverdi, Dr. Sibel Akova and Lect.
Velida Kijevcanin Zimanjic, “Uncertainties and Weaknesses in
International Security Around the Black Sea Region,” Sigma Insight
Turkey, 21 December 2018. https://sigmaturkey.com/2018/12/21/
uncertainties-and-weaknesses-in-international-security-around-theblack-sea-region/
…Six countries surrounding the Black Sea lack common agenda
and that despite the fact that three out of six states namely, Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey are NATO member states, while Georgia and
Ukraine aspire to become NATO members in the future. The view
in these countries regarding their major adversary Russia lacks
cohesion, sharpness and understanding what needs to be done to
deter aggressive Russia…
…Turkey’s policy of status quo proved to be untenable after Russian
illegal annexation of Crimea and a turn of Crimea into Fortress
Russia because the balance of power in the Black Sea region has
shifted in favour of Russia, although Turkey is not yet ready to admit
this point.
…the poor state of relations among the six littoral states complicates
the emergence of a viable maritime security framework necessary to
meet common challenges… Russia has for instance reduced Ukraine’s
share of growth in Black Sea shipments and is poised to challenge
other littoral states by strengthening its competitiveness by military
means… The risk of disruption to maritime trade flows is growing,
and the prospect that Russia will try to increase its influence over the
Bosporus and Dardanelles should not be underestimated.
…Russia also seeks to foster mistrust and division among Romania,
Bulgaria and Turkey in order to preclude them from acting in concert
or forging a strong NATO flank…Among NATO members in the Black
Sea region only Turkey has fully developed anti-submarine warfare…
the Black Sea eastern flank of NATO remains vulnerable to any
potential attack from and by Russia and is not yet ready to defend
itself…
A common security threat assessment is needed for NATO’s Black
Sea eastern flank… Economic development is crucial among NATO
states in the Black Sea as this would help shield each society against
Russia’s disinformation, political penetration and populist appeals
to sectors of society…Russia looking to exploit any opportunity to
surprise five littoral states… perhaps five littoral states can learn a
lesson or two from experience of the Baltic States and Scandinavian
countries. For that they require unity, patience, understandings of
each other shortcomings, and readiness to help each other as it was
done in case of the Baltic States, when Scandinavian countries helped
the latter and the Baltic States helped each other. Furthermore,
Bulgaria and Turkey in particular should be ready to overcome
painful historical legacies…

“…the Black Sea eastern flank of NATO remains vulnerable to any potential attack from and by Russia and
is not yet ready to defend itself.”

OE Watch | February 2019

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Stay in Afghanistan until 2021
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 December, the Turkish
Parliament passed a motion to extend Turkey’s presence
within the NATO-led “Resolute Support Mission” in
Afghanistan until 2021. The accompanying passages from
Turkish sources discuss Turkey’s role within this mission.
Resolute Support was launched on 1 January 2015,
following the conclusion of the previous NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission
at the end of 2014. Resolute Support’s mission is to help
Afghan security forces and institutions develop the capacity
to defend Afghanistan and protect its people in a sustainable
way. The mission comprises approximately 16,000
personnel from 41 NATO allies and partners.
As the passages note, Turkey currently has 469 personnel
within Resolute Support. The passages discuss comments
by Volkan Bozkır, the President of the Foreign Relations
Commission within the Turkish Parliament. Bozkır
notes that Turkey has spent over $1.1 billion to support
Afghanistan, and carried out over 1000 projects in every
single province of Afghanistan. Bozkır also notes that, for
the period of 2018-2020, Turkey has promised to provide
$20 million each year to Afghanistan, for a total of $60
million for the three-year period. In addition to the support
that Bozkır discusses, it should be added that the current
Commander of the Hamid Karzai International Airport (or
Kabul International Airport) is a Turkish Brigadier General.
Bozkır also notes that the security situation in Afghanistan
is still fragile and that attacks are continuing, calling on
regional countries and the international community to
continue their support until a sustainable foundation for
peace and stability has been achieved.

Source: “TBMM’de Afganistan tezkeresi kabul edildi (Afghanistan motion
accepted in the Turkish Grand National Assembly),” CNNTurk.com, 25
December 2018. https://www.cnnturk.com/turkiye/tbmmde-afganistantezkeresi-kabul-edildi
The Presidential motion to extend the period of duty for the Turkish Armed
Forces (TAF) units in Afghanistan has been accepted in the Turkish Grand
National Assembly General Council. TAF will stay in Afghanistan for two more
years.
Source: “Türkiye, 2 Yıl Daha Afganistan’da Kalacak (Turkey will stay in
Afghanistan for 2 More Years),” Asya’nin Sesi (Voice of Asia), 26 December
2018. https://asyaninsesi.com/turkiye-2-yil-daha-afganistanda-kalacak/
[Turkish Parliament Foreign Relations Commission President] Volkan Bozkır
said that the progress in Afghanistan is still very fragile and noted that “Until
the peace and stability in Afghanistan becomes sustainable, it is critical
that the region’s countries and the international community continues its
support.”...
Bozkır said that the total assistance that Turkey has provided to Afghanistan
has surpassed $1.1 billion dollars, noting that “Over 1000 projects have been
carried out in every single province of Afghanistan.”...
Bozkır noted that Turkey currently has 469 personnel in Afghanistan within
the Resolute Support Mission, noting that “Despite all the efforts, the security
situation in Afghanistan is fragile. Peace has not been achieved and attacks
continue.”
Bozkır noted that, “It was declared during the Warsaw Summit that our
financial assistance [to Afghanistan] would be a total of $60 million for the
period of 2018-2020, to be paid in the form of $20 million each year. The $20
million promised for 2018 is being transferred in installments.”
On the other hand, Bozkır noted that the Afghan parliamentary elections,
which took place on 20 October 2018, were an important step. He reminded
that if the upcoming Presidential elections to be held in Afghanistan in the
spring of 2019 were successful, this would be another important step in
establishing an environment conducive to political compromise.”

Turkey and Afghanistan share a special relationship based
on strong religious, historical and cultural ties, which date
back to the founding of both countries. These ties made
it easier for Turkey to play an active role in Afghanistan
within ISAF from 2001 until the end of 2014. While Turkey
did not participate in counterinsurgency or counterterrorist
operations in ISAF, Turkish troops played important roles in
ensuring security in their area of responsibility, providing
logistical assistance to other international forces, training
Afghan security personnel and contributing to capacity
development. Turkey has also played an important role in
training local police and military forces in Afghanistan.
In addition, Turkish forces have run several Provincial
Reconstruction Teams (called PRTs) in different parts of
Afghanistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) logo (LEFT), Resolute Support Mission logo (RIGHT).
Source: LEFT: North Atlantic Treaty Organization via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ISAF-Logo.svg,
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Public Domain.
RIGHT: Kopiersperre via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Resolute_Support.svg, Public Domain.

“The total assistance that Turkey has provided to Afghanistan has surpassed $1.1 billion dollars... Over
1000 projects have been carried out in every single province of Afghanistan.”
OE Watch | February 2019

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
IRGC: Iran Can Extend Ballistic Missile Range
OE Watch Commentary: In the accompanying excerpted article
from Mashregh News, an outlet close to the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC), General Amir Ali Hajizadeh, the commander
of the IRGC’s aerospace force, addresses Iran’s missile program
against the backdrop of a broader speech about how the United States
and Europe cannot be trusted. He praises Iran’s go-it-alone attitude
and argues that if Iranian authorities listen to or compromise with
the West, the Islamic Republic would face terrorist movements and
military threats within its own territory. That he singles out both
the Pahlavi regime (overthrown in 1979) and alleged US support for
separatist movements highlights growing concern about the increasing
profile and popularity of Reza Pahlavi, son of the ousted shah, as well
as recent attacks in Iranian Kurdistan, Khuzestan, and Balochistan.
In the same speech, Hajizadeh acknowledges that sanctions and
military embargoes had caused Iran difficulty, but said that indigenous
defense industries (many of which the IRGC controls) had overcome
such difficulties and enabled Iran to develop cutting-edge military
technology.

“We have no technical or contractual limitations on
the range of missiles.”
Source: “Europa va Amrika Tigheha-ye Yek Qichi baraye Fishar beh
Iran Hastand (Europe and America are twin blades of a scissors to
pressure Iran),” Mashregh News, 10 December 2018. https://www.
mashreghnews.ir/news/918359
General [Amir Ali] Hajizadeh said that Iran’s jihadist and
revolutionary outlook has solved many problems from the beginning
of the revolution to the present, including confrontation with the
separatist groups and the Holy Defense [Iran-Iraq War]…
He added: “One of our fundamental problems is the economic
and military boycott, but today we have missiles and UAVs and a
variety of equipment, and this is due to self-sufficiency, pursuit of
a revolutionary outlook, and to be at the forefront of revolutionary
people in this area….
The commander of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s Air Force Corps
noted the range of ballistic missiles, and added: “We have the ability
to build missiles with taller fins.” The 2000-kilometer range is not
limited by technical restraints, but what [the 2,000 km range] we have
decided on to date is based on our needs. Many enemy bases are
between 300-400 km and the next step is 700-800 km. We have no
technical or contractual limitations on the range of missiles.

Iran’s continued development of ballistic missiles remains a
diplomatic bone of contention between Tehran and many Western
states. In the article, Hajizadeh urges his followers not to worry about
the 2,000 kilometer limit to Iran’s ballistic missile range, assuring
them that such a limit is self-imposed and the result of a political
decision, and that Iran has the technology to exceed that. Indeed,
Iran has increasingly launched satellites utilizing the same rocket
technology that could be used for longer range missiles. This creates a situation where Iran seeks diplomatic benefit from limiting its range,
while pursuing the technology and means to extend its missiles’ reach at will.

Beyond discussion of the longest range missiles, Hajizadeh brags about Iran’s medium-range arsenal. Though he does not say as much
outright, the 300-400 kilometer range missiles would be capable of hitting almost any US military facility in the Persian Gulf region, while the
700 – 800 kilometer range missiles could target Iranian adversaries in Saudi Arabia or Afghanistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

Iran’s Khorramshahr missile with a range of 1200 miles.

Source: Hossein Zohrevand, Tasnim News Agency via Wikimedia Commons, CCA 4.0, https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/media/1396/06/31/1526662.

OE Watch | February 2019

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Create Space Agency
OE Watch Commentary: On 13 December 2018 Turkey
announced the creation of a space agency after a 20 year delay.
The agency will coordinate space activities and strengthen
the Turkish aerospace industry. The accompanying excerpted
article from the state-owned Anadolu Ajansı provides
information about the objectives Turkey aims to achieve by
creating a space agency. According to the article, there are a
number of reasons why Turkey created this agency now. First,
one mission of the agency is to provide support and strengthen
the Turkish aerospace industry. The second is to boost Turkish
capabilities in space technology by improving and capitalizing
on the scientific infrastructure and creating human capital.
Third, a national space agency, with increased Turkish space
technology capabilities, will lead to independent access to
space. Finally, it aims to coordinate with other scientific and
technological fields and institutions to create an independent
Turkish aerospace policy.

Reconnaissance and surveillance satellite Göktürk 2 (model) of Air Force Command by
Turkish Aerospace Industries at IDEF 2015.

The article also argues that aerospace requires collaboration
Source: CeeGee [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:TaiIDEF2015_(8).JPG.
between various fields and sectors such as civilian and military
and public and private. Space technology is not completely new to Turkish public and private sectors. The Turkish Air Force Command
operates two satellite systems for reconnaissance and surveillance. Göktürk 2, Turkey’s first high-resolution electro-optical satellite was
a joint venture of the Turkish Aerospace Industries and TUBITAK Space and was launched into orbit in 2012. Göktürk 1, a military
reconnaissance and observation satellite, was developed by the Italian Telespazio and French partner Thales Alenia Space and put into orbit
in 2016. The development of Göktürk 3 is underway. Turkey also has communication satellites, including Türksat 1B (launched in 1994),
Türksat 1C and Türksat 2A (launched in 1996 and in 2001 respectively), Türksat 3A (in 2008), as well as Türksat 4A (in 2014) and Türksat
4B (in 2015). The communication satellites Türksat 5A and Türksat 5B are planned to be launched in 2020 and 2021 respectively. The author
concludes the article by stating that creating and maintaining a space agency is a “matter of national security” for Turkey. End OE Watch
Commentary (Gunduz)

“...the most important functions of space agencies are to create a national space strategy and to create a
science and technology policy towards space.”
Source: Arda Mevlütoğlu, “Uzay Ajansı ve Türkiye’nin uzay teknolojilerindeki yeri (Space Agency and Turkey’s place in space
technologies),” Anadolu Ajansı, 26 December 2018. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/uzay-ajansi-ve-turkiye-nin-uzay-teknolojilerindekiyeri/1349127
The Turkey Space Agency (TUA) was established on December 13 by Presidential decree… The establishment of the TUA has been followed
for a long time by those who are interested in the field and the aerospace industry sector.
The TUA will have financial and administrative autonomy as well as a special budget…The TUA will prepare and carry out the National
Space Program…
The necessity and importance of Space Agency
…First of all…the most important functions of space agencies are to create a national space strategy and to create a science and technology
policy towards space. Aerospace is a sector in which the most advanced technologies are being used and it brings in many different
disciplines by nature…
…the vast majority of systems, platforms and applications developed for space are combined together by different users. In other words,
military and civilian areas of usage are mostly intertwined… In this sense, the national space agency has the function of a coordination
mechanism between military, commercial, industrial, public and academic stakeholders.
It is a matter of national security to ensure that the activities of all the elements in the military, commercial or other areas of space are
provided in an uninterrupted and secure manner. Therefore, the space agency is of critical importance for the pre-determination, analysis and
preparation of emergency action plans, for managing and ultimately disposing of all kinds of natural or man-made threats and risks…

OE Watch | February 2019

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran’s Army Aviation Gets UAV Unit
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic of Iran prides
itself on its indigenous military industries which, in recent years,
have invested greatly in shipbuilding, ballistic missiles, and
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). In the accompanying excerpted
article from Iran’s official state news agency, IRNA, Brigadier
General Yousef Ghorbani, the head of the regular army’s aviation
unit, talks about starting up an army aviation UAV unit. Such an
announcement suggests the advances in Iran’s UAV program are
real and that UAVs are well-integrated into Iranian military doctrine.
Ghorbani speaks about five categories of Iranian UAVs: electronic
warfare, assault, transport, surveillance, and suicide.
That the regular military will soon have a UAV unit is important
to note. After all, the Islamic Republic has parallel militaries—the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and the regular military
(sometimes called Artesh, the Persian word for army). The IRGC is
the more elite of the two. Its job is to defend the revolution, meaning
enemies can be domestic or foreign, while the regular military is
charged with territorial defense and securing Iran’s borders. The
IRGC always has the first crack at cutting-edge technologies and new
military platforms, while the regular military usually takes second
fiddle. If the regular military is now integrating a UAV unit, that
suggests both that the IRGC already has enough and that all Iranian
strategists welcome the qualitative importance UAVs can bring to the
nation’s defense.
That the article mentions that UAVs now continuously monitor Iran’s
western border also signals the increasing difficulty Iran may have
securing its border with Iraq, especially given the Kurdish insurgency
and Arab unrest it faces across that frontier. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

Source: “Guruh-e Pehpad-e Havaniruz Tashkil Mishavad (An UAV
unit for the Islamic Republic of Iran Army Aviation is formed),”
Islamic Republic News Agency, 17 December 2018. http://www.irna.
ir/fa/News/83137088
Brigadier General Yousef Ghorbani stated in an interview with the
IRNA defense correspondent, with regard to the issue of the formation
of a drone unit, the formation of a drone group for Army Aviation is
on the agenda and it will soon be formed. He added, “Army Aviation
had earlier conducted reconnaissance operations with helicopters,
but today we will be begin to transition to UAVs in this arena.
The commander of Army Aviation said, the military had previously
used drones for “some missions.” According to IRNA, the Islamic
Republic of Iran Army Ground Forces has one of the most powerful
UAVs in the area and, so far, it has exhibited various UAV types like
electronic warfare, assault, transport, surveillance, and suicide.
Brigadier General Kiomars Heidari, commander of the Islamic
Republic of Iran Army Ground Forces, gave an interview with IRNA
a while back [on 12 October 2018] in which he stated that this year,
a new drone would be revealed, and he said, the new drone would
carry out missions with new flight links. According to local army
commanders, the Ground Forces are continuously monitoring the
Western borders of this country with UAVs.
In another part of the conversation, Gen. Ghorbani, commander
of the Army’s air force, said Iran had great self-sufficiency in the
manufacture of helicopter parts, and he said, “We use indigenous
parts to maintain our helicopters and for our weapons, and in this
context, not even the smallest part is manufactured abroad, and
this military organization maintains the massive fleet of the Islamic
Republic’s helicopters….

“The Ground Forces are continuously monitoring
Iran’s western borders with UAVs.”

General Yousef Ghorbani, commander of Iran Army Aviation.
Source: IRNA, http://img6.irna.ir/1397/13970926/83137088/n83137088-72722155.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Sell ATAK Helicopters to the Philippines
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey and the Philippines signed an
agreement extending the Turkish defense industry’s reach into South East
Asia. A memorandum of understanding was signed by Ismail Demir,
the head of Turkey’s Defense Industries Presidency (SSB), and Delfin
Lorenzana, the Defense Secretary of the Philippines on 18 December
2018. The accompanying excerpted article from the Turkish newspaper
Haber Turk argues that this agreement will pave the way to more defense
cooperation between Turkey and the Philippines.

Source: “Atak helikopterine Filipinler yolu açıldı (A way opens
for ATAK helicopters to the Philippines ),” Haber Turk, 18
December 2018. https://www.haberturk.com/atak-helikopterinefilipinler-yolu-acildi-2265016-ekonomi

The article notes that at the signing ceremony, Demir said Turkey
currently sells firearms, ammunition and night-vision systems to the
Philippines and that this memorandum puts the sales of the Turkish
Aerospace Industries’ (TAI) T-129 ATAK combat helicopter as well as
unmanned aircraft (possibly TAI’s Anka) on the agenda. The Philippine
Air Force was initially going to purchase 24 T-129 ATAK helicopters, but
due to the lack of funds, the number was reduced to eight for now.

The deal was signed by Ismail Demir, the head of Turkey’s
Defense Industries Presidency (SSB), and Delfin Lorenzana, the
Defense Secretary of the Philippines.

Turkey previously signed an agreement with Pakistan for the sale of 30
T-129 ATAK combat helicopters (see: “Turkey to Sell T-129 Helicopters
and Four Corvettes to Pakistan” OE Watch, September 2018). The
agreement with Pakistan has been postponed for six months because of
issues surrounding the engine license. Exporting T-129 ATAK helicopters
is subjected to the permission of the United States because of the rights
over the use of LHTEC T800-4A turboshaft engine and Turkish officials
are now reportedly in search of T-129 ATAK helicopter engines in Europe
and China. While Turkey continues to increase its defense exports and
to strengthen its position through diversifying industrial collaboration
efforts with more countries, it still heavily relies on the industry’s
leading countries for critical parts of military hardware. End OE Watch
Commentary (Gunduz)

Demir [continued] cooperation in technology and local
talent development are key to the bilateral relations with the
Philippines…

Turkey and the Philippines have signed a Memorandum of
Understanding in defense industry cooperation…Turkey’s ATAK
helicopter’s new address will be in the Philippines…

Demir said [Turkey] is currently selling guns, ammo and nightvision glasses to the Philippines, Turkey now has its indigenous
ATAK battle helicopter, unmanned aircraft and vessels on its
agenda to sell to the Philippines…

Demir pointed out to Turkey’s experience in these matters [and]
said “Our defense industry policies are attractive because these
countries want to know the models Turkey is implementing and
they wonder how Turkey has achieved this up until now.”
The Philippines at first will purchase about 10 [helicopters].
There is a possibility of [purchasing] more than 10.
TAI previously signed an agreement with Pakistan for the sale
of 30 ATAK helicopters.

“Turkey and the Philippines have signed a Memorandum of Understanding in defense industry
cooperation…Turkey’s ATAK helicopter’s new address will be in the Philippines…”

Turkish Land Forces’ T-129 ATAK attack helicopter of Turkish Aerospace Industries at IDEF 2015.

Source: CeeGee [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TaiIDEF2015_(11).JPG.

OE Watch | February 2019

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Chinese Military and Commercial Cooperation with Tunisia
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese investments in Tunisia appear to be on the rise,
particularly after the Tunisian government signed up for China’s One Belt One Road Initiative
in July 2018. Furthermore, the Chinese military is looking to deepen relations with its Tunisian
counterpart in the next year, as detailed in the accompanying passages from local media
sources.
In the spring of 2018, the Tunisian government put out a tender for bids to extract phosphate
ore from the Sra Ouertane deposits, located in the country’s economically depressed central
province of El Kef. As noted in the first accompanying passage, from Tunisia’s official press
agency, the sole offer came from China. The government appears intent on opening the mine
to generate valuable employment and revenue opportunities, though environmental and
profitability concerns may yet prevent the project from going forward.
A more ambitious Chinese investment proposal, detailed in the second accompanying excerpt
from Sputnik, involves Tunisia’s Mediterranean port city of Zarzis (Jarjis), located in the
southern province of Medenine near the border with Libya. A September 2018 Memorandum of
Understanding calls for Chinese investment to expand the city’s existing industrial zone, along
with the construction of a 2.5-kilometer bridge connecting it to the nearby island of Djerba and
a 140-kilometer railway connecting it to the main land route linking Tunisia and Libya. These
projects, according to a Tunisian minister, would “change the face” of southern Tunisia.
China is also strengthening its linkages with Tunisia’s military. The third accompanying
excerpt, from a 31 December 2018 Tunisian Defense Ministry press release, notes that China
recently pledged to provide Tunisia with unspecified military equipment, “according to the
needs of the military.” Military collaboration between the two is expected to grow in 2019, with
a newly established “joint Tunisian-Chinese military committee” to be the main vehicle for this
cooperation. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

Tunisia Administrative Map.

Source: User:(WT-shared) Burmesedays, Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection Tunisia Maps,
OpenStreetMap [CC BY 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia
Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tunisia_Regions_map.png.

“…the creation of a joint Tunisian-Chinese military committee, which will hold its first round in China in
2019, and which will represent a good framework for supporting this cooperation.”
Source:
‫ تونس تتلقى عرضا وحيدا من الصني الستغالل منجم رساورتان بالكاف‬: ‫  من أكرب املناجم يف العامل‬
“One of the largest deposits in the world: Tunisia receives a single bid from China to mine the Sra Ouertane deposit in El Kef,” Agence Tunis
Afrique Presse via Jawhara FM, 27 December 2018. https://goo.gl/KYY3Eg
The only bid for exploiting the Sra Ouertane Phosphate mine, in the south of El Kef Province, is currently being studied. It was made by
China and aims at extracting the surface phosphate ore deposits, which according to initial estimates total 10 billion tons, making it one of the
largest deposits in the world and which can be mined for many consecutive decades.
Source:
‫وقعت الحكومة التونسية والصني عىل اتفاقيات لتنفيذ مشاريع بنى تحتية وإنشاء منطقة صناعية جنويب تونس‬
“Tunisian and Chinese governments sign agreement on infrastructure and industrial zone projects in southern Tunisia,” Sputnik, 5 September
2018. https://goo.gl/UdpPqM
In press statements, the Tunisian minister of state and real estate affairs said that these projects will change the face of the south and benefit
all of Tunisia. “China and Tunisia have been quietly working on these intended projects for two years. Other similar projects are being worked
on in the center and northwest areas”… this China-Tunisia agreement aims to build a close partnership, especially given Tunisia’s joining
the One Belt One Road Initiative in July 2018. These projects are particularly important given their proximity to the Tunisia-Libya border
along the Mediterranean Sea, which will contribute to strengthening trade and economic flows between the countries, provided the situation
stabilizes in Libya.
Source:
‫إمضاء اتفاقية هبة صينية لفائدة املؤسسة العسكرية‬
“Agreement signed for Chinese gift to the military,” National Defense Ministry Press Office, 31 December 2018. http://www.press.defense.
tn/?p=1256
During the meeting between Tunisian Defense Minister Abdel Karim al-Zubaidi and Chinese Ambassador Wang Wenbin at the defense
ministry headquarters this afternoon, an agreement was signed for China to donate equipment to Tunisia, according to the needs of the
military. The defense minister praised Chinese support for Tunisia in all domains, including military cooperation, which has in recent years
grown and which the military has used to improve its capabilities. He noted that the creation of a joint Tunisian-Chinese military committee,
which will hold its first round in China in 2019, and which will represent a good framework for supporting this cooperation.
OE Watch | February 2019

54

AFRICA
Anger in Sudan: Large Protests Against al-Bashir Regime
OE Watch Commentary: There is anger in Sudan fueling a
demand for change in the government, and as the accompanying
excerpted article from Deutsche Welle explains, that anger is not
because the price of bread tripled, but rather it is a response to
the rule of President Omar al-Bashir. President al-Bashir came to
power in a 1989 military coup and has stayed in office through three
allegedly corrupt elections; however, he continues to insist that
these incidents of people taking to the streets are “bread protests”
orchestrated by opposition infiltrators, including some backed by
Israel, and all of whom want to overthrow his regime.

“The protest wave sweeping across Sudan was never
about bread; it is a nation fed up with a decades-old
military dictatorship, say human rights activists and
experts.”

The president and his security forces are responding forcefully,
using tear gas, stun grenades and even shooting protesters. Those
who survive regroup and return to launch new protests. Meanwhile,
he is arresting opposition leaders. A group of Darfuri University
students also were rounded up; accused of launching an arson
attack on offices of al-Bashir’s ruling National Congress, they
later “confessed” on national television to being a sabotage cell.
The quotation marks around confessed were in the original article,
reflecting the regime’s abysmal human rights record. Al-Bashir was
even indicted by the International Criminal Court, which stated he
bore responsibility for genocide, crimes against humanity, and war
crimes committed in Darfur.
This is not the first time the people have protested, nor is it the first
time the protesters were met with violence. In 2013, 300 of them were
shot dead. While previous protests ended with the regime still firmly
in place, at least some say this time they are not going to give up.
Although time will eventually tell if that is indeed the case, the article
cites the fact that these are the largest protests since Sudan’s 1964
October Revolution, which returned the country to civilian rule.
As the article explains, there is some disagreement as to whether or
not this movement can be considered part of, or similar to, the Arab
Spring. Indeed the chant of some of the Sudanese, “The people want
to bring down the regime,” was used by protesters during the Arab
Spring. However, the argument against it being an Arab Spring is that
unlike the 2010 revolution which spread throughout parts of North
Africa and the Middle East, this is a homegrown and spontaneous
uprising. The idea of whether or not this uprising is an Arab Spring
is open to debate; however, not open to debate, as detailed in the
article, is the anger of the people against the regime. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir is facing massive protests against his regime.”
Source: Meeting with President of Sudan Omar al-Bashir (2018), http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/57998, CC 4.0.

Source: Benita van Eyssen, “Anger over dictatorship, not bread, fueling Sudan uprising,” Deutsche Welle, 29 December 2018. https://www.
dw.com/en/anger-over-dictatorship-not-bread-fueling-sudan-uprising/a-46894036
The protest wave sweeping across Sudan was never about bread; it is a nation fed up with a decades-old military dictatorship, say human
rights activists and experts.
“There is something novel and interesting about this wave of protests: The didn’t start in Khartoum but in provincial towns because the
price of bread tripled in these towns, as compared to the capital,” says Magdi El Gizouli, a Sudanese academic and fellow of the Rift Valley
Institute in Germany.
“One reason for them to be particularly angry is that this comes against the background of severe economic deterioration in the country.”
It is definitely time for Al Bashir to step down, according to El Gizouli. “It has been time for some years already. He is not out of government,
of course, but I think Sudan has gone beyond him. He is almost a relic of another era.

OE Watch | February 2019

55

AFRICA
Africa: Trouble Spots to Watch in 2019
OE Watch Commentary: With parts of Africa bracing for
potentially significant violence in 2019, the accompanying
excerpted article from The East African provides the
perspective of an actual African publication as to where the
continent’s trouble spots might be, in contrast to perspectives
from numerous non-African sources. While different African
journalists may or may not include some of the six nations
listed here, the article presents strong evidence as to why
each one was chosen. Below are brief descriptions of the six.

“A number of African countries have been mapped as
possible trouble spots on which the African Union and the
United Nations should keep a close watch this year, either
due to elections or internal conflict.”

Nigeria, as the article describes, is a front-runner for
potential violence as the country goes to the polls in
February to possibly replace President Buhari, who at 75 is
in ill-health but remains in the race. Meanwhile, delays in
funding for the electoral commission and security agencies
are hindering election preparations. Major issues facing the
country include corruption, unemployment, and nepotistic
political appointments, while previous bouts of political
violence, such as attacks on minorities following the 2011
elections, have people nervous that such acts could be
repeated.
Elections are an issue in Comoros as well. President Azali
Assoumani’s forced referendum overturning an agreement
With concerns that South Sudan, one of the trouble spots mentioned in the accompanying
that provides for the presidency to be rotated among the
excerpted article, could have trouble implementing its 2018 peace treaty, soldiers assigned to
three islands has led to the deterioration of the political
the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), such as these from the UK, will still be present in 2019.
Source: Isaac Billy/UNMISS/Flickr, https://goo.gl/Yx2phs, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.
environment.
Sudan also comes up as a trouble spot. Since midDecember, people have taken to the streets to both protest
high food prices and to pressure Omar al-Bashir, who
has been President for 30 years, to step down. There are
concerns that Bashir could ratchet up the repression even
more.
South Sudan, the world’s newest nation, saw a peace
treaty signed in 2018 by some of the warring parties. While
there has been a decline in fighting, there are worries
that difficulties in implementing the agreement could see
violence flare once more.

Source: Fred Oluoch, “Africa’s top trouble spots in 2019 mapped,” The East
African, 6 January 2019. https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/ea/Africa-toptrouble-spots-in-2019-mapped/4552908-4923110-2sit6rz/index.html
A number of African countries have been mapped as possible trouble spots on
which the African Union and the United Nations should keep a close watch this
year, either due to elections or internal conflict.
President Assouman [of Comoros] is planning to call early elections this year,
which could help him remain in power beyond 2021, when he was supposed to
exit…He has forced some opposition leaders into exile.
But the deal [in South Sudan] is a work in progress and worrying, because it
envisages elections in 2022, perpetuating the Kiir-Machar rivalry until then,
paving the way for another showdown.

In Somalia the central government has reached an impasse
with the regional ones, making political progress and stability uncertain. Meanwhile, the battle against al-Shabaab continues.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo also makes the list as election results are taking longer than expected. Additionally, militia groups
have threatened to resist any government should the results suggest the outcome was rigged in favor of Emmanuel Ramazani Shady.
Some may disagree with the inclusions and omissions on this list from a major African news outlet. However, in declaring what potential
trouble spots there are on its own continent, this article provides an African perspective as to what to pay particular attention to in 2019. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

OE Watch | February 2019

56

AFRICA
Can Businessmen Bring Peace in Gao, Mali?
OE Watch Commentary: On 9 December the Bamako, Mali-based Frenchlanguage publication Nord Sud Journal published the accompanying excerpted
article about men in Gao who are attempting to use mutual business interests
and their status as “notables” as a way to reconcile the existing conflicts in the
city. According to the article, the owner of a transport company called Sonef
Group led an initiative that brought together the leader of an Arab militant
movement called Arab Movement of Azawad (MAA) and a Tuareg militant
movement called Coordination of Azawad Movements (CMA) for three days
starting in late November. While no specifics were mentioned about the deal
they reached in the article, it did state they agreed to set up a consultation
framework that focuses on sustainable economic development. There are also
notables brought in from the Songhay community that have become part of the
framework.
The article indicates that a final agreement to settle all the issues between
the different communities has not yet been made, nor have all of the youths
who have left home to fight returned. However, at least among the business
representatives and notables there is newfound optimism. It is therefore worthy
of mention that the article does not point to any role from either the Malian
government or international organizations in this effort: only members of the
business community and respected elders representing their ethnic groups were
involved. This reflects the sometimes overlooked power of grassroots bottom-up
initiatives compared to a top-down approach when engaging in peacemaking.
Thus far, this reconciliation process exists only in Gao and therefore it has
not yet proven to be transferable to other cities. Nevertheless, by setting up
an office, they now have a forum to convene for future meetings. Gao was
occupied by al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) in 2012 and has not seen
peace since then, even though AQIM has largely been pushed out of the city.
Now, apparently the city has new prospects for a thaw in violence. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Everyone is in this union for peace,
reconciliation, for economic and social
development.”
Source: “Gao: la paix des braves entre Hanoun et Ould
Laweinate (Gao: the brave peace between Hanoun and Ould
Laweinate),” Nord Sud Journal, 9 December 2018. https://
www.nordsudjournal.com/gao-la-paix-des-braves-entrehanoun-et-ould-laweinate/
The leaders of the Arab Movement of Azawad (MAA)
Hanoun Ould Ali and Mohamed Ould Laweinate engaged
in a reconciliation earlier this month at a meeting in
Tinfanda, Gao region. From 30 November to 2 December,
a community meeting was held in Tinfanda, 110 kilometers
north of Gao, in which Hanoun Ould Ali, leader of the
MAA, and Mohamed Ould Laweinate, the leader affiliated
with the Coordination of Azawad Movements (CMA),
reconciled. This reconciliation, which was initiated by the
entrepreneur Nema Ould Sidi Amar, owner of the Sonef
Group, put an end to several years of war.
During this meeting, an office bringing together Arab
leaders from the region was also set up before being
presented to the Gao Consultation Framework, which
brings together the city’s notables. “Today, there is no
problem. Everyone is in this union for peace, reconciliation,
for economic and social development. That’s why we,
Hanoun Mohamed Ould Aweinate and Mohamed Ould
Idriss, have set up an office that we presented to the Gao
Consultation Framework.” they said.

Eleveurs Peuls.

Source:KaTeznik [CC BY-SA 2.0 fr (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/fr/deed.en)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eleveurs_Peuls.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

57

AFRICA
Chinese Weapons in Rwanda
OE Watch Commentary: While Rwanda has sourced much of its military equipment
from a variety of countries, including Russia, France, South Africa, the United States,
and Israel, as the accompanying excerpted article from the South African website
DefenceWeb relates, the country’s armed forces are increasingly turning to China for
military hardware. The latest items, including Red Arrow 9A anti-tank missiles and at
least one PCL-09 self-propelled howitzer, were first displayed on 11 December 2018 at
Rwanda’s annual combined arms exercise, labeled Hard Punch III, that took place at the
Gabiro Combat Training Center.
The PCL-09, built by Poly Technologies, mounts a Soviet D-30 122 mm howitzer
on a Shaanxi 6x6 truck. Only a single PCL-09 (export designation CS/SH1, not to be
confused with the Norinco SH1 155 mm self-propelled artillery system) was seen at the
exercise and while the article does not mention if Rwanda purchased others, it does say
that alongside it was an SH3 122 mm tracked self-propelled howitzer. The SH3 122 mm
is built by China and was first seen in Rwanda during the 2017 iteration of the exercise.
Also making an appearance at Hard Punch III was an Otokar Cobra armored vehicle.
Fitted to the Cobra were Red Arrow 9A (HJ-9A) anti-tank missiles. According to the
article, the Red Arrow 9A has a range of 5,500 meters and carries a high explosive antitank warhead able to penetrate 1200 mm of armor. Additionally, the article relates that
Rwanda might be the first export user for this type of missile, which is already in service
with the Chinese People’s Liberation Army.
Several other pieces of Chinese military hardware in use by the Rwandan military
were also mentioned in the article. While there is some uncertainty as to exactly what
artillery platforms China has previously exported to Rwanda, there is no uncertainty that
China continues to be a big supplier to this small country. End OE Watch Commentary
(Feldman)

“Rwanda’s military is now operating
Chinese PCL-09 self-propelled
howitzers and Red Arrow 9A anti-tank
missiles.”
Source: “Rwanda unveils new Chinese weaponry,”
DefenceWeb, 14 December 2018. https://www.
defenceweb.co.za/land/land-land/rwanda-unveilsnew-chinese-weaponry/
Rwanda’s military is now operating Chinese
PCL-09 self-propelled howitzers and Red Arrow 9A
anti-tank missiles.
The CS/SH1 can fire projectiles out to a range of
around 27 km with a rate of fire of eight rounds
per minute. A total of 40 rounds are carried. The
vehicle can be fitted with a 12.7 mm machinegun
on the crew cabin for self-protection – the cab has
seating for five persons. The vehicle weights around
16 500 kg and can reach a top speed of 85 km/h
with a range of 600 km.
The Rwanda Defence Force (RDF) also operate
2S1 self-propelled howitzers armed with 122 mm
D-30-derived guns.

“Rwandan soldiers during a deployment in 2014. Increasingly the Rwandan military is purchasing Chinese weapons.”
Source: Rwanda Government/Flickr, https://goo.gl/EVKYoT,, CC BY-ND 2.0.

OE Watch | February 2019

58

AFRICA
Political Uncertainty Persists Following Coup Attempt
in Gabon
OE Watch Commentary: The attempted coup in Gabon by a small
group of soldiers on 7 January 2019 was swiftly brought to an end.
Lieutenant Ondo Obiang Kelly, deputy commander of the Republican
Guard and the self-declared head of the Patriotic Youth Movement of the
Gabonese Defense and Security Forces, was the last of five perpetrators
arrested, with two others having been killed by government forces.
Although the coup attempt is over, as the accompanying excerpted article
from the East African relates, many Gabonese are still wondering who is in
charge as President Ali Bongo has been out of the country since suffering
a stroke in October while visiting Saudi Arabia. He later went to Morocco
where his New Year’s Eve speech, characterized by slurred words and a
squint, has raised even more questions about his health and possible return
to power. Meanwhile, complicating matters back in Gabon is the fact that
there is no Prime Minister, a position appointed by the head of state.

“The brief attempt on power has prompted
many to ponder the flux gripping a country
where political change has been negligible for
more than half a century.”

Having such political uncertainty in Gabon is rare. For nearly 42 years
the country was ruled by Omar Bongo, the current president’s father.
When Omar Bongo died in 2009, his son won the election, and has ruled
the country since. Thus, except for the country’s first president, who ruled
for seven years, and two interim presidents who served during the time
between the death of the father and the election of his son, the country has
been ruled by a member of the Bongo family.
As the article describes, life in Gabon quickly returned to normal
following the failed attempt to grab power, with shops reopening, the roads
reopened to traffic, and the internet restored, which had been cut off. While
the impact of the attempted coup faded, the concern of who is running the
country, which dates back before the coup to when Bongo had a stroke,
has not. One opposition newspaper described the situation in November as
Gabon dangerously being on automatic pilot. The opposition even tried to
have the Constitutional Court declare a power vacuum, but instead the court
president announced a new clause in the law to clarify the situation.
The message from the authorities following the coup attempt is that
Gabon is doing fine and that Bongo will soon return; however, as the coup
demonstrated and the article describes, there is uncertainty with regards to
the country’s political situation. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)
Source: “Gabon coup bid highlights country in grip of uncertainty,”
The East African, 8 January 2019. https://www.theeastafrican.
co.ke/news/africa/Gabon-coup-bid-highlights-country-in-grip-ofuncertainty/4552902-4926542-10302b8/index.html
The brief attempt on power has prompted many to ponder the flux
gripping a country where political change has been negligible for more
than half a century.
In his lengthening absence, a small group of soldiers stormed the state
broadcasting headquarters in the capital on Monday and went on the
air urging the Gabonese people to “rise up.”
The coup attempt turned out to be short lived. Security forces attacked
the building and arrested the leader, killed two and freed radio
technicians and journalists who had been held hostage.
In a country based on an executive president, Bongo’s absence has
been felt in many ways, from institutional fog to press speculation of
tensions between Bongo’s cabinet director, Brice Laccruche Alihanga,
and the head of the intelligence services, Frederic Bongo.

Gabon in Africa (TOP), Topographic map of Gabon (BOTTOM).

Source: TOP: TUBS [CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], from
Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gabon_in_Africa.svg.
BOTTOM: Mysid [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], via
Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Topographic_map_of_Gabon-en.svg.

OE Watch | February 2019

59

AFRICA
Will Cameroon Grant Clemency to
Anglophone Separatists?
OE Watch Commentary: Since the start of the Ambazonia crisis in
Cameroon in 2017, Anglophone speakers have protested against perceived
favoritism towards French speakers in the country. This has led to
rising levels of organized violence between the state and the separatists.
The accompanying excerpted French-language article from La Afrique
Tribune discusses a possible measure of leniency from the government
towards the arrested separatist leaders, which would represent a change
from the government’s generally harsh stance towards the separatists and
could lead to a possible resolution to the crisis.

“A gesture for the new year could pave the way
for a dialogue and be the element that would
undo this crisis that has claimed many lives.”

According to the article, the legal proceedings of 289 separatists are
soon to take place and 210 separatists have already been released by a
military court. The article notes these releases have been the result of
presidential clemency that was expedited before the Christmas holiday.
However, the article notes that the leader of the separatists, Sisiku Julius
Ayuk Tabe, who declared himself to be the president of Ambazonia, has
not been mentioned as part of the clemency program. He was arrested
in Nigeria in 2017, along with his declared ministers, and extradited to
Cameroon.
The article states that releasing Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe could lead
to an opening for peace negotiations with the separatists. However,
according to the article, his applications for release have been consistently
turned down. The article also quotes the director of a human rights group
who supports his release from prison for the purpose of reconciliation,
but also suggests that it would be an unprecedented gesture before
the new year. Although Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe was not released
from prison during the holiday season and still stands trial, the article
expresses optimism that there a can be a non-violent resolution to the
Ambazonia crisis if the government takes conciliatory measures towards
the separatists, including beginning dialogue with the imprisoned leaders.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Southern cameroon map.

Source: CIA World Factbook, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Southern_cameroon_map.JPG, Public Domain.

Source: “Grâce présidentielle pour le “président autoproclamé” de l’Ambazonie? (Presidential pardon for the “self-proclaimed president” of
Ambazonia?),” La Afrique Tribune, 16 December 2018. https://afrique.latribune.fr/politique/2018-12-16/cameroun-grace-presidentielle-pourle-president-autoproclame-de-l-ambazonie-801265.html
The presidential clemency is a gesture of appeasement but does not affect the self-proclaimed “president” of Ambazonia. Since the special
hearing under the Presidential Ordinance, releases have increased. This is an early Christmas present that is interpreted as at least a gesture
of clemency. But this “grace” has not benefited leaders of the movement including Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe, leader of the Southern Cameroon
National Congress (SCNC), the radical branch of the Liberation Movement of Southern Cameroon (LMSC), who proclaimed himself
“president” of Ambazonia.
Arrested in January 2017 in Nigeria with 46 of his “ministers”, he was extradited to Cameroon and then jailed at Kondengui Central Prison
in Yaoundé. Several times postponed, his trial is still before the court, which has refused all his applications for provisional release or final
release. Some separatists believe that his release could perhaps allow a resolution of the crisis that has erupted in the two English-speaking
regions of Cameroon. One might be surprised to think of a presidential pardon for the separatist leaders as a gift during the end-of-year
speech of Paul Biya. A gesture for the new year could pave the way for a dialogue and be the element that would undo this crisis that has
claimed many lives.

OE Watch | February 2019

60

AFRICA
Kenya Now Has a Coast Guard
OE Watch Commentary: Although it has had a navy for decades, Kenya
never had a coast guard, that is, until now. As reported in the accompanying
excerpted article from DefenceWeb, on 19 November 2018 at the Liwatoni
Fisheries Complex in Mombasa, President Uhuru Kenyatta launched the
Kenya Coast Guard. It is perhaps most fitting that the ceremony was held
at the fisheries complex, because combating the estimated $100 million per
year illegal fishing trade will be one of its main objectives.
The Coast Guard will be comprised of personnel from the police,
army and intelligence services and civilian professionals seconded from
the Public Service Commission, although the article does not describe
its relationship to the country’s other military branches or how it will
coordinate its activities with the navy. Heading up this newly formed
service is Brigadier Victor Naisho Loonena.
During the inauguration ceremony, President Kenyatta also
commissioned the Coast Guard’s first vessel, the MV Doria. The ship,
which had been ordered by Denmark’s JGH Marine on Kenya’s behalf,
was handed over to Kenya by Bangladeshi shipbuilder Western Marine
Shipyard. Armed with a single 20 mm Oerlikon cannon, the MV Doria
is reportedly 54.7 meters long and when empty displaces 350 tons. It has
a cruising speed of 20 to 25 knots, a top speed of 35 knots, and a range
of 1,500 nautical miles. It is designed for a crew of 12 and can hold 60
passengers. A helicopter deck adds to its capabilities.
Beyond protecting the country’s marine resources, particularly its fishing
grounds, the Kenyan Coast Guard will also have as its mission combating
drug and human trafficking. No additional information was available in the
article to say if this newly launched Coast Guard, with only one ship that
has only one cannon, has plans to grow to meet the heavy tasks placed upon
it. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

“…the Coast Guard will ensure that our ocean
will not be used for drug and human trafficking,
and illegal fishing. It will guard against
exploitation of our natural resources by foreign
countries and ensure that no foreign vessel will
steal our fish.”
Source: “Kenya Launches Coast Guard,” DefenceWeb,
22 November 2018. http://www.defenceweb.co.za/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=53
822:kenya-launches-coast-guard&catid=108:maritimesecurity&Itemid=233
The Coast Guard was inaugurated during a ceremony on 19
November at the Liwatoni Fisheries Complex in Mombasa.
Kenyatta said that “the Coast Guard will ensure that our
ocean will not be used for drug and human trafficking, and
illegal fishing. It will guard against exploitation of our natural
resources by foreign countries and ensure that no foreign vessel
will steal our fish.
Kenyatta officially commissioned the MV Doria vessel, which
will be used to patrol Kenyan waters as the country steps up
efforts in protecting, and effectively harnessing its maritime
resources.
“Kenya has great potential for growing the Blue Economy,
which would immensely contribute to our GDP, as well as
create more jobs. This can only be achieved if we put in the
work, invest appropriately and fully harness our maritime
resources,” Kenyatta said.

OEWATCH
community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 8
Issue #11
November 2018

Foreign news & PersPectives oF the oPerational environment

1RL257E Krasukha-4
Electronic Warfare System
EURASIA
3
5
6
8
9
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
21
22
23

Russian Combined Arms Armies Plan Electronic Warfare
Battalions
Russian MoD Considers a “Pocket” Iskander
The S-500 “Prometheus” Air and Missile Defense System Is
Coming!
More Muscle for the Northern Fleet
Increasing Russia’s “Brown-Water” Navy
Why Russians Fight in Syria
Increased Economic Strains for Russian Military Personnel
Military Benefits of the Caspian Sea Convention for Russia’s
Power Projection Capabilities
The Joint Tajik-Uzbek Effort to Demine the Border
Gauging Armenian and Azerbaijani Military Exercises
Moscow Pushes Own Approaches to Cyber Security on Rest
of CSTO
Russian De-dollarization: Economic Counter-Attack?
Polish Perspective on Russian Disinformation Campaigns
Social Media Restrictions for Russian Security
NATO Arctic Exercise Draws Russian Response
French Naval Vessel Sails Northern Sea Route
Russian Coast Guard Expanding in the Arctic
India and the Arctic?
Bulgarian Fighter Aircraft Acquisition

INDO-PACIFIC

AFRICA

49 Yemen’s Civil War Fails to Discourage Horn of Africa Refugees
Made-in-China 2025
50 Cameroon Prison Break Signals Rising Anglophone Insurgency
A Look at the PLA’s Youth Aviation Programs
Recruit Training Extended for New PLA Recruits to Increase 51 South Sudan’s Civil War Death Toll Reaches 400,000
52 Nigeria’s Chukwu on Cross-Border, Counter-Boko Haram
Readiness
Operations
The Growing Face of China’s Civil-Military Integration
53 Environmental Crimes Reportedly Leading Funding Source for
Initiative
Terrorists
Poor Training and Insufficient Personnel Hamper Chinese
54 Military Intervention for Ebola Outbreak in DRC
Maritime Militia Development
Chinese-Nepalese Anti-Terror Training Causing Concern in 55 With Tight Budgets, South Africa’s Military Strains to Meet
Mandates
India
56 Partisanship Alleged in Promotion of Malian Generals
31 India Upgrades Its MiG-29s
57 Will Corruption in South Sudan Torpedo Peace Plan?
32 Singapore Unites Southeast Asia to Counter Terrorism
33 Is It Too Late for the Maldives to Lift Itself Out From Under
China’s Hold?
LATIN AMERICA
34 Vietnam Begins Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan
58 A Bolsonaro Brazil and the FSP
59 Mexican President-Elect Plans to Extend Federal Security
Presence
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
60 Worse to Come in Venezuela
35 Iranian Government Details Ahvaz Terrorist Incident
60 Overton Window Shift on Venezuela
36 Yemen: Houthis Claim Increased UAV Use
37 Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Confirms Use of Armed 61 Chinese Medical Aid to Venezuela
62 ELN and FARC Seek Sanctuary
Drones in Syria
63 Colombia May Return to Aerial Fumigation of Coca Fields
38 Iran to Build New Missile System?
64 Protests Disturb Peace Commonly Associated with Costa Rica
39 Turkey Tests Anti-torpedo Torpedo
65 Student Marches as a Form of Struggle
40 Turkish Naval Special Forces
41 The Turkish-Russian Alliance in the Middle East
43 Russia and China Help Egypt’s Space Industry Move
Forward
44 Supreme Leader’s Advisor: United States Common Enemy
of Iran and China
45 Turkish and Iranian Cooperation to Fight Terrorism
46 Turkey Challenges Republic of Cyprus’s Drilling Plan
48 The “Soft War” on Hezbollah
24
26
27
28
29
30

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | February 2019

61

AFRICA
Nigerian NGO Targets Amnesty International
OE Watch Commentary: In December, the Nigerian army made headlines when it
announced it was suspending the operations of Amnesty International in the country.
The office of the presidency soon followed with a statement of support for the army;
however, after international condemnation of the army’s decision, it then reversed
course and allowed Amnesty to continue to operate in the country.

“We want to make it categorically
clear that only the enemies of Nigeria
collaborate with Amnesty international.”

Nevertheless, according to the accompanying excerpted article from Vanguard, on 20 December a pro-government NGO called Save
Humanity Advocacy Centre (SHAC) has reiterated the army’s statements about Amnesty International. SHAC has discouraged Nigerian NGOs
from cooperating with Amnesty International on grounds that it has a dangerous agenda that will destroy the country. SHAC went so far as to
claim that any NGO that cooperated with Amnesty International was an enemy of the country itself.
The article notes that SHAC’s dissatisfaction with Amnesty International was related not to Amnesty’s often critical coverage of the war
against Boko Haram, but appeared to be related to a December 2018 documentary about violence between herders and farmers in Nigeria that
state the violence led to 3,600 deaths. The article also indicates that it was popular because it was endorsed by Nigerian NGOs.
SHAC’s claims about Amnesty International echo the previous army and government sentiment and reflect the pressure the country is facing
from multiple conflicts. At the same time, as evidenced by the international backlash against Nigeria for its prior condemnation of Amnesty
International, the country has not handled criticism well. It seems to now be allowing or even encouraging an organization like SHAC to make
remarks that previously would have come from the government or army. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
Source: “Local NGOs working with AI to destroy Nigeria,”
Vanguard, 20 December 2018. https://www.vanguardngr.
com/2018/12/terrorism-local-ngos-working-with-ai-todestroy-nigeria-shac/
The Save Humanity Advocacy Centre (SHAC) has
expressed disappointment with the manner some indigenous
NGOs work with the Amnesty International with the sole
aim of creating tension and unrest in Nigeria. The group
specifically frowned at the eagerness with which some
indigenous groups endorsed a recent report published by
Amnesty International about the crises between herdsmen
and farmers in the country.
We want to make it categorically clear that only the
enemies of Nigeria collaborate with Amnesty international.
So anyone that partners with Amnesty International
towards the realization of its destructive goals in Nigeria
is an enemy of the country and must be treated as one.
They would be named and shamed as those abusing the
sacredness of NGO work to promote terrorism, which
implies that like Amnesty International, they have blood on
their hands.

Hauwa Ibrahim – Human rights lawyer, Nigeria.

Source: Bundesministerium für Europa, Integration und Äußeres [CC BY 2.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hauwa_Ibrahim_human_rights_lawyer.jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

62

AFRICA
DRC Ebola Outbreak Now Second Worst in History
OE Watch Commentary: When Ebola broke out in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (DRC) in October 2018, there were hopes that it could quickly be brought under
control, but also a number of concerns it might prove difficult to do so. Unfortunately,
the concerns were justified. The outbreak continues and as the accompanying excerpted
article from CAJ News reports, this Ebola eruption has now been declared the second
largest outbreak of the disease in history. With at least 245 recorded fatalities, it has
surpassed the previous second place record holder, the 2000-2001 outbreak in Uganda,
by 20 deaths. Perhaps the only bright spot is that it is still way behind the first place
world record holder, which is the 2014 West Africa outbreak that took the lives of over
11,000 people.

Source: Jean Kassongo, “DRC Ebola eruption
second deadliest in history,” CAJ News, 4 January
2019. http://cajnewsafrica.com/2018/12/03/drcebola-eruption-second-deadliest-in-history/
The ongoing Ebola outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) is now the second worst
such eruption in history.
Spikes in violence have forced the suspension of
efforts to contain the spread of the disease. Some
1 million people are displaced in North Kivu,
complicating matters further.

That the disease is proving hard to control is not surprising to the people who were
tracking it. As noted by previous reports, the outbreak is partially centered in the
“The international community must continue to
conflict-ridden areas of North Kivu. More than 50 armed groups are operating in that
pay attention to this crisis or it will likely spiral,
province, making disease surveillance and treatment extremely difficult. The article
costing further lives and possibly spreading over
mentions Ebola is projected to continue for six more months, but does not describe how
national borders.”
the disease will be eradicated in a region so dangerous that health care workers risk their
lives should they decide to enter it. Further complicating the situation is the presence
of approximately one million displaced persons uprooted by the violence. Besides the problems related to insecurity, the deterioration of the
country’s health services is also allowing Ebola to spread. Additionally, tensions surrounding the country’s recent election have made for a
difficult backdrop against which to organize resources to combat the disease.
Numerous lessons were learned from previous Ebola outbreaks; however, this one is different in that so much of it is in a conflict zone,
making implementation of many of those lessons quite difficult. As a result, the number of deaths is projected to rise, perhaps, as the article
relates, by the hundreds. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The international community must continue to pay attention to this crisis or it will likely spiral, costing
further lives and possibly spreading over national borders.”

“Arrival of medical supplies to help fight an Ebola outbreak in the DRC that because of its location in conflict-ridden areas is proving difficult to stop.”
Source: MONUSCO/Flickr, https://goo.gl/qQcCRx, CC BY-SA 2.0.

OE Watch | February 2019

63

LATIN AMERICA
Who’s Who at Maduro’s Inauguration
OE Watch Commentary: 10 January was inauguration day for
what is Nicolás Maduro’s new period as the head of the Bolivarian
government in Caracas. The event provided an opportunity for a
snapshot measure of the regime’s foreign support. As reported in the
first accompanying reference, from RCN Radio, a number of Latin
American governments calling themselves the Lima Group had already
announced they would not recognize Maduro as president, stating that
the electoral exercise held in Venezuela last May lacked democratic
guarantees and free participation. Maduro’s inauguration went off
without a hitch, nevertheless, with at least five foreign chief executives
in attendance: Evo Morales of Bolivia, Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua,
Timothy Harris of Saint Kitts and Nevis, Miguel Díaz-Canel of Cuba,
and Salvador Sánchez Cerén of El Salvador. According to Maduro in his
inaugural speech, 94 foreign countries were represented. Russia, China
and Turkey sent delegations, according to the accompanying reference
Nicolás Maduro holding his declaration after being sworn in for his second term.
Source: Presidencia El Salvador [CC0], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nicol%C3%A1s_Maduro_2019_
from El País. Brazil, the most important of Venezuela’s neighbors,
Inauguration.jpg.
did not send a delegation, and during his speech, Maduro took a
…Venezuela is the center of a world war…
stab at new Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, calling the latter
a “fascist.” Paraguay’s President Mario Abdo Benítez, meanwhile, took the opportunity to announce that he was cutting diplomatic ties with
the Maduro regime and closing the Paraguayan embassy in Caracas, as reported by the excerpted article from Infobae. More significant among
absent government delegations was that of Ecuador. Ecuador’s government under former president Rafael Correa had been a central member of
the Bolivarian alliance. The accompanying reference from El Español notes the presence of a Turkish representative, representation from OPEC,
and the presence of a few foreign communist party leaders. During his speech, Maduro characterized himself as the leader of a vanguard in a
world war [against] North American imperialism. All in all, it is hard to say if it was a good or a bad day for the Bolivarian regime. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“

”

Source: “El Grupo de Lima no reconoce a Maduro como presidente de Venezuela (The Lima Group does not recognize Maduro as president
of Venezuela),” RCN Radio, 4 January 2019. https://www.rcnradio.com/internacional/grupo-de-lima-no-reconoce-nicolas-maduro-comopresidente-de-venezuela
“…the Group of Lima does not recognize Nicolás Maduro as president of Venezuela. This determination is taken after the meeting that was
carried out this Friday in the capital of Peru…they exhort Maduro to not take possession for the new presidential period this coming January 10…”
Source: “Nicolás Maduro desafía
a Occidente aferrado a China
y Rusia y busca el apoyo de
México (Nicolas Maduro defies
the West, hanging onto China
and Russia and seeking the
support of Mexico),” El País,
10 January 2019. https://elpais.
com/internacional/2019/01/10/
america/1547150403_382340.html
“Listening to him were, among
others, the Vice President of
Turkey, Fuat Oktay; the Chinese
Minister of Agriculture, Han
Changfu and the Vice President of
the Russian high Chamber, Ilyas
Umakhanov….Maduro inaugurated
the new period without the presence
of any representative from the
United States, the European Union
and the neighboring countries… He
[Maduro]…launched a “long live
Mexico…even though the Mexican
government only sent the chargé
d’affaires from the embassy.”

Source: “Minuto a minuto: ante el repudio mundial, Nicolás
Maduro juró como presidente ante el Tribunal Supremo de
Justicia (Minute by minute: in the face of worldwide repudiation,
Nicolás Maduro swore in in front of the Supreme Court),”
Infobae, 10 January 2019, https://www.infobae.com/america/
venezuela/2019/01/10/en-vivo-el-dictador-nicolas-maduro-asumesu-segundo-mandato-en-venezuela/
“Minute by minute: facing world repudiation, Nicolás Maduro
swore in as president in front of the Supreme Court…The Chavista
leader began another period of six years, considered illegitimate
by a great part of the international community, with a country
in ruins and increasingly isolated…[during his speech] He left a
strong message against the European Union: ‘Enough aggression
against Venezuela, old oligarchic Europe.’…The Venezuelan
right has infected the Latin American right with its fascism. We
see the case of Brazil with the ascendance of a fascist like Jair
Bolsonaro…There is a world on its feet, Venezuela is in the front
line of the battle, we are in a position of vanguard. The world is
much bigger than the North American threats…It is clear, public,
notorious and known that Venezuela is the center of a world war
of North American imperialism, and of its satellites…’
…the president of Paraguay, Mario Abdo Benítez, announced the
rupture of diplomatic relations with Venezuela. He will close their
embassy and retire their diplomats.”

Source: “Cuba, Bolivia y
Osetia del Sur, los principales
presidentes que irán a la jura de
Maduro (Cuba, Bolivia and South
Ossetia, the principle presidents
that went to the inauguration
of Maduro),” El Español, 10
January 2019. https://www.
elespanol.com/mundo/20190110/
cuba-bolivia-osetia-surprincipales-acompanaranmaduro/367464154_0.html
“The list of high-level
International representatives
also includes the Secretary
General of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC)…AVN informed of the
arrival of representative from
Antigua and Barbuda, The
Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mozambique, as well
as communist leaders from South
Africa and Lebanon…”

OE Watch | February 2019

64

LATIN AMERICA
Russia Provides Financial, Military and Political
Support to Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: President Nicolas Maduro’s visit to Moscow in early December 2018 resulted in discussions to finalize economic,
military and political assistance to the South American nation. In terms of finance, Venezuela has been struggling to pay billions of dollars in
debt to Russia. According to the first excerpt, Russia has overlooked this debt and accepted a new deal proposed by Maduro allowing the country
to drill for oil and mine for gold in exchange for subsequent exportation to Russia.
In terms of military cooperation, during Maduro’s trip to Moscow, Russia also agreed to send two Tu-160s to Venezuela, according to the
second excerpt. The Russian bombers stayed in Venezuela for less than a week, but while there they flew for over 10 hours in the Caribbean.
Venezuelan Air Force F-16A/B Viper and Su-30MKV Flanker-C fighter jets also flew with the bombers during certain points of the mission,
according to Russia. Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu stated in early December that Russia will continue to send its military aircraft and
warships to visit Venezuela as part of bilateral military cooperation, in addition to providing economic and political support to the country. End
OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“These bombers stayed in the country for less than a week, but did fly with the Venezuelan Air Force
during their time in country.”
Source: “Rusia invertirá 6 mil millones de dólares en Venezuela
(Russia to Invest $6 billion to Venezuela),” El Colombiano, 6
December 2018. http://www.elcolombiano.com/internacional/
venezuela/como-apoya-rusia-a-venezuela-YD9775133

Source: “Qué busca Rusia con su “renovada” alianza económica y militar
con Venezuela (What is Russia Looking for with its Renewed Economic
and Military Support to Venezuela?)” BBC, December 12, 2018. https://
www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-america-latina-46529876

President Nicolas Maduro stated in early December that
Venezuela signed deals securing a $6 billion investment from
Russia in the South American country’s oil and gold sectors.
This deal was made following a three-day trip to Moscow by
Maduro.

Meetings between Presidents Vladimir Putin and Nicolás Maduro
resulted in procurement of investment, but also focused on Russia offering
military support by sending (2) TU-160s bombers. These bombers stayed in
the country for less than a week, but did fly with the Venezuelan Air Force
during their time in country.

Russian long-range aircraft make a flight to international airport of Venezuela.
Source: Russian Defense Ministry, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=62208@cmsPhotoGallery, CC 4.0.

OE Watch | February 2019

65

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil on a New Course
OE Watch Commentary: For over fifteen years, Brazil has been led by a leftist party, the Workers Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores). The
accompanying excerpted reference from El Tiempo proffers the key highlights of President Bolsonaro’s inauguration speech, which the article’s
author opines will mark the new azimuth. The author does not appear to be a Bolsonaro fan, however. According to the article, President
Bolsonaro intends to move the Brazilian Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, pull out of the United Nations migration pact and perhaps out of the
Paris climate change agreement. The article also indicates that Bolsonaro will be taking a confrontational posture against the Marxist Maduro
regime in Caracas. The suggested positions of the new Brazilian president appear to be more overtly in line with United States policies than any
time in recent decades.
The second accompanying reference is from the Spanish language British Broadcasting Company news service, BBC News Mundo. It reports
on the deployment of Brazilian Army troops to Fortaleza, a major city on Brazil’s northern coast. Violence there seems to be the first test of
Bolsonaro’s presidency, but it is somewhat early to determine either the true nature of the violence or the effectiveness of the new president’s
response. Interestingly, the English language version of the same BBC article (“Brazil deploys troops to stop violence in Fortaleza”) carries
pieces of notably different language with a distinct editorial perspective, not about the events, but about the president. For instance, the English
language version includes the sentence “He is seen as a deeply divisive figure whose racist, homophobic and misogynistic remarks have
angered many.” That sentence is not included in the Spanish language version. No Portuguese language version was found. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)
Source: “Claves del discurso de posesión de Bolsonaro como presidente de Brasil
(Key points in Bolsonaro’s inaugural speech as president of Brazil),” El Tiempo,
2 January 2019. https://www.eltiempo.com/mundo/latinoamerica/claves-deldiscurso-de-posesion-de-bolsonaro-como-presidente-de-brasil-310600
“In his inaugural speech this Tuesday, President of Brazil Jair Bolsonaro
launched a crusade of conservative values against criminality, corruption and
leftist ideologies…He affirmed that his arrival marked the day in which the
people began to liberate themselves from socialism, to liberate themselves from
the inversion of values, from state gigantism, and from political correctness…
Bolsonaro thanked God for having survived the knife wound to his abdomen
during the campaign…Bolsonaro promised to move the Brazilian embassy from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem…He also announced the withdrawal of Brazil from the
United Nations’ World Migration Accord and threatened to do the same with the
Paris Accord against climate change…”

Source: Editors, “Brasil: Bolsonaro envía tropas
a Fortaleza para frenar la ola de violencia (Brazil:
Bolsonaro sends troops to stop the wave of violence),”
BBC News Mundo, 6 January 2019. https://www.bbc.
com/mundo/noticias-46775173
“Some 300 military troops were sent to the northeast
of the Brazilian city of Fortaleza to combat a wave of
violence, authorities of that Latin-American country
said this Saturday…The disturbances originated after
a series of protests against new laws in local prisons,
[which are] mostly controlled by criminal gangs…
[President] Bolsonaro praised the decision of [Justice
Minister] Moro to send the army…”

“Bolsonaro launched a crusade of
conservative values against criminality
corruption and leftist ideologies.”

Seashore of Fortaleza (2012).

Source: Arthur Fonseca [CC BY 3.0 br (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/br/deed.en)], via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fortaleza,_Brazil_(3).jpg.

OE Watch | February 2019

66

LATIN AMERICA
New Brazilian President Declares Reset
with Indigenous People and Lands
OE Watch Commentary: It only takes a cursory look at the Brazilian press to see that President Bolsonaro has begun his term with
controversy. Among his decrees and actions in his first week of office was to initiate significant changes regarding the governing of the
indigenous peoples and their lands—largely those in the Amazon, but applying to all indigenous peoples and lands in Brazil. The National
Indian Foundation (FUNAI), which since the 1970s has had responsibility for indigenous lands and people, will be stripped of that role according
to President Bolsonaro. Instead, the Ministry of Agriculture will now have the job to oversee indigenous territories.
This was a shot across the bow for those dedicated to protecting the Amazon, the last great indigenous territory left in Brazil. The indigenous
people themselves, NGOs, environmentalists, the UN and even the Catholic Church have publicly condemned the move as the accompanying
excerpted articles demonstrate.
Historically and to greater or lesser degrees, the Amazon has been under assault from farmers, ranchers, loggers and many other sectors
of the Brazilian economy. In fact, while the encroachment into indigenous land has at times slowed down, it has never stopped or reversed.
The Amazon, and its native peoples, have continued to shrink since the first Europeans entered the territory hundreds of years ago. As
industrialization and large scale agribusiness have proliferated in Brazil, more and more pressure to tap the Amazon of its resources pits
indigenous people and their allies against powerful agribusiness interests and other elements of Brazilian society.
It was rubber in the late 19th and early 20th century. In fact, it was Brazilian rubber that helped the US war machine operate during World War
II. Today, it is gold, timber, and exotic animals to name a few of the resources at stake in the Amazon; however, farming and ranching threaten
vast tracks of otherwise protected land.
On 4 January 2019, the Missionary Indigenous Council (CIMI) published an open letter on CNBB condemning the “transfer to the Ministry
of Agriculture, commanded by farmers who opposed the rights of the peoples, to carry out the identification, delimitation, demarcation and
registration of areas required by indigenous peoples. In short, the government decreed…the annihilation of the rights guaranteed in Articles 231
and 232 of the Federal Constitution.” Indigenous leaders themselves were quick to respond to the presidential announcement and in one of many
public letters, stated, according to the article from Folha De. S.Paulo, “Those who are not indigenous cannot suggest or dictate rules of how we
should behave in our territory and in our country. We have the capacity and autonomy to speak for ourselves.”
The statement reveals another point of contention in Brazil regarding the native inhabitants of the Amazon. The remaining indigenous people
of Brazil, and particularly of the Amazon, have held special territorial status via the 1988 post-military dictatorship constitution. So much so,
some argue, that too much territory is being held hostage by so few. Indeed, estimates vary but all sources agree there are far less than a million
native inhabitants occupying the Amazon. From that perspective, there will continue to be pressure to push into and exploit the vast region.
President Bolsonaro just upped the ante. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

Upper Rio Negro near the Amazonian town of são gabriel da cachoeira in the Amazon.
Source: Dodge Billingsley.

OE Watch | February 2019

67

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: New Brazilian President Declares Reset
with Indigenous People and Lands
“…one signal that seeks to remind the world that Russia has interests in Venezuela…”
Source: “Em nota CIMI aponta medidas inconstitucionais do governo
Bolsonaro que afronta direitos indigenas (In note CIMI points to
unconstitutional measures of the Bolsonaro government that faces indigenous
rights),” CNBB, 9 January 2019. http://www.cnbb.org.br/em-nota-cimiaponta-medidas-inconstitucionais-do-governo-bolsonaro-que-afrontadireitos-indigenas/?fbclid=IwAR19I9O4Y0PMudnETUBM3gRRu9bUrmX
WHvk-eORAH0_wfIgsicPA1jYPF_o
The Missionary Indigenous Council (CIMI), an organization linked to the
National Conference of Brazilian Bishops (CNBB), published a note on
January 4 in which it repudiates measures intended to develop the country
for purposes that disqualify individual and collectives of communities and
traditional peoples, attacking leaders who fight for rights, threatening and
criminalizing defenders of the environment, indigenists, entities and civil
society organizations. Get to know, below, the entire document…
…“transfer to the Ministry of Agriculture, commanded by farmers who
opposed the rights of the peoples, to carry out the identification, delimitation,
demarcation and registration of areas required by indigenous peoples. In
short, the government decreed…the annihilation of the rights guaranteed in
Articles 231 and 232 of the Federal Constitution…”

Source: “Em carta a Bolsonaro, lideranças indígenas
pedem diálogo e criticam medidas (In a letter to Bolsonaro,
indigenous leaders ask for dialogue and criticize measures),”
Folha De S.Paulo, 4 January 2019. https://www1.folha.uol.
com.br/poder/2019/01/em-carta-a-bolsonaro-liderancasindigenas-pedem-dialogo-e-criticam-medidas.shtml
“Those who are not indigenous cannot suggest or dictate
rules of how we should behave or act in our territory and
in our country.” We have the capacity and autonomy to
speak for ourselves,” write indigenous leaders in a letter to
President Jair Bolsonaro.
…It is a reference to Bolsonaro’s speech that the Indians
should not live in isolation, as if they were in a zoo. However,
revising the policy of non-contact adopted by FUNAI today
worries indigenous experts “We do not accept integration
policy anymore, we do not want to be decimated by new
government actions…We want to continue being indigenous,
with right to our ethnic identity, just as we are Brazilian.”…

Yanomani woman in Maturaca near the Venezuela border region of the Amazon.
Source: Dodge Billingsley.

OE Watch | February 2019

68

LATIN AMERICA
Five Wars in Colombia?
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying reference is a curious, excellent
commentary about a legalistic, international interpretation of what might be
going on in Colombia. Several groups are fighting with and among each other,
including drug gangs, former FARC units that did not adhere to the FARCSantos agreement, other Marxist guerrillas including the ELN and a series of
et cetera. The International Red Cross apparently has weighed in to confuse
matters, in part perhaps because of internal decisions regarding what their role
should be, on what legal basis they can lend conflict assistance, and to whom.
An IRC report finds five armed conflicts going on inside Colombia. The author
of the article does a careful and respectful, but skeptical job of trying to sort
out the definitional puzzle and what it might mean. What can the Colombian
government do within international law (and where), what assistance can it
request or receive (or even not refuse) and what liabilities do its agents face?
These questions are all implicated in the definitional soup pondered in the Radio
Santafé essay. For anyone interested in unraveling or teaching the complexities
of current international law as it might be applied to wars of other than an
international character, this could serve as highly useful prompt. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“But ‘what is meant by armed conflict?’”

Armed domestic conflict in Colombia.

Source: Bettyreategui [CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], from Wikimedia Commons, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Conflicto_interno_armado_en_Colombia.png.

Source: Ariel Cabrera, “En Colombia no hay un conflicto armado, hay cinco ¿Qué está pasando?: CICR (In Colombia there is not an armed
conflict, there are five. What is going on?: ICRC),” Radio Santafé, 27 December 2018. http://www.radiosantafe.com/2018/12/27/en-colombiano-hay-un-conflicto-armado-hay-cinco-que-esta-pasando-comite-internacional-de-la-cruz-roja/
“With the signing of the Peace Accord, Colombia has lived a complex panorama. In several zones in the country armed confrontations
among diverse actors continue and at some points they have intensified, says the International Red Cross, IRC, which underlines that,
therefore, one should not talk of an armed conflict, but rather, five…The first prerequisite for working in favor of those who suffer the effects
of the violence is to know the applicable juridical framework, which means in turn, the bases for dialog prone to protecting the population
that suffers its effects…The ICR has as a mandate ‘to protect and assist victims of armed conflicts and other violent situations”. But ‘what is
meant by armed conflict?’ and what would these ‘other violent situations be?’…The non-governmental groups that are participating in acts of
violence are sufficiently organized. The indicative criteria to establish this condition would be the existence of a hierarchical structure and
chain of command, capacity to plan coordinate and carry out military action, capacity to recruit and train weapons carriers, the existence of
rules of internal discipline, capacity of the commanders to control members of the group and to control territory…”

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | February 2019

69

LATIN AMERICA
Argentina and Paraguay Collaborate Locally and
Internationally to Target Hezbollah Money Laundering
OE Watch Commentary: The Tri-Border Area (TBA) of Latin America lies between the borders of Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay. More
specifically, this region is comprised of the following cities in each country: Puerto Iguazú in Argentina, Foz do Iguaçu in Brazil and Ciudad del
Este in Paraguay.
For decades, the TBA has been recognized as a lawless region as illegal activity is rampant within it. From an international security
standpoint, the TBA it is also significant because Hezbollah uses the area as an operation base in Latin America to finance its activities abroad
through illicit activities, to include money laundering and drug trafficking.
Hezbollah is active in the TBA, but until recently the region’s countries had taken little action to thwart the group’s illegal activities or arrest
key leaders. The first excerpt points out that over the course of 2018, both Paraguay and Argentina began targeting specific individuals known to
work as financial backers for Hezbollah in the TBA. This same source discusses the arrest of Assad Ahmad Barakat in Brazil and identifies him
as a key Hezbollah financier and leader in the TBA. With the help of Brazil, Paraguay was able to extradite Barakat to the United States.
Following the arrest of Ahmad Barakat in mid-April 2018, both Argentina and Paraguay continued to target financial cells of Hezbollah
operating in the TBA. The second excerpt highlights this activity and discusses how Argentina’s Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) froze assets
of members of the Barakat clan operating in the TBA following operations that began in July 2018. The arrested individuals allegedly generated
more than $10 million in proceeds for Hezbollah since 2012 by laundering money through a casino owned by the group in Iguazú, Argentina.
Meanwhile, Paraguay provided much of the intelligence for the arrests in this operation.
The third excerpt discusses additional actions Paraguay is taking to combat Hezbollah activities by working with the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF, known as GAFI in Spanish) to discuss Paraguay’s plan in 2019 and 2020. Furthermore, both Argentina and Paraguay have
created collaborative information sharing plans to thwart Hezbollah money laundering/illegal activities, with international support. This idea
is discussed in the fourth excerpt, which also highlights how Paraguayan National Police are currently exchanging information regarding
Hezbollah with Argentina, Brazil, the United States and various countries in the Middle East. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“...Paraguay is also working to thwart the same type of activity through internal investigations and via
enhanced cooperation and intelligence sharing with Argentina.”
Source: “Qué es Hezbollah y qué
vínculo tiene con Argentina (What
is Hezbollah and What are it’s
Ties to Argentina?),” Perfil, 15
November 2018. https://www.perfil.
com/noticias/internacional/que-eshezbollah-y-que-vinculo-tiene-conargentina.phtml

Source: “Triple frontera: detuvieron a Assad
Ahmad Barakat, líder de una organización
vinculada a Hezbollah (TBA: Assad Ahmed
Barakat, leader of a Hezbollah-linked
organization, is detained),” La Nacion, 21
September 2018. https://www.lanacion.com.
ar/2174245-triple-frontera-detuvieron-assadahmad-barakat-lider

In September, Assad Ahmad Barakat
was apprehended in the TBA. He is
accused of being Hezbollah’s link in
the Southern Cone and the presumed
head of an extensive Hezbollah
money-laundering network in Latin
America.

Last July, pursuant to a Financial
Intelligence Unit (FIU) resolution, the
Argentine government froze the assets of
the Barakat clan, after they established an
operation to launder 10 million dollars in a
casino in Iguazu.

Source: “Hugo Velázquez: El Gobierno tiene
‘voluntad política’ para combatir el lavado de
dinero (Hugo Velázquez: The Government has a
Political Obligation to Combat Money Laundering
Activities,)”, Telam, 20 January, 2019. http://www.
telam.com.ar/notas/201901/324798-paraguayvicepresidente-lavado-dinero.html
Paraguayan authorities also met with the
International Financial Action Task Force (GAFI)
to discuss Hezbollah activity in Paraguay and
simultaneously allowed this organization to look at
their 2019/2020 plan which aims to combat financial
crimes, movement of contraband and corruption in
the TBA.

Source: Juan Villamayor, “Estamos cortando la pata financiera de Hezbollah y de las mafias en la Triple Frontera (Juan Villamayor: We
are Cutting Off Hezbollah’s Financial Supporters in the Tri-Border Region),” La Nacion, 6 December 2018. https://www.lanacion.com.
ar/2199922-juan-villamayor-estamos-cortando-pata-financiera-hezbollah
[Paraguay’s] National Police is sharing intelligence with Argentina, Brazil, the United States and several countries in the Middle East...
Barakat was arrested in Brazil thanks to information provided by Paraguay.

OE Watch | February 2019

70

