https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 10
Issue #5
May 2020

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 COVID-19 and the Russian Spring Draft
4 No Dock for the Kuznetsov?
5 Strengthening Russian Influence in Crimea
6 Constructing Multifunctional Medical Centers to Combat
COVID-19
7 Less Transparency on Military Topics?
8 Coastal Defense Missiles Will Be at Victory Parade
9 The Russian Army’s Domestic Support for Civil Authorities
11 Russian View of Foreign Dependence on Space Capabilities
12 Russian Topographic Maps and Cloud-Based Technology
13 Russia Continues to Upgrade its Northern Fleet
14 The Russian Army’s Smoke Screen Production And Training
16 New Arctic T-80BVM Tanks Get Workout
17 The Utility of Russian-Serbian Relations to Moscow
19 Armenia to Acquire Radar System from India
20 Uzbekistan and Tajikistan Continue Security Cooperation
INDO-PACIFIC
21 China: Building Leadership Skills in NCOs for the Future
Battlefield
23 China: The Changing Dynamics of Mobilization Under
Informatized Warfare
24 PLA Adopts New Digital Camouflage for All Services
26 Why the PLA Adopted the Type 95 Light Support Weapon
28 China Launches Test-bed For High-Bandwidth
Communications Satellites
30 China: ‘Business as Usual’ as COVID-19 Diverts the World’s
Attention?

32 Chinese Military Hosts Video Conferences to Help Allies Combat
COVID-19
34 China’s Deepening Diplomatic and Economic Engagement in
Afghanistan
36 Japanese Self-Defense Forces: Integration, Does it Hurt? (Ittaika
Itai ka)
38 Vietnam Asserts Historical Claims in Maritime Dispute with China
39 Insurgents Exploit Thailand’s Efforts against COVID-19
40 Indonesia’s Maritime Border Security Challenges
41 Bypassing the “Make in India” Initiative
42 Pakistan Moving into Sales of JF-17 Fighters
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
43 Chinese-Arab Cooperation in the Time of COVID-19
45 China’s COVID-19 Diplomacy in the Middle East
47 COVID-19 and the Egyptian Military
49 Russia Sees Opportunity in COVID-19 to Isolate Iranian Forces in
Syria
51 Syria’s Idlib Continues to Challenge Turkish-Russian Relations
52 Syrian Conflict Increasingly Shaped by Expansive Use of UAVs
54 Russia’s Presence in the Middle East and the Eastern
Mediterranean
55 Turkey’s Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Weapon
56 Turkey’s Energy Security and Dependency
57 The Impact of COVID-19 on SDF Operations and ISIS
58 Hezbollah’s Standing in Lebanon Tarnished by Coronavirus
Response
59 COVID-19 Prompts Israel and Hamas to Explore Prisoner Swap
61 The Houthi Movement Says COVID-19 is US Biological Weapon
63 Iran Announces Mass Production of COVID-19 Test Kits

65 Iran: Khamenei on Power and Patience
67 India Evacuates its Citizens from Iran
68 Iran Unveils Ghadir Submarine Upgrades
AFRICA
69 Al-Shabaab’s Infighting Over Funds
70 Arms Spending in East Africa
71 South Sudan’s Obstacles to Peace
72 Terrorism and Conflict Interfere with Great Green Wall Progress
73 Obstacles to African Union Involvement in Libya
74 Amidst COVID-19 Pandemic, Neglecting the Neglected Tropical
Diseases
75 Mali Air Force Super Tucano Goes Down Over Sévare
77 Chad’s President to Lead Military Operations against Boko Haram
78 Mozambican Jihadists Escalate Violence
79 Key Boko Haram Leader Killed in Joint Operation on Lake Chad
Islands
LATIN AMERICA
80 Venezuela Loses its Only Telecommunications Satellite
82 The Venezuelan Navy Loses a Coastguard Ship
83 Venezuela and Coronavirus
84 Colombia and Coronavirus
85 What Happened to Daniel Ortega?
86 China’s Image in LATAM Suffering?
87 Ecuador Worst Hit by COVID-19?
88 Gulf Cartel Distributes Food and Supplies to Residents of Ciudad
Victoria, Tamaulipas
89 Mexico: Another Car Bomb Explosion Near National Guard in
Celaya, Guanajuato

approved for public release; distribution is unlimited

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 10 | Issue 5

May | 2020

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Greg Sarafian
Matthew Stein

Indo-Pacific

Syed Fazl-e Haider
Andrew Hartnett
David Hunter-Chester
Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Peter Wood

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

David Dennis
Zachary Fesen
Ihsan Gündüz
Karen Kaya
Jerrilee Plude
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest
Alma Keshavarz
Stevie Lundell

ON THE COVER:
PLA Tank crew wearing Type 07 camouflage participate in the Tank Biathlon 2018 in
Russia.
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TankBiathlon2018-74.jpg, CC BY
4.0

		
Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
COVID-19 and the Russian Spring Draft
OE Watch Commentary: Given the uncertain
situation with the coronavirus pandemic, there had been
considerable speculation whether Russia’s Ministry of
Defense (MoD) would still go forward with the Spring
2020 conscription campaign. However, as the first
excerpt from the pro-government Izvestia points out, “on
30 March, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a
decree on conscription from 1 April to 15 July,” whereby
135,000 new recruits will be conscripted into military
service for one year.
The article quotes an expert who justifies the decision
by asserting that “in the event of a real military threat,
the army should be able to mobilize even in difficult
Military document proving conscript service of the Russian army Source: CPI-RUS.
Source: CPI-RUS via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Military_ticket_Russian_army.jpeg, Public Domain
epidemiological conditions.” He also goes on to point out
that delaying the draft would force “the entire military training system… to be redrawn,” presumably by either extending current draftees or
allowing units to become undermanned. To protect against the spread of this virus, this expert supports the decision for a “two-week quarantine
for conscripts before being sent to the troops,” thus postponing the actual movement of new recruits to their units until 20 May, as well as the
introduction of “special security measures… during the transportation of draftees to duty stations.”
The coronavirus also caused additional downstream effects for those draft-age Russian males who will graduate from high school this spring.
The virus has forced the delay of the Unified State Exam, which serves as the key document for graduating high school students to obtain admission
to university education (and a deferment from conscript duty). The second excerpt from the liberal radio station, Echo Moscow, reports that “the
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov,” has directed “15 thousand students will be given the opportunity to pass the exam for admission to
universities.” Provided the student does well on the exam, he will begin university studies in the fall instead of entering the draft pool. End OE
Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The draft cannot be canceled, because in the event of a real
military threat, the army should be able to mobilize even in
difficult epidemiological conditions.”
Source: “Эксперт оценил решение оставить весенний призыв – 2020 (An expert considers the decision to hold the spring draft – 2020),”
Izvestia, 1 April 2020. https://iz.ru/994384/2020-04-01/ekspert-otcenil-reshenie-ostavit-vesennii-prizyv-2020
Director of the Bureau of Military-Political Analysis, Alexander Mikhailov, called the decision proper not to cancel the spring conscription.
Earlier, on 30 March, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree on conscription from 1 April to 15 July.
According to Mikhailov, the draft cannot be canceled, because in the event of a real military threat, the army should be able to mobilize even
in difficult epidemiological conditions.
“Secondly, 135 thousand new recruits should not drop out of the training system for young recruits, otherwise the entire military training
system will have to be redrawn,” he said.
The main difference between the spring 2020 draft is increased measures for the prevention of viral diseases and two-week quarantine for
conscripts before being sent to the troops, Mikhailov noted. Special security measures will be applied during the transportation of draftees to
duty stations.
For this reason, the youngest replenishment will enter the troops only by 20 May, which in the current conditions is absolutely justified, the
expert said….
Source: “Выпускников школ, которым уже есть 18 лет, не будут призывать в армию этой весной (Graduates of schools that are already
18 years old will not be drafted into the army this spring),” Echo Moscow, 9 April 2020. https://echo.msk.ru/news/2622019-echo.html
Graduates of schools that are already 18 years old will not be drafted into the army this spring. This was reported by the Chief of the General
Staff Valery Gerasimov. According to him, 15 thousand students will be given the opportunity to pass the exam for admission to universities,
Interfax reports. At the same time, because of the coronavirus, the main wave of unified state examinations was moved from the end of May to
June.
OE Watch | May 2020

3

EURASIA
No Dock for the Kuznetsov?
OE Watch Commentary: According to Kremlin
plans, by the end of this year, 70% of the Russian military
will be equipped with “modern” weaponry. While there
is little doubt that the Ministry of Defense will announce
that they have reached (or exceeded) this target, the
Russian navy remains unable to project combat power
via its sole aircraft carrier (Admiral Kuznetsov). The
brief excerpt from the moderate Svobodnaya Pressa
describes the latest travails in trying to construct the
necessary infrastructure needed to repair this Sovietera vessel.
After returning from its voyage to support air
operations in Syria in early 2017, the Kuznetsov was
slated to undergo a major overhaul near Murmansk
and return to service this year (2020). However, as
Admiral Kuznetsov in the floating dock PD-50 in 2006.
the article points out, the ship’s overhaul was abruptly Source: Mikhail Rogov No machine-readable
author provided. Serguei S. Dukachev assumed via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Aircraft_carrier_Admiral_Kuznetsov_(in_dock).jpg, CCA-SA 2.5 Generic
stopped when the country’s largest floating dock (PD-50)
where the Kuznetsov was parked, sank in October 2018, further damaging the deck of the carrier. Problems continued in December 2019, when a
fire broke out on the Kuznetsov while repair work was underway, resulting in yet more damage.
Since recovering the floating dock was deemed unfeasible, the article describes the plan to merge two dry docks, by digging out a space large
enough between the docks to accommodate the Kuznetsov. However, as the article points out, even though funding was appropriated toward this
project, “experts in the shipbuilding industry unanimously argued that the terms for the reconstruction of the docks were completely unrealistic.”
According to the article, construction of the new dock began in late 2019, although “it has now become clear that the reconstruction of two
parallel docks at the 35th shipyard in Murmansk has actually been discontinued… and the prospects are absolutely vague.” The article suggests
that given the delays in constructing a new dock to accommodate the Kuznetsov, where necessary repairs can be made, “the aircraft carrier may
be ready in 2023,” or may not “return to duty until the middle of the decade,” if then. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The only Russian aircraft carrier will remain idle for repair
for many more years…”
Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Адмирал Кузнецов» будет атаковать корабли НАТО прямо с берега (The Admiral Kuznetsov will attack
NATO ships directly from the shore),” Svobodnaya Pressa, 7 April 2020. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/261747/
The only Russian aircraft carrier will remain idle for repair for many more years…
…Everything rests in the absence of a dock, in which the aircraft carrier could accommodate for repair work…. The fire that arose last
December [2019] during welding operations claimed the lives of two sailors. Moreover, the losses, which were finally calculated at the end of
this week, amounted to half a billion rubles….
…It has now become clear that the reconstruction of two parallel docks at the 35th shipyard in Murmansk has actually been discontinued.
This is where the long-suffering aircraft carrier should be located…. Last year, it was announced that the dock under the Admiral Kuznetsov
would be ready in 2021, and repairs would be completed in 2022. The opinion of independent experts is different. In the best case, if the
reconstruction of the docks immediately resumes, the aircraft carrier may be ready in 2023. At worst ...
…Now the work has come to a standstill, and the prospects are absolutely vague…. Back in the summer of last year, when a contract was
signed between USC and IIS, experts in the shipbuilding industry unanimously argued that the terms for the reconstruction of the docks were
completely unrealistic. As for the repair of an aircraft carrier, it can end at best in 2023.
…Consequently, the “Admiral Kuznetsov” may return to duty in the middle of the decade.
This sad story has another “author”. It began with the fact that in the fall of 2018, an accident occurred during the stay of Admiral Kuznetsov
in the floating dock PD-50 on the territory of the 82nd Shipyard. As a result of difficult weather conditions, the supply of electricity from the
shore to the dock was cut off…. As a result, the largest floating dock operated in Russia sank.

OE Watch | May 2020

4

EURASIA
Strengthening Russian Influence in Crimea
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past six years,
the Russian military has continued to strengthen the
overall infrastructure and its combat capabilities within
the annexed Crimean Peninsula. For instance, alongside
auto and truck transport, rail service along the new Kerch
Strait Bridge began last December. Militarily, as the first
excerpt from the official news agency TASS points out,
Russia continues to fortify its “aviation and air defense
in Crimea.” The article describes a recent military
exercise which combined “Black Sea Fleet naval aviation
and air defense, aviation and air defense of the Southern
Military District, S-400 missile air defense crews” to
thwart “a massive missile strike of the mock enemy.”
While there is no question that Russia has greatly
improved its access to Crimea and ability to defend this
Photo of Kerch Strait Bridge, December 2019.
peninsula, it has also transplanted some less favorable
Source: Rosavtodor.ru, https://bit.ly/2xcxbey, CCA 4.0 Intl
characteristics. The second excerpt from the pro-business
daily, Kommersant, describes a recent military court case in Crimea where contract soldiers paid bribes, from 3-15 thousand rubles ($40-$200) to
“receive positive marks for passing the standards for physical fitness.” Contract soldiers receive an additional bonus based on their physical fitness
test results. The article goes on to point out that “the Crimean Military Garrison Court has recently reviewed at least 13 criminal cases against
contract soldiers who paid bribes for positive assessments of physical training.” Perhaps in an attempt not to tarnish the Russian military’s “polite
soldier” image, the article asserts that “several of… [the contract soldiers] served in Ukrainian Navy units until 2014.”
While acts of minor bribery within the Russian military are nothing new, it is curious that this incident was not covered by any of the media
organs within the Ministry of Defense (e.g. Krasnaya Zvezda, Zvezda TV, etc…). From the Kremlin’s perspective, Russia now “owns” Crimea
and they have continued to integrate this peninsula into all aspects, both good and ill, of their political, legal, economic, information and military
infrastructure. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“In total, the Crimean Military Garrison Court has recently

reviewed at least 13 criminal cases against contract soldiers
who paid bribes for positive assessments of physical training.”
Source: “Авиация, ПВО С-400 проводят учения по масштабному отражению ракетной атаки в Крыму (Aviation, S-400 air defense
conduct drills on massive missile attack deflection in Crimea),” TASS, 3 April 2020. https://tass.com/defense/1139669
Planes and S-400 air defense systems deflected a massive missile strike of the mock enemy during the bilateral military exercise of the Russian Black Sea
Fleet and Southern Military District aviation and air defense in Crimea, Fleet press service announced Friday.
“According to the drill scenario, aviation and missile defenses, deployed in Crimea, provide the peninsula’s air defense, while the Southern Military
District aviation, based on the mainland, conducts the air offensive,” the Fleet disclosed.
The attacking party seeks to secure the air supremacy by destroying targets at the Opuk proving ground. At the same time, the defense planes cover the
S-400 crews and deflect the enemy’s massive missile strike….
The drills involve the Black Sea Fleet naval aviation and air defense, aviation and air defense of the Southern Military District, S-400 missile air defense
crews, located on the Crimean Peninsula, and more than 20 military planes.

Source: Vadim Nikiforov “У матросов есть заносы (Sailors have drifts),” Kommersant, 1 April 2020. https://www.kommersant.ru/
doc/4310112
As Kommersant learned, the Crimean Garrison Military Court examined more than ten criminal cases of petty bribery. The defendants in the case
are military men serving on contracts in the coastal defense forces of the Black Sea Fleet. All of them paid 3-15 thousand rubles to an unknown official
through an intermediary. In return, they received positive marks for passing the standards for physical fitness….
…For a fictitious assessment of physical certification on October 14, he gave a bribe through an intermediary of 15 thousand rubles. And Nikolai Pavlov,
who serves in the army under contract since October 2018, according to court documents paid a bribe of 10 thousand rubles for the mark “excellent” on
passing the standards for physical training.
In total, the Crimean Military Garrison Court has recently reviewed at least 13 criminal cases against contract soldiers who paid bribes for positive
assessments of physical training.

OE Watch | May 2020

5

EURASIA
Constructing Multifunctional Medical Centers to Combat
COVID-19
OE Watch Commentary: As this commentary is being written, like the rest
of the world, Russia is in the midst of fighting the coronavirus. Initially, Russian
government officials claimed that they had the situation well under control, but it
now appears that the spread of this virus will test the country’s medical system.
The accompanying excerpt from the military weekly, Voyenno-Promyshlennyy
Kuryer, discusses various roles the Russian military is playing in the fight
against COVID-19.
The article begins by describing the plans for the recently reconfigured
Military Construction Company (VSK) to construct “16 multifunctional
medical centers in 15 regions of the country.” As the article points out, this
organization “was created in the structure of the Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation by decree of President Vladimir Putin” in October 2019.
The VSK is comprised of “about 11 different organizations,” and according to
the article, “work is ongoing from Kaliningrad to Kamchatka around the clock,
National Defense Management Center of the Russian Federation.
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:National_Defense_Management_
in three shifts” to build and equip these medical centers.
Center.jpg, CCA 4.0

The article points out “engineering and railway troops” have been enlisted to help in the construction, stressing, “coordination and control are
also carried out around the clock, including through the National Defense Management Center of the Russian Federation.” The article asserts
that these centers will be equipped with the latest medical technology and that staffing and medical training for these new centers is handled by
“the Military Medical Academy.” The article claims that “the first multifunctional medical center in Nizhny Novgorod will be commissioned
on 20 April,” with the others being completed shortly thereafter. These facilities will “provide the necessary medical assistance to both military
personnel and the civilian population” to combat the coronavirus. The article concludes by reminding readers of the epidemiological support that
the Russian military provided to Italy and Serbia, where “specialists of the radiation chemical and biological defense troops” helped to disinfect
various housing areas and medical institutions.
It’s too early to predict how effective the Russian medical system and these additional military measures will prove in combatting the spread of
the coronavirus. Until now, strengthening the country’s healthcare infrastructure (both civilian and military) has not been the Kremlin’s highest
priority. This virus may change that. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Work is ongoing from Kaliningrad to Kamchatka around the
clock, in three shifts….”
Source: Oleg Falichev, “Военные возводят защиту от вируса (The military is building protection against the virus),” VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer, 7 April 2020. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/56324
On the site in Odintsovo, under the supervision of Deputy Minister of Defense Timur Ivanov, the construction of a medical center is being completed. The RF Ministry
of Defense also exercises tight control over other such complexes that are being built on the territory of the Russian Federation…. There is no doubt that they will be
delivered on time. The teams have strict discipline, well-established technology and accurate logistics of material delivery….
…On October 18, 2019, the Military Construction Company (VSK) was created in the structure of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation by decree of
President Vladimir Putin. The goal is construction in the interests of the Ministry of Defense and the Armed Forces…. Deputy Minister Timur Ivanov identified the
structures that became part of the VSK. These are about 11 different organizations, in particular, the 20th and 31st design institutes of the Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation, the Main Directorate for the Arrangement of Troops, five construction enterprises (one in each military district and the Northern Fleet) and three
specialized in the creation of airfields, hydraulic structures, and nuclear facilities spheres….
As you can see, VSK is a serious organization, and who else but she can contribute to the fight against coronavirus. In just one day, the number of workers employed
at the construction sites of 16 multifunctional medical centers in 15 regions of the country increased by a thousand and, as of 1 April, amounted to more than five
thousand people. Work is ongoing from Kaliningrad to Kamchatka around the clock, in three shifts. The foundation was poured at all objects, now the installation of
buildings is being carried out. Over 800 units of construction and special equipment are involved. The work is carried out on behalf of the Supreme Commander with
the involvement of engineering and railway troops, the use of modern technology. Coordination and control are also carried out around the clock, including through the
National Defense Management Center of the Russian Federation.
We add to the above that each medical center will be equipped with… anesthesiology equipment, endoscopy, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. The appropriate
staff of medical personnel who have already completed or is completing training and advanced training at the Military Medical Academy of the Russian Defense
Ministry.
The first multifunctional medical center in Nizhny Novgorod will be commissioned on 20 April. From 10-15 April, the first eight centers will receive the necessary
equipment and medical equipment. According to Timur Ivanov, the completion of the events will provide the necessary medical assistance to both military personnel and
the civilian population.
As for the actions of military epidemiologist and virologists in the Italian Bergamo… Russian medical and nursing teams have been involved in the treatment of
patients in 65 boarding houses that are adapted by the local authorities to isolate and treat Italian citizens infected with coronavirus. In particular, a team of doctors
of epidemiologists and specialists of the radiation chemical and biological defense troops of the Ministry of Defense of Russia, together with Italian military specialists,
carried out a complete sanitary disinfection of the boarding house and several medical institutions. In total, more than 5,000 square meters of interior and access roads
have been disinfected…. Russia has also provided similar assistance to Serbia.

OE Watch | May 2020

6

EURASIA
Less Transparency on Military Topics?
OE Watch Commentary: There’s no question that the readiness, morale and combat
capabilities of the Russian military have considerably improved since Sergei Shoigu
became Minister of Defense back in 2012. While the statistics in each of these categories
are notable, even more impressive has been the actual combat performance of Russian
military units during complex operations, whether in Ukraine or Syria. During a recent
presentation before the Federation Council, Defense Minister Shoigu highlighted his
many accomplishments over the past eight years (see link below for complete speech).
As the brief excerpt from the pro-business daily Kommersant points out, Shoigu also
touched upon what he referred to as “weaknesses in Russia’s media legislation,” which
allows pro-Western media outlets to publish material which could harm the country’s
national security.
According to the excerpt, Shoigu claimed that “over the past three years,” the Russian
Ministry of Defense (MoD) has repelled “more than 25 thousand hacker attacks from
abroad…[and] each year their number is growing by 12%.” He goes on to assert that
these foreign hackers “have helpers in Russia,” where “under the guise of media laws…
these pro-Western journalists… are trying to infiltrate military facilities, searching
for relatives and witnesses.” Shoigu is likely referring to those rare investigations by
Russian journalists who have uncovered material which reflect poorly on the MoD
(e.g. casualties, abuses, corruption). The article lists a number of these investigative
reports from the past several years which have alleged Russian military involvement
and personnel losses in Ukraine and Syria.
The article concludes on a cautionary note, quoting a Russian media expert who
“fears that Sergei Shoigu’s proposal to tighten media legislation will be implemented,” Official portrait of Sergey Shoigu with awards. June 2014.
Source: http://structure.mil.ru/management/minister/photo/port.htm CCA 4.0 Intl
pointing out that it is already “extremely difficult for Russian journalists to work with
military topics.” While there’s no question that the Russian military has become stronger under Defense Minister Shoigu, this article suggests that
some of this improvement may stem from a greater effort to suppress bad news and negative reporting. (For Shoigu’s full speech, see: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=lsYNpPhbIKY&feature=youtu.be&t=320) End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… According to him [Shoigu], the laws on mass media cover
up a “pro-Western opposition division,” trying to penetrate
military facilities and post materials on the Internet.”

Source: Elena Rozhkova, Maria Litvinova, Natalia Glukhova, “Минобороны обнаружило журналистский дивизион; Сергей Шойгу
призвал ужесточить законодательство о СМИ (Defense Ministry discovered journalism division; Sergei Shoigu urges tightening of media
legislation),” Kommersant, 26 March 2020. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/4301552
Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu spoke on Wednesday at a meeting of the Federation Council as part of a government hour. In addition to
assessing the country’s combat potential and the social side of army life, the minister touched upon the problem of the weaknesses of Russian media
legislation. According to him, the laws on mass media cover up a “pro-Western opposition division,” trying to penetrate military facilities and post
materials on the Internet. Mr. Shoigu did not cite specific examples….
Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu labeled the information space as a “theater of operations,” during his remarks to the Federation Council on March
25th. According to the Minister of Defense, over the past three years, more than 25 thousand hacker attacks from abroad have assaulted the information
infrastructure of the RF Armed Forces, and each year their number is growing by 12%. Although Russia, according to Mr. Shoigu, is ready to fight them,
he is upset that foreign hackers “have helpers in Russia.” According to him, there is a “pro-Western opposition division,” whose “activists”, “under the
guise of media laws, are trying to infiltrate military facilities, searching for relatives and witnesses.” ”They climb into the hospitals where our wounded
are, in cemeteries, in commemorations, in the families of our dead children. They expose the entrances and exits from our closed facilities and put them
on the Internet,” the minister complained.”
…In recent years, a number of investigations and reports of Russian journalists have been released, which provoked a negative reaction from the
military department. Among them are the material of Kommersant’s special correspondent Ilya Barabanov on military operations near Debaltseve, an
interview with Novaya Gazeta journalist Yelena Kostyuchenko and a contract tanker who received severe burn wounds during battles in eastern Ukraine,
a series of reports by Pavel Novaya Gazeta special correspondent Pavel Kanygin about the events in the Donbass. Mr. Shoigu could have in mind the
publication of Leo Schlosberg in his newspaper “The Pskov Province” about contract servicemen who died under obscure circumstances, who allegedly
took part in hostilities in Ukraine, as well as other journalistic and human rights investigations regarding the presence of the Russian military in Syria
and Libya….
…Igor Yasin, co-chair of the independent Trade Union of Journalists and Media Workers, fears that Sergei Shoigu’s proposal to tighten media legislation
will be implemented, although it is extremely difficult for Russian journalists to work with military topics.

OE Watch | May 2020

7

EURASIA
Coastal Defense Missiles Will Be at Victory Parade
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer discusses Russian plans to display the
3K60 Bal [3К60 «Бал»] (NATO: SSC-6 Sennight) coastal defense missile system at the May 9th ‘Victory Day’ Parade commemorating the Soviet
victory over Nazi Germany. The Bal can launch eight Kh-35 [Х-35] (NATO: AS-20 Kayak) missiles with approximately a 130km range (260km
with the new Kh-35U missile). A typical Bal complex (battalion) consists of two command vehicles, four TELs, four transport-loader vehicles, two
Monolit-B coastal and air reconnaissance radars, and one support vehicle. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Bal-E coastal missile system.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2015/i-Bmxs6QC, CCA-NC-ND-4.0

Bal-E coastal missile system.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2015/i-ffM5cBC/A, CCA-NC-ND 4.0

“On May 9, as part of a mechanized convoy on Red Square, the
‘Bal’ will be represented by self-propelled launchers, transport
and reloading vehicles, and command control and communication
centers - a total of six vehicles…”
Source: Oleg Falichev, “«Бал» без маскарада: Один залп и нет авианосца (‘Bal’ Without a Masquerade: One Salvo and No Aircraft
Carrier),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 24 March 2020. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/56045
‘Bal’ Without a Masquerade: One Salvo and No Aircraft Carrier
…On May 9, as part of a mechanized convoy on Red Square, the “Bal” will be represented by self-propelled launchers, transport and
reloading vehicles, and command control and communication centers - a total of six vehicles…Recall that the “Bal” (GRAU 3K60, NATO
classification SSC-6 Sennight) was adopted by the Russian Armed Forces since 2008. And the state tests were completed in 2004.
At present, according to some reports, Russia has 50 coastal defense units (as of 2019):
• 11th Coastal Missile-Artillery Brigade (Utash settlement) - 4 launchers;
• 15th Coastal Missile-Artillery Brigade (Sevastopol) - 4 launchers;
• 72nd Coastal Missile Brigade (Smolyaninovo) - 4 launchers;
• 72nd Coastal Missile Brigade (Kunashir Island) - 4 launchers;
• 25th Coastal Missile Brigade (Donskoye village) - n / a;
• 520th Coastal Missile-Artillery Brigade (Anglichanka, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky) - 4 launchers;
• 847th Separate Coastal Missile Brigade (Kaspiysk) - 4 launchers.
Speaking at the final military department collegium of 2019, Minister of Defense Sergey Shoigu said that another Bal coastal missile system
will enter the Navy in 2020. Over the past six years, 17 “Bal” and “Bastion” coastal defense systems have entered the army, allowing for the
rearmament of 17 battalions.
In addition to Russia, the complex is in service with Vietnam and Venezuela (2 complexes, 8 SPU Bal-E)…

OE Watch | May 2020

8

EURASIA
The Russian Army’s Domestic Support for Civil
Authorities
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted articles discuss
the Russian Army’s support for Russian civil authorities due to the COVID-19
crisis. The article from Kommersant discusses how the Russian military will
create four task forces for the purpose. Apparently, these units will be built
around existing Radiation, Chemical, and Biological (RKhB) Defense units,
with substantial engineering and logistic support. Of particular interest, the
article mentions the size of Russian RKhB defense brigades, approximately
1000 personnel. The article from Nezavisimaya Gazeta discusses Russian
plans to mobilize reservists, if necessary, to man mobile field hospitals. End
OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

ARS-14KM decontamination and degassing station.

Source:Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/282nd-NBC-Protection-Troops-training-center/ihr2nqDd, CCA NC-ND 4.0

“…The mobile reserve of the General Staff in this case means
organizations involved in medical support for the troops. These are
depots for special medical equipment, decontamination vehicles, and
so on. These are so-called temporarily mothballed military hospitals,
medical laboratories, and other subunits designed to conduct antiepidemiological measures…”
Source: Oleg Mukhin, “Коронавирус остановят броней (Stopping Coronavirus with Armor),” Kommersant Online, 26 March 2020. https://
www.kommersant.ru/doc/4302151
Stopping Coronavirus with Armor
Two of the four Russian Defense Ministry task forces for countering the spread of “viral infections” will be stationed in Black Earth regions. Their
creation was announced on Wednesday (25 March) evening. Their nucleus could be the 27th Separate Radiation, Chemical, and Biological (RKhB)
Defense Brigade from Kursk, and they will also include medical and engineering subunits, supply and logistics resources, and military police.
For the time being, subunits are concentrating at training grounds as part of a readiness inspection, but the command room at the military district
HQ headquarters will be analyzing “a simulated epidemiological situation” around the clock…The creation of the first task forces “ for the purpose
of containing emergency situations” was announced on Wednesday evening (25 March) by the Western Military District press service. So far, it is the
only district to announce the formation of such bodies; the decision to do so was made by the district’s commanding officer, Colonel General Aleksandr
Zhuravlev.
At the district, they stress that the task forces are being created solely “as part of an inspection of readiness for containing emergency situations arising
from the threat of mass contamination and spread by viral infections.”…The events should take place “solely at training grounds” of the armed forces,
without civilian services being involved. Also to be inspected will be the military’s transport resources for moving required forces and assets by air and
rail to assist the sick and carry out quarantine and treatment measures.
Judging from the stated purpose and list of equipment being brought out by the military, the nucleus of the two Black Earth task forces could be the 27th
Separate RKhB Defense Brigade in Kursk — one of the largest entities of its kind (about 1,000 personnel). Its purpose is to work in the focal points of
radioactive, chemical, and biological contamination; analyze the level of contamination; treat localities or sites; and lay smokescreens.
The brigade is regularly on exercise and has new equipment — mobile chemical protection complexes, degassing stations, ARS-14KM spray stations,
TMS-65U special heat treatment machines (including for disinfecting equipment and places), KLP-10 field laboratories (for situation analysis), and
special treatment stations. And it is this equipment, according to the Defense Ministry, that will gather at the training grounds in the first instance.
The remaining part of the Black Earth task forces, to judge from the district’s news roundups, could be drawn mostly from subunits of the 20th Guards
Combined-Arms Army (headquartered in Voronezh). According to a report by the district, apart from RKhB defense troops the task forces will consist
of medical and engineering subunits, supply and logistics resources, and military police. The 20th Army in Voronezhskaya Oblast — in Voronezh and
Boguchar — has subunits of this type…

OE Watch | May 2020

9

EURASIA
Continued: The Russian Army’s Domestic Support for Civil
Authorities
Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “На борьбу с COVID-19 армия бросит
мобильные резервы Генштаба (General Staff Mobilizes Reserve to
Combat COVID-19),” Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 26 March 2020.
http://www.ng.ru/politics/2020-03-26/1_7828_army.html
General Staff Mobilizes Reserve to Combat COVID-19
…The Defense Ministry is preparing not only to safeguard its
personnel, but also if necessary to give help to the civilian population, as
Russian military specialists are doing in Italy. The Russian Federation
Defense Minister said the Defense Ministry plans by mid-May to
complete the construction of 16 modular infection centers in various
regions of the country…
The construction of all the modular infection centers, which is being
carried out around the clock by railroad troops and engineering troops
(4,000 people and 750 items of equipment are involved), is due to be
completed by 15 May. This is the period when experts predict the spread
of COVID-19 will peak…

Decontamination of armored vehicles with ARS-14KM
decontamination and degassing station.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/282nd-NBC-Protection-Troopstraining-center/i-ktVvTPZ, CCA NC-ND 4.0

Judging by comments in social networks and the media, many people
did not really understand the phrase “mobile reserve of the General
Staff.” As a former senior officer in the Defense Ministry recounted,
on condition that he remained anonymous, “the mobile reserve of the
General Staff in this case means organizations involved in medical
support for the troops. These are depots for special medical equipment,
decontamination vehicles, and so on. These are so-called temporarily
mothballed military hospitals, medical laboratories, and other subunits
designed to conduct anti-epidemiological measures and to provide
protection against weapons of mass destruction.”
They can play a dual role — protecting the troops and protecting
the population. The main question here is finding military specialists
capable of putting the reserve into operation. “If two or three mobile
field hospitals are deployed, there will be enough officer specialists.
But if the mobile reserve of the General Staff has to be deployed in
order to protect cities with a population of more than 1 million against
this particularly dangerous infection, it will be necessary to call up
specialists from the reserve, in other words, reservists,” the expert
noted.
As Nezavisimaya Gazeta was told by Lieutenant General Yuriy
Netkachev, he remembers how, in order to resolve medical, antiepidemic, and other tasks in the interests of the country, reservists were
called up in large numbers in Soviet times, when the Chernobyl tragedy
occurred in April 1986. “At that time, the military commissariats called
up several thousand specialist servicemen liable for callup, as reservists
are now customarily called, from which several civil defense regiments
were formed. They were subordinate to the USSR Defense Ministry and
carried out the main functions in the cleanup after the tragedy,” the
expert stressed. In the event of an unfavorable scenario with the spread
of COVID-19, something similar might happen in Russia, he reckons…

Field hospital.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ISSE-2009/i-fvtvDgf/A, CCA NC-ND
4.0

TMS-65U decontamination vehicle.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/282nd-NBC-Protection-Troopstraining-center/i-9bRZxc8/A, CCA NC-ND 4.0

OE Watch | May 2020

10

EURASIA
Russian View of Foreign Dependence on Space
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted interview of Colonel Sergey Suchkov, Chief of the Aerospace Forces’ (VKS) Main
Center for Space Situation Reconnaissance in Krasnaya Zvezda discusses his views on the importance of space as both an enabler for conducting
terrestrial warfare, and now as a domain in its own right. Of particular interest, Suchkov points out a perceived dependency of foreign states (US/
NATO) on space for a myriad of capabilities. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“It is no secret that the main means of command and control of troops,
weapons, reconnaissance, communications, navigation, and meteorology of
foreign states are concentrated in outer space today...”
-Colonel Sergey Suchkov, Chief of the VKS Main
Center for Space Situation Reconnaissance

Source: Yuliya Kozak, Наблюдать за звёздами и гарантировать безопасность страны (Observing the Stars Guarantees State Security),”
Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 27 March 2020. http://redstar.ru/nablyudat-za-zvyozdami-i-garantirovat-bezopasnost-strany/
Observing the Stars Guarantees State Security
Peering into the starry sky, filled with satellites and orbital stations invisible to the naked eye, one would hardly think that all the
aforementioned, as well as everything that goes on outside the Earth’s atmosphere, is being constantly watched -- not just to idly admire, but
to ensure the security of Russia’s military space activity. And this continuous monitoring is being conducted at the Aerospace Forces’ (VKS)
Main Center for Space Situation Reconnaissance (RKO). Here, in a literal sense, by call of duty, they know everything about the near-Earth
space that must be known, in order to fend off the threats, which space may pose for our country. As to what those threats exactly are -- we
discussed with Colonel Sergey Suchkov, the chief of the VKS Main Center for Space Situation Reconnaissance.
You talked about the threats, and how to counter them? What is the national space monitoring system? What is its role in ensuring our
country’s national security? And how can the information of the Main RKO Center impact the increase of the Russian Federation Armed
Forces capabilities?
The Russian National Space Monitoring System is a large information network, uniting the capabilities of all the Defense Ministry’s and
civilian departments’ resources. It is intended for continuous, permanent, and global observation of space and for evaluating the space
situation both in peacetime and in wartime.
Its role in implementing the country’s national security lies in its information support for the accomplishment of such tasks as: foiling the
threats emanating from space and in space, the unimpeded deployment and functioning of a domestic spacecraft grouping, and assessment of
other hazards associated with man-made space debris.
It is no secret that the main means of command and control of troops, weapons, reconnaissance, communications, navigation, and
meteorology of foreign states are concentrated in outer space today, while space itself is gradually turning into a sphere of armed struggle,
along with the sea, land and air. Incidentally, military operations of recent decades were conducted through space.
As for the enhancement of the capabilities of our armed forces, it is achieved through the timely receipt of reliable information on the space
situation. Thanks to this, a forecast of the nature of the foreign states’ operations in space -- and, as a consequence, on Earth -- can be made.

OE Watch | May 2020

11

EURASIA
Russian Topographic Maps and Cloud-Based Technology
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
Izvestia discusses Russian plans to provide greater access of geospatial
information by means of cloud-based technology. According to Izvestia,
currently only the staffs of military districts, armies, and divisions have
access to such information, but in the future this information will be
directly accessible by lower level formations, including forward deployed
reconnaissance units. Of particular interest, the article mentions the use
of the Apsheronsk-2015 [Апшеронска-2015] system that is capable of
producing 3D maps that ‘will be especially useful in the development and
conduct of large-scale combat operations’. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

Commander personal tablet PC.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MAKS-2013/i-bVdcKHb/A, CCA NC-ND 4.0

“The Defense Ministry is currently engaged in the creation of

an online topographic repository. It will store maps of all scales,
as well as 3D terrain models. The staffs of military districts,
armies, and divisions now have immediate access to such
information. But in the near future, soldiers of reconnaissance
groups in enemy rear will also have access to it…”
Source: Aleksey Ramm and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Облачные атласы: в армии создается топографическое онлайн-хранилище (Cloud
Atlases: Russian Army Creates Online Topographic Repository),” Izvestia Online, 7 April 2020. https://iz.ru/994729/aleksei-ramm-bogdanstepovoi/oblachnye-atlasy-v-armii-sozdaetsia-topograficheskoe-onlain-khranilishche
Cloud Atlases: Russian Army Creates Online Topographic Repository
The Russian servicemen will have “cloud atlases” at their disposal. The Defense Ministry is currently engaged in the creation of an online
topographic repository. It will store maps of all scales, as well as 3D terrain models. The staffs of military districts, armies, and divisions now
have immediate access to such information. But in the near future, soldiers of reconnaissance groups in enemy rear will also have access to
it…
Per Viktor Murakhovskiy, the chief editor of the Arsenal Otechestva magazine, in modern conditions, it is impossible to conduct troops
command and control, as well as to plan operations without relevant maps. “A map is a commander’s main working tool,” the expert
believes. “Establishing precise areas and boundaries that the troops must occupy can only be done with a map. When planning actions,
determining one’s deployment location is the first thing an officer or a general should perform. All further steps originate from this. A verbal
description of the terrain will not suffice here, as the probability of an error that may lead to the loss of control is very high. New technologies
will help the commanders to acquire maps almost immediately, significantly improving troops controllability.
With the advent of electronic repositories, it will no longer be necessary to print out maps for all occasions, store them in warehouses, and
deliver them in truckloads to the troops when needed, the military expert Oleg Zheltonozko believes. “Now, having arrived at a new location,
the commander will immediately receive a map in electronic form and determine his positioning on terrain,” the specialist explained. “If
necessary, it will be possible to print the maps in needed number of copies even in field conditions -- such possibility is now available. The
army has received compact equipment, allowing to do this fast when needed…
In order for the troops to be able to use the most up-to-date topographic information in field conditions, the Apsheronsk-2015
[Апшеронска-2015] automated system of ultra-precise electronic maps and 3D models of the terrain was deployed…Optical, infrared,
laser, and radar sensor data is used in creating and updating electronic maps and 3D models. As a rule, these sensors are installed on
reconnaissance satellites, combat aircraft, UAVs, and ships.
Thanks to their operations, an officer can see a detailed and accurate digital map on the screen of a special tablet or laptop. The 3D models
provide an opportunity to assess the terrain topography and take its peculiarities into consideration when conducting combat operations. In
particular, they help determine the most convenient directions of advance or possible threat directions, and where to expect an enemy strike.
It also makes it possible to home in artillery and aviation to targets.
The main advantage of the Apsheronsk-2015 is the rapid creation of a modern reliable, accurate, and readable digital information. In order
to organize the coordination of interbranch troop groupings and the successful work of staffs, this system can generate 3D layouts of terrain
-- they will be especially useful in the development and conduct of large-scale combat operations.
Geospatial information systems are also being used today in the preparation of military operations. They make it possible to provide staffs
and commanders with relevant, constantly updated digital maps.
OE Watch | May 2020

12

EURASIA
Russia Continues to Upgrade its Northern Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying passage discusses, Russia recently demonstrated its two newest ships conducting joint logistics
training in rough-seas, during a Beaufort Force 7 moderate gale in Arctic waters. The purpose-built Russian oil tanker “Akademik Pashin” is an
ice-class vessel designed for these conditions. Still, transferring fuel and cargo in rough seas while moving at just under 14 miles-per-hour seems
a bit of a challenge. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Russian Navy’s two newest ships …showed off their

capabilities in the Barents Sea. Oil tanker “Akademik Pashin”
and “Admiral Kasatonov” set out from the Kola Peninsula for
joint training in harsh weather. In high waves and winds up to
15 meters-per-second, several tons of liquid and solid materials
were transferred from the tanker to the frigate.”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “Two brand new naval vessels training in Arctic waters,” The Barents Sea Independent Observer, 10 March 2020.
https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2020/03/two-brand-new-naval-vessels-training-arctic-waters
Two brand new naval vessels training in Arctic waters
The Russian Navy’s two newest ships …showed off their capabilities in the Barents Sea. Oil tanker “Akademik Pashin” and “Admiral
Kasatonov” set out from the Kola Peninsula for joint training in harsh weather. In high waves and winds up to 15 meters-per-second, several
tons of liquid and solid materials were transferred from the tanker to the frigate. The two vessels maintained a speed of 12 knots during the
operation and the materials were transferred by beam line, according to news agency Sudostroenie .
On 25 December, the Nevsky Naval Yard transferred the 130-meter-long tanker to the Northern Fleet. The «Akademik Pashin» is the first
tanker in several decades built exclusively for the Russian Navy. It has a deadweight of 9,000 tons and is ice class Arc4, which enables it to
operate in the icy waters of the north. The ship can simultaneously provide three vessels with fuel and other material while underway in an
open sea.
The “Admiral Kasatonov” was built at the Severnaya Yard in St. Petersburg. It is the second ship of new Russian frigate class Project 22350,
a multipurpose fighter ship that is capable of combating enemy underwater and surface ships, aviation, as well as coastal targets at distances
of more than 1.5 kilometers. The ship is currently undergoing testing in the Barents Sea. In late February, sister ship “Admiral Gorshkov”
conducted the first ship-launched firing of the new hypersonic missile Tsirkon. Several more missile tests will reportedly be conducted from the
frigate during 2020.

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download

OE Watch | May 2020

13

EURASIA
The Russian Army’s Smoke Screen Production And
Training
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article from Izvestia and the excerpt from Krasnya Zvezda discuss smoke screen production and
training. The Soviet and Russian armies were/are great believers in the use of smoke in combat and operations. In Soviet days, approximately 30%
of the known artillery ammunition stockpiles were smoke rounds. Most Russian vehicles and vessels are able to produce their own immediate
smoke screens. Russians have not invested in top-attack armor to the same degree at the West, trusting in the efficacy of particulate smoke. Now
the Russians are testing an automated command and control system to bring critical areas under a smoke screen and electronic curtain and maintain
them. Evidently the system surveys the area’s meteorological condition and electronic spectrum and develops an aerosol visual and electronic veil.
There appears to be an active component to this effort by interfacing with air defense forces to engage aerial targets from UAVs to cruise missiles.
The value of smoke in tactical actions has been emphasized by the experience of urban combat in Syria. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The force is rehearsing new tactics to camouflage important
facilities and equipment concentrations. The troops will be
concealed by an impenetrable veil.”

Source: Aleksei Ramm and Bogdan Steopovoi, “The Russian Army will form within an aerosol cloud away from spies,” Izvestia, 10 March
2020. https://iz.ru/976360/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/dym-v-otechestvo-armiiu-spriachut-ot-shpionov-v-aerozolnykh-oblakakh
The Russian Army will form within an aerosol cloud away from spies
The force is rehearsing new tactics to camouflage important facilities and equipment concentrations. The troops will be concealed by an impenetrable
veil. The army tested a new automated command and control system (ASU). According to the Defense Ministry, its mission is to conceal airfields, staffs,
and unit concentration areas using smoke screens. Electronic warfare assets, as well as specialized vehicles that produce the veil, are combined in the
ASU. The system determines how enemy reconnaissance is tracking the force with the aid of aircraft, drones, or satellites. Afterwards, it issues the
command to implement a specific regime. Experts note that conducting combat operations these days without such a veil is unthinkable.
Initial exercises of Nuclear, Biological and Chemical defense (RKhBZ) subunits camouflaging a large troop formation with the aid of the new equipment
were conducted in Buryatia. They rehearsed the procedure for the employment of smoke and aerosol screens. They make it possible to provide effective
cover for troops from ground, aerial, and space reconnaissance, and also from all types of precision and even laser weapons, the military department
earlier reported. Right now this element of combat training in the troops is being treated with utmost attention.
Military expert Oleg Zheltonozhko believes that the civil war in Syria proved that the need for camouflaging troops with smoke screens has increased.
“Such cover makes it possible to hide troops or their movement from reconnaissance, and also to counter high-precision weapons... In Syria, Israeli
aviation conducted most of their attacks from maximum distances to avoid air defense retaliatory fire. In most cases, a precision-guided weapon was
used, which, as a rule, has a laser homing warhead. Smoke defocuses the guidance beam and does not allow the munition to find the target of attack. As
a result, high-precision bombs and missiles miss or self-destruct.” He noted that videos from the Syrian Arab Republic show how the tanks are concealed.
They move to the attack position, fire and then launch smoke bombs and leave the line of fire. This protects armored vehicles not only from conventional
grenade launchers but also from antitank guided missiles with laser homing warheads. “In this aspect, the Russian Armed Forces have an advantage
over the majority of the NATO countries’ armies,” Our RKhBZ troops have subunits that can cover entire areas with smoke and aerosol screens. First
and foremost, this is how the staffs, army and frontline aviation airfields, troop concentration areas, as well as depots and bases are protected. Special
attention is paid to the transport infrastructure: tunnels, crossings, bridges, and important railroad stations, which serve to supply troop groupings.”
The Buryat maneuvers
Defense of an entire area was rehearsed at the Eastern Military District maneuvers in Buryatia. In the course of the exercises, NBC systems identified
enemy reconnaissance assets observing the force. As the NBC subunits entered the area, they determined the type of smoke clouds, as well as aerosols,
which effectively covered the territory of the troops’ concentration from the enemy.
In modern conflicts, combined screens are the most effective, since any high-tech army uses a range of reconnaissance assets, including spy satellites.
Only competently selected camouflage can block this unwanted attention. NBC subunit officers, who receive all the necessary information from the ASU,
are tasked with selecting the methods of installing smoke screens and special charges, as well as for their detonation. They take into account the wind
speed and direction, air humidity, and other important weather parameters, when choosing the right type of aerosol and smoke screen.
Special vehicles and the RPZ-8KhM external detonation electronic control system are employed to set up the screen. This equipment makes it possible to
activate the aerosol countermeasure devices at a distance of up to 10 kilometers in any weather conditions.
Depending on the situation, the veil set up systems make it possible to cover a specific area with the desired type of smoke. An ordinary smoke screen
can disrupt the visual reconnaissance of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). In the event that enemy radar are also observing the territory, metal
particulates are added to it, so as to reflect radar signals. As a result, the enemy sees “snow” on the radar station displays, instead of helicopter and tank
silhouettes.
NBC troops can use special chemical fillers, which hide soldiers and equipment from enemy thermal imaging devices. Aerosols used together with the
smoke, impedes the effective use of most modern weapons, including cruise missiles with laser guided warheads.
The war in Syria has had a serious impact on army tactics. Air defense assets need to be able to destroy attacking aircraft, helicopters, and UAVs while
on the move. Such skills will prove useful if the force is suddenly attacked by kamikaze drones or if the drones precede a cruise missile strike. Equipment
on the march is particularly vulnerable. As a result, the Pantsir and Tor anti-aircraft systems crews are developing changes to their combat training
program, providing drills to destroy cruise missiles, aircraft, and UAVs while on the move. Among the air defense troops, this method is called “firing
from horseback.”

OE Watch | May 2020

14

EURASIA
Continued: The Russian Army’s Smoke Screen Production
And Training
Source: “Russia: Under Cover of Flamethrowers, Smoke Screen,” Krasnaya Zvezda, 11 March 2020. http://redstar.ru/pod-prikrytiemognemyotov-i-dymovoj-zavesy
Russia: Under Cover of Flamethrowers, Smoke Screen
The following excerpt is from an article on the successful training of the 1st Mobile Chemical Defense Brigade at the 4,000 hectare Shinkany
range:
Facility camouflaging is carried out using modern TDA-3 smoke generating vehicles. “Their main component is an aviation engine, which
transforms the smoke mixture into a dense aerosol cloud. In comparison with other models, the capability of using a powder composition
to camouflage objects not only in the visible spectrum, but also in the infrared one, is the distinctive feature of this vehicle,” Major Andrey
Ukhlichev, commander of the aerosol countermeasures battalion stated.
Indeed, not even a couple of minutes went by, as all the facilities that were in front of us, disappeared in a dense impenetrable smoke. The
total area of the veil was about 2.5 square kilometers.

Over the years, FMSO has studied and written about foreign perspectives on pandemics. One example is below. For more
information on previous FMSO work on pandemics including Ebola, search OE Watch issues:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Death Unguarded: Unsecured Virulent Pathogens in
African Medical Facilities
By Robert Feldman
While affluent countries can afford secure, state-of-the-art bio labs to house deadly pathogens
for research, many countries do not have the financial and/or technical resources to provide
such facilities. Antiquated equipment, minimal security, and other problems have plagued these
labs in less developed countries, increasing the risk for theft of lethal microbes by terrorists as
well as dangerous accidents. This article discusses these issues and the concerns regarding
the ability of some countries to provide ongoing and adequate security of these facilities.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195089

OE Watch | May 2020

15

EURASIA
New Arctic T-80BVM Tanks Get Workout
OE Watch Commentary: The T-80BVM has a gas-turbine engine that makes it optimum for starting at -40º. It is faster than other Russian tanks,
has excellent cross-country capability but it is expensive, high-maintenance and hardly fuel efficient. It does not perform well in mountainous
dusty terrain, but is the premier tank for Arctic conditions. It made its official Northern Fleet debut in the 7 November 2019 Military Parade in
Murmansk. As the accompanying article discusses, the tank is now in the hands of troops conducting company-level training. Will it be involved
in amphibious landings during this year’s summer training? End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The drills assessed the troops’ readiness to accomplish

gunnery, tactical, engineering and special training exercises
within the required time limits, and also the tactical skills of
commanders in a battle.”

Source: Unattributed, “Russian Northern Fleet motor rifle troops employ upgraded T-80BVM tanks in drills,” Tass, 6 April 2020. https://tass.
com/defense/1140825
Russian Northern Fleet motor rifle troops employ upgraded T-80BVM tanks in drills
The Northern Fleet’s motorized rifle brigade held company-level tactical drills during troops’ qualification checks after the winter training
period, involving over 100 weapons systems, including the upgraded T-80BVM tanks...
“Company-level tactical drills were held in the Pechengsky district of the Murmansk Region. Aside from the personnel of motorized infantry
units, the drills involved more than 100 items of combat hardware: MTLB multi-purpose light-armored prime movers and T-80BVM tanks,”
according to a press office statement. During the drills, the motorized rifle troops practiced going on high alert and conducted a march to the
designated areas, repelling attacks by enemy subversive groups and overcoming notionally contaminated terrain...
“At the training ground, the troops practiced small arms, combat vehicle, artillery, mortars and grenade launcher fires against targets
that simulated the enemy’s armored vehicles at distances of 100 to 3,000 meters and conducted fire against low-flying air targets.” The
drills assessed the troops’ readiness to accomplish gunnery, tactical, engineering and special training exercises within the required time
limits, and also the tactical skills of commanders in a battle. Special attention was paid to troops’ cohesion in defense and a counter-attack,
camouflaging and terrain reconnaissance…
The T-80BVM is the Russian upgraded version of the T-80BV tank. The upgraded tanks arrived at the Northern Fleet’s motor rifle brigade
in 2019. The T-80BVM tank features a multi-channel gunner sight, a 125mm 2A46M1 gun, a 12.7mm NSVT anti-aircraft and a 7.62mm PKT
coaxial machine-gun. The ammunition load includes the 9K119 Refleks missile system. The tank is equipped with a weapon stabilizer and a
vision device for the mechanic/driver. The T-80BVM is outfitted with an upgraded GTD-1250TF gas turbine engine with a 1,250 horsepower
capacity. The tank can develop a maximum speed of 70 km/h and has a fuel capacity for 500 kilometers. T-80BVM tanks feature improved
maneuverability and mobility and are outfitted with new devices that enhance their combat efficiency, the level of protection and reliability in
extreme conditions. The new engine improves the tank’s performance characteristics, especially in harsh Arctic conditions.

OE Watch | May 2020

16

EURASIA
The Utility of Russian-Serbian Relations to Moscow
OE Watch Commentary: A recent visit by Russian
Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu to Serbia revealed not only
the continuation of longstanding ties between Moscow and
Belgrade, but the contemporary efficacy of this relationship,
within several disparate frameworks, for Moscow. As noted
in the revealing title of the second accompanying source,
Serbian foreign policy seems to portray a need for satisfying
several external influences – complicated further by the
intricacies of resolving the question of Kosovo – which may
also reflect the dynamics between the ruling Serbian coalition
and those in the (Serbian Radical Party – led) opposition.
Notwithstanding its ostensible multipronged international
engagement, Belgrade’s underlying relationship with Russia
is significant – and manifests itself in a myriad of forms, to
include military cooperation, societal views of history, and
regional politics.

Russian President Vladimir Putin with Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić, JAN 2019.
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/transcripts/59690, CC BY 4.0

Regarding military armaments, Serbia has acquired (at
times, free of charge) Russian-built equipment. Noticeably missing in the first accompanying article’s listing of weapon systems, however, is
any allusion to the more sensitive (and potentially destabilizing) first shipment of Pantsir-S1 air defense systems, which arrived within a week of
Shoigu’s visit. Serbia’s purchase of this advanced system, announced in fall 2019, took place despite possible US sanctions.
Apropos societal views on history, the image of Shoigu visiting Serbia soon after the 20-year anniversary of NATO operations was clearly
symbolic; the first accompanying article recalls Shoigu’s leadership of Russia’s humanitarian aid operation as then-Russian Minister for Emergency
Situations. Not surprisingly, his visit included a formal call at a Serbian exhibition, dedicated to this aforementioned anniversary. Moreover, in a
not subtle linkage to another common view, the first reference notes Shoigu’s visit to a WW II memorial, honoring a monument to Soviet soldiers
who liberated Belgrade. (The continued presence and diplomatic emphasis on the WW II / Soviet memorial in Serbia is in stark contrast to, for
example, the ongoing diplomatic drama occurring between Czechia and Russia over a Czech decision to take down the statue of Soviet Marshal
Konev – the liberator of Czechoslovakia.)
Politically, Serbia’s warmer relations with NATO, as alluded to in the second accompanying reference, likely do not inspire great trepidation
in Moscow; Serbian President Vučić, as noted in the first reference, does not intend for Serbia to join the Alliance. Of greater import and utility
to Russia is Serbia’s vocal aspirations to join the European Union (EU). As the EU still maintains sanctions against Russia (extended through
mid-September 2020) for the destabilization of Ukraine, Moscow will continue to leverage both individual political relationships – as well as
the general European dependence on Russian natural gas and oil – in order to chip away at Brussels’ ability to concretely impose any form of
punitive measures. In Belgrade, Moscow enjoys both of these factors. Finally, as referenced in the second accompanying article, the lack of a final
resolution to Kosovo continues to impart to Moscow regional leverage broadly as an influential international arbiter in the process, and narrowly
as the protector of (as yet unfulfilled) Serbian interests, strengthening even further Belgrade’s political dependence on Russia.
The still-serving Serbian Foreign Minister’s blunt 2019 opinion regarding Russian President Putin and NATO military operations in 1999, noted
in the third accompanying reference (and revealingly quoted in the margins of the second accompanying reference), offers an instructive view of
the general Serbian societal opinion of Russia – now and in 1999. That is to say, it was within the 1999 context of a chaotic, reeling, post-Soviet
Russia that NATO (and the West) was able to perpetrate what most Serbs consider to be a historical wrong. This opinion, shared by both Moscow
and many ordinary Russians, may ultimately be the most important aspect of the strong bilateral relationship. End OE Watch Commentary
(Sarafian)

“Within the framework of Russian military cooperation with
international partners, Serbia occupies a special place.”
“[Serbian] President Vučić has repeatedly stated that Serbia will
not join NATO while he is in office.”
OE Watch | May 2020

17

EURASIA
Continued: The Utility of Russian-Serbian Relations to
Moscow
Source: “Сергей Шойгу в Белграде напомнил о том, что объединяет наши страны (Sergei Shoigu in Belgrade reminded [us] what unites
our countries),” Moskovskiy Komsomolets, 17 February 2020. https://www.mk.ru/politics/2020/02/17/sergey-shoygu-v-belgrade-napomnil-otom-chto-obedinyaet-nashi-strany.html
“Within the framework of Russian military cooperation with international partners, Serbia occupies a special place.”
… the Armed Forces of Serbia received six MiG-29s from Russia, as well as 30 BRDM-2MS [an upgraded BRDM-2 armored reconnaissance
vehicle ] and 30 T-72MS tanks…
“In 1999, Sergey Shoigu visited Belgrade multiple times and [as then-Russian Minister for Emergency Situations] led the Russian
humanitarian aid operation [in response to NATO military operations against Serbia and Montenegro].”
“[Serbian] President Vučić has repeatedly stated that Serbia will not join NATO while he is in office.”
“During a brief visit to Belgrade, Sergei Shoigu took the time to take part in the ceremony … at the Liberators of Belgrade [during WWII]
memorial… [and] laid flowers at the monument to Soviet soldiers.”
Source: “На трех стульях: как Сербия лавирует между Россией, США и ЕС (Straddling three chairs: how Serbia maneuvers among
Russia, the USA and the EU),” Izvestia, 1 March 2020. https://iz.ru/981367/kseniia-loginova/na-trekh-stuliakh-kak-serbiia-laviruet-mezhdurossiei-ssha-i-es
“At the same time [as the March 2020 visit of Serbian President Vučić to the U.S.], an active rapprochement between Belgrade and NATO is
occurring…”
“The White House has repeatedly expressed concern about Serbia’s acquisition of Russian arms, including the Pantsir-S1 air defense
system.”
“It is unfavorable for Russia to support a final settlement of the Kosovo issue…”
Source: “‘Если бы Путин тогда был президентом, нас бы не посмели бомбить’ Глава МИД Сербии Ивица Дачич — о давлении Запада
и обмене территориями с Косово (If Putin had been president [during that period], they would have not dared to bomb us” Serbian Foreign
Minister Ivica Dačić- on Western pressure and the exchange of territories with Kosovo),” Izvestia, 19 April 2019. https://iz.ru/869415/alekseizabrodin/esli-putin-togda-byl-prezidentom-nas-ne-posmeli-bombit
[Portion of Foreign Minister Ivica Dačić’s reply to a question, regarding Serbia’s relations with western partners]
“We are grateful to the Russian Federation for the help that it provided at that time in [1999], but if Putin had been president [during that
period], they would have not dared to bomb us. Russia, I think, would have taken a different position.”

In 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and
reestablished the nation’s military prowess.
This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to describe
how control over the security services and the
military have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download
OE Watch | May 2020

18

EURASIA
Armenia to Acquire Radar System from India
OE Watch Commentary: The armed forces of Armenia
maintain various Russian radar systems (among an inventory
of largely Russian weapons and equipment), but as the
accompanying excerpted article reports, a recent agreement
with the government of India will introduce a new radar system
into the Armenian military. The article from News.am reports
that the Indian government “reached an agreement worth $40
million to provide radar systems to Armenia” and that it “was
reported by Indian media with sources in the government.”
The article included a link back to the original article from
India Today and it appears that a number of other Armenian
sources which reported on the acquisition got it from there and
not from an announcement from the Armenian government.
The article mentions that the agreement is for “four Swathi
radar systems” and notes how the system can “simultaneously
manage several projectiles from different types of weapons
in different places” and that it is currently in service “on the
line of contact in Kashmir.” The article also points out how Weapon Locating Radar (Swathi) passes through the Rajpath during the full dress
“Armenia tested Russian and Polish systems, but chose the rehearsal for the Republic Day Parade-2018, in New Delhi on January 23, 2018.
Source: Government Open Data License - India (GODL),
Indian system.” The Indian bid on the contract reportedly https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Weapon_Locating_Radar_(Swathi)_passes_through_the_Rajpath_during_the_full_dress_
rehearsal_for_the_Republic_Day_Parade-2018,_in_New_Delhi_on_January_23,_2018.jpg
came in lower than the Russian one, even though the Armenian
armed forces are often able to purchase weapons and equipment from the Russian defense industry at the same prices the Russian armed forces
pay. While it does not mention which Russian system took part in the bid to offer a comparison of capabilities with Swathi, the purchase is taking
place alongside other notable acquisitions and reforms in the Armenian armed forces (see: “Russia’s Security Assistance Balancing Act in the
Caucasus,” OE Watch, February 2020). End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Armenia tested Russian and Polish systems, but chose the
Indian system.”
Source: “СМИ: Индия будет поставлять Армении радары на $40 миллионов (Media: India will provide Armenia $40 million worth of
radar systems),” News.am, 2 March 2020. https://news.am/rus/news/563320.html
India reached an agreement worth $40 million to provide radar systems to Armenia. This was reported by Indian media with sources in the
government.
The contract states the provision of four Swathi radar systems…The radar can simultaneously manage several projectiles from different types
of weapons in different places. It is noted that the Indian army uses this system on the line of contact in Kashmir…It was reported the Armenia
tested Russian and Polish systems, but chose the Indian system.

RUSSIA MILITARY STRATEGY: IMPACTING 21ST CENTURY
REFORM AND GEOPOLITICS by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
Russian military’s main tasks are to maintain the combat readiness of the Armed Forces and to
ensure the Russian Federation’s defensive capability. Russia’s military heritage will assist this process tremendously. Combat readiness includes updated strategic thought, new equipment revelations, and future-war projections. Defensive capability includes not just protecting Russia’s territory, but also the security of the nation’s national interests and conduct of geopolitics. Capturing
the essence of these developments is the goal of this book. In the process a few templates for
understanding Russian military thought and actions are offered for further consideration and use.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195605/download
OE Watch | May 2020

19

EURASIA
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan Continue Security Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: As the governments of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan have improved their relationship over the past few years, security
cooperation became one way to measure how far they’ve come. The accompanying excerpted articles report on a few developments between the
armed forces of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan that demonstrate this progress.
The first article from Asia-Plus, a Russian-language news website based in Tajikistan, reports on a recent joint military exercise carried out by
Uzbek and Tajik units at a facility in Tajikistan. The article notes it was a “joint special-tactical anti-terrorist exercise,” involving a scenario of
“an incursion across the border by an armed group.” The article reports on a few aspects of the exercise, including how Uzbeks “conducted an air
strike” on the enemy after carrying out aerial surveillance. It is worth remembering that during clashes with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan
in 1999, the Uzbek government unilaterally carried out airstrikes against the group in Tajikistan’s territory. The Uzbek government at the time
believed that the Tajiks had not been doing enough to deal with the militant group, and it stressed an already frail relationship.
The second article, also from Asia-Plus, reports that the Uzbek and Tajik defense ministries are set to sign “a memorandum of cooperation
on military intelligence” that will allow “for the organization and carrying out of joint exercises, the exchange of experience and information in
the field of military intelligence.” It is unclear how the part of the memorandum on joint exercises is different from existing agreements, but the
exchange of information in military intelligence marks another step in closer cooperation. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“According to the plan of the exercise, in order to repel
an incursion across the border by an armed group, the
Uzbek soldiers carried out aerial surveillance and after
finding the enemy, conducted an air strike.”

Source: “Минобороны Узбекистана: учения с армией Таджикистана превзошли все ожидания (The Ministry of Defense of Uzbekistan:
the exercise with the army of Tajikistan surpassed all expectations),” Asia-Plus, 17 March 2020. https://asiaplustj.info/ru/news/tajikistan/
security/20200317/minoboroni-uzbekistana-ucheniya-s-armiei-tadzhikistana-prevzoshli-vse-ozhidaniya
The joint exercise of the armed forces of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, “Commonwealth 2020,” was held at a high level, according to the
ministry of defense. The joint special-tactical anti-terrorist exercise with units from the ministries of defense of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan took
place March 11-14 at the Tajik “Fakhrabad” training facility…
According to the plan of the exercise, in order to repel an incursion across the border by an armed group, the Uzbek soldiers carried out
aerial surveillance and after finding the enemy, conducted an air strike. Units of the armed forces and border guards of Tajikistan took part in
repelling the attack on the border…
A scenario during the course of the exercise also worked through a situation of the armed group occupying an airport…according to the plan
at this stage of the exercise, Uzbek soldiers, descending by rope from Mi-8 helicopters, supported three assault groups of the Tajik army…

Source: Avaz Yuldashev, “Таджикистан и Узбекистан подпишут меморандум о сотрудничестве в сфере военной разведки (Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan will sign a memorandum on cooperation on military intelligence),” Asia-Plus, 14 February 2020. https://asiaplustj.info/ru/
news/tajikistan/security/20200214/tadzhikistan-i-uzbekistan-podpishut-memorandum-o-sotrudnichestve-v-sfere-voennoi-razvedki
The Ministries of Defense of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan will soon sign a memorandum of cooperation on military intelligence…The document
provides for the organization and carrying out of joint exercises, the exchange of experience and information in the field of military
intelligence.
Cooperation between the neighboring states in military-technical cooperation started to develop after the state visit by the President
of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev to Dushanbe in March 2018…It was then that an agreement was signed by the two governments on
cooperation in areas of the transit of military or special cargo, and cooperation in civil defense…an agreement was also signed between the
defense ministries of the two states on military cooperation…
…on April 23-26, 2019 at the Fakhrabad training facility, a joint training took place for military intelligence units of Uzbekistan and
Tajikistan…

OE Watch | May 2020

20

INDO-PACIFIC
China: Building Leadership Skills in NCOs for the Future
Battlefield
OE Watch Commentary: One of the biggest issues that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has had to confront is its lack of leadership skills
in what has been referred to as the “Five Cannots (五个不会),” of commanding officers and the “Two Inabilities (两个能力不够).” These have been
identified as issues and referenced in a number of Chinese military reports over at least the past five years and are defined and broken down in the
first and second articles, both published in Jiefangjun Bao as:
Five Cannots:
•

(Officers/leaders) cannot judge/analyze the situation

•

(Officers/leaders) cannot understand the intention of higher authorities

•

(Officers/leaders) cannot make operational decisions

•

(Officers/leaders) cannot deploy troops

•

(Officers/leaders) cannot deal with unexpected situations

Two Inabilities (often translated as Insufficient Abilities):
•

“Our military’s ability to fight a modern war is insufficient”

•

“Our cadres’, at all levels, abilities to command modern war is insufficient”

In a world with rapidly evolving technology and the changing dynamics and function of China’s military, the PLA is now pushing to professionalize
and develop the leadership skills of its non-commissioned officers (NCO). The third article extract, also published in Jiefangjun Bao, describes
how a brigade in the Tibet Military District is working to improve the comprehensive command abilities of its infantry squad leaders through
what can be seen as a trial by fire.
During drills and exercises, infantry squad leaders are being assigned to specialized squads of various other branches to give them an opportunity
to master the operation of different specialized weapons and equipment from other branches. This also affords them the opportunity to see how
command works within these different branches. To further build their decision-making ability Infantry squad leaders are incorporated into major
battle groups during combat scenarios, where they are encouraged to share their views and recommendations with the more senior leadership in
key areas, such as in the use of force and firepower attack. Also, combat training scenarios are not scripted and infantry squad leaders are placed
in unfamiliar scenarios.
Infantry squad leaders are viewed as the “end-point” commanders on the battlefield. Battalion and company commanders will delegate command
to them. They are expected to accomplish combat tasks independently, are expected to develop their capability in “joint thinking,” and have a
good grasp on available supporting forces. Therefore, we might expect to see an increasing stringency in their training as time goes on. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Infantry squad leaders are the end-point commanders
on the battlefield, so they must also have joint thinking,
and they must consider supporting forces.”
Source: “西藏军区某旅着力提升“末端指挥员”综合指挥能力:步兵班长独立指挥支援火力 (A Brigade of Tibet Military District Exerts
Efforts to Improve the Comprehensive Command Abilities of ‘Commanders at the End Points’: Infantry Squad Leaders Command Supporting
Firepower on Their Own),” Jiefangjun Bao, 30 March 2020. http://www.81.cn/bzzj/2020-03/30/content_9779985.htm
A Brigade of Tibet Military District Exerts Efforts on Improving the Comprehensive Command Abilities of ‘Commanders at the End
Points’: Infantry Squad Leaders Command Supporting Firepower on Their Own
“Infantry squad leaders are the end-point commanders on the battlefield, so they must also have joint thinking, and they must consider
supporting forces.” A leader from the brigade told a reporter that to improve the overall command abilities of infantry squad leaders, the
brigade is following the path of overlapping squad leader posts within the scope of brigade and battalion. It puts infantry squad leaders into
specialized squads of various other branches so that they can master the operation of the specialized weapons and equipment of several
branches and learn how command is exercised there. When organizing training exercises in combat actions and the operations which groups
of military officers do in them, the brigade incorporates infantry squad leaders into major battle groups, and it encourages them to give their
views and recommendations in those teams regarding the use of forces and firepower attack, so as to play the role of brain trust for scientific
decision making by battalion and company commanders.
… In unfamiliar conditions, and with no set advance plan for the combat operations and no script to follow, battalion and company
commanders delegate command to infantry squad leaders for accomplishing tasks…
OE Watch | May 2020

21

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China: Building Leadership Skills in NCOs for
the Future Battlefield
Source: Li Chunli, “着力破解“两个能力不够”问题 (Focus on Breaking Down the Problem of the Two Insufficient Abilities),” Jiefangjun
Bao, 30 December 2014, <http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2014-12/30/content_97805.htm>
Focus on Breaking Down the Problem of the Two Insufficient Abilities
President Xi profoundly pointed out that our army’s ability to fight modern wars is insufficient, and cadres at all levels are not capable of
commanding modern wars.
… it is necessary to stand on the cusp of the storm and examine the importance and urgency of resolving the “Two Insufficient Abilities.”

Source: “西藏军区某旅着力提升“末端指挥员”综合指挥能力:步兵班长独立指挥支援火力 (A Brigade of Tibet Military District Exerts
Efforts to Improve the Comprehensive Command Abilities of ‘Commanders at the End Points’: Infantry Squad Leaders Command Supporting
Firepower on Their Own),” Jiefangjun Bao, 30 March 2020. http://www.81.cn/bzzj/2020-03/30/content_9779985.htm
A Brigade of Tibet Military District Exerts Efforts on Improving the Comprehensive Command Abilities of ‘Commanders at the End Points’: Infantry Squad
Leaders Command Supporting Firepower on Their Own
“Infantry squad leaders are the end-point commanders on the battlefield, so they must also have joint thinking, and they must consider supporting forces.” A leader
from the brigade told a reporter that to improve the overall command abilities of infantry squad leaders, the brigade is following the path of overlapping squad leader
posts within the scope of brigade and battalion. It puts infantry squad leaders into specialized squads of various other branches so that they can master the operation
of the specialized weapons and equipment of several branches and learn how command is exercised there. When organizing training exercises in combat actions and
the operations which groups of military officers do in them, the brigade incorporates infantry squad leaders into major battle groups, and it encourages them to give
their views and recommendations in those teams regarding the use of forces and firepower attack, so as to play the role of brain trust for scientific decision making by
battalion and company commanders.
… In unfamiliar conditions, and with no set advance plan for the combat operations and no script to follow, battalion and company commanders delegate command to
infantry squad leaders for accomplishing tasks…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | May 2020

22

INDO-PACIFIC
China: The Changing Dynamics of Mobilization Under
Informatized Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: “Mobilization is born for war and executed toward war.” That is how the accompanying Chinese article, published
recently in Jiefangjun Bao, begins. The article is part six of a series of articles on the concepts and roles of informatized warfare in various
military functions, in this case mobilization.
China’s National Defense Mobilization Law went into effect in July 2010. According to the law, the National People’s Congress Standing
Committee has the power to place the national economy and civilians in China, to include foreign assets, in a war-time footing if state sovereignty,
unification, territorial integrity, or security is threatened. In 2010, theorists and military scholars were still researching the concept of informatized
warfare as new technologies were coming online. Ten years later, with the future battlefield becoming so complex, the face of mobilization is
changing as well.
The PLA has embraced the concept of science and technology, bringing the military and the mobilization effort to new heights. The authors of
the article explain that the rapidly changing revolution in informatized warfare will change the form and methods of mobilization. They look at
the strategic functions of national defense mobilization in the new age and ask the question of how China might “seize future commanding heights
and establish a powerful, new-type mobilization support setup” that can fully support an actual combat.
The authors explain that the future of informatized warfare extends beyond the concept of military strength. It also comprises “comprehensive
national power.” In this era of informatized warfare, the side that is able to set up/mobilize the fastest will be at an advantage over the other.
In the era of informatized warfare, the entire inner dynamics of the future battlefield has evolved. For example, support is no longer needed
predominantly for a ground battlefield, but rather it has expanded to a multi-dimensional space in land, sea, air, electromagnetics, and cyber. It has
gone from a campaign level to a strategic level. A mobilization system, according to the authors, needs to consider the construction of the entire
support model.
Because of technology, joint operations are becoming increasingly precise under the conditions of informatized warfare (precision strike,
precision support). Because of the growing complexity of warfare (joint operations involve multiple armed services… technology, increasingly
rapid decision making), the traditional mobilization method, which had once been used during the age of mechanized warfare, will no longer
suffice. It needs to be much more precise and calculated. The authors refer to “precision mobilization support,” saying it needs to be turned into a
powerful “lever” for the enhancement of combat strength.
The authors anticipate that the ongoing competition for superiority in science and technology will only intensify, and whoever masters advanced
science and technology and can form deterrence and combat strength through rapid mobilization and agglomeration, will become a ‘disruptor’ of
conventional superiority and a ‘dominator’ in future rivalries and military struggles among great powers.
They also paint a picture of a “hybrid war” in which lines are blurred between military and civilian participation (civil-military integration),
between the front and rear, and between strategic, campaign, and tactical operations. Because of these increasingly blurred lines, intelligent
technology becomes more critical and therefore intelligent mobilization is stepping up the tempo and becoming increasingly important at all
levels. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“…Whoever masters advanced science and technology
and is capable of forming deterrence and combat strength
through rapid mobilization and agglomeration will become a
‘disrupter’ of conventional superiority and a ‘dominator’ in
future rivalries and military struggles among great powers.”
Source: Yu Yunxian and Yuan Zongyi, “信息化战争应有怎样的动员观 (What Kind of Mobilization Concept Should Informatized Warfare
Have?),” Jiefangjun Bao, 2 April 2020. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2020-04/02/content_258063.htm
Mobilization is born for war and executed toward war. With the rapid development of the S&T revolution, a number of new-type combat forces with extremely high operational
effectiveness have taken the stage of war and helped bring about essential changes to the form and operational mode of informatized warfare, and consequently, fundamental
transformations will definitely be made to the ideas, demands, methods and so forth of national defense mobilization as well…
Given that joint operations involve multiple combat-engaging armed services, vast battlefields, and intensive use of technology, and, at the same time, come with high intensity, a quick
tempo, and massive consumption of goods and materials, the task of mobilization support is extremely heavy and arduous.
We can anticipate that the contest for S&T supremacy in the future military sphere will be more intensified. All major powers in the world today, who are vigorously adapting to new
changes and pushing ahead with transformation, are studying how to convert intangible quality S&T potential into tangible war capabilities, thereby seizing the strategic new heights
in military S&T innovation. Hence, whoever masters advanced science and technology and is capable of forming deterrence and combat strength through rapid mobilization and
agglomeration will become a “disrupter” of conventional superiority and a “dominator” in future rivalries and military struggles among great powers. Thus we are required to firmly
establish the idea of science and technology being the core mobilization power…
…The age of intelligent mobilization has quietly come and is moving up-tempo to the forefront of war and becoming an important component, and by taking part in the entire process of
joint operations with all elements involved at all times, it has evolved into a key factor in informatized warfare and a “linchpin” vital to the outcome of war.
…This is not only an attempt to actively adapt to and design the rules of future warfare, but also the key to gaining an early start and winning the initiative in future informatized joint
operations.
In the age of globalization, international, regional, and business-to-business cooperation is getting closer and closer, and the allocation and turnover of such important resources
as goods and materials, technology, talent, and equipment is getting more handy and smooth region-wide or even worldwide. This is an inevitable trend of economic and social
development, and also provides an even broader platform for national defense mobilization.

OE Watch | May 2020

23

INDO-PACIFIC
PLA Adopts New Digital Camouflage for All Services
OE Watch Commentary: The PLA is beginning to transition
to a new type of camouflage, an updated digital pattern that will
be used across all services and arms.
China began development of camouflage in the 1980s, releasing
the Type 81, a mottled camouflage roughly similar to the “Frog
Skin” or “Duck Hunter” patterns. Improvements came with the
high contrast Type 87 with rounded leaf pattern similar to US
woodland, that with some improvements, was still used as late as
2007 across most of the PLA.
In the late 2000s, the PLA adopted the digital Type 07 pattern
which has since become the standard across the PLA. Type
07 also had a multitude of service and climate-specific types
including a basic pattern, Navy and Army Special Forces pattern,
and terrain-specific patterns for the People’s Armed Police and
Rocket Force. According to the accompanying article, it suffered
several deficiencies, such as the use of impractical blue for
wearing Type 07 camouflage participate in the Tank Biathlon 2018 in Russia.
Marine and Navy forces, which only had limited utility during PLA Tank crew
Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TankBiathlon2018-74.jpg, CC BY 4.0
amphibious operations and in normal times made it harder to spot
personnel that had fallen in the water. The design used for the PLAAF Airborne Corps similarly only helped reduce signature while parachuting
but had high contrast in almost all environments once troops were on the ground.
Perhaps representing an attempted solution to these problems, the PLA appears to have tried a more general pattern several years ago. At the
military parade in 2017 held in Zhurihe, Inner Mongolia, PLA units were shown wearing “Type 15,” a pattern similar to Multicam. It first adopted
low-visibility patches and name tapes, which has been carried over to the latest version. However, it does not appear to have been used widely.
The first indication that China was rolling out yet another new type of camouflage was in September 2019 when Chinese Central Military
Commission member and Defense Minister Wei Fenghe wore the camouflage during his visit to Russia and observation of the Tsentre-2019
exercise. On October 1st 2019, the PLA displayed the camouflage at the National Day parade. As noted by the article, commanders and commissars
of the five joint Theater Commands and formations of troops in the parade wore the different patterns. The camouflage was jointly developed by
the Institute of Military Equipment [军需装备研究所] in Beijing, a subordinate organization of the Logistic Support Department of the Central
Military Commission, and SunTexGroup [中天科技], an Anhui province-based textile manufacturer.
The “starry sky” pattern, which will likely be called Type 19 [19式], does away with the service-specific patterns in favor In comparison to
the Type 07 camo, “starry sky” uses a smaller ‘pixel-size’ and has a more dispersed pattern. While this adopts a single digital pattern, unlike the
U.S. Universal Camouflage Pattern (UCP) adopted in 2004 it has color variants for different environments and missions. The article notes that in
addition to offering superior concealment, the universal adoption will also reduce logistics requirements.
Notably, the adoption of new camouflage appears to be part of a broader effort that will affect other parts of the PLA. The PLAAF, for example,
rolled out new regulations on paint schemes for aircraft in March, adopting a low-visibility style low observable coatings and markings which will
incorporate radar signature reducing materials. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“The new “Starry Sky Camouflage” combat uniforms have improved
color and style, abandoning the previous model of dividing the camouflage
type according to military service. The new type uses five types: woodland,
jungle, desert, wasteland and urban, making them more in line with actual
camouflage and the requirements of a realistic combat environment.”

OE Watch | May 2020

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: PLA Adopts New Digital Camouflage for All
Services
Source: “‘星空迷彩’扰敌 新戎装重实战 (‘Starry Sky Camouflage’ to Confuse Enemies, New Equipment for Real Combat,” Takungpao [大
公报]) 2 December 2019. http://www.takungpao.com/news/232108/2019/1202/384299.html
Beginning this year the People’s Liberation Army will replace its uniforms. The new “Starry Sky Camouflage” combat uniforms have
improved color and patterns, abandoning the previous model of dividing camouflage type according to military service. The new camo
uses five types: woodland, jungle, desert, wasteland and urban, bringing them more in line with the requirements of a realistic combat
environment. The uniform is part of an integrated individual combat system that includes gloves, bulletproof clothing, helmets, etc., placing
equal emphasis on incorporating cutting edge technology and combat effectiveness to meet the needs of all services and arms carrying out
joint operations in all types of terrain.
…
The “Starry Sky” pattern is divided into five types: woodland, jungle, desert, wasteland and urban. Woodland camouflage is used in
temperate regions, and jungle camouflage is used in tropical regions. While the pattern is the same, darker or lighter shades of green are
used to adapt to different types of vegetation. Desert camouflage is also similar to wasteland camouflage. While the former is a lighter tint to
mimic a sand dune environment, the latter is darker to mimic the shade of the rock and brush vegetation environment of the Gobi desert. The
urban camouflage pattern uses a mixture of light gray and blue pixels.
Leaders of Five Theater Commands Act as “Models”
During the October military parade, the formation carrying the PLA flag was led by five generals, the commanders and commissars of the
five major theater commands, each wearing a type of camouflage. General Liu Yuejun [刘粤军], the commander of the Eastern Theater ,
Lieutenant General Wang Jianwu [王建武], Commissar of the Southern Theater, General Zhao Zongqi [赵宗岐], commander of the Western
Theater, Lieutenant General Li Qiaoming [李桥铭] commander of the Northern Theater, and Zhu Shengling [朱生岭], Commissar of the
Northern Theater were dressed in the new woodland, jungle, desert, wasteland, and urban camouflage. The ongoing military reorganization
is breaking the barriers between arms and services and promoting joint operations— “Starry Sky camouflage” is also the result of this trend.
The PLA’s current Type 07 camouflage distinguishes military units by color, such as Army woodland and desert camouflage, Navy marine
camouflage, Air Force urban camouflage, Rocket Force jungle camouflage, etc, which would have significant shortcomings in combat.
For example, the blue and white camouflage of the Marine Corps and the light blue camouflage of the Air Force paratroopers only have
a camouflage effect during a brief part of amphibious landings or landing by parachute, and their color contrasts significantly with their
environment. Additionally, conspicuous armbands and logos impair soldiers’ ability to avoid detection.
Helping Soldiers Remain Concealed
“Starry sky camouflage” marks a shift from “service camouflage uniforms” to “universal camouflage uniforms”, which are common to
all military services and are used according to terrain, environment, and missions. This is the first time that the People’s Liberation Army
replaced military camouflage with general-use camouflage. The fact that military service cannot be determined by camouflage is also tactical.
For example, during the parade, the Air Force Airborne Force and the Army Special Operations Forces are all dressed in desert camouflage.
In the future, officers and men of the Marine Corps at the Djibouti base will wear desert camouflage, which is more in line with the local
geographical conditions. Additionally, universal camouflage is also more in line with the joint logistics support model to ensure threedimensional offensive and defensive operations in border areas [疆域立体攻防作战].
…
The pixel block of the Type 07 camouflage used large pixels, and while the “starry sky camouflage” retains the use of a digital camouflage
design, the pixel color blocks are much smaller and use more dispersed patterns to enhance the degree of realism and ability to blend into the
background. It also produces different effects according to lighting and distance and has enhanced camouflage effects in low-light and nearinfrared.

OE Watch | May 2020

25

INDO-PACIFIC
Why the PLA Adopted the Type 95 Light Support Weapon
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpt
details the PLA’s experience with the Type 88 generalpurpose machine gun, which has since been abandoned
in favor of the Type 95 light support weapon (QBB-95), a
variant of the Type 95 assault rifle. In laying out the key
points of this evolution it highlights the current direction
of PLA infantry tactics and development.
In the late 1970s, the PLA held a series of tests to
determine the appropriate caliber for a planned set of
infantry weapons, which concluded that a small caliber
would best be suited for China’s needs. The resulting
5.8x42mm cartridge is used by PLA rifles, designated
marksman rifles and machine guns use a common, though
a “heavy” variant with stronger casing and heavier grain
bullet is used for some applications.

“Machine gun Type95,” National War College.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Machine_gun_Type95.jpg, Public Domain

As the article highlights, at the time the global trend was toward the use of lighter-caliber machine guns for use with squads. The Type 88 was
designed in the mid-90s to fill this role and was issued to units beginning in 1997.
A two-man crew operated the weapon, providing a rate of fire of 1,000 rounds per minute, with an effective range is 1,000 meters. The belt-fed
machine gun used 100-round belts in the light machine gun configuration and 200 rounds when used with a tripod.
However, a sea change in views on the appropriate caliber for use in squads, in part due to the PLA’s observations of US success in the first Gulf
War and Somalia, led them to question the utility of the system. Heavier 12.7mm machine gun teams were integrated at the company and battalion
level putting the Type 88 in an awkward position in which its requirement for two-man teams, the additional awkward weight of the tripod, which
added an additional 4.2kg (9.25lbs), combined with Type 88’s reliance on the heavier 5.8mm ammunition was a contributed to its abandonment in
favor of the Type 95 light support weapon in 2016.
The Type 95 support weapon does not require additional crew and can provide effective or suppressing fires at 600 and 800 meters. Equipped
with a longer and heavier barrel than the standard Type 95 assault rifle and a bipod for stability, it has a firing rate of upwards of 650 rounds per
minute. While it uses 80-round drums instead of 100- or 200-round belts, Automatic Riflemen in the PLA Navy Marine Corps (PLANMC), for
example, carry at least four of the 80-round drums in chest pouches.
For now, the Type 95 assault rifle remains standard, though members of the People’s Armed Police and coastal defense units are equipped with
the Type 03 rifle. A new rifle, the QBZ191 rifle, was first displayed at the National Day parade in 2019, and a designated marksman variant appears
to be in testing. However, it is unclear if all forces will eventually be equipped with it. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Since 2015, our military’s new mechanized infantry squad has
undergone great changes. The Type 88 machine gun has been replaced,
and each squad is equipped with two Type 95 machine guns, eliminating
the assistant gunner position. As a result, six personnel are assigned
to an infantry fighting vehicle, and a squad will have two machine
gunners, giving them significantly more firepower.”

OE Watch | May 2020

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Why the PLA Adopted the Type 95 Light
Support Weapon
Source: “中国造出世界最轻通用机枪为何又弃用 有两个缺陷 (Two flaws: Why the World’s lightest General-Purpose machine gun was
abandoned by China),” Sina, 《出鞘》Drawn Sword Blog, 7 May 2019. https://mil.news.sina.com.cn/jssd/2019-05-07/doc-ihvhiews0315150.
shtml
The Chinese Type 88 general-purpose machine gun (also referred to as the QJY88) 5.8-mm general-purpose machine gun first appeared in
1999. Known as the world’s lightest in that category, with a total weight under 7.6kg (16.8lbs), However, it was only in service for roughly ten
years, and finally was discontinued in 2016, due to unclear advantages, insufficient power, and mediocre performance.
As a new general-purpose machine gun, the Type 88 general-purpose machine gun was not well received. Data indicates that while its
design was finalized in 1996 and troops began receiving it in 1997, its total production rate over 20 years is very low, not surpassing 20,000
units. This might lead some to believe that it had “made a quick exit.” By contrast, the first-generation general-purpose machine gun
developed by our army, the Type 67 machine gun, produced more than 30,000 in the 1970s alone. At present, the Type 88 general-purpose
machine gun is still serving in the army, although it has not “quickly withdrawn from the stage of history.”
The Type 88 is designed to act as a light machine gun when using a tripod, and it becomes a medium machine gun when placed on a tripod.
Compared with the Type 95 machine gun, it had a superior weight of fire and suppression effects, leading to optimism about its tactical utility.
Beginning in 2005, the PLA operational units began to implement a new infantry squad weapon system for mechanized infantry. The tripod
for the Type 88 was replaced with a bipod and infantry squads were equipped with it in a two-man light machine gun configuration, giving
squads firepower approaching that of U.S. military squads.
However, this optimism was short-lived. After the Gulf War, the U.S. military questioned the combat capability of the small caliber 5.56 mm
M249 machine gun. In 1993, after heavy losses in Mogadishu it concluded that while the 5.56 mm light machine gun is both light and flexible,
it offered inferior suppression capability compared to 7.62 mm general-purpose guns.
For the Type 88, even when using the heavier variant of 5.8mm, its power and range cannot be compared with medium-caliber generalpurpose machine guns. While a key driver of the development of the Type 88’s development was the then-popular idea that medium-caliber
machine guns were ‘useless,’ experience on the battlefield had definitively disproved that theory.
Given the new observations of battlefield performance, Chinese planners worried that if equipped at the company- or battalion- level, the
Type 88 would clearly be deficient. Currently, fire support sections [火力排] in motorized companies in the PLA are equipped with two
(Type 89) 12.7mm heavy machine gun squads, and a large number also equipped at the battalion level. The Type 88’s capabilities pale in
comparison to the Type 89’s in terms of range, weight of fire and suppression.
This placed the Type 88 general-purpose machine gun in an awkward situation. On the surface it may seem suitable for deployment
with squads, but in fact, it fails in a number of ways, such as its requirement for using the heavier variant of 5.8mm ammunition, which
complicates logistics.
At the same time, due to its weight, it requires flotation devices when fording rivers or wading across a beach. It is not convenient to use and
can slow down a combat team’s assault operations, limiting its roles. Given these reasons, it is not surprising that the Type 88 was eventually
abandoned.
Since 2015, our military’s new mechanized infantry squad has undergone great changes. The Type 88 machine gun has been replaced, and
each squad is equipped with two Type 95 machine guns, eliminating the assistant gunner position. As a result, six personnel are assigned to
an infantry fighting vehicle, and a squad will have two machine gunners, giving them significantly more firepower.

OE Watch | May 2020

27

INDO-PACIFIC
China Launches Test-bed For High-Bandwidth
Communications Satellites
OE Watch Commentary: In January, China launched a test-bed
satellite that it hopes will become the first of a new generation of
powerful communications satellites. The new satellite, SJ-20 [实践
二十号], or “Shijian” for test or verification, is the first launch of the
new Donfanghong-5 series communication satellite.
While most internet and other data applications use fiber optic
cables, satellites are now challenging long-held assumptions that
satellites can only act as a compliment or extension of ground
networks. Companies like OneWeb in the UK and Amazon’s
Project Kuiper and SpaceX’s Starlink program plan to use massive
constellations of smaller communications satellites in lower orbits
(with 648, 3,000 and 42,000 satellites respectively) to offer highspeed internet.
By contrast, China appears to be opting for a smaller number
of high-throughput satellites (HTS), which can transmit massive
volumes of data. The Shijian, China’s heaviest satellite to date, is
capable of broadband internet in the Ka (26.5–40) and Extremely
High-Frequency Q/V bands (33-75 GHz). Chinese scientists are
particularly excited about the ability to transmit in the higher
bands, as it allows the satellites to use Ka-band bandwidth for other
connections, resulting in lowered costs. In the article, Li Feng [李
峰], chief designer of the SJ-20, noted that the ability to transmit in
Q/V increases transmission bandwidth by “4-5 times.”
To provide the required power, the article notes that the
Donfanghong-5 bus has a huge array of solar panels. With the 12
panels fully extended, the satellite is 40 meters end-to-end. The core module is also significantly larger than previous generations (see graphic),
2.5 tons heavier and features more antennae clusters.
For China, these satellites are even more important and are “keystones” in their broader ambitions for space. China envisions a network
connecting several constellations of satellites with airborne ISR sensors, ground stations, and end-users, the “Space-Earth Integration Network
Project” [国家天地一体化信息网络工程]. The ambitious project spans civilian and military organizations and will connect government agencies
with SOEs and private companies to accomplish their goals.
The commercial aspect of these constellations is also key, and the development of the Dongfanghong-5 series is in anticipation of demand in
the near future. Chinese planners see the satellite industry as an economic bonanza that will provide space-based communication and television
services across Asia and Europe to complement its infrastructure and investment projects that are part of the Belt and Road Initiative. The article
also notes that the satellites are part of “Broadband China” [宽带中国], a plan launched in August 2013 by the Chinese government for a phased
rollout of improved mobile and broadband internet coverage for the country, slated for completion by 2020. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Industry predictions indicate that by 2022, high-throughput satellites will
account for 50% of the total global satellite bandwidth; in the same timeframe
demand for China’s satellite broadband will also reach more than 1TB.”

OE Watch | May 2020

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China Launches Test-bed For High-Bandwidth
Communications Satellites
Source: “未来20年通信卫星就靠它 (The Next 20 Years of Communications Satellites Will Depend on It),” Economic Daily [经济日报], 4
January 2020. http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2020-01/04/c_1125420981.htm
Recently, China successfully launched the Shijian-20 satellite via a Long March 5 carrier rocket from the Wenchang space launch center.
This satellite is the first flight test satellite of a new generation of large-scale geostationary satellite platform independently developed by
China. The Dongfanghong-5 satellite bus, will continue maturing of new technologies, promote the application of new technologies, and is of
great significance to the development of China’s aerospace technology.
The Shijian-20 satellite was developed by the Fifth Institute of the Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation and weighs eight tons. It
is both the heaviest satellite currently most technologically advanced satellite developed by China. The primary task of the satellite is to verify
the technical stability of the Dongfanghong-5 hub, as well as test more than 10 world-leading technologies.
Develop the satellite platform first
Communication satellites act as ‘neural networks’ for today’s information society. They offer the advantages of long-distance, large coverage
area, a large number of high-quality communication channels. It is widely used in international and domestic or regional communications,
maritime communications, television broadcasting, and other fields.
Satellite application performance is often achieved by loading different functional loads on a common platform. Currently, many countries
have adopted the design method of a satellite “bus” that, with very little modification can handle different payloads, shortening the satellite
development cycle, saving development funds, and improving satellite reliability.
..With the development of China’s economy and continuous acceleration of national defense modernization, it is becoming more and more
important that China’s communication satellites make significant leaps in performance. Academician Zhou Zhicheng [周志成] (chief designer
and project head of the Shijian-20 and Donfganghong-5 programs) noted that the “original reason for developing the Dongfanghong-5 was
because China needs high-throughput communication satellites.” The Dongfanghong-5’s characteristics of “high loads, high power, and
high-accuracy control,” are an international benchmark, and which can meet China’s demands for high-throughput communication satellites
for the next 20 years.
Through the use of modular design and digital development, the Dongfanghong-5 hub can greatly shorten the satellite development cycle
and improve production efficiency. For mature general-purpose loads, the satellite development cycle does not exceed 36 months. At the same
time, the localization rate of the Dongfanghong-5 hub has reached 100%, further driving the development of China’s domestic aerospace
equipment.
As China’s common platform for large-scale satellites in geosynchronous orbit, the Dongfanghong-5 hub is highly adaptive and can
be widely used in high-orbit communications, microwave remote sensing, optical remote sensing, space scientific exploration, scientific
experiments, orbit services, etc.
The successful launch of the Shijian-20 satellite, therefore, represents an important step forward in the Dongfanghong-5 program and lays a
solid foundation for its use in other applications. With the development of commercial satellite live broadcasting, emergency communications,
mobile communications, Internet of Things and other business applications, as well as the steady development of conventional GEO-orbit
satellite communications, the satellite communications industry represents a major market.
Industry predictions indicate that by 2022, high-throughput satellites will account for 50% of the total global satellite bandwidth; in the same
timeframe demand for China’s satellite broadband will also reach more than 1TB. Facing broad demand and in the interest of furthering
the national “Belt and Road” and “Broadband China” strategies, China will rely on the Dongfanghong-5 as a platform to develop several
communication satellites capable of transmitting between 100GB and 1TB, which will provide service to countries along the “Belt and Road”
and surrounding areas.

OE Watch | May 2020

29

INDO-PACIFIC
China: ‘Business as Usual’ as COVID-19 Diverts the
World’s Attention?
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying three article excerpts suggest that the ongoing COVID-19 crisis has not distracted China from
its international exploits and military plans. On the contrary, they suggest that the pandemic has created an opportunity for China to advance its
agenda in contested areas like the South China Sea, while the rest of the world is distracted. Despite China’s global aid and diplomacy efforts, the
articles demonstrate a continued distrust in the country’s intentions and a perception that it is “business as usual for China and its military,” given
what it is doing in the public eye as well as behind the scenes.
In the first article, published in the Taipei Times, Chang Yan-tin, an adjunct professor at Taiwan’s National Defense University, points out that
J-11 fighters, H-6 bombers, and KJ-500 airborne early warning and control aircraft flown by the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Air Force had
“intruded into Taiwan’s outer airspace... during their first long-distance nighttime exercise.” Chang points out that this was the first time Chinese
warplanes operated over the Taiwan Strait during nighttime exercises. The fact that the maneuvers took place while the world was busy fighting
the COVID-19 pandemic, according to Chang, “implies that there are political motives behind the action.” The author explains that China is using
a “compound strategy – with military activity, public opinion, and psychological propaganda warfare – to gradually change the Strait’s status quo.”
The next two articles, published in Philippine media outlets Philstar.com and Inquirer, are reporting the Chinese Academy of Sciences’
establishment of two research stations on the heavily contested Subi and Fiery Cross Reefs. This is taking place as Beijing makes a big show of
donating 100,000 COVID-19 test kits to Manila. According to Philstar.com, “the ‘research’ constitutes further incursion in waters within the
Philippines’ 200-mile exclusive economic zone plus 150-mile extended continental shelf. The article also points out that recently, Beijing had also
delivered a million respirators and 250,000 test kits to the Czech Republic, with huge quantities of other supplies to follow. The donation came
despite the fact that, in December 2018, the “Czech cyber-security agency became the first in Europe to ban Chinese telecom giants Huawei and
ZTE for spyware in 5G technologies.”
As the Inquirer notes, it is “still business as usual” for China and its military, even as “the world is turning topsy turvy over the novel coronavirus
2019 pandemic that started in China.” The article goes on to quote maritime security expert Collin Koh as saying, “the launching of two new
research centers by China at this time is a significant development. Some may think that the ongoing coronavirus pandemic would have distracted
Beijing from these maritime flashpoints. Truth is, this is far from the case. The PLA is touted to remain ready despite the coronavirus.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Some may think that the ongoing coronavirus pandemic would
have distracted Beijing from these maritime flashpoints…Truth is,
this is far from the case. The PLA is touted to remain combat ready
despite the coronavirus.”

Source: Chang Yan-ting, “Prepare for War to Keep Peace with Rowdy PLA,” Taipei Times Online, 30 March 2020, https://www.taipeitimes.
com/News/editorials/archives/2020/03/30/2003733631
Prepare for War to Keep Peace with Rowdy PLA
In the past, Chinese warplanes only operated over the Taiwan Strait during the daytime. That the first nighttime exercise took place as the
world is busy fighting the COVID-19 pandemic implies that there are political motives behind the action.
The PLA Air Force is being transformed from a purely defensive force to a regional expeditionary one. The reason for these frequent
operations in the Strait airspace in recent years is that China wants to use a compound strategy — with military activity, public opinion
and propaganda warfare — to gradually change the Strait’s “status quo.” It has also launched a psychological warfare campaign that is
increasing tension in the region.
Today’s around-the-clock surveillance and reconnaissance is advanced, and it is no longer possible for the CCP to wage a quick attack to
force a speedy result…
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues and the China-US trade dispute is turning into global economic warfare, the Chinese economy
has apparently deteriorated due to its huge deficits. Due to Beijing’s overarching disease prevention framework with closed control and
lockdowns, the serious economic crisis could turn into a major political event.

OE Watch | May 2020

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China: ‘Business as Usual’ as COVID-19 Diverts
the World’s Attention?
Source: Jarius Bondoc, “Beijing Surveys Philippines Reefs While Donating Virus Tests,” PhilStar, 27 March 2020. https://www.philstar.com/
opinion/2020/03/27/2003675/beijing-surveys-philippines-reefs-while-donating-virus-tests
Beijing Surveys Philippines Reefs While Donating Virus Tests
One simply can’t trust China’s communist rulers. As Beijing gave Manila Covid-19 test kits it bolstered control of two of seven Philippine
reefs it illegally is occupying. Civilian ruses were used, no different from deploying fisheries militia to Philippine maritime jurisdictions.
China’s Academy of Science “established two research stations” on Subi and Fiery Cross Reefs, the official Xinhua News Agency announced
last weekend. “Scientists [will] live and conduct field research on ecology, geology, and environment.”
The “research” constitutes further incursion in waters within the Philippines’ 200-mile exclusive economic zone plus 150-mile extended
continental shelf.
Twenty and 55 miles respectively from Philippine Pagasa island municipality, Subi and Fiery Cross are in fisheries-rich Spratlys. The
archipelago is said to also contain oil, gas, and other minerals…
Last Saturday in Manila the Chinese embassy made a big show of donating 100,000 Covid-19 test kits to the Dept. of Foreign Affairs. It was
the second dole; 2,000 kits came five days ahead. The Philippines direly needs testing and other medical supplies to contain the pandemic that
sprang from Wuhan in Dec...
Also last weekend in the Czech Republic, Beijing delivered a million respirators for potential severe Covid-19 patients. Earlier Prague
received 250,000 test kits. Three more planeloads were expected Sunday with more respirators, two million face masks, personal protection
equipment, and other medical supplies. In Dec. 2018 the Czech cyber-security agency became the first in Europe to ban Chinese telecom
giants Huawei and ZTE for spyware in 5G technologies. Last Dec. 2019 the prime minister suddenly sacked the three-year-long agency chief
allegedly for inexperience. Before heading cyber-security the latter was for ten years with the Czech national security department.

Source: Frances Mangosing, “China Launches New Facilities in West PH Sea Just as World’s Eyes Fixed on COVID-19,” Inquirer, 30 March
2020. https://globalnation.inquirer.net/186253/china-launches-new-facilities-in-west-ph-sea-just-as-worlds-eyes-fixed-on-covid-19
China Launches New Facilities in West PH Sea Just as World’s Eyes Fixed on COVID-19
While the world is turning topsy turvy over the novel coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic that started in China, it’s still business as
usual for the Asian giant in the West Philippine Sea (South China Sea).
Maritime security expert Collin Koh said the launching of two new research centers by China at this time is a significant development.
“Some may think that the ongoing coronavirus pandemic would have distracted Beijing from these maritime flashpoints,” Koh told
INQUIRER.net.
“Truth is, this is far from the case. The PLA (People’s Liberation Army) is touted to remain combat ready despite the coronavirus,” he said.

OE Watch | May 2020

31

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Military Hosts Video Conferences to Help Allies
Combat COVID-19
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 April, military health
experts from the People’s Liberation Army hosted a
video conference call with Pakistan’s military, where
20 health experts with experience in disease outbreak
prevention and control discussed strategies for dealing
with COVID-19. According to the accompanying article
published by the Chinese state-run Ministry of Defense
Network, the Chinese experts called in from Beijing and
Wuhan, while the Pakistani experts participated from the
city of Rawalpindi to discuss issues such as monitoring
and detection of COVID-19, emergency command
coordination, and clinical treatment options. The article
notes that the video conference was the first of several
organized by the Chinese military “to share experience
in the prevention and control of new coronary pneumonia
outbreaks with foreign troops.” It also states that the next
step for the Chinese military will be to “build a community
of human destiny, strengthen international cooperation
in the fight against epidemics with the military of the
countries concerned, work together to combat the epidemic
situation, maintain international health security, and make
new contributions to improving human health and build a
more healthy community.”

The Flag of The People’s Liberation Army.

Source: PhiLiP via Wikimedia Commons. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_the_People%27s_Liberation_Army.svg, Public domain

On 8 April, a second video conference call was held, this time with the Singaporean military, to share knowledge regarding the prevention
and containment of COVID-19. According to the Ministry of Defense Network, 17 experts from the health departments of both armies with
experience in disease testing and prevention first introduced “the overall situation and experience of their respective military forces participating
in the national epidemic prevention and control.” The experts then discussed topics including COVID-19 testing and diagnosis, clinical treatment
methods, epidemic trends (including imported cases), and “psychological intervention.”
On 9 April, the Chinese military hosted a third video conference, this time to discuss COVID-19 with the Russian military. The Ministry of
Defense Network reported that over 30 experts from the health departments of the Chinese and Russian militaries with experience dealing with
disease outbreak and containment experience held discussions. China shared the same expertise with Russia that it previously provided to Pakistan
and Singapore, but this time also discussed conducting epidemiological investigations and rehabilitative blood plasma therapy for patients with
critical cases of COVID-19. The article claimed that Russia “spoke highly of the tremendous efforts made by the Chinese military to participate in
epidemic prevention and control and the important achievements China has achieved in fighting the new coronary pneumonia epidemic,” saying
“We sincerely thank the Chinese military for its high-quality, frank and in-depth academic exchanges and experience sharing, which we believe
fully reflect the new era of China and Russia.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hartnett)

“During the next step, the Chinese military will uphold the concept of
serving to build a community of human destiny, strengthen international
cooperation in the fight against epidemics with the military of the
countries concerned, work together to combat the epidemic situation,
maintain international health security, and make new contributions to
improving human health and build a more healthy community.”

OE Watch | May 2020

32

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Chinese Military Hosts Video Conferences to
Help Allies Combat COVID-19
Source: Qiao Nannan, “Chinese and Pakistani armies hold a video conference on the sharing of experience in the prevention and control of
new coronary pneumonia,” Ministry of Defense Network, 7 April 2020. www.mod.gov.cn/diplomacy/2020-04/07/content_4863295.htm
On the afternoon of April 6, about 20 people from the military health departments of China and Pakistan and experts in clinical, detection,
prevention and control related fields held video sharing sessions on the prevention and control of new coronary pneumonia in Beijing, Wuhan
and Rawalpindi.
Subsequently, the two parties focused on the exchange of emergency command coordination, epidemic prevention and control, monitoring
and detection, clinical treatment and other topics.
This is the first video conference organized by the Chinese military to share experience in the prevention and control of new coronary
pneumonia outbreaks with foreign troops. During the next step, the Chinese military will uphold the concept of serving to build a community
of human destiny, strengthen international cooperation in the fight against epidemics with the military of the countries concerned, work
together to combat the epidemic situation, maintain international health security, and make new contributions to improving human health
and build a more healthy community.

Source: Qiao Nannan, “Chinese and Singaporean troops hold a video conference on sharing experience in the prevention and control of new
coronary pneumonia,” Ministry of Defense Network, 9 April 2020. www.mod.gov.cn/diplomacy/2020-04/09/content_4863460.htm
On the afternoon of April 8th, the Chinese and Singaporean military held a video conference on the experience sharing of the prevention
and control of the new coronary pneumonia epidemic. A total of 17 experts from the health departments of the two armies and related fields
in clinical, testing, prevention and control participated in Beijing, Wuhan and Singapore. The two sides introduced the overall situation and
experience of their respective military forces participating in the national epidemic prevention and control. The experts focused on the topics
of epidemic prevention and control, diagnostic testing, clinical treatment and epidemic trends, and combined with case analysis to discuss the
treatment of critical patients and in-hospital control, psychological intervention and prevention and control of imported cases.

Source: Qiao Nannan, “Chinese and Russian troops hold a video conference on sharing experience in the prevention and control of new
coronary pneumonia,” Ministry of Defense Network, 10 April 2020. www.mod.gov.cn/diplomacy/2020-04/10/content_4863462.htm
On the afternoon of April 9th, the Chinese and Russian armed forces held a video conference on the experience sharing of prevention
and control of the new coronary pneumonia epidemic. More than 30 experts from the health departments of the two armies and clinical,
detection, prevention and control related fields participated in Beijing, Wuhan and St. Petersburg. The Chinese side introduced the overall
situation and experience of the Chinese army’s epidemic prevention and control work. Experts from both sides focused on topics such as
epidemic prevention and control, diagnostic testing, and clinical treatment, and combined with case studies to discuss and communicate
epidemiological investigations, critical patient treatment, and rehabilitation plasma therapy and other strategies.
The Russian side spoke highly of the tremendous efforts made by the Chinese military to participate in epidemic prevention and control and
the important achievements China has achieved in fighting the new coronary pneumonia epidemic. We sincerely thank the Chinese military
for its high-quality, frank and in-depth academic exchanges and experience sharing, which we believe fully reflect the new era of China and
Russia.

OE Watch | May 2020

33

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Deepening Diplomatic and Economic
Engagement in Afghanistan
by Syed Fazl-e Haider
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, The China Brief, Vol: 20, Issue: 6, dated 1 April 2020.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-deepening-diplomatic-and-economic-engagement-in-afghanistan/

OE Watch Commentary: On 29 February, US and Taliban representatives signed the “Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan” in Doha,
Qatar, which laid out a framework for ending the 18-year old conflict in Afghanistan. As the US plans to draw down its forces in Afghanistan,
China is set to further deepen its involvement. Beijing wishes to achieve at least two key objectives. First, it wants to block any contact between
the Taliban and ethnic Uighur Muslim militants seeking independence from China. Second, the PRC wants long-term stability in Afghanistan in
order to extend the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC)—the flagship project of China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)—to the country.
Beijing sees Afghanistan as a primary link between the Central Asian republics and the CPEC. To achieve its objectives, Beijing has pursued
positive engagement with the Taliban. These ties have increased over the past couple of years: for example, in 2019 Taliban representatives paid at
least two visits to Beijing (in June and September) for talks with PRC officials.
With multi-billion dollar investments in different development projects, China is the largest foreign investor in Afghanistan. China has adopted
a two-step process over the past twelve years to increase its stake in Afghanistan: first investments, followed by political engagement. The PRC
first entered Afghanistan as a major investor and developer in 2007, when it won a $3.5 billion contract to operate the Ayanak copper-gold mine
in the country’s eastern Logar Province. Then, it also invested in oil and gas exploration projects and railway infrastructure development in the
war-torn country. On the political front, Beijing made contacts with both the Afghan government and Taliban to promote a political settlement of
the conflict—particularly after the US President cancelled peace talks with the Taliban last September.
China’s economic interests in Afghanistan coincide with its wider plans: to develop western China, increase regional trade links, build energy
pipelines, and expand its economic influence in the region. The PRC is likely to deepen its strategic partnership with Pakistan and Afghanistan
to form a “Pamir Group” in order to establish a new Silk Road linking the Caucasus to western China. Historically, the Pamir Mountains were
considered a strategic trade route between Kashgar in China, and Kokand in Uzbekistan on the Northern Silk Road.
Both geographically and geopolitically, China enjoys a favorable environment to increase its stakes in Afghanistan. It shares a small border with
Afghanistan through the Wakhan Corridor. and the regional powers surrounding Afghanistan generally have good relations with the PRC, favoring
China’s increased involvement in Afghanistan. Pakistan is China’s closest strategic ally, and host to the massive CPEC program; Iran is seeking
to deepen its strategic ties with China amid rising tensions with the United States; and Tajikistan is among the states that first joined the BRI, and
also hosts a de facto PRC military base in the far eastern part of the country.
The PRC has now emerged as a key political player in Afghanistan—and after the withdrawal of US troops, China may be expected to play
an even more active role. Presently, China is committed to hosting a meeting between the Afghan government and Taliban—a key US demand
that has been rejected by the Taliban, which derides the Afghan government as a US puppet. If this were to occur, it would mean that, after the
withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan, the actual political settlement process would be initiated and led by Beijing.
In the diplomatic arena, Pakistan is China’s major trump card for enhancing its political profile in Afghanistan. Pakistan is believed to have
played a major behind-the-scenes role in brokering China-Taliban peace consultations. In October 2018, the late Maulana Sami ul Haq, a stalwart
Afghan Taliban supporter, called on China to play a greater role in the Afghan peace negotiations. Popularly known as “Father of the Taliban,”
Maulana invited Beijing to play the role of arbitrator to the Afghan conflict. He advocated increased Chinese engagement because of China’s stakes
in the region, and stated that China should not leave Afghanistan-related matters solely to the United States. Thanks to leveraging such contacts
through its closest ally Pakistan, the PRC developed backdoor communication links with the Taliban.
Afghanistan was not initially included in the map of China’s BRI program when it was launched in 2013. BRI plans instead focused on Pakistan
and Central Asia. In recent years, however, Beijing has increased its stakes in Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s potential role in the BRI has been
discussed in a report by the Organization for Policy Research and Development Studies (DROPS), a Kabul-based think tank. The report highlights
potential roles for Afghanistan that fits well into the BRI: It provides the shortest route between Central Asia and South Asia, and between China
and the Middle East; it can also serve as a gateway to the Arabian Sea. The $60 billion CPEC program contains transportation infrastructure
projects that can be extended to Afghanistan, thereby further integrating it into the BRI.

(Continued)

OE Watch | May 2020

34

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s Deepening Diplomatic and Economic
Engagement in Afghanistan
Serious discussions are ongoing to incorporate Afghanistan into the CPEC. In 2017, China convened a trilateral dialogue with Pakistan and
Afghanistan intended to discuss CPEC expansion into Afghanistan. In a trilateral foreign ministers’ meeting hosted by Islamabad in September,
representatives from the three sides observed that the Peshawar-Kabul Motorway may provide the foundation for Afghanistan’s formal joining of
the CPEC, as Peshawar—Pakistan’s largest northwestern city—is already linked to the route. The sides decided to pursue the motorway under a
“China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Plus Cooperation” (CAPPC) program.
For China, the conflict-ridden but strategically located country of Afghanistan could either prove to be a unique opportunity, or a formidable
security challenge. Through its increased presence in Afghanistan, the PRC has worked over the past 12 years to convert the security problems
emanating from volatile Afghanistan into a strategic and economic opportunity to expand its influence to South and Central Asia—and even
further afield to the Middle East and Europe. Afghanistan will likely be formally included in China’s BRI map in the future, as Beijing gradually
attains greater economic stakes and diplomatic influence in the war-ravaged country. The PRC may be expected to leverage CPEC to provide a
springboard for the extension of its BRI into Afghanistan and Iran, and onwards into the energy-rich Gulf region. Following the withdrawal of US
troops, China—with the help of its close ally Pakistan—is set to become a major player in Afghanistan. End OE Watch Commentary (Haider)

Over the years, FMSO has studied and written about foreign perspectives on pandemics. One example is below. For more
information on previous FMSO work on pandemics including Ebola, search OE Watch issues:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Avian Influenza: Potential Impact on Sub-Saharan Military Populations
with High Rates of Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome
By Robert Feldman and Kent Nickell
Before COVID-19 grabbed all of the headlines, health officials were also looking at several
other diseases that could potentially reach pandemic level. One of these was H5N1,
commonly known as avian influenza or bird flu. This article, which originally appeared
in Military Medicine, discusses the possibility that in people infected with both H5N1
and HIV, the AIDS from HIV might suppress the immune reaction to allow further
mutation of H5N1 to occur, with a possible disease outbreak from the new strain to follow.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/200034

OE Watch | May 2020

35

INDO-PACIFIC
Japanese Self-Defense Forces: Integration, Does it Hurt?
(Ittaika Itai ka)
OE Watch Commentary: Japan was disarmed at the end of World War II, and adopted a constitution in 1947. War-renouncing article nine of
the constitution says, among other things, Japan will never maintain an army, navy, air force or other war potential. This was problematic in 1950
when, a few weeks after the Korean War started, Japan, still under occupation, was directed by the Supreme Commander, Allied Powers (SCAP),
General MacArthur, to rearm. Not that the SCAP used the term rearm: instead he directed the Japanese to form, initially, a 75,000-man National
Police Reserve (NPR). The fact that the NPR wore retooled American fatigues, were trained by American army officers and NCOs and were
equipped with rifles, machine guns, mortars and field artillery, left no doubt: this was a new Japanese army. But the key was, it was not called an
army. In 1954 what had been the NPR was renamed the Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF). The GSDF joined the renamed maritime and newly
established air components to form the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF). But the importance of terminology and euphemism remained and
remains a powerful norm to this day.
After their defeat, the Japanese developed a strong aversion to war, and a national commitment to never experience war again. This quickly
became a norm that political scientist Andrew Oros aptly describes as domestic anti-militarism. A large segment of the population can be counted
on to react negatively to almost any change in JSDF policies, equipment, or missions, fearful that any change could potentially lead towards a
slippery slope which ends in military dictatorship and unending war with suffering and privation for ordinary people. Avoiding certain trigger
words and broad use of euphemisms are two ways Japanese administrations cope with the domestic anti-militarism norm.
Thus, JSDF units are not deployed (hahei) but dispatched (hakken). Soldier (gunjin) is not used, but unit member (taiin) is. The term is ‘domestic
anti-militarism’ because Japan has been willing to allow the American military to use bases in Japan and a majority of the Japanese people support
an alliance with the US. It is not pacifism, as is so often claimed in the West; US armed forces in Japan are armed, and the Japanese do not object
to this (for the most part). But the Japanese like to believe the ‘polite social fiction’ (tatemae) that their own well-armed troops are not military
forces, but self-defense forces ( jieitai) that do not participate in war. Keeping up that social fiction has been difficult under Prime Minster Abe,
whose policies have stretched what the JSDF is allowed to do, to include increasing JSDF support to US forces. As a result, another trigger word
has become prominent: ittaika, which literally means becoming one body, and in the triggering context refers to integrating the JSDF under US
military command.
On 19 March, the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (MSDF) commissioned its latest Aegis cruiser, the Maya. The first accompanying article
notes this is the first Japanese Aegis cruiser with Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) – that is, its defensive missiles can respond to an
enemy track from a different Aegis ship. The article observes this newest cruiser comes with many new capabilities, but notes, “On one hand, air
defense is strengthened, but (having) the CEC means integration with US forces, which already has the capability, will be accelerated.” The article
also quotes Japan Defense Minister Kono Taro in his commissioning speech using the term ‘coordinated missile defense’ (sougo misairu bouei)
and thus avoiding the use of ittaika.
Prime Minister Abe had taken a different tack the month before, when answering questions in Japan’s legislature, the Diet. An opposition
representative and former foreign minister, Okuda Katsuya, had asked him whether American and Japanese vessels would cooperatively deal with
a situation where an unidentified vessel appeared while an MSDF vessel was escorting an American vessel. In this case the opposition member
avoided the offending word, but as the second accompanying passage notes, Abe answered, “Since there will not be direct communications
with a foreign fleet, including American military vessels, and the Americans will, practically speaking, respond to peculiar situations with their
own judgment, this cannot be thought of as integration.” The PM was aware that opposition figures often use euphemisms themselves to ask
questions, then, if the questioned official agrees to the purposely innocuous query, pounce, declaring “This constitutes integration,” or whatever
the anathema word or concept is. When officials do fall for such ploys, the result is potentially inflammatory. So the PM preemptively declared
there was no integration.
Not all Japanese deplore ittaika. As the third accompanying passage shows, Nikkei, a news service with a right-of-center editorial bent, for
instance, in 2017, lauded ‘unified action’ (ittai unyou) between US forces and the JSDF, declaring it simply included mutual operations, missions
and training of the two members of the alliance; that the JSDF’s capabilities were strengthened thereby; and that this increased capability, as well
as the ‘sense or feeling of unity’ (ittaikan) this portrayed to Japan’s enemies strengthened deterrence. Even the favorably minded Nikkei however,
rather than the term itself, used two different synonyms for ittaika, but with the same ittai prefix and thus similar enough to send a message of
support.
A blogger in Okinawa, on the other hand, indicates the fear that drives the domestic anti-militarism norms, including the tendency to make certain
terms and concepts odious. Published in January 2019, the blogger discusses the ongoing training of newly instituted amphibious-operationscapable GSDF troops by the US Marines, and the plan to station more GSDF troops in the Ryukyu islands that constitute Okinawa prefecture. As
the final passage notes, the blogger concludes this is not just an issue of adding to Okinawa’s already heavy military basing burden, but whether
or not this integration of US forces and the JSDF would draw Okinawa into an American war and make Okinawa, again, a battlefield. He calls
on Okinawa’s governor to call for halting USF and JSDF ittaika and steadfastly opposing stationing more JSDF troops in the prefecture. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hunter-Chester)

OE Watch | May 2020

36

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Japanese Self-Defense Forces: Integration,
Does it Hurt? (Ittaika Itai ka)
“The integration of U.S. Forces and the Self Defense Forces is
[an invitation] to enter a dangerous stage where an assumed war
increasingly becomes actual war.”
Source: “海自・米軍、一体化加速 情報共有、防空力強化 「共同交戦能力」艦が就役 (MSDF--USF, Accelerating Integration,
Sharing Intelligence, Strengthening Air Defense [Cooperative Engagement Capability] Ship Commissioned),” Mainichi Shimbun, 20 March
2020. https://mainichi.jp/articles/20200320/ddm/012/010/113000c?cx_fm=mailasa&cx_ml=feature
“As well as being the first MSDF ship with the capability to precisely target an enemy missile and share that targeting with an ally [Cooperative
Engagement Capability (CEC)], it has numerous other functions and constitutes the newest, cutting-edge ship.”

Source: “中東派遣、米軍と一体化ない 夫婦別姓やじ、同調せず―安倍首相・衆院予算委 (Middle East Dispatch, Not USF Integration
--Then a Marriage where both Spouses Keep Their Surnames (Some) Jeered -- (I) Disagree: Prime Minister Abe at the Upper House Budget
Committee),” Jiji Press, 4 February 2020. https://www.jiji.com/jc/article?k=2020020400176&g=pol
“Since there will not be direct communications with a foreign fleet, including American military vessels, and the Americans will, practically speaking,
respond to peculiar situations with their own judgment, this cannot be thought of as integration.” ....
“The prime minister emphasized a Maritime Self-Defense Force ship ... dispatched to the Middle East furnishing intelligence does not constitute
integration with American use of force.”

Source: “自衛隊と米軍の一体運用 抑止力高める狙い (SDF and USF Unified Action Aims to Raise Deterrence Strength),” Nihon Keizai
Shimbun (Nikkei) Digital Edition,14 September 2019. https://www.nikkei.com/article/DGXLASFS13H4B_T10C17A9EA2000/
“Under the Japan-U.S. Alliance, unified action by JSDF and USF means the JSDF and USF together conduct operations, missions and training.”

Source: “沖縄「米軍・自衛隊一体化」とのたたかい正念場 (Okinawa: USF—SDF Integration and a Highly Critical Moment),” Ari no
Hitokoto (An Acceptable Comment) blog by Kihara Satoru, 5 January 2019. https://blog.goo.ne.jp/satoru-kihara/e/76810c246e01bf9e2ff12d1
ed462139
“The integration of U.S. Forces and the Self Defense Forces is (an invitation) to enter a dangerous stage where an assumed war increasingly becomes
actual war.”

JS Maya.

Source: Night1011204 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PSX_20180730_221114.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

OE Watch | May 2020

37

INDO-PACIFIC
Vietnam Asserts Historical Claims in Maritime Dispute
with China
OE Watch Commentary: China has occupied the Paracel
Islands ever since the 1974 naval confrontation between
Chinese and then-South Vietnamese forces. However,
Vietnam still claims sovereignty over them. According to the
excerpted Vietnamese article, on 3 April, Chinese vessels
sank a Vietnamese fishing boat near the Paracel Islands. The
Chinese navy further seized eight Vietnamese fishermen
before eventually releasing them back to Vietnamese
authorities.
While the return of the fisherman quelled tensions, if not
the broader diplomatic dispute, Vietnamese officials were
adamant in justifying their claim to the islands. The article,
for example, notes that the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry
spokesperson stated that Vietnam had both historical and
legal grounds to assert sovereignty over the Paracel Islands.
Besides this, Vietnam asserted that China unnecessarily
jeopardized the lives of the Vietnamese fishermen and
violated mutual understandings between the leaders of China
and Vietnam.

Heritage and Freedom Flag in the Memorial for Battle of the Paracel Islands.

Source: Huyme via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heritage_and_Freedom_Flag_in_the_Memorial_for_Battle_of_the_Paracel_
Islands.JPG, CC by 2.0

According to the article, Vietnam submitted these complaints to the Chinese Embassy in Vietnam. In addition, Vietnam requested that China
agree not to pursue such actions in the future and to compensate the fishermen for the damage to their boat. Based on the article, it appears that
this dispute has been mostly resolved diplomatically but the underlying historical tensions over the islands remain. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“As has been repeatedly affirmed, Vietnam has sufficient
historical evidence and legal grounds to assert Vietnam’s
sovereignty over the Paracel and Spratly Islands in
accordance with international law.”
Source: “Việt Nam yêu cầu Trung Quốc xử nghiêm, bồi thường vụ đâm chìm tàu cá ở Hoàng Sa (Vietnam requests China strictly punish and
compensate it for sinking fishing vessels in the Paracel Islands).” Tuoitre.vn, 3 April 2020. https://tuoitre.vn/viet-nam-yeu-cau-trung-quoc-xunghiem-boi-thuong-vu-dam-chim-tau-ca-o-hoang-sa-20200403230645957.htm
Vietnam handed over an complainnt asking the Chinese to investigate and react swiftly to the Chinese civil servants and police who sank the
Quang Ngai fishing boat in Hoang Sa. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam provided a response to the information about the fishing
vessel and 8 Vietnamese fishermen in trouble in Phu Lam island area, Hoang Sa, Vietnam. The Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokesperson
Le Thi Thu Hang said: “As has been repeatedly affirmed, Vietnam has sufficient historical evidence and legal grounds to assert Vietnam’s
sovereignty over the Paracel and Spratly Islands in accordance with international law. The action of an official Chinese official ship violated
Vietnam’s sovereignty over the Paracel Islands, causing damage to property, threatening the safety and lives and the legitimate interests
of Vietnamese fishermen, and went against the unified common perception of the leaders of the two countries on the humane treatment of
fishermen from the Agreement on Basic Principles Guiding the Settlement of Sea-related Issues. The actions complicate the situation and are
not conducive to bilateral relations as well as to the maintenance of peace, stability, and cooperation in the South China Sea.”
According to Thu Hang, the representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has communicated with the representative of the Chinese
Embassy and presented the protest note, requesting the Chinese side to investigate and clarify the situation of civil servants and ships.

OE Watch | May 2020

38

INDO-PACIFIC
Insurgents Exploit Thailand’s Efforts against COVID-19
OE Watch Commentary: As COVID-19 spreads
in Southeast Asian countries, including Thailand,
military forces are being tasked with disinfecting
areas where people congregate. In southern
Thailand, the military has disinfected places of
worship to prevent a spread. However, according
to the excerpted Bangkok Post article, insurgents in
southern Thailand carried out a bombing targeting
Thai soldiers after they disinfected a mosque. This
led to injuries of two soldiers in a group of eight
who were returning to their base from the mosque.
The article notes that a police investigation
determined that the insurgents were responsible for
the bombing, conducted with a homemade bomb,
and planted on the route from the mosque to the
military base. The article further notes that one
week before this bombing occurred, there were two
other bombings at the Southern Border Provinces
Administrative Centre in nearby Yala in southern
Thailand. Those bombings targeted a COVID-19
prevention meeting. This means that within one
Phukhao Thong, Sukhirin District, Narathiwat 96190, Thailand.
week, there were three separate attacks connected Source: Kitti Lekakul via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phukhao_Thong,_Sukhirin_District,_Narathiwat_96190,_Thailand_-_panoramio_(2).jpg,
CC by 3.0
to the Thai government’s efforts to address the
spread of COVID-19 in the country’s restive south, where Muslim Malay insurgents have waged an insurgency for several decades.
Even if the insurgents are not exploiting the government’s and military’s exposure during COVID-19 meetings and disinfecting activities to
attack government and military targets, the insecurity resulting from these attacks will hamper efforts to prevent the spread of the virus. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“A police investigation found that the ranger
team had been helping with a cleaning activity
at Ban Lamai mosque on Friday.”

Source: “Rangers hurt in blast after mosque cleaning,” Bangkok Post, 21 March 2020. https://www.bangkokpost.com/thailand/
general/1883520#cxrecs_s
Two rangers were hurt in a bomb blast as their team returned from taking part in a cleanup at a mosque to combat the spread of the
coronavirus in Rangae district on Friday evening. Eight rangers were returning to their base—four on a pickup truck and two on a
motorcycle—when a roadside bomb went off. The force of the blast wounded two—Penphet Yammali, 30, and Witthaya Tengrang, 30—who
were sitting in the back of the pickup truck.
A police investigation found that the ranger team had been helping with a cleaning activity at Ban Lamai mosque on Friday. The home-made
bomb, planted near a power pole, was detonated when their pickup passed the spot. Authorities believed the bomb, weighing 25kg, was the
work of insurgents seeking to target security forces. Just last week, 25 people were injured when two bombs were set off outside the Southern
Border Provinces Administrative Centre in Yala, where a meeting on Covid-19 prevention was taking place.

OE Watch | May 2020

39

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia’s Maritime Border Security Challenges
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying passage from an
Indonesian source discusses the country’s counter-piracy priorities. In
particular, the article discusses the efforts of Indonesia’s Maritime Security
Agency (referred to as “Bakamla”), in conducting surveillance between
the maritime borders of Indonesia and the Philippines, where, among other
security threats, Abu Sayyaf has kidnapped Indonesian fishermen (see: “Abu
Sayyaf Kidnapping Indonesians at Sea,” OE Watch, March 2020). According
to the article, special operations will be conducted in North Sulawesi because
it is the Indonesian province that is closest to the Philippines’ maritime
borders.
The article features an interview with the Director of Bakamla, Leonidas
Braksan, who states that the porousness of the borders make Indonesia
vulnerable to piracy. Braksan notes that defending Indonesia’s borders
requires the navy, police headquarters, and Indonesian National Narcotics
Agency to cooperate. This suggests that in addition to terrorism and piracy,
Indonesia is also dealing with drug trafficking occurring between smugglers
in the Philippines and Indonesia. In fact, terrorist groups like Abu Sayyaf
have been known to engage in narcotics trafficking so these threats are not
mutually exclusive.
Further, Braksan asserts that Bakamla always needs to take preemptive
Logo of the Maritime Security Agency of the Republic of Indonesia.
measures and anticipate new security crises in Indonesia’s maritime border Source: Badan Keamanan Laut via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Logo_of_the_Maritime_Security_
Agency_of_the_Republic_of_Indonesia.png, CC by 4.0
areas. This is relevant because besides the Philippines, there have also been
increasing instances of piracy in the maritime borders between Singapore and Indonesia. As the second passage from Singapore’s Straits Times
reports, for example, on 16 March, the two countries’ navies intercepted a vessel attempting a robbery in the strait between Singapore and
Indonesia. This was the eighth time in a three-month period that a piracy attempt was reported in the strait, which represents an uptick from the
previous year. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Specifically for North Sulawesi, which directly borders the
Philippines, there are special operations being conducted by [the
Indonesian Maritime Security Agency].”
Source: “Bakamla Zona Maritim Tengah Fokus Jaga Perbatasan Indonesia (Bakamla’s Maritime Zone Has a Focus on Guarding Indonesia’s
Borders),” kumparan.com, 5 March 2020, https://kumparan.com/manadobacirita/bakamla-zona-maritim-tengah-fokus-jaga-perbatasanindonesia-1syhFE0e7OA
Dr. Leonidas Braksan of the Republic of Indonesia’s Maritime Security Agency (Bakamla) Central Maritime Zone continues to conduct
surveillance in the border area between Indonesia and the Philippines. Specifically, for North Sulawesi, which directly borders the
Philippines, there are special operations being conducted by Bakamla. Leonidas Braksan said that monitoring border areas is indeed a
priority program in Bakamla. In fact, according to Leonidas, not only Bakamla, but all government institutions, also make the surveillance
of border areas one of their most important tasks. “It is not just Bakamla. BNN, and the Navy, and then Police Headquarters also focus on it
(the border area), because the border is quite vulnerable,” said Leonidas.
Concerning the latest information about the border, Leonidas revealed that his side always has initial information that is kept internally, as
that is necessary for doing operations. “We need to be alert so we can anticipate if needed,” he said.
Source: “Sea robbery attempt in Singapore Strait foiled by Singapore and Indonesian navies,” Straits Times, 16 March 2020. straitstimes.com/
singapore/sea-robbery-attempt-in-singapore-strait-foiled-by-singapore-and-indonesian-navies
A daring robbery attempt by three pirates in the Singapore Strait on Monday (March 16) morning was foiled by the close cooperation
between the Republic of Singapore Navy (RSN) and the Indonesian navy (TNI-AL).
...
Eight piracy attempts in the Singapore Strait have been reported this year as of February.
There was a marked uptick last year in the number of such incidents in the Singapore Strait, with 31 attempts reported.
OE Watch | May 2020

40

INDO-PACIFIC
Bypassing the “Make in India” Initiative
OE Watch Commentary: The government
of India’s deal to manufacture the AK-203
rifle in India through a licensing agreement
with Kalashnikov Concern has been delayed
due to a requirement as part of the “Make in
India” initiative (see: “An Update on IndiaRussia Security Cooperation,” OE Watch,
April 2020). In order to fulfill the army’s
urgent need for rifles, it appears that the
Indian Ministry of Defense is bypassing the
initiative and acquiring a number of light
machine guns from Israel. The accompanying
excerpted article discusses this deal.
The article from Force, a news website
with a focus on military and security issues
An IWI Negev Light Machine Gun of the Special Action Force (SAF).
Source: Rhk111 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IWI_Negev_Machine_Gun_@_SAF_36th_Anniversary_Exhibit.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0
in India, reports how the Indian defense
ministry signed an agreement “with an Israeli firm called Israel Weapons Industries for procurement of 16,479 Light Machine Guns under the
Fast Track Procedure (FTP) in a bid to modernize Infantry.” A statement from the defense ministry notes that the light machine gun is the “Negev
7.62X51 mm” (the Negev NG-7) and that the acquisition is “operationally urgent.” The article also notes that this is not the first time in the past year
that the defense ministry (under the previous minister Nirmala Sitharaman) fast tracked acquisition of a weapon. It mentions how “Indian Army
has already inducted its newly acquired American SiG 716” and the army reportedly put these into service with units in the Northern Command.
The article does not say where exactly the newly acquired Negevs will be put into service, but that they “will boost the confidence of the frontline
troops.” End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“On 19 March... the Ministry of Defence (MoD)
acquisition wing signed a... contract with an Israeli firm
called Israel Weapons Industries [to procure] 16,479 Light
Machine Guns, under the Fast Track Procedure (FTP) in
a bid to modernize Infantry.”

Source: “India to Procure 16,479 Light Machine Guns From Israel,” Force, 20 March 2020. http://forceindia.net/india-procure-16479-lightmachine-guns-israel/
…The Ministry of Defence (MoD) acquisition wing on 19 March 2020 signed a Rs880 crore contract with an Israeli firm called Israel
Weapons Industries for procurement of 16,479 Light Machine Guns under the Fast Track Procedure (FTP) in a bid to modernise Infantry.
“The contracted Negev 7.62X51 mm LMG is a combat proven weapon and currently used by several countries around the globe...The
provisioning of this operationally urgent and very critically needed weapon will boost the confidence of the frontline troops and provide much
needed combat power to the Armed Forces,” MoD announced in a statement.
…This move comes after the 2019’s approval by the then defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman to procure the Sig Sauer rifles. The Indian
Army has already inducted its newly acquired American SiG 716.
An expected contract to induct more than 7 lakh AK-203 assault rifles which are going to be produced in the joint venture between India and
Russia is also due.

OE Watch | May 2020

41

INDO-PACIFIC
Pakistan Moving into Sales of JF-17 Fighters
OE Watch Commentary: The JF-17 is a multirole combat aircraft developed jointly by the Pakistan
Aeronautical Complex and China’s Chengdu Aircraft
Corporation.
Its development and introduction
provided Pakistan’s air force with a multi-role fighter
and an upgrade to its inventory. While sales of the
JF-17 were not an initial goal, the accompanying
excerpted article reports that the Nigerian Air Force is
taking delivery of three JF-17 fighters from Pakistan
later this year, and there are a few things worth noting.
The article from Quwa, an English-language website
reporting on defense issues in Pakistan, reports that
the Nigerian Air Force “will receive its three JF-17
Thunder multi-role fighters in November 2020.” The
article mentions that the Nigerian government began
saving money for the JF-17s a few years ago and how
“Pakistan was waiting for payments before starting the
production of the fighters.” The author of the article
believes that the Nigerian government “will follow-up
JF-17 Thunder with the 8,126 m-high Nanga Parbat in the background.
Source: Asuspine via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pakistan_Air_Force_JF-17_Thunder_flies_in_front_of_the_26,660_ft_high_Nanga_
Parbat.jpg, GFDL 1.2
this contract with a follow-on order to fully replace its
legacy F-7Ni and FT-7Ni fighters,” though he also notes how the Nigerian government “seems to be ordering aircraft once it has sufficient cash
funds for an order on-hand (i.e., not through a line of credit or loan)” so it is unknown when another order would take place or how many fighters
it would include.
The author also points out that while the JF-17 is an upgrade to Nigeria’s current inventory of fighters, the three JF-17s set to be delivered “are
from the tail-end of the Block-II’s production run” and that if there is an additional purchase of JF-17s, it “would likely involve one of the newer
JF-17 variants,” either the JF-17Bs or JF-17 Block-IIIs. As Pakistan continues production of the JF-17B and Block-III variants, it will be worth
watching if any sales come out of it. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“By 2021, Pakistan Aeronautical Complex (PAC) will be
rolling-out JF-17Bs and JF-17 Block-IIIs.”
Source: Bilal Khan, “Nigeria Will Take Delivery of JF-17 Fighters in November 2020,” Quwa, 1 March 2020. https://quwa.org/2020/03/01/
nigeria-will-take-delivery-of-jf-17-fighters-in-november-2020/
The Nigerian Air Force’s (NAF) Chief of Air Staff (CAS) Air Marshal Sadiq Abubakar announced that the NAF will receive its three JF-17
Thunder multi-role fighters in November 2020…
Nigeria started budgeting funds for its JF-17 order in 2016…The three-year gap between the time Nigeria started budgeting funds and the
ECC’s approval suggests that Pakistan was waiting for payments before starting the production of the fighters.
It is likely that the NAF will follow-up this contract with a follow-on order to fully replace its legacy F-7Ni and FT-7Ni fighters. Nigeria
seems to be ordering aircraft once it has sufficient cash funds for an order on-hand (i.e., not through a line of credit or loan).
However, these three initial JF-17s are from the tail-end of the Block-II’s production run. By 2021, Pakistan Aeronautical Complex (PAC)
will be rolling-out JF-17Bs and JF-17 Block-IIIs. Thus, any follow-on purchase by the NAF would likely involve one of the newer JF-17
variants.
That said, the JF-17 Block-II represents a major capability jump for the NAF. In addition to beyond-visual-range air-to-air missiles
(BVRAAM), the Block-II is configured for precision-strike through satellite-guided and laser-guided bombs, the C-802 anti-ship missile, and
the stand-off range Range Extension Kit (REK).
Through the JF-17, Nigeria possesses one of Sub-Sahara Africa’s most well-equipped fighters (second only to, arguably, the South African
Air Force’s JAS-39C/D Gripen). Even a full squadron of 16-18 aircraft would amount to a significant force capability in the region, especially
if it includes the Block-III…
OE Watch | May 2020

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Chinese-Arab Cooperation in the Time of COVID-19
OE Watch Commentary: There is consensus in Arabic-language media that the coronavirus pandemic and its aftermath will change the
structure of international relations and alliances. In the Middle East and North Africa, China’s early response to the pandemic’s spread has been
interpreted as a harbinger of deeper Sino-Arab cooperation to come.
China’s reach was on display in the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic, perhaps most notably in the North African Maghreb (Morocco,
Algeria, Tunisia). As those countries’ historical allies across the Mediterranean were forced to deal with the domestic consequences of the
epidemic, China provided early and well publicized assistance to all three. A former Tunisian foreign minister, cited in the excerpt from al-Araby
al-Jadid, argues that the pandemic may help bring about greater North African integration, a longtime political aspiration that has never been
realized. The one thing that is clear amidst all the moving pieces, he adds, is that “China’s position will become stronger after the coronavirus.”
Chinese aid to Algeria, meanwhile, invited controversy after a commentator on French state-owned media (France24) questioned whether it was
genuinely intended or mere “diplomatic propaganda.” The accompanying passage from the website of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum
(CASCF), a quasi-official Chinese entity that promotes cooperation with members of the Arab League, highlights the ensuing Franco-Algerian
diplomatic spat and explains: “Because the facts cannot be discredited, local media in Algeria have reported widely about Chinese help at these
critical moments. Furthermore, China’s aid has continued flowing.”
In Algeria and other countries, Chinese aid has been presented as an exercise in solidarity to repay Arab support in the early stages of the
epidemic. In the excerpt from Baghdad Today, for instance, China’s ambassador to Iraq emphasizes that “the aid that Iraq sent to China when
the coronavirus appeared was substantial, and the Iraqi government and people were supportive of us, so now is our turn to help Iraq in order to
overcome and contain this virus.” Similar sentiments are expressed by the diplomat in charge of CASCF affairs at the Chinese Foreign Ministry,
in an op-ed published by the Saudi daily al-Sharq al-Awsat, where he explains how Chinese assistance will “contribute to a Chinese-Arab victory
in this battle.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

China-Arab States Cooperation Forum Logo.

Source: CASCF website, http://www.chinaarabcf.org/ara/images/bg_A_1.png, no copyright (logo)

“China’s speed and capabilities will contribute to a
Chinese-Arab victory in this battle…”
Source:
‫هل تعيد تونس ترتيب عالقاتها الدولية بعد كورونا؟‬
“Will Tunisia Restructure its Foreign Relations Post-Coronavirus?” al-Araby al-Jadid, 10 April 2020. https://tinyurl.com/ty7mptd

Most diplomats agree that international relations will change after the Coronavirus crisis. New alliance will be built, while other
relationships lose their luster. In the midst of these developments, Tunisia, like other countries, may be forced to restructure its international
relations and review its foreign policies, as the crisis has demonstrated the degree of solidarity from some countries and the absence of it
from others. China is among the countries that have supported Tunisia in the face of the Coronavirus. China announced medical assistance
and a donation of medical equipment and equipment, which recently arrived in Tunisia. More assistance is planned… Former Foreign
Minister Ahmed Wanis said in a statement to Al-Araby Al-Jadeed: “After the Corona crisis, a new distribution of relations and responsibilities
will emerge at the global level… There will be an opportunity to restore the unity of the greater Maghreb, as this crisis may force countries to
reach a settlement, especially in Morocco’s relationship with Algeria… North African integration may be the solution… International relations
will change according to the new arrangement of countries and the extent to which they can revitalize their economies and develop their
relations. It is clear that China’s position will become stronger after the Coronavirus.”

OE Watch | May 2020

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Chinese-Arab Cooperation in the Time of
COVID-19
Source:
‫الجزائر تتهم وسائل اإلعالم الفرنسية بتشويه املساعدة الصينية‬
“Algeria Accuses French Media of Misrepresenting Chinese Aid,” China-Arab States Cooperation Forum, 7 April 2020. http://www.chinaarabcf.org/ara/
zagx/rwjl/t1766751.htm

During the critical period of epidemic prevention and control in China, Algeria continued to provide assistance to China. When Algeria
needs it, China has also emerged at the right time, and this is a vivid example of international cooperation in fighting the epidemic. But
France24 has deliberately tarnished China… This expert criticized Tunisia and Algeria for not being effective in combating the epidemic,
and then began attacking Chinese aid. He said that the medical supplies were not Chinese aid to Algeria but rather special assistance to
a local military hospital by a local Chinese company that made a lot of money. He claimed that this aid is only part of China’s diplomatic
propaganda… The Chinese embassy in Algeria issued a statement the same day, noting that the French analyst not only ignored the efforts
of Chinese assistance to combat the novel coronavirus epidemic in Algeria, but also made false, obnoxious and defamatory comments on the
subject. China expressed its condemnation and opposition. Because the facts cannot be discredited, local media in Algeria have reported
widely about Chinese help at these critical moments. Furthermore, China’s aid has continued flowing.

Source:
‫ العراق ارسل لنا مساعدات كبرية بداية ظهور كورونا… جاء الوقت لرد الجميل‬:‫السفري الصيني‬
“Chinese Ambassador: Iraq Sent Substantial Assistance When Corona First Appeared… It Is Time for Repayment,” Baghdad Today, 6 April 2020. https://
tinyurl.com/sdllsc3
Chinese ambassador, Zhang Tao, said on Monday that the government of Iraq has fully supported his country since the beginning of the coronavirus,
indicating that the time has come to repay that help and help Iraq be rid of the coronavirus… “the aid that Iraq sent to China when the coronavirus
appeared was substantial, and the Iraqi government and people were supportive of us, so now is our turn to help Iraq in order to overcome and contain
this virus.”

Source:
‫مكافحة الوباء وبناء مجتمع املستقبل املشرتك للبرشية‬
Li Chengwen, “Fighting the Epidemic and Building a Shared Future for Humanity,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 14 March 2020. https://tinyurl.com/usrgh26

China is closely tied to Arab countries in the midst of this battle against the epidemic… The Chinese people will not forget… the assistance of
Arab countries and the solidarity of Arab friends in social media… China’s speed and capabilities will contribute to a Chinese-Arab victory in
this battle… You know your true friends in times of trouble. We are confident that this ordeal will add strength to the China-Arab friendship,
and the ties of China-Arab cooperation will be further strengthened… The cooperation between China and the Arab countries in combating
the epidemic will show the world once again the strength of developing countries in solidarity, and foresee broader prospects for cooperation
in building a common future society.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | May 2020

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
China’s COVID-19 Diplomacy in the Middle East
OE Watch Commentary: China appears to be conducting an intense
propaganda campaign to pre-empt being held accountable for the role it played
in the spread of COVID-19 across the world. It has been conducting what some
have called “coronavirus diplomacy” in Africa, Europe, Southeast Asia and the
Middle East, sending supplies and medical assistance to countries hit hard by
the pandemic. The accompanying passages discuss China’s provision of masks,
experts and medical equipment to the Middle East, including Algeria, Tunisia,
the Palestinian National Authority and Iran. As the final passage warns, this
assistance could eventually translate into leverage for China in terms of access to
natural resources, investments and increased influence in the region.
The first passage from Middle East Eye discusses China’s assistance to
Algeria, including medical expertise, respirators and equipment. As the passage
notes, the supplies were donated by the state-owned China State Construction
Engineering Corporation (CSCEC). China will also reportedly build a small
3M N95 Particulate Respirator Mask.
hospital in Algeria to provide preventive care for roughly 5,000 Algerians and Source: Banej via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:3M_N95_Particulate_Respirator.JPG,
CC BY-SA 3.0
4,000 Chinese employed by CSCEC working in Algeria. The second and third passages point out similar support to Tunisia and the Palestinian
Authority, to include test kits, masks, protective gear and medical expertise.
The fourth passage looks at China’s support to Iran, including a batch of anti-epidemic supplies and a team of voluntary health experts. The
Chinese President notes that China “will continue to provide as much assistance as it can for Iran” in its fight against the COVID-19 outbreak and
stresses that “China and Iran are comprehensive strategic partners.” The final passage notes that Beijing has donated over 250,000 masks donated
to Iran, calling this Beijing’s ‘mask diplomacy.’
As the final passage points out, China’s support to governments across the Middle East “could be a prelude to a policy that extends beyond the
protection of China’s economic and energy interests.” In the long-term, this could lead to a “shift in the regional balance of power, with China
playing a bigger role.” End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“From a geopolitical perspective, it is not
inconceivable that [the pandemic] will lead to
a shift in the regional balance of power, with
China playing a bigger role.”
Source: “Coronavirus: Algeria gets help against pandemic from trade partner China,” Middle East Eye, 4 April 2020. https://www.
middleeasteye.net/news/coronavirus-algeria-gets-help-against-pandemic-trade-partner-china
Algeria [has] found a helping hand in China, the top exporter to Africa’s biggest nation.
An Air Algerie plane arrived in the capital Algiers from Beijing in late March carrying a 13-member Chinese medical team and equipment,
including respirators... The supplies were donated by the state-owned China State Construction Engineering Corporation (CSCEC) on behalf
of Beijing to help Algeria battle its Covid-19 outbreak.
With 1,251 officially declared cases, including 130 deaths, Algeria is worse hit than its North African neighbours Tunisia and Morocco, and
its health sector is in dire need of improvement.
...
China, where the novel coronavirus first emerged in December, has been helping other countries fight the disease, offering masks, experts
and equipment.
Algeria, with a population of more than 40 million, has placed orders with China for 100 million face masks and 30,000 testing kits, as well
as protective medical clothing and other equipment.
China is also expected to build a small hospital in the North African country to provide preventive care for roughly 5,000 Algerians and
4,000 Chinese employed by CSCEC, official Chinese media reported, without providing further details.
...
Beyond health care, China has invested in oil refineries across Algeria and has built roads and railways.
OE Watch | May 2020

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: China’s COVID-19 Diplomacy in the Middle
East
Source: “China donates medical aid to Tunisia,” Xinhuanet.com, 17 April 2020. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-04/17/c_138983311.
htm
China donated a batch of medical aid to Tunisia’s Ministry of National Defense... The medical aid includes N95 masks, test kits and medical
protective glasses.

Source: “China delivers 10,000 coronavirus kits to Palestine,” Middle East Monitor, 31 March 2020. https://www.middleeastmonitor.
com/20200331-china-delivers-10000-coronavirus-kits-to-palestine/
The Palestinian Authority Health Ministry has had 10,000 coronavirus test kits and ventilators delivered from China... In addition, the
Chinese ambassador to Palestine... stated that his country was exploring the possibility of dispatching a medical team to Palestine to help
Palestinian medics address the coronavirus pandemic.

Source: “Xi says China ready to provide further assistance for Iran against COVID-19 epidemic,” Xinhuanet.com, 14 March 2020. http://
www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-03/14/c_138877556.htm
To help Iran beat the coronavirus outbreak, China has offered Iran a batch of anti-epidemic supplies and sent a team of voluntary health
experts, said the Chinese president.
Chinese President Xi Jinping said China will continue to provide as much assistance as it can for Iran in the latter’s fight against the
COVID-19 outbreak.
Stressing that China and Iran are comprehensive strategic partners and their people enjoy a traditional friendship, Xi noted that the Iranian
government and people have provided sincere and friendly support and help for China’s fight against the epidemic.

Source: Valeria Talbot, “Covid-19 in MENA: Toward a Shift in the Regional Balance of Power,” Italian Institute for International Political
Studies, 9 April 2020. https://www.ispionline.it/en/pubblicazione/covid-19-mena-toward-shift-regional-balance power-25677
While it is hard to predict what the pandemic’s political, economic and social consequences will be, from a geopolitical perspective it is
not inconceivable that it will lead to a shift in the regional balance of power, with China playing a bigger role. Beijing has been particularly
proactive in lending support to governments across the region – from Algeria to Tunisia, and from the Palestinian National Authority to Iran
– by supplying medical equipment and sharing medical expertise. Beijing’s so-called ‘mask diplomacy’ – with over 250,000 masks donated to
Iran – could be the prelude to a policy that extends beyond the protection of China’s economic and energy interests.

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download
OE Watch | May 2020

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
COVID-19 and the Egyptian Military
OE Watch Commentary: From the perspective of
its supporters in the media, the Egyptian government’s
initial response to the coronavirus pandemic has been
exemplary. The first accompanying article, authored by a
retired military officer who serves as deputy director at the
Egyptian Center for Strategic Studies, a think tank, argues
that “the Egyptian state offers a positive model for how to
deal with the coronavirus crisis in the economic, health and
social fields.” The author lists 13 points that others can use
to learn from the Egyptian state’s “serious, responsible and
positive” approach to the outbreak, including the importance
of having “a strong army” with “the financial capabilities
to assist the state in peacetime, help the civil sector achieve
self-sufficiency as much as possible, and provide all the
necessary requirements, especially in times of crisis.”
The Egyptian Army’s Chemical Warfare Division has
President of Egypt Abdel Fattah el-Sisi at a state visit in Russia in 2017.
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://kremlin.ru/events/president/trips/56360/photos/51705, CC BY 4.0
been the public face of the Egyptian military’s response
to coronavirus. Prior to the pandemic, it was unknown on social media beyond some gentle mocking for apparently doing little more than
manufacturing inexpensive consumer goods, such as liquid hand soap and sanitizer, under the brand name “King.” In mid-March, it entered
the spotlight by engaging in extensive though marginally effective campaigns to spray disinfectants on public spaces across Egypt. In further
and likely more effective measures, the Egyptian military’s manufacturing plants have been mobilized to produce masks, medical necessities,
sanitizers and other products viewed as essential to containing the virus’s spread. In a display of its regional ambitions, the Egyptian military even
sent medical aid to Italy.
Enforced physical distancing has not been part of the Egyptian government’s early efforts to prevent the epidemic from spreading. Countries
with comparable socio-political structures, including Jordan, Tunisia and Morocco, were much quicker to deploy military vehicles to enforce strict
physical distancing measures and/or mitigate the effects thereof, usually working alongside police and security forces. For a variety of reasons,
Egyptian measures have been more permissive and mostly enforced by police forces, though as noted in the accompanying excerpt from al-Araby
al-Jadid, more restrictive measures “would definitely require the army to more actively participate in the curfew implementation.”
In March, two high-ranking Egyptian military officers died of COVID-19. The official account claimed they died in the line of disinfection
duty, but the final accompanying passage suggests at least one of them contracted the virus in late February, after a meeting with international
investors to discuss projects in Egypt’s New Administrative Capital (NAC). The NAC has been a centerpiece of the grand infrastructure projects
that constitute a key pillar of the Sisi government’s military-led economic growth strategy. The Egyptian government’s main international partner
in the NAC project is the China State Construction Engineering Corporation (CSCEC). Initial government functions were to be transferred to the
NAC in the summer of 2020, but this has now been pushed back to 2021, after workers at the site were found to be infected with COVID-19. End
OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“The implementation of these measures would
definitely require the army to more actively participate
in the curfew implementation…”
Source:
‫الدور اإليجايب للدولة املرصية تجاه أزمة كورونا‬
Mohammed Ibrahim al-Duiri. “The Egyptian State’s Positive Role in the Coronavirus Crisis,” Egyptian Center for Strategic Studies, 10 April 2020. https://
www.ecsstudies.com/opinions/8732/

There is no doubt that the Egyptian state offers a positive model for how to deal with the Coronavirus crisis in the economic, health and
social fields… In this article, I will try to address thirteen major points that I view as lessons learned and drawn from the serious, responsible
and positive way the state has dealt with the Coronavirus crisis, as well as what could be useful to support the pillars of the state in the postepidemic phase… The fifth point: The importance of a strong army that can defend the state against any potential threats while also having
the financial capabilities to assist the state in peacetime, help the civil sector achieve self-sufficiency as much as possible, and provide all the
necessary requirements, especially in times of crisis.
OE Watch | May 2020

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: COVID-19 and the Egyptian Military
Source: “Egypt’s Armed Forces engage in tangential battles,” Ahram Online, 2 April 2020. http://english.ahram.org.eg/News/366359.aspx
… The army is contributing with the production of disinfectants and hygienic substances and products in Nasr Company, military production
factories and the Arab Manufacturing Organisation, and by means of the countrywide sanitisation and disinfection campaigns in major
thoroughfares, government buildings, schools and universities, Al-Azhar buildings, the Coptic Cathedral and other vital public institutions.

Source:
: ‫سياسات غري ف ّعالة نتيجة ضعف اإلمكانات‬
“Coronavirus in Egypt: Ineffective Policies due to Limited Capabilities,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 30 March 2020. https://tinyurl.com/w8r9ghh

Sources in the cabinet revealed to al-Araby al-Jadid that there are several proposals already in place to deal with the pandemic in its third
stage, including completely stopping trains and subways, isolating some areas inside Greater Cairo and preventing exit and entry from them,
then isolating those provinces with the most cases. The sources noted that the implementation of these measures would definitely require the
army to more actively participate in the curfew implementation, alongside the police which has thus far taken charge of implementing these
policies in cities.

Source:
‫ تدابري ملنع التفيش باملعسكرات‬:‫كورونا يرضب الجيش املرصي‬
“Coronavirus Strikes the Egyptian Military: Preparations to Avoid an Outbreak in Military Camps,” al-Araby al-Jadid. 24 March 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
r6r4ooe

Contrary to the Egyptian Army Spokesman Col. Tamer Al-Rifai’s announcement that [Major General Shafie Abdel Halim] Dawoud and
[Major General Khaled] Shaltout had died during the army’s chemical warfare disinfection campaigns of government installations, roads and
public squares over the past days, a well-informed sources told al-Jadeed al-Jadid that Dawoud was the first senior officer diagnosed with
coronavirus. This happened approximately two weeks ago, after he held a meeting with a number of foreign investors and contractors who
came to Egypt at the end of February, to work on project linked to the New Administrative Capital.

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence
in 1991, new regional military and security
alliances have been created (some of which are
Russian-led), new military partnerships with
non-NATO countries have been established, a
number of joint military exercises have been
conducted, over a dozen high-profile incidents
of violence and civil unrest have taken place, and
military installations have been used by foreign
militaries. While this activity gained attention, it
has not been collectively compiled. A compilation
of this activity can serve as a guide for current and
future military and security involvement in Central
Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880
OE Watch | May 2020

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia Sees Opportunity in COVID-19 to Isolate Iranian
Forces in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The COVID-19 pandemic and its widespread occurrence in Iran may have created an opportunity for Russia in Syria.
Citing threats to the health and safety of Syrian Arab Army soldiers from the pro-Iranian forces that travel back and forth to Iran, Russia has
imposed a rule to temporarily “isolate” the pro-Iranian forces from the Syrian Army, with a view to eventually “make this isolation permanent.”
The accompanying passages discuss this situation, in light of Russia and Iran’s conflicting long-term goals and competition for influence in Syria.
As the first passage from an interview with a Turkish expert notes, Russia’s long-term goal in Syria is to “establish territorial integrity under
the Syrian Baath regime-- its close ally since Cold War years and its satellite.” The expert points out “Moscow’s interests and vision, in this
framework, is also in conflict with Tehran and the Quds Force, who want to make Syria into a second Lebanon, and various militias into a second
Lebanese Hezbollah (or a Syrian Hezbollah).” According to the expert, in the Kremlin’s future vision of Syria, the only armed forces there are
the Syrian Arab Armed Forces. He points out the long-standing ties between Russia and Syria, even noting that the Syrian Army was at one time
called “an Arabic-Speaking Red Army.”
However, currently, there are pro-Iranian forces fighting on the side of the Syrian Arab Army. As the second passage notes, “Russian commanders
in Syria decided to turn the situation related to the coronavirus epidemic in Iran to their benefit by starting to filter out pro-Iranian forces fighting
on the side of the Syrian Arab Army.” According to the passage, “the Russian command ...imposed a rule requiring deployment of Syrian army
formations loyal to Russia separately from pro-Iranian forces. These precautions were introduced in order to prevent infection among the soldiers
that, in some way or another, come into contact with the Iranian “Shiite international forces” and local militias affiliated with Tehran.” The author
notes that the pandemic may allow those opposing Iranian influence in Moscow and within the Syrian government to take “temporary” measures
to protect the Syrian forces by isolating the Iranian ones, with a long-term view of making this isolation permanent. However, the author claims
that these steps will “hardly be able to alter Tehran’s general infiltration into the Syrian army and security apparatus and even less able to drive
Iranian militias out of the eastern regions.”
The difficulty in driving Iran out of Syria is explained in the final passage, which points out that Iran is working to entrench and bolster its
influence in Syria, by rebuilding Shiite-dominated neighborhoods in Damascus, Homs, Aleppo, Latakia and Tartus. The author notes “this
includes not only returning Shiites who fled their homes during the civil conflict, but also bringing in others from Lebanon and Iraq, all part of an
alleged demographic engineering scheme to entrench the Islamic Republic’s influence.” End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The pandemic will officially allow those opposing
Iranian influence in Moscow... to take “temporary”
measures to isolate Iranian forces and gradually make
this isolation permanent.”
Source: Taha Akyol, “Esad’ın İdlib’deki ordularını Rusya kurdu “(Russia Established Assad’s Armies in Idlib),” Karar.com, 2 March 2020.
https://www.karar.com/esadin-idlibdeki-ordularini-rusya-kurdu-1547116
The Russian Federation’s ultimate goal in Syria [is to] establish territorial integrity under the Baas regime-- its close ally since Cold War
years and its satellite. Moscow’s interests and vision, in this framework, is also in conflict with Tehran and the IRGC Quds Force, who want
to make Syria into a second Lebanon, and various militias into a second Lebanese Hezbollah (or a Syrian Hezbollah). In the Kremlin’s future
vision of Syria, the only armed forces there are the Syrian Arab Armed Forces...
‘An Arabic-Speaking Red Army’
Relations between the Russian Federation Armed Forces and the Syrian Arab Armed Forces are not based on a contextual security
cooperation; on the contrary, they are based on deep, cultural and doctrinal ties that go all the way back to the Arap-Israel wars during
the Cold War. During this period, the armed forces of the Baas regime could be called “An Arabic-Speaking Red Army.” Today, the two
main units conducting the Idlib operation-- the 25th Division and 5th Army Corps-- were established by the Russians during the civil war.
The Commander of the 25th Division Gen. Suheyl el-Hassan, was awarded multiple awards by Russian Chief of the General Staff Valery
Gerasimov, and praised during Putin’s visit to the Khameimen base.

OE Watch | May 2020

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia Sees Opportunity in COVID-19 to
Isolate Iranian Forces in Syria

Vladimir Putin visited the command post of the Russian Armed Forces in Syria. With President of the Syrian Arab Republic Bashar al-Assad (left) and
Russia’s Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu. 7 January 2020.
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/62545, CC BY 4.0

Source: Antan Mardasov, “Is COVID-19 changing Astana allies’ dynamics in Syria?” Al Monitor, 31 March 2020. https://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2020/03/russia-iran-syria-turkey-coronavirus-subversion.html#ixzz6JQrb6jSL
Al Modon, a Lebanese periodical, has reported that Russian commanders in Syria decided to turn the situation related to the coronavirus
epidemic in Iran to their benefit by starting to filter out pro-Iranian forces fighting on the side of the Syrian Arab Army. The Russian
command allegedly imposed a rule requiring deployment of Syrian army formations loyal to Russia separately from pro-Iranian forces. These
precautions were introduced in order to prevent infection among the soldiers that, in some way or another, come into contact with the Iranian
“Shiite international forces” and local militias affiliated with Tehran.
...
“It is only natural that groups of military advisers and special forces personnel would face a security issue during the pandemic, considering
the threats in central and eastern Syria created by [air connections] with Iran and Shiite pilgrims traveling back and forth,” [a] Russian
military source said.
...
It is rather likely that the pandemic will officially allow those opposing Iranian influence in Moscow and within the Syrian government to
take “temporary” measures to isolate Iranian forces and gradually make this isolation permanent. However, these steps will hardly be able to
alter Tehran’s general infiltration into the Syrian army and security apparatus and even less able to drive Iranian militias out of the eastern
regions.

Source: Amberin Zaman, “Is Syria unable, or unwilling, to fend off Iran coronavirus contagion?” Al Monitor, 25 March 2020. https://www.
al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2020/03/syria-iran-coronavirus-stop-spread.html#ixzz6JQspoveg
Rebuilding Shiite-dominated neighborhoods in Damascus, Homs, Aleppo, Latakia and Tartus is a key element of Iran’s strategy of bolstering
its influence in Syria. This includes not only returning Shiites who fled their homes during the civil conflict, but also bringing in others from
Lebanon and Iraq, all part of an alleged demographic engineering scheme to entrench the Islamic Republic’s influence.

OE Watch | May 2020

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syria’s Idlib Continues to Challenge Turkish-Russian
Relations

OE Watch Commentary: The situation in Syria’s Idlib province and the question of how to deal with radical elements continue to be a
contentious issue between Turkey and Russia. The ceasefire that Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Russian President Vladimir Putin
reached on 5 March de-escalated the situation temporarily. Since then Turkey stepped up measures to strengthen its position by deploying more
military personnel and equipment and by setting up more outposts. As part of the ceasefire, Turkey and Russia started joint patrols around the
M4 highway. While Turkey faces challenges in keeping extremist groups in Idlib under control, Russia seems to be facing challenges keeping
the Syrian regime and Iran backed militias in compliance with the ceasefire. The first accompanying article analyzes the challenges Turkey faces
dealing with extremist groups in Idlib while the second article discusses the threat these radical groups pose to joint Turkish-Russian patrols along
the M4 highway.

Turkey needs to deal with the extremist groups in Idlib for several reasons. As the first article from Al-Monitor states, these groups challenge
Turkey to “achieve its immediate goals” of establishing safe zones in Idlib province for “the millions of Syrian refugees it hosts.” Estimated at
over 3.5 million, Syrian refugees in Turkey have “become a heavy burden” at a time when Turkey faces a possibility of financial collapse and
the COVID-19 crisis. Second, the presence of extremist groups, notably Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), tests Turkish-Russian relations. Russia has
repeatedly called on Turkey to clear them from Idlib since 2017. However, Turkey has not shown a clear desire to take on HTS and other extremist
groups. The author states that “[h]aving failed to take on HTS and similar groups in any significant manner to date, the question remains as to
whether Ankara has the will to carry out this task today” despite these groups obstructing recent Turkish-Russian joint patrol on the M4 highway.
The second article notes that while the cease-fire reached on 5 March has been opposed by HTS, which continues its operations along the M4
highway and poses a threat to joint Turkish-Russian patrols. The author states that two “missions were conducted on 15 March and 23 March…
but both... had to be cut short due to provocative moves by these groups.” The third mission was postponed due to security reasons. As the second
passage notes, this situation “constitute[s] very good reasoning for the Russian and Syrian armies to break the ceasefire in the region,” which
doesn’t bode well for the cease-fire holding up in the long-term. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The jihadi groups that Ankara has maintained some
degree of contact with in the region remain Turkey’s
Achilles’ heel in its dealings with Russia over Idlib.”
Source: Semih Idiz, “Does Turkey have the will to take on jihadis in Idlib?” Al-monitor, 24 March 2020. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2020/03/turkey-syria-russia-will-ankara-take-on-jihadis-in-idlib.html
The situation in the northwestern Syrian province continues to be volatile, despite the fragile cease-fire reached between Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Vladimir Putin in
Moscow on March 5.
The jihadi groups that Ankara has maintained some degree of contact with in the region remain Turkey’s Achilles’ heel in its dealings with Russia over Idlib.
These groups also pose an obstacle to Ankara as it tries to achieve its immediate goals in the province. Turkey’s principal aim is to establish safe zones there to house
the millions of Syrian refugees it hosts.
Russia’s position has not changed. It insists that jihadi groups in Idlib have to be eliminated before military operations can be finally terminated... The main group in
Russia’s crosshairs is Hayat Tahrir al Sham (HTS), which Moscow continues to refer to by its original name, Jabhat al-Nusra. The Moscow Summit on March 5 once
again tasked Ankara with removing HTS and related groups from Idlib.…
Having failed to take on HTS and similar groups in any significant manner to date, the question remains as to whether Ankara has the will to carry out this task today.
…
The question of jihadi fighters in Idlib has taken on an added significance now following last week’s killing of two Turkish soldiers in the region by “radical groups,”
as stated by Turkey’s Ministry of Defense.
…
HTS has refused to comply with the cease-fire reached at the Moscow summit. Russia says HTS was also the organizer of the recent protests that obstructed the joint
Turkish-Russian patrol on the strategic M4 highway.

Source: Serkan Demirtaş,“Radical groups block Turkish-Russian patrol in Idlib ria” Hurriyet Daily News, 1 April 2020. https://www.
hurriyetdailynews.com/opinion/serkan-demirtas/radical-groups-block-turkish-russian-patrol-in-idlib-153458
The ceasefire seems to hold in general terms, but the joint patrolling missions cannot be carried out properly due to the continued activities of the radical groups
along the M4. The first and second missions were conducted on March 15 and March 23 respectively but both operations had to be cut short due to provocative moves
by these groups.
Under normal conditions, the third mission had to take place last weekend. Ankara blames the bad weather conditions, but it seems it’s more than that. Citing security
reasons, the Russian side is not very much willing to hold the joint mission with calls on the Turkish government to take measures against the disruptive activities of the
radical groups.
…
The radical groups remaining near the highway will likely continue to interfere with the joint patrolling mission and it would constitute very good reasoning for the
Russian and Syrian armies to break the ceasefire in the region.

OE Watch | May 2020

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Syrian Conflict Increasingly Shaped by Expansive Use of
UAVs
OE Watch Commentary: Recent developments in Syria have served to highlight the ways in which unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are
being exploited by both conventional militaries and insurgent groups. Wael Fatha, a writer for the Lebanese newspaper al-Watan al-Arabi, echoed
the belief among some Russians that the skies of Syria were the scene of the so-called drone wars. This past February, Turkish forces launched
a uniquely punishing series of drone strikes against Syrian army positions and formations in Idlib province in order to blunt the Syrian army’s
Russian-backed advance deeper into the province. The Israeli-based Jerusalem Post commentator Seth Frantzman argued that the drone strikes,
“reveal the degree to which Turkey has created a groundbreaking armed force of drones over the last several years.” While the Russian no-fly
zone in northwestern Syria has prevented Turkish manned jets from conducting airstrikes within the region, these most recent strikes demonstrate
an ability for Turkish UAVs to successfully operate in denied airspace. While Turkey has employed its UAVs in targeted strikes against Kurdish
insurgent forces in northeastern Syria and northern Iraq, it has never before launched such a large quantity of attacks in such a short span of time
against primarily conventional targets.
Likewise, insurgent groups in Syria have dramatically increased their use of imported and improvised UAVs to conduct both intelligence
gathering and attacks against Syrian regime and other targets. Wael Fatha cites Russian military claims of more than 60 attempted UAV attacks
against its base in Humaymim in northeastern Syria, and an additional 58 attacks against its base in Latakia since the start of 2019. As a result,
Russian forces have recently deployed new anti-air assets in Humaymim intended to defeat the surge in drone attacks. Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir
Khalil, a journalist writing in the Saudi-owned and London-based al-Majalla, adds that while many of the UAVs acquired or manufactured by
insurgent and terrorist groups are unrefined or crudely fashioned, their low-cost and ease of use has made them attractive to such groups. In some
respects UAVs are leveling the playing field for insurgent groups facing off against more technologically advanced militaries such as Russia,
Turkey, and the United States. Khalil asserts that, contrary to Russia’s deployment of anti-air systems, the most promising defense against drones
will be found through developments in electronic warfare and jamming techniques. End OE Watch Commentary (Dennis)

“Major General Konashenkov noted that opposition fighters
were continually improving their UAVs, with some new UAVs
able to travel upwards of 250 km and operate at altitudes up
to four kilometers. He added that such capabilities make it
increasingly harder to track the UAVs.”

“The Syrian conflict has seen a drastic expansion of drone
warfare as regional powers and terrorist groups have resorted to
UAVs after this new technology has flooded into conflict zones
around the world. Since every side has been subject to drone
attacks, every side is now attempting to employ them.”

OE Watch | May 2020

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Syrian Conflict Increasingly Shaped by
Expansive Use of UAVs
Source: Wael Fatha, “‫ هل تشعل الصراع فى الشرق األوسط؟‬.. ‫( حروب الدرون‬Drone Wars… Will They Inflame Tensions in the Middle East?)” al-Watan al-Arabi, 10
December 2019. https://alwatanalarabi.com/-143268‫استخدا‬-‫بعد‬-‫األوسط‬-‫الشرق‬-‫صراعات‬-‫مستقبل‬

“The Russian Army claimed that since the beginning of 2019 it has destroyed more than 60 UAVs that were heading towards its base in
Humaymim, Syria. The base is close to areas still occupied by jihadists and opposition fighters. Major General Igor Konashenkov said that
Russian forces also intercepted another 58 UAVs and 27 missiles targeting its base in the Latakia province--a stronghold for Bashar alAssad’s regime in northwest Syria.
Konashenkov insisted to journalists that Russian forces thwarted all of the attempted attacks.
During a press conference organized by the Russian military, Konashenkov also asserted that the UAVs used in the attempted attacks, while
rudimentary in nature, were capable of releasing rockets from an altitude of more than two kilometers. Most of the UAVs had appeared to
originate from Khan Shaykhun and Lataminah--two small towns that were captured by the Syrian Army in August of 2019. However, other
UAVs were launched from various areas in Idlib province as well. Idlib remains one of the last bastions of jihadists and opposition fighters
in Syria and it has become the source of tensions between Moscow and Ankara due to efforts to prevent a wide-scale offensive by the Syrian
regime in the province.
In Humaymim, Russia has deployed two air defense systems aimed to thwart UAV attacks: the Pantsir-S1 and the Tor-M2. These are in
addition to its well-known S-400 air defense system, which is deployed at Humaymim. It has also deployed an S-300 anti-air system at its
naval base in Tartus, located in southern Latakia province.”

Source: Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadr Khalil, “‫ أسلحة اإلرهابيين على ساحة الشرق األوسط‬:‫( حرب الدرونز‬Drone Warfare: Terrorists’ Weapon of Choice on Battlefields
Across the Middle East),” al-Majalla, 14 October 2019. https://arb.majalla.com/node/77186/«‫الدرونز‬-‫»حرب‬

“Terrorist groups have resorted to the use of UAVs due to the relative ease of smuggling, purchasing, or manufacturing them. The costs of
acquiring a drone can range anywhere from $300 to $3000. While capabilities in range and payload size can differ, the low cost of such
drones, combined with their ability to achieve effects similar to missiles costing millions of dollars, has led many to call them, “low cost, high
impact terrorist weapons.”
...
The past few years have seen an abrupt change in terrorist groups’ willingness to manufacture and employ drones in terrorist operations
as drones have become more accessible and available. Parts can be easily procured over the internet, and drones are capable of carrying
explosives and being used in attacks against vital government and civilian institutions that can result in property damage or loss of human
life.
…
Ibrahim al-Marashi, an associate professor of history at the California State University in America, says, “Terrorist groups have
demonstrated a willingness to adopt certain aspects of modernity to include UAVs. They have been able to easily acquire UAVs and are even
able to control them via their smartphones.”
...
al-Marashi pointed out that the best defense against these “terrorist aircraft” is through electronic warfare capabilities that can jam and
disrupt the aircraft’s navigational equipment. There are other ways to defeat drones as well, and many of them have been developed since the
so-called “drone wars” broke out above Syria.”

Source: Seth Frantzman, “Turkish Drones Revolutionize Idlib Conflict - Analysis,” Jerusalem Post, 2 March 2020. https://www.jpost.com/
Middle-East/Turkish-drones-revolutionize-Idlib-conflict-analysis-619510
“In Idlib, Turkish armed and surveillance drones have come into their own. According to accounts Turkey has devastated some Syrian
regime units, damaging or destroying up to 100 tanks, 72 artillery pieces and several air defense systems. In the fog of the Syrian war, which
has dragged on nine years, it is never clear if the various accounts are accurate, but videos from drone feeds don’t lie.
Turkey has shown that the drone can be used in an area where air defenses may deny the ability to fly larger jets, such as Turkey’s F-16s,
but where smaller drones can operate with impunity. It has shown they can be effective tactically and score many successes, transforming the
battlefield. Turkey’s widespread use of drones in Idlib, if the accounts are accurate, may be one of the largest concentrations of drones used in
this manner before.”
OE Watch | May 2020

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s Presence in the Middle East and the Eastern
Mediterranean
OE Watch Commentary: Historically Russia has always wanted to gain
access to the Middle East and the Mediterranean. Its centuries long successive
battles with the Ottoman Empire were fought mostly to achieve this objective.
While Russia gained its first access point to the Mediterranean by establishing
a naval base in Syria in the 1970s, it was not until the Syrian civil war that
it became a major player in the Middle East and the Mediterranean. The
accompanying article from Turkey’s state-run news agency, Anadolu Ajansı
provides insights into increased Russian activities in the Middle East and the
Mediterranean.
According to the article, Russia’s national security strategy and military
doctrine require Russia to be a major player in the Middle East for various
reasons. First, the activities of terrorist groups and the risk of them getting
Vladimir Putin in Khmeimim Air Base in Syria.
their hands on nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction is a major Source: Kremlin.ru via Wikimedia,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_Putin_in_Khmeimim_Air_Base_in_Syria_
(2017-12-11)_24.jpg, CC-BY-4.0
concern for Russia. Second, Russia wants to block European countries’ search
for a natural gas supplier who would be an alternative to Russia; as its position as a formidable supplier of natural gas provides it with leverage
over the energy security of major European countries. As such, Russia has been closely following the hydrocarbon discoveries in the Eastern
Mediterranean in addition to working to curb the possibility of natural gas flowing from the Persian Gulf to Europe.
Russia’s policy towards Iran is also part of its power play for greater influence in the Middle East. Through maintaining good relations with
Iran, Russia extends its influence to the Persian Gulf to balance and leverage the United States’ influence in the greater Middle East. Iran’s Shia
proxy groups in Iraq and Syria support Russia’s policies in those countries. Russia and Iran also collaborate in controlling the price and output of
petroleum. While Russia sees an ally in Iran, it does not want a stronger Iran which does not rely on Russia.
Russia’s national security strategy and military doctrine call for an active role in the Eastern Mediterranean balance of power, for three reasons.
First, this allows Russia to have a rapid response in the Middle East and protect Russian interests by fortifying its naval and air bases in Syria’s
Tartus and Khmeimim respectively. A naval base in Syria enables Russian naval ships and submarines sailing in the Mediterranean at all times.
To this end, Russia is trying to establish more naval bases in the region including in Egypt and Libya. Second, Russia wants to keep an eye on
hydrocarbon exploration in the Eastern Mediterranean and in Libya because natural resources in these regions could potentially compete with its
supply in European markets. Russia also intends to prevent any efforts of constructing pipelines transmitting natural gas from the Persian Gulf to
Europe through the Eastern Mediterranean. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The current Russian national security strategy and military
doctrine also aims to be effective in [the Middle East]…”
Source: “Rusya Orta Doğu’da ne yapmak istiyor? (What does Russia want to do in the Middle East?),” Anadolu Ajansı, 18 March 2020.
https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz/rusya-orta-dogu-da-ne-yapmak-istiyor/1770192
Moscow’s interest in the Middle East is not new. The Russians aimed to be active in this vast geography including mainly in the Arabian Peninsula, Iran,
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and North Africa during the Tsarist and Soviet periods. The current Russian national security strategy and military doctrine also
aims to be effective in this region…
In it’s concept of national foreign policy, the Russian Federation declares that it sees the Middle East as a priority area in terms of global security
problems. The possibility of the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction and the activities of terrorist organizations in this region
are considered among the primary threats. Russia, one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC), sees itself as one
of the parties to the Middle East problems as a member of the Middle East Quartet.
However, Russia does not declare its intention of preventing being “bypassed” by the West within the scope of Europe’s energy security policies. Since
the 2005 Russia-Ukraine gas crisis, Western countries have been making efforts to provide alternatives to energy from Moscow and to establish energy
transmission lines that will “bypass” Russia. The control of the Eastern Mediterranean coasts is gaining importance [due to] plans to direct the natural
gas deposits in the Persian Gulf to Europe.…
The Russian Federation considers the Mediterranean an important area of interest, as explained in its National Security Strategy and Military Doctrine.
It wishes to make the Russian navy effective in green (open seas) and blue (ocean) waters and to keep it in constant navigation… Russia wants to patrol
near the crisis regions and continue its existence. In addition, in order to be able to use its nuclear warhead missiles when necessary, Russia aims to keep
its submarines and ships carrying them in the Mediterranean. According to Russia, the Tartus port in Syria alone is not enough. For this reason, Russia’s
search for a base on the North African coast continues. In this context, it continues its dialogue with Egypt or Libya.
Libya interests Russia due to its geopolitical importance of having Africa’s largest hydrocarbon resources and its proximity to Europe. In Libya, as in
Syria, directing energy resources to Europe may lead to Russia being left out of the energy equation…
Iran is the third important policy area of Russia in the Middle East. Iran stands out as a support factor for Russia both in the use of airspace and in
policies against the USA. Iran’s influence in Iraq is also important in this respect. Russia also uses Iran in balancing the US and its allies in the Strait
of Hormuz and the Persian Gulf. Iran’s Shia militias have also supported Russia’s policies in Syria and Iraq for a long time... Iran is also an actor that
Russia wants to see [as an ally to control] oil prices and supply.

OE Watch | May 2020

54

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Weapon
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey’s defense industry
continues to unveil new products to improve Turkey’s
warfighting capabilities, particularly unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). While some Turkish defense manufacturers
have focused their efforts on developing and improving the
capabilities of UAVs, others have focused on disrupting UAV
attacks. Most recently, Turkey’s electromagnetic anti-drone
systems producer Harp Arge (R&D) has produced an antiUAV gun to disrupt UAV attacks. The accompanying articles
provide insights into Turkey’s first anti-drone gun.
According to the first article from the manufacturer Harp
Arge, the ES-60 Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Gun weighs
5.5-pounds and its indigenous antenna technology allows for
its reduced size and weight. The weapon has the capability
to disrupt drone communication via control and command
TAI ANKA-S.
Source: N13s013 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TAI_ANKA-S.jpg, CC-BY-SA-4.0
centers by causing a malfunction using high-speed
electromagnetic interference. It can combat UAVs within nearly a two mile-range. As the article states, this Anti-Drone Gun has capability to
function silently in three seconds to disrupt drone systems “without negative consequences to human health, public safety and the environment.”
This gun “provides the most effective solution to combatting drones.” With its foldable and adjustable butt, it is easy to operate in challenging field
environment.
The second article states that over 70 percent of the Anti-Drone Gun was produced by indigenous capabilities. The manufacturer notes that the
firm has been working on the design and a prototype of an anti-drone weapon for a long time. Finally, the investment of Ekba Holding enabled
its production and now, the firm “will start mass production of the ES-60 after establishing its assembly line.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Gündüz)

“Harp ES-60 Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Gun offers
mobile solutions to field troops with its 2.5 kg weight and
3 km effective range…”
Source: “ES-60 Elektromanyetik Drone Savar Silahı (ES-60 Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Gun)” harparge.com, Undated. http://www.
harparge.com/drone-savar
Drones have been widely used recently due to their high availability and low costs…
Especially in rallies, concerts, stadiums and similar public events, stopping drones with firearms comes with serious drawbacks. The AntiDrone gun applies high-speed electronic warfare technology to the drone.
Drones exposed to electromagnetic attack are disabled by losing connection with command and control. The ES-60 Electromagnetic AntiDrone Gun offers an effective solution in the fight against the drones since it does not harm human health and environmental safety and
produces a silent and fast result.
Harp ES-60 Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Gun offers mobile solutions to field troops with its 2.5 kg weight and 3 km effective range. With its
local and national special antenna design, the ES-60 Electromagnetic Anti-Drone Gun provides operational convenience to the user with its
ergonomic structure. Our guns are 100% compatible with your own binoculars and gun apparatus with the 22mm picatiny rail system. Our
drone gun, which is presented with a foldable and adjustable butt stock option, is designed for difficult field conditions.
Our ES-60 Electromagnetic Drone repellent electromagnetic weapon systems pacify drones with its super focused antennas and high power
output. With fast scanning, continuous mixing is applied to drone command and Gps / Glonass frequencies. Using the anti-drone weapon for
3 seconds is sufficient to blind the drone systems.
Source: Göksel Yıldırım,“ Milli drone savar 3 kilometreden drone uçurmayacak (National drone repellent will not let drones fly within
3 kilometers),” Anadolu Ajansi, 15 March 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/bilim-teknoloji/milli-drone-savar-3-kilometreden-droneucurmayacak/1766630
More than 70 percent of its content is locally sourced and the anti-drone gun was on display for security personnel…
Harp Arge said they had been working on the design and prototyping of an anti-drone gun for a long time but that its production was made
possible only after it was acquired by Ekba Holding recently. The company has now been included in the Cemd Defense Corporation group
that operates as part of the Ekba Holding and will start mass production of the ES-60 after establishing its assembly line.

OE Watch | May 2020

55

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Energy Security and Dependency
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey’s dependence on foreign
energy poses a threat to Turkey’s energy security specifically
and national security in general. The accompanying article
from Sigma Turkey analyzes Turkey’s energy efficiency,
reliance on import, and diversification of its energy resources
by investing in renewable energy resources.
According to the article, Turkey’s energy consumption can
be reduced by increasing its energy efficiency. The author
cites reports from Turkish Chamber of Mechanical Engineers
stating Turkey’s “potential for energy savings is 50% for
buildings, 20% for industrial use and 15% for transportation.”
However, the article does not make any suggestion as to
how Turkey could be more energy efficient, but it states
that efficient usage of energy could reduce dependency on
importing energy especially from Russia.

Southern Gas Corridor.

Source: Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Southern_Gas_Corridor.jpg, CC-BY-SA-4.0

Turkey heavily relies on Russia for energy. The author states that for a NATO country to depend so heavily on Russian oil, natural gas, and coal
resources is a security risk. While Turkey has reduced its dependency on Russian natural gas to 48 percent thanks to the TANAP pipeline, this is
still considered a high enough percentage to pose a threat to energy security. Turkey is also dependent on Russian crude oil and petroleum products
totaling slightly over 46 percent as of November 2019. Additionally, Turkey imports about 40 percent of its coal from Russia. Besides above the
energy resources, Russia is also building Turkey’s first nuclear power plant (Akkuyu Nuclear Power Plant) and Russia will have control over its
operation and uranium and nuclear waste management processes.
Turkey could take several measures to address this situation. It could unleash its renewable energy potential. The author provides a diagram from
Turkey’s Chamber of Mechanical Engineers report visualizing Turkey’s renewable energy resource potential in Hydro-electric, wind, geothermal,
solar and biomass. According to Orhan Aytaç, Member of the Energy Policies Working Group of the Chamber of Mechanical Engineers if Turkey
“could operate the existing power plants in full capacity, [it] could increase Turkey’s generating capacity between 95 – 145 billion kWh.” The
author also notes that Turkey’s idle renewable energy capacity for electricity generation could further increase the energy “generation capacity by
610 billion kWh which is more than twice the current electricity consumption.” End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The risk in [Turkey’s] energy dependency debacle is the Russian
Federation’s overwhelming share in it.”
Source: A. Necdet Pamir “Turkey’s Energy Outlook – A Snapshot,” Sigma Turkey, 30 March 2020. https://www.sigmaturkey.com/turkeysenergy-outlook-a-snapshot/
…Turkey is almost totally import-dependent for natural gas, oil and hard coal… Increasing Turkey’s energy efficiency will lead to a significant drop in
our primary energy consumption… According to reports by the Chamber of Mechanical Engineers, our potential for energy savings is 50% for buildings,
20% for industrial use and 15% for transportation. Focusing on reduction of energy efficiency, next to energy savings, also means additional employment
potential.
…
Despite these pessimistic figures, on the full part of the bottle, there exists a very significant potential of renewables in the country while those sources
are almost fully under-utilised. The claims that Turkey does not have adequate natural energy resources are unfounded. To the contrary, the country has
more than enough solar and wind renewable energy potential as well as significant potential of geothermal energy.
…
Another risk in our energy dependency debacle is the Russian Federation’s overwhelming share in it. Depending on a single or a group of countries
for any country’s energy needs is a security risk in itself, but Turkey’s situation is slightly more perilous since it is a NATO country while in dire need of
Russian oil, gas and coal resources. Our dependency for Russia in natural gas has somewhat came down to 48% in recent years thanks to TANAP (via
Azerbaijan)…
Our dependency on Russia does not end there. Russia’s share in our coal imports is at a commanding 40%. But the real danger will be the Akkuyu NPP,
if it ever comes to be, where Russia will have absolute control over its construction, operation, uranium and nuclear waste management processes.
…
If we could operate the existing power plants in full capacity, we could increase Turkey’s generating capacity between 95 – 145 billion kWh (Orhan
Aytaç, Member of the Energy Policies Working Group of the Chamber of Mechanical Engineers).
If Turkey could use its idle renewables capacity for electricity generation, this would further increase the generation capacity approximately by 610
billion kWh which is more than twice the current electricity consumption. Increasing energy efficiency in all sectors will further contribute a 25% to these
figures.

OE Watch | May 2020

56

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Impact of COVID-19 on SDF Operations and ISIS
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
continues to be a threat throughout the region despite its territorial defeat.
The question of what happens to imprisoned ISIS members still lingers. The
Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), which played a key role in
defeating ISIS in Syria hold thousands of transnational ISIS members in their
mostly makeshift prisons. They have continuously called on other countries
to repatriate their nationals because of the challenges of detaining them for a
number of years. However, with few exceptions, no country has been willing
to take their nationals back. The idea of establishing an international tribunal
to put those detained ISIS members on trial was never solidified. Now with
the threat of a global COVID-19 pandemic, it is even more challenging for the
Baghuz ISIL Families.
Kurds to safeguard these ISIS members as they have revolted to try to escape. Source: Voice of America via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Baghuz_ISIL_Families.png, CC-PD-Mark|PD-VOA
While the first accompanying article provides insights into the prison revolt by ISIS members, the second article analyzes the impact of COVID-19
on operations against ISIS and ISIS attacks in Syria.
The first article from Rudaw, a news network broadcasting from the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, describes the prison revolt that took place in alSinaa Prison in Syria’s al-Hasakah province. The fear of COVID-19 seems to have been the major trigger of the revolt and attempted escape. The
prison holds about five thousand ISIS members. The majority of them were captured during the SDF’s fight to take control of the last ISIS-held
territories in Deir ez-Zor, Syria. The intention of the revolt seems to have been to overpower the guards and find ways to escape. However, SDF
spokesperson Kino Gabriel stated that no members of ISIS were able to escape. Mr. Gabriel stated that even though this incident confirms SDF’s
ability to secure imprisoned ISIS members, it also proves the need for the international community to provide support to SDF and the Kurds to
ensure these imprisoned members of ISIS and their families that are kept in camps are guarded securely. The need to provide assistance to the
Kurds seems to be more pressing now due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As the second article from the Rojava Information Center, a local news outlet based in northeast Syria points out, overall ISIS attacks have
decreased due to COVID-19. Similarly, SDF’s raids and arrests on ISIS sleeper cells have decreased as well. While the widespread assassinations
by ISIS has declined, ISIS continues to target the “individuals connected to the Autonomous Administration or SDF.” The article states that ISIS
distributed flyers in Deir ez-Zor warning citizens not to associate themselves with the Kurdish-led autonomous administration in northeast Syria.
End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The incident confirms their ability to secure ISIS terrorists, pointing to
the need for more support from the international community…”
Source: “HSDê li ser revîna girtiyên DAIŞê daxuyanî da (The SDF has issued a statement on the escape of ISIS prisoners),” Rudaw.net, 30
March 2020. https://www.rudaw.net/kurmanci/kurdistan/300320209
Spokesperson for the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) Kîno Gabriel, said in a statement that on Sunday ISIS detainees were able to sabotage and
remove the internal doors of the cells, create holes in the walls and take control of the ground floor of the prison…
Kîno Gabriel … the SDF’s Anti-Terrorism Forces intervened and were able to take the prison under their control and secure the [prison] and all the
detainees inside it.
“We confirm that there are no escapees…, and that the situation in the detention center is under full control.”
Gabriel also said that “the incident confirms their ability to secure ISIS terrorists, pointing to the need for more support from the international
community and the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS in order to provide maximum protection for detentions and camps that include ISIS members and their
families…”

Source: “Report: anti-ISIS arrests and raids drop as tensions over COVID-19 rise,” Rojava Information Center, 07 April 2020. https://
rojavainformationcenter.com/2020/04/report-anti-isis-arrests-and-raids-drop-as-tensions-over-covid-19-rise/
• March saw decreases across the board – in terms of attacks, raids, deaths and arrests – suggesting COVID-19 has distracted SDF and ISIS alike
• Though last month, February, we saw a spike in arrests by the SDF, Asayish and Coalition, arrests fell 97% to just 3 in March
• With 48 attacks, there is a small decrease of 9% compared to the month before. As always the majority occurred in Deir-ez-Zor, with a significant
amount in Heseke as well
• Kurdish-majority cities along the border, such as Derik, Qamishlo, Amude and others, have once again remained untouched by sleeper-cells
…
Though assassinations did decline in March, ISIS continued their campaign of targeting individuals connected to the Autonomous Administration or
SDF. As of 4 April, ISIS continued distributing fliers throughout Deir-ez-Zor, threatening all who continue their association with AANES and SDF…
In March, the RIC only managed to confirm 3 arrests of sleeper-cells which is a huge decline from February (96 documented arrests).

OE Watch | May 2020

57

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Hezbollah’s Standing in Lebanon Tarnished by
Coronavirus Response
OE Watch Commentary: As the spread of coronavirus impacts countries throughout the Middle East, it is exacerbating political, economic,
and military tensions in Lebanon, especially among its Shia citizens. Longtime Lebanese journalist and political analyst Hanin Ghaddar, writing
in the Beirut-based al-Majalla, observes that Hezbollah’s reputation amongst its own supporters has been marred by its negligent and opaque
response to the coronavirus crisis--a response many see as driven by undue deference to Iran. Even before the virus began to spread throughout
the country, Lebanon was suffering from sustained political and economic hardship. On 7 March, the Hezbollah-backed government of Hassan
Diab announced it was defaulting on Lebanon’s sovereign debt amidst a financial crisis that was forcing private businesses to close and lay off
workers. And, as Ghaddar points out, Lebanon’s medical system pre-coronavirus already faced a shortage of critical medical supplies and workers.
However, as the coronavirus began to appear in Lebanon, Hezbollah stayed silent and continued to maintain its close links with Tehran. Even as
it became apparent that Iran was in the throes of a massive outbreak, Hezbollah ignored pressure to stop inbound flights from Iran. Hanin Ghadar
points out it was Hezbollah’s Shia supporters who expressed the most concern and anger about the party’s decision, in part because they were the
community likely to be exposed to people traveling from Iran.
There is a perception that Hezbollah and Iran’s negligent response to the coronavirus pandemic is driven by a desire to project strength and a
preoccupation with continuing operations against American forces in Iraq and in the broader Middle East. Indeed, Ghadar highlights the fact that
Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, spent much of early March--a critical period for the spread of the coronavirus--in Tehran meeting with
senior Iranian officials about Iran’s efforts against the American presence in Iraq. Nasrallah didn’t comment on the growing pandemic in Lebanon
until a sermon on 13 March. Hanin Ghaddar argues that such actions have led many of Hezbollah’s own supporters to question whether Hezbollah
cares more about appeasing its Iranian benefactors than alleviating the growing suffering of the Lebanese people who it purports to serve. End
OE Watch Commentary (Dennis)

“Even once the coronavirus pandemic is behind us, Iran
will forever be linked by people in the region to the virus
that took many of their loved ones’ lives. In Lebanon,
Hezbollah will pay the price for that link.”
Source:
“‫«كورونا‬-‫زمن‬-‫يف‬-»‫الله‬-‫و«حزب‬-‫( »لبنان‬Lebanon and Hezbollah in the time of Coronavirus),”
al-Majalla, 27 March 2020. https://arb.majalla.com/node/83626/‫نانبل‬-‫بزح«و‬-‫»هللا‬-‫يف‬-‫نمز‬-«‫»انوروك‬

“The flights from Iran have caused dissatisfaction with Hezbollah amongst Shia residents more than any other group, as Lebanon’s
Shia community are the ones most directly exposed to the virus from those coming from Iran. Hezbollah’s inability to form a functioning
government, to combat corruption, or to implement meaningful reform is bad enough. But now they are literally injuring Lebanese citizens by
allowing the virus spread from Iran.
Just a week before the coronavirus began to spread, Lebanon had defaulted on paying its sovereign debt. Lebanon does not have the
money it has pledged to combat coronavirus. It’s no secret that most of Lebanon’s hospitals were already suffering from a lack of medical
supplies,which includes a lack of spare parts for the ventilator machines which are in high demand today.
Lebanon is anxious about increased unemployment and the loss of jobs, as many never returned to work after the financial crisis hit. The
Lebanese government has yet to begin negotiations with its creditors and debtors nor has it developed a plan to deal with it. Worse, it has no
idea at all about how to defeat the coronavirus. Asides from forcing people to stay in their homes, the government has provided no medical,
economic, or social support to attempt to decrease the Lebanese people’s suffering.
It wasn’t until March 13th that Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, commented on the coronavirus situation. In fact, it’s been reported that
he had been busy visiting Tehran to discuss responses to the American presence in Iraq. The Iranian regime and Hezbollah neglected their
response to coronavirus and, even as the situation deteriorated, they continued to prioritize military operations over protecting the Iranian
and Lebanese public.
Many Lebanese were critical of the Iranian flights coming to Lebanon, foremost among them Shia themselves. However, despite the criticism,
Hassan Nasrallah said nothing. In his Friday sermon, he asked people to stay at home and practice social distancing but avoided mention
of the Iranian flights. Many Lebanese believe that the flights aren’t just bringing home Lebanese from Iran, but instead are also bringing in
Iranians stricken with the virus so that they can receive care in private Hezbollah hospitals. This belief was strengthened by Hezbollah’s
decision to ban the media from entering Beirut’s Airport when the Iranian Air flights arrived at the airport as if Hezbollah was trying to hide
someone or something.”

OE Watch | May 2020

58

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
COVID-19 Prompts Israel and Hamas to Explore Prisoner
Swap
OE Watch Commentary: In early April, Hamas
and Israel signaled their willingness to explore indirect
negotiations over a potential prisoner swap. The move
came amid an outbreak of COVID-19 in both Israel and
the Gaza Strip. The accompanying passages from local
sources discuss this prospect as well as the humanitarian
needs of the Gaza Strip in light of the outbreak, which
could be part of the potential negotiations.
The first passage from The Jerusalem Post discusses
that Hamas has shown a willingness to negotiate with
Israel over the return of the bodies of Israeli soldiers
Hadar Goldin and Shail Oron who were killed in
the 2014 Israel-Gaza Conflict as well as two Israeli
civilians, Avera Mengistu and Hisham as-Sayyid
currently held by Hamas. The leader of Hamas in the
Gaza Strip, Yahya Sinwar stated, “We are ready to make
partial concessions on our prisoners issue in exchange
for Israel’s release of elderly prisoners, patients, and
prisoners as a humanitarian gesture in light of the IDF facilitated the transfer of approximately 100 tons of medical supplies and goods into Gaza through
Kerem Shalom Crossing. July 19, 2014.
coronavirus crisis.” The Israeli Prime Minister’s Office Source: Israel Defense Forces via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Transferring_Goods_and_Medical_Supplies_into_Gaza_(14716916773).jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0
called for immediate negotiations with Hamas through
intermediaries to return the bodies and captive civilians held by Hamas.
Israel Defense Minister Naftali Bennett mentioned linking humanitarian aid the Gaza Strip needs to fight COVID-19 to the recovery of Israelis
held in the Gaza Strip. “There is talk of the humanitarian world in Gaza… Israel also has humanitarian needs, which are mainly the recovery of
the fallen,” Bennett stated, “and I think that we need to enter a broad dialogue about Gaza’s and our humanitarian needs. It would not be right to
disconnect these things.” According to the second article by Avi Issacharoff from The Times of Israel, Israel is having Egyptian mediators ask
Hamas leadership for greater detail about the group’s negotiation position. Moreover, Israel told Egyptian mediators the Israeli Government is
willing to exchange food, medical equipment, and a limited number of elderly and female Palestinian prisoners for the release of Israelis held in
the Gaza Strip.
The last passage from Al-Monitor outlines the threat COVID-19 poses to the Gaza Strip. Two Palestinians traveling from Pakistan and Cairo into
the Gaza Strip have already introduced the virus into the densely populated territory. In the event the virus does spread rapidly in the Gaza Strip,
the article outlines how the Gazan health system does not have the capacity to handle a large outbreak of COVID-19, which only has 70 intensive
care unit beds and 65 ventilators for a population of 2 million people. The World Health Organization has provided disinfectant, protective gear,
and 1,000 test kits for Gazans through the Israeli office of the Coordination and Liaison Administration (CLA), which is the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) unit responsible for coordinating movement from Israel into the Gaza Strip. End OE Watch Commentary (Fesen)

“I think that we need to enter a
broad dialogue about Gaza’s and our
humanitarian needs. It would not be right
to disconnect these things.”

OE Watch | May 2020

59

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: COVID-19 Prompts Israel and Hamas to
Explore Prisoner Swap
Source: Lahav Harkov, “Netanyahu: I’m willing to negotiate captives’ release with Hamas,” The Jerusalem Post, 7 April 2020. https://www.
jpost.com/breaking-news/netanyahu-im-willing-to-negotiate-captives-release-with-hamas-623910
“The coordinator for captives and missing people, Yaron Bloom…with the National Security Council…are prepared to act constructively
with a goal to return the bodies and missing people and end this matter, and call for an immediate discussion through intermediaries,” the
Prime Minister’s Office statement read.
Hamas has held the bodies of IDF soldiers Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin since Operation Protective Edge in 2014 and has civilians Avera
Mengistu and Hisham al-Sayed in captivity.
Sinwar said… “ready to make partial concessions on our prisoners issue in exchange for Israel’s release of elderly prisoners, patients and
female prisoners as a humanitarian gesture in light of the coronavirus crisis…”
Defense Minister Naftali Bennett said…“there is talk of the humanitarian world in Gaza… Israel also has humanitarian needs, which are
mainly the recovery of the fallen” – meaning Goldin and Shaul – “and I think that we need to enter a broad dialogue about Gaza’s and our
humanitarian needs. It would not be right to disconnect these things.”
Source: Avi Issacharoff, “Progress said made in talks for return of prisoners held in Gaza amid virus fears,” The Times of Israel, 5 April 2020.
https://www.timesofisrael.com/liveblog_entry/progress-said-made-in-talks-for-return-of-prisoners-held-in-gaza-amid-virus-fears/
…Israel had asked Egyptian mediators to talk to the Hamas leadership and clarify Sinwar’s statements.
Israel consulted with Egypt on the possibility of resuming negotiations for the exchange of prisoners and in return will allow food and
medical equipment into the Gaza Strip and the release of a number of elderly men and women incarcerated in Israel.
Source: Shlomi Eldar, “As coronavirus spreads to Gaza, Israel can offer little,” Al-Monitor, 27 March 2020. https://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/originals/2020/03/israel-physician-for-human-rights-gaza-strip-palestinians.html
One Israeli source involved in what has been happening in Gaza describes how the virus-carriers got infected. It all started about two weeks
ago, when two Palestinians arrived in Gaza after spending time in Pakistan and Cairo. They arrived at the border crossing with Egypt by
bus, together with many other Gazans, and when they crossed over into the Gaza Strip…
on March 25, only 144 tests were conducted on a population of approximately 2 million, squeezed into a densely populated area with
extremely poor conditions to maintain hygiene. The continued spread of the virus will definitely result in the collapse of the already
impoverished health system in Gaza, where the total number of intensive care beds is just 70, and there are only 65 ventilators, some of them
already in use.
The Israeli office of the Coordination and Liaison Administration (CLA) for Gaza announced that 1,000 test kits, protective equipment and
disinfectant were provided to Gaza… “This undertaking by the World Health Organization…

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | May 2020

60

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Houthi Movement Says COVID-19 is US Biological
Weapon
OE Watch Commentary: In a March 2020 speech, Houthi
Movement leader Abd al-Malek al-Houthi explained to his
audience that “experts in biological warfare” have noted “that
for years the Americans have worked to take advantage of
the coronavirus and spread it within certain societies.” The
targeted societies, he added, are China, certain Muslim
countries, and the Islamic community as a whole. With no
documented COVID-19 cases in Yemen at the time of the
speech, al-Houthi confidently asserted that the pandemic
reaching Yemen “would be due to an American-supervised
action, via its Saudi and Emirati tools,” in which the ruse
of “humanitarian assistance in the form of medical tools or
foodstuffs” would be used to distribute materials contaminated
with the virus.
Some days after this speech, unidentified aircraft
apparently dropped supplies of protective masks in several
parts of Yemen. The Houthi-controlled government put out a
statement urging residents to not touch the masks, saying they
had been dropped by the Saudi coalition and were infected
Veterinarian Hasan Alkaf, takes samples from a camel during the first reported Middle East
with the coronavirus. A Yemeni newspaper investigated but
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) case in Haramout, Yemen in April 2014.
Source: CDC Global Flicker Account, https://www.flickr.com/photos/cdcglobal/17053986812, CC BY 2.0
was unable to verify the claim, which it considered “a clear
and explicit Houthi plan to hold the coalition responsible for any cases that may appear in the future.” Houthi sources also claimed that the virus
was being spread from Saudi officers to their Yemeni partners in the National Army, most notably on coastal fronts near the Saudi-Yemeni border.
The accompanying passage from the Saudi daily al-Sharq al-Awsat highlights how Yemeni social media activists ridiculed al-Houthi’s statements.
However absurd the claims might be, the Houthis have now established a clear narrative for their followers to understand the pandemic. Consistent,
targeted and effective messaging campaigns have been a centerpiece of Houthi success at the domestic level. Yemen’s ongoing conflict is to
them a conspiracy to expand US-Israeli power, one in which Gulf countries (Saudi Arabia and the UAE) and international institutions are mere
tools. Coronavirus is but the latest weapon in their adversaries’ arsenal: “Americans and Israelis and their proxies do not refrain from oppressing
mankind, whether through viruses, bombs and deadly weapons or by corrupting people’s lives.”
For now, the coronavirus-as-US-bioweapon narrative is limited to the fringes of Arabic-language government and media discourse. Yet as they
are forced to deal with the pandemic’s fallout, governments across the region may be forced to conjure a plausible scapegoat in order to deflect
popular anger. In this respect, the Houthis are well ahead of the curve. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“If the virus did come to Yemen it would be due to an
American-supervised action…”
Source:
‫ أي وصول لكورونا إىل اليمن سيكون بفعل وإرشاف أمرييك‬:‫قائد الثورة‬
“Leader of the Revolution: If Coronavirus Comes to Yemen it Will be by American-Supervised Action,” Saba, 21 March 2020. https://www.saba.ye/ar/
news3091591.htm

The leader of the revolution [Abd al-Malik Badr al-Din al-Houthi] pointed out that by the grace of God, the coronavirus epidemic did not
reach Yemen... and if the virus did come to Yemen it would be due to an American-supervised action, via its Saudi and Emirati tools, and that
it would be dealt with as a hostile action… He explained that some societies have been targeted with using what is portrayed as humanitarian
assistance in the form of medical tools or foodstuffs that are contaminated with viruses that transmit deadly epidemics. There are military
means for targeting societies with these germs and viruses, so-called biological warfare. “Some experts in biological warfare talk say that for
years the Americans have worked to take advantage of the coronavirus and spread it within certain societies,” he said. He noted that America
is expected to target China by virtue of tis being an economic and cultural competitor. They also focus on societies within our Islamic
community and on the community as a whole… He said, “Americans and Israelis and their proxies do not refrain from oppressing mankind,
whether through viruses, bombs and deadly weapons or by corrupting people’s lives. It is important to be aware of the negative role nature of
the forces of evil, in order to go against them and confront their sabotage.”
OE Watch | May 2020

61

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: The Houthi Movement Says COVID-19 is US
Biological Weapon
Source:
‫ هل أنزل التحالف صناديق كاممات ملوثة أم أن الحوثيني يدبرون ألمر جلل؟‬..‫عاجل فتحذير فتحقيق‬
“Breaking: Warning and Investigation… Did the Coalition Drop Boxes of Contaminated Masks or Are the Houthis Preparing Something Big?” al-Masdar
Online, 1 April 2020. https://almasdaronline.com/articles/179892

Regardless of whether or not the coalition dropped boxes of masks or not, many saw in the Houthi allegations of “dropping boxes
contaminated with the coronavirus,” a clear and explicit Houthi plan to hold the coalition responsible for any cases that may appear in the
future or if there are already existing cases that are being kept secret, as is widely reported in Sanaa, and they are looking for a specific way
to announce this and hold the coalition responsible for its spread.
Source:
! ‫ ضباط سعوديون أدخلوا فريوس كورونا إىل هذه املدينة اليمنية‬: ‫جامعة الحويث‬
“Houthi Movement: Saudi Officials Brought Coronavirus to this Yemeni City!” Yemen Press, 2 April 2020. https://yemen-press.com/news114225.html

The Houthi news agency, Saba, reported that Saudi officers had spread the coronavirus among government forces soldiers in the city of
Midi. According to the agency, intelligence indicated an outbreak of the coronavirus among what it described as the aggression’s mercenaries
(the National Army) in the Midi front. It said the number of confirmed infections totaled 36 as of March 26 and included the 3rd Brigade, 82nd
Brigade, the 10th Brigade, the Cavalry Brigade, and the Special Forces Brigade.
Source:
‫سخرية مينية من زعيم الحوثيني بعد ادّعائه أن كورونا سالح أمرييك‬
“Yemenis Mock Houthi Leader After Claims Coronavirus is an American Weapon,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 22 March 2020. https://tinyurl.com/rmx8a5m

A new speech by Houthi militia leader Abd al-Malik al-Houthi, broadcast by his group’s al-Masirah channel yesterday (Saturday), has drawn
widespread ridicule from Yemeni activists on social media, after he claimed that the novel coronavirus is an American weapon and that his
brother Hussein al-Houthi established the group based on “divine directives.”

Over the years, FMSO has studied and written about foreign perspectives on pandemics. One example is below. For more
information on previous FMSO work on pandemics including Ebola, search OE Watch issues:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Avian Influenza: Potential Impact on Sub-Saharan Military Populations
with High Rates of Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome
By Robert Feldman and Kent Nickell
Before COVID-19 grabbed all of the headlines, health officials were also looking at several
other diseases that could potentially reach pandemic level. One of these was H5N1,
commonly known as avian influenza or bird flu. This article, which originally appeared
in Military Medicine, discusses the possibility that in people infected with both H5N1
and HIV, the AIDS from HIV might suppress the immune reaction to allow further
mutation of H5N1 to occur, with a possible disease outbreak from the new strain to follow.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/200034
OE Watch | May 2020

62

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Announces Mass Production of COVID-19 Test Kits
OE Watch Commentary: On 19 February, Iran reported two coronavirus deaths, hours after confirming their first case. As of the
end of March, Iran had confirmed 41,495 confirmed cases and 2757 deaths. The latest models by the University of New South Wales predict that
by late June, Iran could reach 48 million cases—half their population— if serious interventions are not taken.
While COVID-19 cases continue to grow at a staggering rate, Iranian media has reportedly been overflowing with mixed information surrounding
the virus. As fake remedies made their way across social media, Iranian media reported nearly 300 people have been killed and more than a
thousand have been sickened by ingesting methanol under the guise that it can cure or prevent coronavirus. As the passage from Sputnik notes,
while Iranian hospitals are fighting to treat their coronavirus patients, they are further pressed to handle the influx of patients with methanol
poisoning—and its side effects, which include permanent blindness.
Other Iranian media outlets have resolved to rhetoric—pointing out that US-led sanctions have crippled Iran’s ability to import the necessary
drugs and protective gear to combat the virus properly. Despite US claims that medicines and medical equipment are not under sanctions,
Iranian Foreign Ministry retorted that the US has practically blocked the transfer of Iran’s financial resources in other countries into the Swiss
Humanitarian Trade Arrangement (SHTA).
Nevertheless, Iran touts its technological superiority, announcing their achievements in producing a COVID-19 test kit that can provide results
in three hours, with 98% accuracy. As the first accompanying passage from Iranian news outlet Khabar discusses, during an official ceremony
held by Brigadier General Farhad Amiri, head of the Ministry of Defense’s Institute of Education and Research, and General Azizi Delshad,
representative to the General Staff of the Armed Forces, the Ministry of Defense’s Institute of Education and Research declared that these kits are
highly accurate and have been verified by relevant authorities. Furthermore, the tests are reported to be entirely produced domestically, and are
now being mass-produced in order to fulfill the needs of the Iranian armed forces and medical fields. Iran has even offered to export this kit to
other countries, if required.
Pishtaz Teb Zaman Diagnostics is one of the companies responsible for supplying Iranian labs with 80,000 kits per week. According to the
second passage from Tasnim News Agency, Vahid Younesi, a business development manager at Pishtaz Teb Zaman Diagnostics highlighted that
his company was prepared to deliver 400,000 kits within the by late May. While listing key features of their kits, he stated, “It will take two hours
for test results to come out”—an hour faster than reported by most Iranian media outlets. Without further details, Younesi pointed out that around
20 countries have already placed an order to purchase Iran’s kits. End OE Watch Commentary (Plude)

“We are proud to present one of the most important
defense achievements made by the scientists and experts of
the Ministry of Defense.... This [COVID-19 test] kit can
test for the virus with superior precision within 3 hours and
can operate on all genomes in the world…Today, it is ready
to be mass produced and provided to medical centers…”
Source: “Kithaye Tashkhise Corona Sakhte Vezahrate Defa’ Che Vizhegihaye Darad? (What are the Features of the Ministry of Defense’s
Coronavirus Diagnosis Kits?),” Khabaronline.ir, 30 March 2020. https://khabaronline.ir/news/1370785
What are the Features of the Ministry of Defense’s Coronavirus Test Kits?
A ceremony unveiling the mass-production of COVID-19 detection kits was held at the General Staff of the Armed Forces with Brigadier
General Farhad Amiri, head of the Ministry of Defense’s Institute of Education and Research, and General Azizi Delshad, representative to
the General Staff of the Armed Forces in attendance.
After extending holiday greetings for Eid, Amiri announced, “We are proud to present one of the most important defense achievements made
by the scientists and experts of the Ministry of Defense, along with the support of Iran’s Armed Forces.”
General Azizi Delshad, head of the Industrial Research Department for the General Staff of the Armed Forces also said during the
ceremony, “This kit can test for the virus with superior precision within 3 hours and can operate on all genomes in the world…Today, it
is ready to be mass produced and provided to medical centers… “There is nothing else in the world similar to this kit that can also be
exported.”

OE Watch | May 2020

63

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran Announces Mass Production of COVID-19
Test Kits
Source: “Iranian Coronavirus Diagnostic Test Kits Ready to Hit Global Market,” Tasnim News Agency, 25 March 2020. https://www.
tasnimnews.com/en/news/2020/03/25/2230472/iranian-coronavirus-diagnostic-test-kits-ready-to-hit-global-market
Vahid Younesi, the business development manager at Pishtaz Teb Zaman Diagnostics, said the research and development team at his
company began its work on the production of indigenous laboratory test kits for the new coronavirus, after the first cases were confirmed in
Iran last month.
The Iranian coronavirus test kit “is exactly on par with the foreign-made ones as regards precision, functionality and time of diagnosis … It
will take two hours for test results to come out,” he said.
Younesi went on to say that his company will start exporting the Iranian coronavirus test kits once domestic needs are met, emphasizing that
some 20 countries have placed ordered to purchase the kits.

Source: “Suicide by Methanol Alcohol in Iran Over Coronavirus Fears!,” Sputnik News, 28 March 2020. https://ir.sputniknews.
com/iran/202003286153451-%D8%AE%D9%88%D8%AF%DA%A9%D8%B4%DB%8C-%D8%A8%D8%A7%D8%A7%D9%84%DA%A9%D9%84-%D9%85%D8%AA%D8%A7%D9%86%D9%88%D9%84-%D8%AF%D8%B1-%D8%A7%DB%8C%D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%86-%D8%A7%D8%B2-%D8%AA%D8%B1%D8%B3-%DA%A9%D8%B1%D9%88%D9
%86%D8%A7-/
There is only one problem in other countries, the coronavirus epidemic, but now we are simultaneously fighting on two fronts: Coronavirus
and Methanol Poisoning.

Book Review: A Look Back and Forward at
Turkey’s “Strategic Depth” Foreign Policy Doctrine
Karen Kaya
February 2020
“Strategic Depth (Stratejik Derinlik)” is a Turkish book published
in 2001. This was a time when international relations theorists were
describing new frameworks of world order and security modalities
following the end of the Cold War and bi-polar world. Works such as
Francis Fukuyama’s “End of History” and Samuel Huntington’s “Clash of
Civilizations” were icons of this intellectual period. It was in this context
of a changing international system that Turkish International Relations
Professor Ahmet Davutoğlu (who later served as Foreign Minister
between 2009-2014 and Prime Minister between 2014-2016) attempted
to define Turkey’s position in his book “Strategic Depth.” From around
2002 to 2012, the foreign policy that Davutoğlu outlined in his book
was considered the doctrine and roadmap for Turkish foreign policy.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/309386
OE Watch | May 2020

64

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Khamenei on Power and Patience
OE Watch Commentary: Each year, Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei and other top Iranian officials
mark several anniversaries and holidays with major
speeches: The anniversary of the Islamic Republic,
Qods (Jerusalem) Day on the last Friday of the
Islamic month of Ramadan, the anniversary of
the 1979 seizure of the US Embassy, and Nowruz
(Persian New Year).
Khamenei’s Nowruz speech this year, excerpted
here, focused largely on demonizing and chastising
the United States. He noted, “Today, our enemy
and the enemy of the Islamic Republic is the United
States… American officials are liars, treacherous,
shameless, greedy and charlatans.” He continued
to argue that it is the duty of the Iranian nation
to confront the United States. Khamenei then
discussed patience as a reason why the Islamic
Republic remained strong and was destined for
victory. Part of Khamenei’s concept of patience
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei delivering his traditional Persian New Year address.
Source: Khamenei.ir, http://english.khamenei.ir/d/2020/03/22/3/22071.jpg
was strategic—Iran can outlast its enemies—but
part is also steadfast embrace of ideology. Those who remain true to the Islamic Republic’s principles are destined for victory; whole those within
the system—the so-called reformists—who seek compromise with the West are impatient and inevitably fail.
Khamenei’s speech also touched upon demography—an increasingly prevalent theme (see: “Khamenei Speaks on Demography,” OE Watch,
December 2013)—as the Iranian leadership begins to worry about the effect of declining fertility on Iran’s future power. Khamenei bluntly stated
that the birth rate is too low and that, if it remains so, Iranian power will decline.
He then addressed how another element of future Iranian power must be domination of cyberspace. Like demography, this is a repeating interest
for Khamenei who, in 2012, created the Supreme Leader’s Cyberspace Council to help set policy and coordinate among Iran’s numerous cyberspecific organizations.
He then concluded by addressing the coronavirus pandemic and its impact on Iran. While he raised the conspiracy that COVID-19 is an
American invention, he also said he did not know the truth. This is sufficient to signal to the Iranian media that they can continue to “investigate”
the links between COVID-19 and the US government in order to keep the conspiracy theory alive while eschewing regime responsibility for
having done so. Khamenei defended the National Anti-Corona Headquarters’ decision to close shrines and mosques and said that, simply put, the
Islamic Republic “had no other choice.” Here, he rebuked those who continued to defy social distancing restrictions in order to visit shrines and,
in some cases, lick the interior tombs. That said, he argued that the Islamic Republic’s religiosity would be its strength as it gives Iranians a higher
morale caliber than those in the West who are too eager to betray for selfish immoral purposes. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“We should increase our power
as much as we can.”

OE Watch | May 2020

65

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran: Khamenei on Power and Patience
Source: “Sokhanrani Nowruz Rahbar-e Enghalab Khatab beh Mellat-e Iran (The Nowruz Address by the Leader of the Revolution to the
Nation of Iran),” Khamenei.ir, 22 March 2020. http://farsi.khamenei.ir/speech-content?id=45227
Khamenei’s Nowruz Speech
“Patience” does not mean sitting idle and waiting to see how events pan out, rather patience means resisting, showing steadfastness
and refusing to change one’s calculations as a result of the enemy’s deceptions. Patience means pursuing the goals that we have set for
ourselves….
The people have been completely patient. The past 40 years have proved this in a tangible manner. Some of our so-called intellectuals have
unfortunately shown impatience and some of them went as far as to cooperate and to speak in harmony with the enemy because of their
impatience. Of course, only some of them were like this.
The opposite point to such individuals is the youth who are thankfully very large in number, and who will continue to grow in number on
a daily basis, God willing. They are active in the arena of culture, science, technology, politics and international understanding – in other
words, they correctly understand international issues. Such youth are in contrast with those individuals and as I said, they are thankfully
increasing every day. So, showing patience means not giving up, not becoming weak and not having doubts, and stopping the enemy with
courage and wisdom and subjugating him….
I have said in my recent speeches that the country should become strong. Strengthening the country is one of our goals. This is one of the
main guidelines of bethat [commencement of Muhammad’s prophethood]. This concept has been taken from bethat and from the Holy Quran.
The Quran says, “Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power, including steeds of war.” [Qur., 8:60]. It means that we
should increase our power as much as we can….
Preserving the young population of the country is one of the means of power. That is the reason why I stress the issue of increasing the
birth-rate so much. In the present time, our country is a young country. If the birth-rate is not at a sufficient level – which is the case in the
present time – then in a few years’ time, the young population of the country will decrease. Then, a country that has few youths will make
little progress. So, this is one of the means of preserving the young population of society. Another means of power is cyberspace, which is
vital today. Today, cyberspace dominates the lives of individuals throughout the world. There are some people who do everything they need to
do through cyberspace. Power in this area is vital.

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | May 2020

66

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
India Evacuates its Citizens from Iran
OE Watch Commentary: When COVID-19 hit Iran, Qom
quickly became its initial epicenter. Close to Tehran, Qom is
the site of pilgrimage to the Shrine of Fatima Masumeh, the
second most sacred site inside Iran for Shi’ite Muslims after
the tomb of Imam Reza in Mashhad. Beyond pilgrimage,
however, Qom is a center for study, second only to Najaf
in Iraq. Thousands of foreigners study in its religious
seminaries.
The excerpted article from the Mehr News Agency, an outlet
owned by the Islamic Ideology Dissemination Organization,
details a meeting between India’s ambassador to Iran and the
governor of Qom as the two governments sought to evacuate
the 1,200 Indian pilgrims and students stranded in Qom
during Nowruz and after the coronavirus lockdown. In early
March, Indian Foreign Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar Indian pilgrims in Tehran demand evacuation against the backdrop of the Coronavirus pandemic.
Source: Idat.ir, https://idat.ir/upload/attach/573/20200312-1840070.jpeg
reported 6,000 Indian nationals were in Iran, including 1,100
from Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir, and Maharshtra, 300 students from Jammu and Kashmir, and 1,000 fishermen from Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and
Gujarat. The article highlights the many special measures that authorities in Qom took for the safety of Indian citizens and notes that the Indian
Ambassador “praised the management of the province in hosting and treating Indian citizens...”
India and Iran have always maintained close cultural links. Persian is an Indo-European language and was for centuries the lingua franca across
the Indian subcontinent; it was the official language of the Mughal Empire until 1835, when the British Empire imposed English in its stead. It is
closely related to Urdu, Punjabi, and Sindhi, and Persian loan words populate Hindi.
That so many Indian pilgrims and students were stranded in Qom highlights the depth of Indo-Iranian relations. India has not only the secondlargest Muslim population in the world, but also the second greatest numbers of Shi’ites—perhaps 45 million in all—after Iran, which has 66
million out of a population of 81 million in total. Many Indian businessmen seek to leverage their cultural familiarity with Iran to trade, even
against the backdrop of US unilateral sanctions. Indian diplomats repeatedly lobby to utilize the Iranian port of Chahabahar to offload and then
truck goods into Afghanistan, thereby bypassing Pakistan. The exchanges go both ways: With many Iranians unable to study in the West, those
who seek to study abroad often turn to Indian universities. In recent years, the Iranian navy has also made repeated calls in Indian ports.
That authorities in Qom painstakingly worked to shelter and provide care for Indian students and pilgrims at the height of the coronavirus crisis
underscores just how important bilateral relations remain for Iran. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The fight against this disease has not reached the final stage.”
Source: “Zarurat-e Tasrih dar Bazgardandan ba Ghimandeh-e Atbah Hindi dar Qom (The Necessity to Accelerate the Return of the Remaining
Indians in Qom),” Mehr News Agency, 5 April 2020. https://www.mehrnews.com/news/4893056
Repatriation of Indian Pilgrims, Students in Qom
According to the Mehr News Agency, citing the governor of Qom, [Governor] Barham Sarmast, in a meeting held in Qom province with
Gaddam Dharmendra, the ambassador of India in Iran, referring to the friendly relations between the two countries, said, “Iran and India
have joint cooperation in various fields.” Referring to the discovery of the first cases of coronavirus in Qom, he said, “With the first signs of
the disease, officials in Qom province devised special measures to protect the health of citizens as well as foreign nationals.” The governor
of Qom, referring to maintaining health and providing equal health services to foreign nationals since the outbreak of the disease in Qom,
added: “Despite the fact that governments prioritize their services, such a procedure did not take place in Qom and the Islamic Republic.” He
noted the settlement of Indian citizens in 50 locations in Qom, and said, “With the spread of the disease, organizing Indian citizens in hotels
for quarantine, and the treatment of Indian patients was on the agenda.” Sarmast stated, “A good reception was given to Indian citizens
based on the host culture that comes from the Iranian-Islamic tradition, and even Iranian flights were used to send them to their country.” He
noted that 802 Indians had been repatriated in five stages, but he stressed the need for the Indian government to speed up repatriation given
the recovery period. In another part of his speech, the governor of Qom, referring to the control of corona in Qom, said: “Qom province
is in the middle of the road and the fight against this disease has not reached the final stage yet.…” The Indian Ambassador praised the
management of the province in hosting and treating Indian citizens in Qom province and said: “We hope that with the end of this crisis, we
will be able to renew relations with the Islamic Republic more strongly than before.”

OE Watch | May 2020

67

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Unveils Ghadir Submarine Upgrades
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian military
regularly trumpets the supposed successes of
its indigenous military industries, and claims
through state media that its domesticallyproduced military platforms achieve the same
technological prowess as Western-produced
products purchased by Arab rivals across the
Persian Gulf.
In the excerpted article from the official Islamic
Republic News Agency, Abbas Fazelnia, the head
of Iran’s naval factories, bragged that overhaul
of the navy’s Ghadir-class submarine enabled
Iran to operate in the Persian Gulf and the Sea
of Oman with stealth and with “high capability
in diving.” This likely is an exaggeration, at
least for Persian Gulf operation, given that the
Gulf’s maximum depth is less than 300 feet.
Likewise, there is no indication that the Iranian
military has mastered the technology used by
the Japanese Maritime Self-Defense Force to
maximize acoustic properties in order to elude
passive sonar.

The refitted Ghadir submarine in Bandar Abbas, 8 April 2020.
Source: Islamic Republic News Agency, https://img9.irna.ir/d/r2/2020/04/08/4/157064527.jpg

Still, any upgrade—especially should it incorporate Chinese, Korean, or Russian technology—could increase the Iranian submarine fleet’s
nuisance factor within Fifth Fleet operational environment. Fazelnia told the Iranian media that the Ghadir class submarine could fire torpedoes
from two tubes, release minesweepers, launch missiles, and transport commandoes. Given recent Iranian attacks on international shipping in
the Sea of Oman and Emirati waters, any upgraded capability for stealthily inserting commandoes should be of concern. That the Iranian navy
seeks this capability also suggests that the Islamic Republic will not cease its efforts to support insurgencies across the region. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“The strength of the Ghadir class is its small size,
which cannot be tracked or detected.”
Source: “Zirdaryaye Ghadir Ghabul Kesef va Rangiri Nist (The Ghadir Submarine cannot be Detected or Intercepted),” Islamic Republic
News Agency, 8 April 2020. https://www.irna.ir/news/83743884
The Ghadir Submarine cannot be Detected or Intercepted
According to the public relation’s office of the Navy, Rear Admiral Abbas Fazelnia, with reference to the addition of the overhauled Ghadirclass submarine to the navy’s patrol group, said, “Worldwide, there are three classes of light, semi-heavy and heavy submarines, and the
Ghadir is in the light class.” He added, “For the past several years, we have been producing the Ghadir-class submarine, and we are among
the countries that are able to build all submarine classes.” The Commander of Naval Factories said that building a submarine is one of the
most advanced sciences in the world and on the cutting edge of technology, and he said, “If a country can build a submarine, it means it
has access to all the sophisticated technology. Admrial Fazilnia clarified, “At the direction of the commander-in-chief of the armed forces,
we have taken good measures to improve the combat capability, especially in the area of submarines….” He said, “Today, we are witnesses
the addition of the Ghadir-class submarine whose systems are indigenous and are built in the naval factories belonging to the Ministry of
Defense.” He continued, “The strength of the Ghadir class is its small size, which cannot be tracked or detected. On the contrary, it can pose
a great threat to the enemy by carrying smart torpedoes. It has a higher ability to destroy the enemy.”

OE Watch | May 2020

68

AFRICA
Al-Shabaab’s Infighting Over Funds
OE Watch Commentary: Al-Shabaab’s top leaders are
fighting, only this time instead of the battle being with
government soldiers or AMISOM troops, it is with each
other, and it is over money. As the accompanying excerpted
article from the Kenyan news site The Nation reports, in
February of this year the terrorist group’s leader Ahmed
Diriye, aka Abu Ubeyda, tried to expel Mahad Karate, who
is head of finance and intelligence operations, and Bashir
Qorgab, then head of external operations. It appears that
Karate and Qorgab survived the attempted purge through
support of their respective clans, though shortly afterwards
Qorgab and his wife were killed by a drone attack.
Much of the money Diriye and Karate are fighting
over is raised from forced taxation of farmers, herders, and
businessmen both in Mogadishu and al-Shabaab controlled
areas. Diriye accuses Karate of hoarding it, while Karate
argues that his clan, the Hawiye, constitute the majority
“Usually al-Shabaab is fighting with AMISOM soldiers, such as the one pictured here, but lately its leaders
of those who contribute the funds and therefore should
have been fighting among themselves over funds”
Source: AMISOM/Wikimedia/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Advance_contingent_of_AMISOM_troops_deployed_in_Baidoa_09_(7213740332).jpg,
receive a greater share.
Diriye’s strategy of trying to wrestle control from Karate has not worked well due to the Hawiye loyalty to Karate. Now, to try to counter
Karate, Diriye has reached out to several small clans in the hope of forming, as the article describes, “a conglomeration against the Hawiyes,”
though no successes with this attempt were reported.
This fight for control of the funds is playing out against a backdrop of precise drone strikes periodically taking out key leaders, leading to
accusations and counteraccusations of espionage that make attempts to forge alliances and resolve the issue even more difficult. Meanwhile, alShabaab fighters deployed to the Kenyan border find themselves without food due to the infighting between Diriye and Karate over the group’s
money. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Infighting among the top leadership of Somali-based militia
Al-Shabaab over finances is threatening to split the group, an
intelligence report seen by the Nation shows.”
Source: Allan Olingo, “Shabaab leaders split over funds control,” The Nation (Kenya), 27 March 2020. https://www.nation.co.ke/news/
Shabaab-leaders-split-over-funds-control/1056-5505532-9a3qfh/index.html
Infighting among the top leadership of Somali-based militia Al-Shabaab over finances is threatening to split the group, an intelligence report
seen by the Nation shows.
Last week soldiers raided an Al-Shabaab hideout in Holawajir, on the border with Lamu County, and shot dead 12 militants, among them a
local commander who had been providing intelligence and logistical support to terrorists hiding in the forest.
To deflect attention, Al-Shabaab has deployed fighters along the Kenyan border, albeit without food due to the financial wrangles…As a
result, militants deployed along the border have been looting shops. On March 14, on the border of Somalia and Garissa County, Al-Shabaab
militants vandalised two shops, stealing food.

OE Watch | May 2020

69

AFRICA
Arms Spending in East Africa
OE Watch Commentary: Based on the recently released SIPRI
Arms Transfer Database, spending on weapons last year by African
countries varied widely. With African nations frequently criticized
for overspending on military equipment at the expense of money for
development, it is a topic of interest to several African news sites. That
includes The East African, which examined arms spending by five East
African countries, and as the excerpted accompanying article reports,
with $71 million in arms purchases Ethiopia led the pack. A significant
portion of that money was used to purchase 100 57E6 SAMs (surfaceto-air missiles) from Russia that will be used with its Pantsyr-S1
platforms.
At $32 million, Kenya was second in the amount it spent on arms,
much of which went to upgrading its air power. The country made a
range of purchases, as well as receiving several aircraft from Italy and
Poland that it had ordered in earlier years. In spending so much, the “To beef up its air defense system, Ethiopia has purchased 100 57E6 SAMs from Russia for
use with its Pantsyr-S1s, an example of which is pictured here,”
country jumped from 95th in the world in 2018 with regards to arms Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin/Wikimedia,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MAKS_Airshow_2013_(Ramenskoye_Airport,_Russia)_(521-05).
jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
expenditures all the way up to 62nd in 2019. Traditionally its arms
suppliers have been Serbia, Russia, China, and Israel, but last year Italy and the US made inroads.
While Ethiopia and Kenya bumped up their military spending last year, Uganda decreased its outlay from 2018, when it spent $9 million on
arms, to only $1 million last year. As for the other two countries profiled in the article, Rwanda and Tanzania, they did not spend on arms at all
in 2019.
Though there are multiple countries that export arms to Africa, Russia is by far the largest, accounting for 49% of arms exports to the
continent, significantly dwarfing all others. Meanwhile, as numerous factors, especially economic and political, come into play with regards to
arms purchases over a year, how the unusual events of 2020, including the COVID-19 pandemic, influence the quantity as well as source of African
imports won’t be known until the data is crunched and released next March. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Eastern African countries spent $104 million on arms

last year as Ethiopia and Kenya raced to modernize their
defense systems, even as Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
reduced their military spending in the same period.”

Source: Allan Olingo, “Ethiopia, Kenya raise military spend as East Africa arms budget hits $104 million,” The East African, 4 April 2020.
https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/ea/East-African-countries-splurge-usd-104m-on-new-arms/4552908-5513938-wofs23/index.html
Eastern African countries spent $104 million on arms last year as Ethiopia and Kenya raced to modernize their defense systems, even as
Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda reduced their military spending in the same period.
The Sipri arms transfer data shows that Russia accounted for 49 per cent of arms exports to Africa, followed by the US at 14 per cent and
China at 13 per cent.
The data also showed that Russia accounted for 36 per cent of arms imports by African States, China 19 per cent and France 7.6 per cent.
The five largest arms importers in sub-Saharan Africa were Angola, Nigeria, Sudan, Senegal and Zambia.
African countries have over the years been criticized for perceived over-spending on weapons at the expense of their development budgets.

OE Watch | May 2020

70

AFRICA
South Sudan’s Obstacles to Peace
OE Watch Commentary: South Sudan’s government of unity lacks a long term
strategy for peace and was only formed to ease external sanctions. Those are the
claims made in the accompanying excerpted article from the South African website
The Conversation. The lack of optimism that this time the politicians have the
correct formula is based not only on history – since civil war broke out in 2013 the
country has had numerous past peace agreements fail – but also several factors
related to the present peace agreement.
One of the biggest obstacles to peace has been the inability to come to a lasting
agreement as to how the oil present in part of the country should be shared among
the different parties. However, President Salva Kiir having agreed to revert to prewar state boundaries might at least partially solve this problem, though the battle
over control of this valuable resource has been long and some are skeptical that it
will end.
Another criticism of the present agreement, which has been dubbed “the
revitalized agreement” because it essentially recycles some parts of the failed
August 2015 agreement, is that much of it caters to the country’s elites and does
not go far enough in addressing long-term problems. Additionally, the agreement
lacks sufficient accountability mechanisms, does not reform the government, and
does not adequately provide for the disarmament and demobilization of armed
groups. Essentially the agreement’s main focus is on power sharing with insufficient
attention paid to many of the underlying causes, such as government corruption and
ethnic divisions, which fuel the country’s conflict.
To be sure there has been some progress. Last year the different sides aligned
with President Kiir and the leader of his main opposition, Riek Machar, were “Salva Kiir, the President of South Sudan is also Commander-in-Chief of
supposed to form a new unity government. Twice they were forced to delay it, but South Sudan’s army which is struggling to integrate former opposition
into its ranks,”.
finally in February 2020 the unity government was formed. However, full unity Source: Stein Ove Korneliussen/Wikimedia,forces
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Salva_Kiir-3,_by_Stein_Ove_
Korneliussen.jpg, CC BY 2.0
still has not come to the armed forces. The plan was to integrate the rebels and
government forces into one national force, but as the article states, that has been “a difficult task considering all sides had spent years killing each
other.” End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Also, rebels and government forces were to be integrated
into a national army: a difficult task considering all sides had
spent years killing each other.”
Source: Andrew Edward Yaw Tchie, “South Sudan: root causes of ongoing conflict remain untouched,” The Conversation (South Africa), 22
March 2020. https://theconversation.com/south-sudan-root-causes-of-ongoing-conflict-remain-untouched-133542
One sign of trouble with the agreement is that the security forces are not yet united. Another is that it’s not based on ideas about how to
govern or resolve the existing dispute. In essence, the agreement is all about individual elites taking up positions to get access to resources
and power.
The two sides were supposed to form an interim government of national unity last year, but were twice forced to delay it. This was mostly
due to the issue of the first vice-president’s personal security. Also, rebels and government forces were to be integrated into a national army: a
difficult task considering all sides had spent years killing each other.
Citizens have had scant experience of good governance, constitutionalism, the rule of law, human rights and gender equity. Ethnic divisions
endure and social norms and values have been eroded. People have not had time to reconcile. And their economic opportunities still rely
heavily on oil.
Over the past few years, all sides of the conflict recruited fighters on a large scale and there is no comprehensive policy for peaceful
disarmament. Since the 1970s, when violence began, troops have never been fully reintegrated into civilian life.
OE Watch | May 2020

71

AFRICA
Terrorism and Conflict Interfere with Great Green Wall
Progress
OE Watch Commentary: The Great Green Wall project, an
initiative to plant billions of trees across a swath 15 kilometers
wide and 7,775 kilometers long, is falling far behind its
initial schedule. As the accompanying excerpted article
from Deutsche Welle notes, besides corruption and a lack of
funding, terrorism and insecurity are also hindering the Wall’s
progress. These factors are interrelated, as foreign countries
are unwilling to invest funds in insecure environments.
With global warming as well as other factors leading
to the Sahara encroaching on the greener lands to its south,
two of the major benefits the Wall is postulated to provide are
a decrease in both desertification and the loss of fertile soil.
There are numerous add-on benefits to these. For example,
with less desertification and soil loss, additional land becomes
available for farming. Already in Nigeria where five million The Great Green Wall project, which is attempting to prevent the expansion of the Sahara, the sand
colored portion of this satellite picture, by planting millions of trees is struggling in part because of
hectares of land has been restored, 20,000 green jobs have
interference from terrorism and conflict.
Source: NASA/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sahara_satellite_hires.jpg, Public DomainKorneliussen.jpg, CC BY 2.0
been created.
The terrorism and insecurity hindering the Great Green Wall project is spread across several countries. In places such as Burkina Faso, Mali,
and Niger, the aid organizations tasked with implementing the project, along with the indigenous populations who will be doing much of the work,
are paralyzed by the local conditions. As a result an adverse cycle is created. With the people unable to safely plant trees that help mitigate climate
change through carbon sequestration, increased global warming occurs, causing less land to be available for farming, resulting in increased
unemployment and some people turning to crime or terrorism, which makes the area unsafe for tree planting, and thus the cycle repeats itself.
To break that cycle, as the article notes, will take several initiatives, including the elimination of terrorism. However, with several of the
nations along the path of the Great Green Wall being fragile states that suffer from government corruption and poor infrastructure, combating
terrorism to allow the Wall to proceed forward is proving quite difficult. Potential international donors after looking at the operational environment
are sometimes dissuaded from making what they perceive to be a risky investment, while investing in only nations which are free of terrorism and
conflict will have the undesired effect of creating an even wider gulf between the stable and unstable countries. Thus, work will continue on the
Wall, with some nations making more progress than others, but overall it will remain at a level significantly less than originally envisioned. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“This progress cannot be said for many countries in Central

Africa… “Terrorism is very strong here and paralyzes human efforts
and aid organizations. Corruption also plays a role with money rather
going into politicians’ pockets than into project development.””
Source: Silja Fröhlich, “Africa: What Happened to Africa’s Ambitious Green Belt Project?” AllAfrica.com/Deutsche Welle, 6 April 2020.
https://www.dw.com/en/what-happened-to-africas-ambitious-green-belt-project/a-53004690
The Great Green Wall is more than just an environmental project that is intended to restore 100 million hectares of fertile lands in the Sahel,
and in the process cut 250 million tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. It aims to create 10 million so-called green jobs.
This progress cannot be said for many countries in Central Africa, according to Fell. “Terrorism is very strong here and paralyzes human
efforts and aid organizations. Corruption also plays a role with money rather going into politicians’ pockets than into project development.”
But lack of funding is a particularly big problem for conflict-torn countries such as Burkina Faso. The cross-border Great Green Wall
Initiative is currently not investing in the country due to its high insecurity.
Janani Vivekananda thinks this is a mistake: “The project would be a good way to create peace. But if investments are only made in stable
states, then it will harm the weakest who, without investments, are exposed to further conflicts and climate change. Ultimately, this increases
the inequality between stable and fragile states.”
OE Watch | May 2020

72

AFRICA
Obstacles to African Union Involvement in Libya
OE Watch Commentary: Following a meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council earlier this year, the AU is insisting in having a larger role in the Libya’s
peace process, but as the accompanying excerpted article from the South African Institute
for Security Studies notes, there are several challenges to such AU involvement. To
understand these obstacles, it is first necessary to look at the Libyan conflict, which the
article describes as a quagmire involving a multitude of local and international actors who
sometimes have diametrically opposed interests, leading to protracted instability. On the
Libyan domestic side there are two well known players, the UN-recognized government of
national accord (GNA) and Khalifa Haftar’s Libyan National Army (LNA). There are also
two additional domestic entities that get far less media attention: militias and Islamists. As
for non-African nations involved in Libya, the divide is often over who supports the GNA
or LNA, though some offer varying support to both.
Into this fray the AU is trying to exert itself, however, as previously noted, despite
Libya being a member of the organization, it is encountering numerous obstacles
attempting to do so. The first is that the AU failed to become strongly involved with the
already ongoing UN peace process. Thus, the AU is finding it difficult to convince the
belligerents involved in the conflict to turn to it for solutions.
The second challenge facing the AU is the issue of neutrality. While the AU itself may
appear to be neutral, several of the AU member nations are looked at by some Libyans as
having sympathies to the loyalists of former Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi. Along
these same lines, there are reports that several African nations have made deals with
different Libyan factions.
The AU’s third challenge is a lack of agreement among the African nations as to how The African Union, its headquarters pictured here, is encountering
obstacles as it tries to engage in the Libyan peace process.
to approach the Libyan conflict. One example of this is their failure to decide whether or Source: NASA/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sahara_satellite_hires.jpg, Public
DomainKorneliussen.jpg, CC BY 2.0 Andrew Moore/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:African_Union_Conference_Centre_(18167970401).jpg, CC BY-SA 2.0
not to deploy a joint AU-UN peace support mission to the country. Related to this lack of
agreement as to the proper approach is the AU’s final challenge, the significant number of AU committees and other entities tasked with trying to
resolve the Libyan crisis. This inability to coordinate and speak with a single voice is hindering their progress with Libya, which also has multiple
entities that so far are unable to unite. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The AU has been asserting, with increasing vigor, that it must be

included in attempts at brokering peace in and bringing stability back
to Libya, one of its member states.”
Source: “Africa’s Place in resolving Libya’s Quagmire,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 19 February 2020. https://issafrica.org/
pscreport/psc-insights/africas-place-in-resolving-libyas-quagmire
The AU has been asserting, with increasing vigor, that it must be included in attempts at brokering peace in and bringing stability back to
Libya, one of its member states.
The AU is yet to convince Libyan belligerents to turn to the continent for a solution, especially with the strong presence of non-African actors
in both the peace process and the hostilities in the country. Convincing Libyans to make space for a potential African or African-led process
also requires bringing non-African actors to the same negotiation table
In the same vein, some high-level AU officials who are political appointees and are involved in the Libyan peace process are nationals of
neighboring countries and thus may not be perceived to be neutral by some Libyan stakeholders. There are perceptions that they represent
the interests of their capitals rather than those of the AU as a collective entity, irrespective of what their personal commitments may be to the
peace process.
The latest summit has added another entity to this list by creating the contact group for Libya, without dissolving the larger High-Level Adhoc Committee. The difference in mandates between the two has not been clarified, nor how the contact group will be operationalized and
whether the committee will continue to be the main interlocutor in the mediation process in the meantime.
OE Watch | May 2020

73

AFRICA
Amidst COVID-19 Pandemic, Neglecting the Neglected
Tropical Diseases
OE Watch Commentary: With much of the world’s attention
focused on the COVID-19 pandemic, previously neglected tropical
diseases (NTDs) risk becoming even more neglected. These NTDs, as
the excerpted accompanying article from African Arguments points
out, affect more that 1.5 billion people worldwide and each year kill
approximately 170,000 of them. For those who survive, depending
on the disease, there can be disfigurement, chronic pain, and other
ailments that greatly reduce a person’s quality of life.
Numerous diseases qualify as NTDs, but this article described
just three: lymphatic filariasis, schistosomiasis (aka bilharzia) and
trachoma. Briefly, lymphatic filariasis, a mosquito-borne disease
caused by parasitic worms, can result in extensive swelling and tissue
thickening of the limbs. Schistosomiasis is a water-borne disease
caused by parasitic flatworms that may infect the urinary tract or
intestines. Trachoma, the last disease mentioned, is a bacterial
infection that can lead to blindness.

Checking for trachoma, an eye infection that can lead to blindness and which is one of
several neglected tropical diseases in Africa.

Source: USAID/Yonas Getachew/RTI International/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/usaidafrica/49465078742/in/photolist-2in4szd-26tioR3-

Of particular note is that many NTDs disproportionately affect GT499v-26tioBq-25rpGej-JMxg7K-dLN7vF-dLN6vv-dLN67F-dLTCSq-dLN6Jv-dLTC5S-dLTCAo-dLTCLG-dLTBWS-dLN59T-dLN5jP-deLCrt-deLCgE-dLN5PTdLN6Dk-dLN7hF-2in4szo-25apw1a-25apxTD-GT47cp-26tieG1-26tinbQ-2in3iZo-dLTD7C-dLTERd-dLTF2u-dLN79z-dLTDuG-dLTE93-GT4h48-dLN6ST26tidcN-25aptQZ-25rpG6d-JpkizL-GT49pa-26wQob4-deLCxV-LYg9Sw-MhNJwM-MmY1qo-MmX8mQ-LsP8Kk-LYfYK7, Public Domain
females. Several factors account for this, including that women and
girls are often the ones who collect water, thus exposing themselves
to water-borne diseases such as schistosomiasis. Additionally, even if the female is not sick, it is usually a woman who assumes much of the burden
as the primary caregiver in the family, with girls likely to drop out of school to fulfill that role.
There is still much to be done from a public health standpoint in Africa to combat the NTDs. However, while Africa has 40% of the global
NTDs burden, a mere 0.6% of global health funding is dedicated to their elimination. The toll of these diseases, especially on women and girls is
immense, and while this article does not mention it, others also point to the impact the NTDs have on African militaries, from a reduced pool of
healthy recruits to the diversion of soldiers for necessary public health activities. Thus, while there is great fear that COVID-19 could lead to an
untold number of deaths, Africa is already suffering from several other devastating diseases that will likely continue to plague the continent even
if COVID-19 is eventually eliminated. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Among the poor communities affected by

Neglected Tropical Diseases, one group suffers
disproportionately: women and girls.”
Source: Ciku Kimeria, “These diseases that affect 1.5 billion people affect one group the most,”African Arguments, 23 March 2020. https://
africanarguments.org/2020/03/23/ntds-affect-1-5-billion-people-women-girls/
Among the poor communities affected by Neglected Tropical Diseases, one group suffers disproportionately: women and girls.
NTDs primarily affect the world’s most impoverished communities. But within this, one group is even more likely to suffer disproportionately:
women and girls.
While there have been positive changes in the fight against NTDs in the past decade, much more is required if the continent is to completely
eliminate them. Thanks to the work of organizations – such as The Expanded Special Project for Elimination of Neglected Tropical Diseases
(ESPEN), a World Health Organization project founded in 2016; Speak Up Africa, an African policy and advocacy action tank that focuses on
NTDs; and the No to NTDs movement – some progress is being made.
There have been successes recorded. In 2017, Togo eliminated lymphatic filariasis as a public health problem. In 2018, Ghana did the same
with trachoma.

OE Watch | May 2020

74

AFRICA
Mali Air Force Super Tucano Goes Down Over Sévare
OE Watch Commentary: On 7 April, a Malian A-29B Super Tucano crashed while in approach to Base Aerienne 102 near the town of Sévare
in the Mopti region. A number of journalists reported the crash and there is even cell phone video of the plane plummeting to the ground making
the rounds on Twitter (https://twitter.com/DonKlericuzio/status/1247568375208800256). Both pilots were killed in the crash.
Military officials were quick to acknowledge the incident. An official communiqué on 9 April, excerpted here, claimed that the two pilots had just
returned from a combat mission in the Timbuktu area where they “repeatedly attacked and destroyed the enemy, saving their brothers under fire in
Mondoro, Dialloubé, and Boulkessi.” Other reporting on the incident claim that the two pilots were on a routine training mission. An international
aviation press outlet stated the aircraft was returning from an exercise, as part of an anti-terrorist operation against armed groups. If the sortie was
an actual combat mission it would be significant for Mali and the government’s fight against jihadist forces in the Sahel because of the speed in
which the Malian Air Force has gone from delivery, to training, to actual combat air operations.
Neighboring Bukina Faso was the first African nation to order the Super Tucano, receiving its first three aircraft in 2011. Yet Burkinabe pilots
did not fly their first combat missions until 2018. It took seven years to get pilots ready and maintenance infrastructure in place. Only months
ago the Burkino Faso armed forces acknowledged for the first time that Burkinabé crewed Tucanos conducted joint combat missions with French
forces. French Mirage fighters acting as command and control platforms guided the much nimbler Tucanos onto enemy targets.
It took Burkino Faso 11 years to conduct its first combat sortie. Other African nations have adopted the Tucano. Mauritania received two of four
A-29s in 2012 and is still getting up to speed. Officially there has been no indication they have been engaged in air combat operations. Senegal has
three A-29s on order while Ghana has five on the way. Nigeria has twelve A-29s on order and is expected to get their A-29s operational quickly
due to the experience of its air force.
Mali is the 14th nation to acquire the aircraft, ordering six in June 2015. The Super Tucano is heralded as a low cost system to conduct low
intensity missions—perfect for the type of fight Mali and the rest of the nations of the Sahel are engaged in. Mali took delivery of the first four
Tucanos in 2018. Since then the Mali Air Force, with multi-nation assistance, has been training its small pilot corps for the Super Tucanos in
counter-insurgency and close air support role.
In addition to training operations with the Mali Air Force, official military statements and local press coverage of the incident noted that one pilot
received training in Czech Republic while the other was trained in Brazil.
The loss of these pilots and the aircraft represented a twenty-five percent reduction of Mali’s Super Tucano combat capability. Days after President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta paid tribute to the fallen airmen, head of the Air Force Brigadier General Souleymane Doucouré also recognized the
deceased pilots. He also demonstrated his belief in the Super Tucano by taking one for a short flight. The gesture was likely intended to reinforce
Mali’s commitment to the aircraft itself and its intention of establishing an independent military aviation capability.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Billingsley)

“Captain Moussa Maïga and second lieutenant Mamadou
Boubacar Traoré have repeatedly attacked and destroyed the
enemy saving their brothers under fire in Mondoro, Dialloubé,
and Boulkessi, among others. A journey that has earned them
the trust of their fellow service members.”

OE Watch | May 2020

75

AFRICA
Continued: Mali Air Force Super Tucano Goes Down Over
Sévare

Air-to-air with Afghan Air Force Embraer A-29 Super Tucano.

Source: US Air Force from USA Capt. Eydie Sakura via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Air-to-air_with_Afghan_Air_Force_Embraer_A-29_Super_Tucano.jpg, Public Domain

Source: “Deux héros finissent leur partition (Two Heroes Finish Their Mission),” Armed Forces of Mali, 9 April 2020 http://pastel.fama.ml/
deux-heros-deux-excellents-pilotent-finissent-leur-partition/
The Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta, wanted to acknowledge the two pilots who died on
Tuesday, April 7, 2020, following their crash in Sevaré. Marked by the pain of the loss of these pilots and other fallen fighters of the week,
he could not stay far. Deeply moved by these tragic events, he presented his wholehearted compassion to the Malian army and the bereaved
families of these brave sons, on Thursday April 9, 2020 at Air Base 100 in Bamako.
Captain Moussa Maïga and Second Lieutenant Mamadou Boubacar Traoré, two volunteers for the homeland, were back from a commanded
mission in the Timbuktu area. Led to perfection, they returned to Sévaré where they mate their fate. Their mission, to restore morale to
ground troops and local population. They were congratulated by their superiors after each mission. These pilots were also responsible for
government reprisals following the jihadist attack on the post at Dinangourou on February 6, 2020. Captain Moussa Maïga and second
lieutenant Mamadou Boubacar Traoré have repeatedly attacked and destroyed the enemy saving their brothers under fire in Mondoro,
Dialloubé, and Boulkessi, among others. A journey that has earned them the trust of their fellow service members.

OE Watch | May 2020

76

AFRICA
Chad’s President to Lead Military Operations against
Boko Haram
OE Watch Commentary: On 23 March,
a Boko Haram faction operating around Lake
Chad carried out an unprecedentedly large-scale
attack on a Chadian base, killing 92 soldiers.
According to the excerpted article from a progovernment Chadian website, the Chadian
president, Idriss Déby, responded by promising
to personally lead military operations against
Boko Haram. Déby, who came to power three
decades ago in a military coup, traveled from
Chad’s capital N’Djamena to the base, to follow
through on his promise.
The article notes that Déby also promised an
overwhelming response and praised the heroism
of the 92 fallen soldiers in the surprise attack,
which left the military camp in ruins. According
to the article, Déby surveyed the damage before
meeting with military leaders in the Lake Chad
area, who determined that any offensive against
Boko Haram would require speedboats because
Boko Haram’s camps were based on small islands.

Lake Chad map.

Source: United Nations via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lakechad_map.png, CC BY SA 2.0

The image of Déby that emerges from the article is of a leader sacrificing regular presidential duties to carry out a revenge mission against Boko
Haram. The article also includes several quotes from Déby about refusing to accept defeat and chasing Boko Haram down in the same way the
group had chased down the Chadian soldiers. The article portrays the 67-year old leader as one who is not willing to back down from a fight. While
this tone may be expected from a Chadian publication sympathetic to its government and leader, Déby’s actions are unique in a regional context.
Nigeria, Niger, and Cameroon, for example, have also seen major Boko Haram attacks on their territories. However, rarely have their leaders
marched to the frontlines, or taken part in planning operations against Boko Haram. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“I refuse this defeat and the response must
be overwhelming.”
Source: “Déby décide de rester au Lac pour diriger des opérations militaires (Déby decides to stay at the Lake to lead military operations),”
Alwihdainfo.com, 24 March 2020. https://www.alwihdainfo.com/Tchad-Deby-decide-de-rester-au-Lac-pour-diriger-des-operations-militaires_
a84604.html
The President of the Republic Idriss Déby will stay in Lac province to personally lead military operations against Boko Haram. He “refuses
to remain in his office in N’Djamena” after traveling... to Boma, Lac Province, where the army suffered a deadly attack yesterday from Boko
Haram’s Abubakar Shekau faction. According to the Presidency, [he] has decided to settle in Baga Sola for a time to personally coordinate
and direct operations. “I refuse this defeat and the response must be overwhelming,” said Idriss Déby. The President of the Republic took
about 30 minutes to assess the extent of the damage before holding a war meeting with military leaders in the operational area. Among the
military commands and instructions, Idriss Déby ordered that the army be equipped with speedboats. ... The first assessment is of 92 dead and
47 wounded on the side of the army, while Boko Haram managed to carry away its dozen dead fighters.

OE Watch | May 2020

77

AFRICA
Mozambican Jihadists Escalate Violence
OE Watch Commentary: Northern Mozambique is emerging as the newest
hotspot of insurgent activity in Africa. The excerpted Portuguese-language
article in Diario Mozambique elaborates on the security crisis in the country’s
north, through an interview with Mozambican social anthropologist Paulo
Granjo. Granjo argues that the violence is entering a new phase, as evidenced
by the latest jihadist attack in Mocímboa da Praia on 23 March. He claims
the attack demonstrates the jihadists have accumulated numerous weapons,
and were reinforced from abroad, specifically by the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS), to which the Mozambican jihadists are loyal.
The article also discusses the evolution of the jihadists from 2017 to present,
pointing out significant changes. Whereas three years ago they were living on
subsistence food and attacking isolated and defenseless positions, now they are
able to openly confront police and military forces and control some territory.
According to the article, for example, it was in Quissanga and Mocímboa
da Praia, which are separated by around 100 kilometers, that the jihadists
released photographs on social media of their territorial conquests with
fighters holding the ISIS black flag. The article further notes they attempted to
rob banks, cut the communication lines off between those two towns and the
rest of the country, and attack police stations, but they were generally lenient
towards civilians and encouraged them to attend mosques.
The anthropologist does not view these events as indicating that Mozambique
is becoming a failed state. Nevertheless, he points out that the jihadists’ tactics
resemble those that the guerillas used successfully for centuries, suggesting
that there will be no quick resolution to the conflict that has been growing in
Mozambique since 2017. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

Quissanga District in Mozambique 2018.

Source: NordNordWest via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Quissanga_District_in_Mozambique_2018.svg.
CC by 2.0

“Guerrilla behavior is effective and that is precisely why
it has been used for centuries.”
Source: “Grupo Armado Que Ataca Cabo Delgado Recebeu Reforço De Meios E De Pessoal Em Moçambique (Armed Group Attacking Cabo
Delgado Received Reinforcement of Methods and Personnel in Mozambique),” diariomz.com, 29 March 2020. https://diariomz.com/grupoarmado-que-ataca-cabo-delgado-recebeu-reforco-de-meios-e-de-pessoal-em-mocambique/?fbclid=IwAR3mkTZqWHhK7O5ywnfTn5H0gQY
lRYLuyN8ItMtT848cDoKn57iVdaMaVNQ
The researcher at the Institute of Social Sciences Paulo Granjo regards the attacks in northern Mozambique as entering a new phase
involving reinforcing of the methods and personnel of this armed group. “With the attack on Mocímboa da Praia on Monday, we entered
a new phase because everything indicates that, at this moment, in addition to having accumulated large amounts of weapons in attacks,
there is some kind of reinforcement of means from abroad.” In an interview with Lusa about this week’s attacks in Mocímboa da Praia
and Quissanga, the social anthropologist who has studied Mozambique for decades considered that “there is a complete change from what
was happening” since 2017. Until last week, these armed men “were living on subsistence food, with attacks on isolated and defenseless
populations, but this third phase strongly indicates that they obtained reinforcements of means and personnel no longer from Mozambique,
but from abroad, and they are already in a position to demonstrate their military power to confront the police and armed forces and claim
some control over the territory,” asserted the researcher.
The armed fighters, who shared photographs with the Islamic State flag, sent people either to mosques or to the beach “and there was a
direct attack on the police barracks and an attempt to blow up the coffers of bank branches and cut off the optical fiber connections with the
rest of the country”. Asked whether the lack of control by police forces indicates a ‘ failed state,’ the investigator considered it not to be so,
arguing that guerrilla behavior is effective and that is precisely why it has been used for centuries.
OE Watch | May 2020

78

AFRICA
Key Boko Haram Leader Killed in Joint Operation on Lake
Chad Islands
OE Watch Commentary: On 20 March, the Nigerien ministry of
defense announced that it had killed a “figurehead” of Boko Haram,
Ibrahim Fakoura, during an operation on the islands of Lake Chad. The
accompanying passage from the popular French newspaper Le Monde
discusses this development. Although reports are unconfirmed, it is
being noted that Ibrahim Fakoura had a base on Lake Chad islands,
which is why Niger deployed forces from nearby to Diffa to Lake Chad to
target him on a six-day mission. The article points out that Fakoura had
been responsible for attacks against civilians in addition to conventional
attacks on security forces.
The article also discusses Nigeria’s military support to Niger in this
campaign, suggesting that the two countries’ militaries are cooperating,
in contrast to the past when a lack of regional military cooperation
undermined the fight against Boko Haram. Nigeria and Niger, along
with Chad and Cameroon, are also part of the Multi-National Joint
Task Force (MNJTF), whose most effective operations occurred in 2015
Nigerien Army patrol in Diffa 2016.
when it recaptured territories that Boko Haram had conquered in the
Source: Nicolas Pinault via Voice Of America, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nigerien_Army_patrol_in_Diffa_2016.jpg CC x 2.0
previous year. The article notes that the operation, which was part of the
operations of the MNJTF, was “designed and planned by elements of the Nigerien and Nigerian armies.”
The article further notes that eliminating Ibrahim Fakoura was not the only recent counter-terrorism success against Boko Haram. Fifty Boko
Haram fighters were also eliminated in another recent battle in Toumour, Niger. At the same time, the article clarifies that the security situation
remains dire. It states that there are still 120,000 refugees from Nigeria in Diffa, Niger and that the crowdedness is so extensive that several dozen
refugees were killed in a stampede while collecting food and stipends in February.
Lastly, the article notes that the operation was supported by a strategic partner. While it doesn’t specify which country this is, the article notes
that the United States and France have bases in Niger. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Elements of the Nigerien armed forces deployed in Diffa
region carried out an operation on Nigerien islands of
Lake Chad from March 10 to 16, which eliminated Ibrahim
Fakoura, one of the factional leaders of Boko Haram.”
Source: “Le Niger annonce avoir tué Ibrahim Fakoura, ‘figure de proue’ de Boko Haram (Niger announces the killing of Ibrahim Fakoura,
‘figurehead’ of Boko Haram),” Le Monde, 20 March 2020. https://www.lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2020/03/20/le-niger-annonce-avoir-tueibrahim-fakoura-figure-de-proue-de-boko-haram_6033778_3212.html?utm_medium=Social&utm_source=Twitter#Echobox=1584694243
The Nigerien ministry of defense announced it has killed a “figurehead” of the jihadist group Boko Haram, Ibrahim Fakoura, during an
operation in the islands of Lake Chad. “Elements of the Nigerien armed forces deployed in the Diffa region carried out an operation on
Nigerien islands of Lake Chad from March 10 to 16, which eliminated Ibrahim Fakoura, one of the factional leaders of Boko Haram, and
several of his companions,” according to a statement from the ministry of defense read on public television. The operation, which “was
part of the operations of the Multinational Joint Force” (Niger, Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon), was “designed and planned by elements of the
Nigerien and Nigerian armies and supported by a strategic partner.” The United States and France have bases in Niger.
Niamey authorities stated that they had “neutralized” 50 Boko Haram fighters after an Islamist attack on an army position in Toumour, also
in the southeast. According to the UN, Diffa region is home to 120,000 Nigerian refugees and thousands of displaced people fleeing Boko
Haram’s abuses. In mid-February, around 20 people died and several were injured in a stampede during the distribution of food and money
to refugees and displaced persons in Diffa.

OE Watch | May 2020

79

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela Loses its Only Telecommunications Satellite
OE Watch Commentary: Venezuela’s only telecommunications satellite, Venesat-1 (also known as Simón Bolívar) has been out of service
since 13 March 2020, causing disruptions to internet services as well as radio and television broadcasts all over the country. In a brief statement
on 25 March, the Ministry of Science and Technology announced that due to a failure, the Simón Bolívar satellite will no longer provide
telecommunications services. Without further explanation, the Nicolás Maduro regime recognized that the 400 million dollar investment, built
and launched in China in October 2008, was out of orbit with no possibility of recovery. The loss comes a full three years, seven months before
the end of the satellite’s expected service life of 15 years.
Acquired by the Chávez government after a cooperation agreement between Venezuela and China was signed in November 2005, Venesat-1 was
one of three satellites owned by Venezuela and operated by Venezuela’s Bolivarian Agency for Space Activities (ABAE), an agency of the Ministry
of Science and Technology. Technicians and engineers charged with maintenance and monitoring of Venesat-1 were trained in China.
According to Luis Zambrano, a telecommunications engineer and former official of ABAE, the failure of the satellite could have been caused
by internal damage, such as a short circuit, which would push false information into the data system. Alternatively, it may be due to human error;
either due to an oversight, or because preventative measures were not taken.
Several US companies noticed Venesat-1’s failure as it was happening. ExoAnalytic Solutions, based in California, which operates a network of
space tracking and satellite tracking telescopes, detected a significant change in Venesat-1’s orbit on 13 March. Ten days later, AGI, a Pennsylvaniabased specialty company, confirmed that Venesat-1 had moved 30 degrees from its original orbital position, and would be out of Venezuela’s line
of sight if it deviated another 40 degrees, which would complicate any effort to restore control, unless Venezuela turned to ground stations in other
countries. As none of Venezuela’s allies (including China and Russia) were poised to offer assistance in such a task, Venesat-1 operators lost contact
with the satellite while trying to move it to a graveyard orbit.
According to oppositionist publication, Runrun.es, a Venezuelan news, opinion, and analysis website founded by Venezuelan investigative
journalist Nelson Bocaranda, Venezuela depended on Venesat-1 to provide internet and telephony services to underdeveloped regions of the
country, which was heavily laden with Maduro regime propaganda. Due to the unexpected failure, the regime has had to request assistance from
US company, Intelsat, to restore services. Nearly all television and radio services transmitted via Venesat-1 were transferred to the American
satellite Intelsat-14, on 24 March. The articles speculates as to whether or not the assistance provided by Intelsat will fall subject to sanctions
imposed on Venezuela by the Trump administration, or whether Washington will react negatively, as it has done with other companies aiding the
Maduro regime.
In January 2019, the Maduro regime announced negotiations with China were underway for development of a replacement satellite which would
be launched into orbit before the end of Venesat-1’s expected lifespan. It remains to be seen whether those plans will be expedited. End OE Watch
Commentary (Lundell)

“The expected lifespan of Simón Bolívar was 15 years, so its sudden
failure for reasons still unknown, has forced the Maduro regime to
ask for help from a US provider…”

Source: “Asesinado el satélite Simón Bolívar (Simón Bolívar Satellite Assassinated),” Runrun.es, 25 March, 2020.
https://runrun.es/noticias/402156/asesinado-el-satelite-simon-bolivar/
“That day the regime reported that “due to technical difficulties, we are unable to transmit open radio and television broadcasts to the
interior of the country ... We have redoubled efforts to guarantee the restoration of services within the next few hours.” But the problem was
not identified, nor was the type of signal specified, whether analog or digital. Instead, the regime took the unusual tactic of advising users to
‘continue enjoying different signals through cable television systems and other existing subscription services in the country, as well as through
digital or web platforms.’ A TDA [open digital television] user in Venezuela would hardly sign up for a private provider, which does not even
have replacement set-top boxes for their own subscribers, for only a few hours, although they might like to.”
In the hands of the imperial eagle. Venezuela does not have ground stations in other countries, nor does it have close friends, ideological
or political, who can take on the urgency of such a task. Not even the Chinese or the Russians, neither as providers nor as financiers, are
in a position to take action. In order not to prevent the total collapse of its propaganda platform upheld by Venesat 1, the [Maduro]regime
was forced to turn to the oldest of the space industry corporations, the imperialist Intelsat. Based on figures from 2018, the United States
dominates the global satellite market with a 47% revenue share.
Observations from AGI and ExoAnalytic suggest that VeneSat-1 operators lost contact with the satellite while trying to move it to a “suitable,
non-elliptical graveyard orbit,” which is an unused location where damaged or unusable satellites go, a kind of morgue of space debris, so far
away that it makes it impossible for the useless debris to interfere with the functionalities of other space objects.
OE Watch | May 2020

80

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Venezuela Loses its Only Telecommunications
Satellite
Source: “Venezuela pierde su satélite de telecomunicaciones, «joya de la corona» chavista” (Venezuela loses its telecommunications
satellite, Chavista “crown jewel”),” Albertonews.com, 06 April 2020. https://albertonews.com/principales/venezuela-pierde-su-satelite-detelecomunicaciones-joya-de-la-corona-chavista/
“When it was launched into orbit, the Chavista government guaranteed the satellite would benefit 12 million people, and it is also an open
secret that [the satellite] served to oxygenate [the Chavista government’s] propaganda platform. The expected lifespan of Simón Bolívar was
15 years, so it’s sudden failure for reasons still unknown, has forced the Maduro regime to ask for help from a US provider…”
New satellite. In January last year, the Maduro government announced that it was negotiating the development of a new satellite to replace
Venesat-1, which would be launched before the expiration of Simón Bolívar’s expected lifespan. Chavismo’s proposal to China, specifically to
the China Great Wall Industry Corporation, the manufacturer of the three original Venezuelan satellites (Venesat-1, Vrss-1, and Vrss-2), “was
to launch Venesat-2 (Guaicaipuro) a year earlier (2022) than Simón Bolívar stopped being operational, and they would coexist for a time, but
I suppose that now they will have to move up the timeline,” said Zambrano.
Venezuela still has the other two satellites, also launched with China’ assistance. The second to be launched into orbit was the Francisco
de Miranda observation satellite (Vrss-1), in September 2012, with the goal of promoting resource research, environmental protection,
monitoring and disaster management, and urban planning. And the third is the remote sensing Antonio José de Sucre (Vrss-2), launched in
October 2017 with the goal of reinforcing the work of Vrss-1.
Last October, Maduro celebrated the 11th anniversary of the satellite. “Eleven years ago our country’s first satellite was launched into space:
the Simón Bolívar. It succeeded in consolidating and expanding telecommunications throughout the country. Venezuela has the capacity to
achieve definitive technological independence. Let’s go for more!” But five months later they would be discarding the Venesat-1, almost in a
discreet funeral act, leaving behind any possibility of technological “independence”, let alone, going for more.

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment Watch
dating back to 2011. They provide
translated selections with background
from a diverse range of foreign
media that our analysts and expert
contributors believe will give security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues

OE Watch | May 2020

81

LATIN AMERICA
The Venezuelan Navy Loses a Coastguard Ship
OE Watch Commentary: On 30 March, a Portuguese-flagged cruise ship, the RCGS Resolute (apparently doing maintenance and without
passengers) reported being shot at and struck by a coastguard ship belonging to the Bolivarian Navy (as the Navy of Venezuela is officially called),
the Naiguatá. The Bolivarian Captain called for the Resolute to follow the Naiguatá to a Venezuelan port on island of Margarita, the Resolute having
violated Venezuelan territory according to the Bolivarians. As evidenced by the third accompanying reference, the Bolivarians have their version
of events, which, at the time of this writing, does not seem credible. More believable is the version coming from the cruise ship spokespersons:
While the captain of the Resolute was seeking advice about what to do from company headquarters, the Bolivarian captain decided on ramming
the Resolute with his Naiguatá. The Bolivarians later claimed that the Resolute was the aggressor. Too soon it was too late for the captain of the
Resolute to reconsider his pugnacious impropriety. The valiant Naiguatá broke, took on water and later sank. Other units of the Bolivarian navy
rescued the Naiguatá’s crew. Latin America has not seen such a definitive use of ramming as a technique of engagement since the Battle of Iquique
in 1879. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“While the RCGS Resolute suffered minor damage…
the naval vessel suffered severe damage on contact
with the bulbous reinforced icebreaker prow of the
expedition cruiser of the RCGS Resolute ice breaker
class, and began to take on water.”
Source: Computista, RCGS Resolute de Portugal: La armada venezolana nos atropelló y disparó en aguas internacionales (RCGS Resolute
of Portugal: The Venezuelan Navy ran into us and fired at us in international waters),” Noticiero Digital, 1April 2020. https://www.
noticierodigital.com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=150809#p1688649
“While the RCGS Resolute suffered minor damage…the naval vessel suffered severe damage on contact with the bulbous reinforced
icebreaker prow of the expedition cruiser of the RCGS Resolute ice breaker class, and began to take on water.
Ready to help at any time, the RCGS Resolute stayed near the scene during more than an hour and contacted the Maritime Rescue
Coordination Center (MRCC_ in Curacao. That is the international organization that supervises whatever maritime emergency. All efforts to
contact those on board the naval vessel remained without response.”

Source: Jhoan Meléndez, “Se hundió el guardacostas «Naiguatá» tras chocar contra barco portugués (The coastguard ship “Naiguatá” sank
upon crashing against a Portuguese ship),” Noticiero Digital, 3 April 2020. https://www.noticierodigital.com/2020/03/se-hundio-buquenaiguata-de-la-fanb-tras-chocar-contra-barco-portugues/
[Official Bolivarian Armed Forces spokesperson]: “the action of the ship ‘Resolute’ is considered cowardly and criminal, extremely so in that
it didn’t help in the rescue of the crew, failing to meet international norms that regulate lifesaving assistance on the sea.”

Source: Andrea Guidugli, “El Resolute se resistió al registro del BVLNaiguatá y no asistió al buque tras el impacto (The Resolute resisted
inspection from the BVL [Littoral Vigilance Ship] Naiguatá and did not assist the ship after impact),” Infodefensa.com, 1 April 2020. https://
www.infodefensa.com/latam/2020/04/01/noticia-resolute-resistio-registro-naiguata-asistio-buque-impacto.html
“The information, to which this outlet had access, indicates that the Resolute, of Portuguese flagging, not only refused to stop, but also
increased velocity. For this reason, the Venezuelan coastguard vessel was obliged to conduct an interdiction maneuver and position itself in
front of the boat in order to impede its progress…”

OE Watch | May 2020

82

LATIN AMERICA
Venezuela and Coronavirus
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying references are representative of reportage coming out of Venezuela to the effect that the challenge
of the coronavirus is one among many sufferings, that it is compounded and perhaps eclipsed by other severe conditions, and that we are in any
case unlikely to ever know the actual extent of the virus or its contribution to suffering and death in that country. That world oil prices are at rockbottom levels is one of curious coincidences of the global moment. The effect of lower oil prices on Venezuela’s rentier economy has long been
predictable, but the shrinking of the society’s capacity to deal with a crisis like a pandemic is on this occasion worsened by what might seem an
incongruous factor – the disappearance of gasoline inside the oil rich country. The first accompanying reference is brief reportage from El Impulso,
a legacy (1904) newspaper from Barquisimeto of an ostensibly anti-Maduro politician blaming the Bolivarian regime and calling for a government
that could solve the country’s problems. The second accompanying reference is a more substantive, 2500-word investigative report from El
Pitazo, a much newer (2014) but evidently well-funded and more media-savvy outlet. El Pitazo places fuel demand at 135,000 barrels per day and
domestic production at 55,000, or 4% of installed refining capacity. The reasons for the severe gasoline shortage are multiple, all stemming from
government decisions or failures. Equipment deterioration of refineries has put most of them out of operation, the price of crude has made it less
economically feasible to pump, the Cubans get a large measure, experienced oil workers have left the country, etc. The article does say that the US
sanctions on the Venezuelan oil company PVDSA have also had a negative effect on supply. Interestingly, the total number of automobiles on the
road in Venezuela has, according to the article, gone down from 4.1 million in 2012 to 3.4 million today. The third accompanying article is about
a more valuable liquid, potable water, which is also in short supply. The fourth accompanying article is typical of common, recurring reports of
widespread electrical blackouts. The fifth reference is about shortages of beds and equipment at hospitals, a condition that predates the pandemic.
According to reportage, most Venezuelan hospitals do not have dependable electricity, or water supplies, or beds. Ventilator shortages in hospitals
without electricity? PPE shortages in hospitals without soap and water? Something reduced what had been one of the most prosperous countries
in South America to being perhaps the worst prepared to meet a pandemic. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…The country is without gasoline…”

Source: José Escalona, “Guanipa: 9 de cada 10 venezolanos hoy no pueden surtir de combustible (Guanipa [José Guanipa, a vice president
of the national legislature): 9 out of every 10 Venezuelans now cannot get gasoline),” El Impulso, 6 April 2020. https://www.elimpulso.
com/2020/04/06/guanipa-9-de-cada-10-venezolanos-hoy-no-pueden-surtir-de-combustible-6abr/
“It is because of them that the country is without gasoline and in the worst crisis in our history. It is urgent that we have a national emergency government that dislodges the power of
Maduro and his accomplices and really set the foundation for addressing the problems of Venezuelans in the middle of this pandemic…”

Source: Patzzy Salazar y Daniel Benítez, “Escasa producción e importación de gasolina dejan a Venezuela sin combustible (Low production
and import of gasoline leaves Venezuela without fuel), El Pitazo, 4 April 2020. https://elpitazo.net/investigacion/escasa-produccion-eimportacion-de-gasolina-dejan-a-venezuela-sin-combustible/
“…In recent weeks, the clamor has made itself felt in several key sectors of the country, those that require gasoline to receive medical treatment, buy food, or distribute food to the large
consumer centers…
The demand for gasoline is at about 135,000 barrels of gasoline per day; nevertheless, the current production capacity of the country’s refineries allows a production between 55,000
barrels daily, according to Rafael Quiroz, economist expert in petroleum matters…
According to an investigation published by El Pitazo…the average [of oil sent to Cuba] rose between 2006 and 2016, with the delivery of 95, 755 barrels daily…
The experts coincide in that the supply of gasoline is principally due to the fall in national petroleum production, the low installed refining capacity and the difficulty of importing
chemical additives …
The panorama for improvement in the distribution of fuel is not promising. According to the experts, the sanctions are not going to allow Venezuela to be able to acquire the components
needed to produce sufficient gasoline…”

Source: José Escalona, “75% de los hogares venezolanos no recibe agua de manera regular (75% of Venezuelan homes do not receive water
on a regular basis),” El Impulso, 6 April 2020. https://www.elimpulso.com/2020/04/06/75-de-los-hogares-venezolanos-no-recibe-agua-demanera-regular-6mar/
“On his Twitter account, Marco Bozo revealed that 75% of Venezuelan homes do not receive the vita liquid on a regular basis. The legislator indicated that the popular zones of the
country can wait as much as three weeks for even a drop of water…”

Source: María Rodríguez, “Al menos 10 municipios del Zulia sin electricidad por explosión en subestación (At least 10 counties in Zulia
without electricity due to explosion at substation),” El Nacional, 7 April 2020. https://www.elnacional.com/venezuela/al-menos-10municipios-del-zulia-sin-electricidad-por-explosion-en-subestacion/
“From its twitter account, Corpoelec [national electric power company] indicated that the west side of Zulia state was affected. It did not specify the substation where the explosion
occurred [Cuatricenario, west of Maracaibo], which it indicated in a tweet three hours later…
Newswoman María Rodríguez detailed that at least Maracaibo, San Francisco, La Cañada, Machiques, Jesús Enrique Lossada, Mara, Almirante Padilla, Guajira, Catatumbo y Rosario
de Perijá were affected…”

Source: Mariel Lozada, “Venezuela se enfrenta sin camas ni insumos suficientes al coronavirus (Venezuela confronts the coronavirus without
beds nor supplies),” Efecto Cocuyo, 4 April 2020. https://efectococuyo.com/salud/venezuela-se-enfrenta-sin-camas-ni-insumos-suficientes-alcoronavirus/
“According to the Global Health Security Index 2019, Venezuela is one of the three countries of the region with the fewest hospital beds: only 80 per 100,000…
In the area of intensive care, 53% of the hospitals do not have protective gloves, and 55% do not have masks…”

OE Watch | May 2020

83

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia and Coronavirus
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying reference is an interview of a Colombian economist and the second reference is a Colombian
news media review of the strategy announced by the Colombian national government to confront the coronavirus pandemic. The Colombian
economist interviewed in the first reference exemplifies one side of what seems to be an increasingly binomial set of perspectives. His is that the
Colombian economy cannot be sacrificed by draconian social distancing measures (such as that promoted by the Mayor of Bogota), or the society
will not have the wherewithal to do much of anything to confront this or other challenges. The political left in Colombia, of which the mayor of
Bogota is a participant, favors extreme social control measures. As indicated by the second reference, the strategy, or at least the intended strategy
of President Iván Duque’s administration is to mobilize what can be mobilized from the central government but to try to get the economy reignited
as soon as possible. Colombia has a more nationalized medical support system than does the United States, but still has some private hospitals.
The second reference includes nine general lines of effort that the Colombian government is pursuing or planning to pursue. While it reads as
similar to plans announced by other governments, emphasis logically shifts to particular local conditions, for instance, the especially difficult rural
transportation challenge. A general quarantine was put in place on 23 March, and was to expire on 13 April, a “medida de aislamiento preventivo
obligatorio” (obligatory preventative isolation measure) was put in place on 5 April, along with intentions to close the border with Venezuela.
Although social distancing has been officially engaged and encouraged, announcements of the national strategy do not make it the central
feature. The isolation measures have a number of exceptions, and border-closing inclinations, while not un-serious, are subject to the porosity of
Colombia’s long land border with its many smuggling routes. Colombia’s society is in a far better position, however, for confronting a national
emergency such as this pandemic than is that of neighboring Venezuela. Correspondingly, Colombia’s economy is that much more vulnerable to
recession, depending on the approach taken by political leaders. The pandemic, in other words, could become or be made into a leveler of overall
geopolitical strength between two competing, regional ideological and political identities, the Bolivarians and the not-Bolivarians. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“…That woman [Bogota mayor Claudia López] hasn’t
a clue of what she is talking about…”
Source: Miguel Ángel Camacho (interview of Kavier Garay), “Economía colombiana en tiempos de Covid-19: entre recesión y depresión
(Colombian economy in the time of Covid-19: between recession and depression),” Panam Post, 23 April 2020. https://es.panampost.com/
miguel-camacho/2020/04/02/economia-colombiana-covid-19/
“Panam Post interviewed Javier Garay, Doctor in Political Science, professor and researcher at Externado University [Colombia], visiting
scholar at the Anderson School of Management at UCLA and fellow of the Political Science Institute…
Duque understands clearly that the management he gives to the pandemic depends on economic and social stability in Colombia…
Q: Are can confirm that Colombia runs the risk of entering into a recession due to the pandemic we confront?
A: This won’t just be a recession, but we could really be talking about a depression and not only in Colombia…
It is an absolutely inviable proposal…
I think we are at a point of making a cost-benefit calculation. Again, there is no evidence that there aren’t alternatives to a quarantine from
the technical, medical points of view, from the epidemiological point of view. If there are no alternatives, then we need to make a calculated
decision, because we cannot turn off the economy. That woman [Bogota mayor Claudia López] hasn’t a clue of what she is talking about.
What they can do is keep people from going to work, keep business from functioning. That they can do. They can’t oblige the companies to
continue to maintain the workers if they are not producing, because the companies disappear….”
Source: Guiovanni Alarcón, “El gobierno presenta Plan de contingencia para covid-19 en Colombia (The administration presents contingency
plan for COVID-19 in Colombia),” Radio Santafé, 4 April 2020. http://www.radiosantafe.com/2020/04/04/gobierno-presenta-plan-decontingencia-para-covid-19-en-colombia/
“This plan…has nine principle components…
1. Management of population screening and diagnostics…
2. Amplification of medical infrastructure…
3. Territorial program to assure supply sufficiency (all government agencies to address health services)…
4. Additional basic benefits package (financial aid) to COVID-19 patients…
5. Assuring that EMS services are working in networks to coordinate territorial responses…
6. Transportation assistance (especially for rural areas)…
7. Telemedicine…
8. Reduction of non-essential surgeries and trauma…
9. Seek assistance from foreign embassies (especially for equipment such as ventilators)…”
OE Watch | May 2020

84

LATIN AMERICA
What Happened to Daniel Ortega?
OE Watch Commentary: According to the first reference, from an anti-Bolivarian outlet, Daniel Ortega, Marxist dictator and head of Bolivarian
regime in Managua, Nicaragua, decided to take a more-or-less hands-off approach to the coronavirus pandemic, more in line with Mexico, Sweden
or Brazil. Ortega’s inaction was perhaps due in part to the regime’s relative incapacity to do much of anything except order a public quarantine,
a measure he also did not take. The article notes that access to clean water is a widespread problem. The second accompanying article raises a
more interesting political question. Where has Ortega himself gone? Part of the hands-off approach might be due to his personal condition; at the
time of this writing he hadn’t been seen or heard from in a month. His wife, the vice president, has been covering for him. If he is incapacitated,
the legislature is supposed to swear her in as president. The conspiracy theory animating the second accompanying article is of an attempt by the
regime to use the pandemic to get more international aid, but just how hiding Ortega or stalling the transition works to that end is not made clear.
End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“Absences of the president…oblige the National Assembly
to swear in the vice-president-in this case his wife…”

Source: Emmanuel Alejandro Rondón, “El régimen de Ortega deja a los nicaragüenses a merced del Covid – 19 (The Ortega regime leaves
Nicaraguans at the mercy of Covid-19),” Panam Post, 25 March 2020. https://es.panampost.com/emmanuel-rondon/2020/03/25/regimen-deortega-condena-a-los-nicaraguenses-y-los-deja-a-merced-del-covid-19/
“Another enormous problem that confronts Nicaragua is the scarcity of water. In the Nicaraguan portal 100% Noticias [https://100noticias.
com.ni/], a revealing report explains that ‘potable water only arrives at 70% of the urban population and 35% of the rural. A Good part of the
citizenry can’t even wash their hands…”

Source: Elizabeth Fuentes, “El plan macabro tras la desaparición de Daniel Ortega (the macabre plan behind the disappearance of Daniel
Ortega),” El Cooperante, 6 April 2020. https://elcooperante.com/el-plan-macabro-tras-la-desaparicion-de-daniel-ortega/
“It is already 25 days without the Nicaraguans having seen the face or heard the voice of Daniel Ortega. Yesterday, his wife Rosario Murillo
sent a telephonic message to the citizens in which she sent greetings on the part of Ortega…
According to the law, in Nicaragua it is provided that absences of the president, including his death, total incapacity or resignation, would
oblige the National Assembly to swear in the vice-president-in this case his wife Rosario Murillo-and name another vice-president…”

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter
OE Watch | May 2020

85

LATIN AMERICA
China’s Image in LATAM Suffering?
OE Watch Commentary: Judging from a number of Spanish language analyses and opinion pieces, of which the accompanying references
are exemplary, it appears that one of the victims of the coronavirus is China’s public stature in the Spanish-speaking world. The first of the
accompanying references makes the common argument that the pandemic is somehow being used to advantage by China in its quest for world
domination. The second reference is measured, but addresses that same argument about Chinese advantage-taking by noting how demand for
Chinese goods has suffered badly from the pandemic. The third reference is evidence that Chinese official reportage is not being readily accepted.
Interestingly, and admitting that the outlets referenced herein are from a relatively conservative range within the LATAM media universe, the
writers tend to specify the Chinese Communist Party as the villain, rather than just China. Furthermore, many writers like Jorge Ospina (fourth
reference) have not just doubted the responsibility of the Chinese government in regard to the pandemic, they have noticed the congruence of
the pronouncements of the World Health Organization with the propaganda of the Chinese Communist Party. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“The Communist Party put its totalitarian apparatus to
the service of hiding information…”
Source: Emmanuel Rincón, “Coronavirus: la estrategia de China para impulsar un nuevo orden mundial (Coronavirus: China’s strategy to
impel a new world order),” PanamPost, 6 April 2020. https://es.panampost.com/emmanuel-rincon/2020/04/06/coronavirus-china-ordenmundial/
“China has used the coronavirus strategically like a Trojan Horse to push its agenda of economic and cultural domination and position itself
in international organizations…
Many theories have been brandished regarding the coronavirus, nevertheless, it is not possible to confirm in an empirical manner that this
pandemic was created in some lab in Wuhan, but what we can affirm is that the Communist Party put its totalitarian apparatus to the service
of hiding information about this pandemic…”
Source: Beatriz de Majo, “¿Existe un plan chino de dominación? (Is there a Chinese plan of domination),” El Nacional, Caracas, 7 April
2020. https://www.elnacional.com/opinion/existe-un-plan-chino-de-dominacion/
“China has used the coronavirus strategically like a Trojan Horse to push its agenda of economic and cultural domination and position itself
in international organizations…
Many theories have been brandished regarding the coronavirus, n “…Might it interest the gurus of the Communist Party that their
counterparts in this interactive and globalized world – with 80% of the world population outside their borders – forming a concert of nations
asphyxiated and impoverished with a [level of economic] demand completely decimated? It is enough to cite only one statistic: Chinese
exportations during the first two months of this year went down 16%, and that happened before the rest of the planet felt, in turn, the battering
of the pandemic crisis…” evertheless, it is not possible to confirm in an empirical manner that this pandemic was created in some lab in
Wuhan, but what we can affirm is that the Communist Party put its totalitarian apparatus to the service of hiding information about this
pandemic…”
Source: Jesús Centeno, “Nadie en Wuhan cree la cifra oficial muertos por Covid-19 (Nobody in Wuhan believes the official death figures for
COVID-19),” La Razon and EFE, Madrid, 1 April 2020. https://www.larazon.es/internacional/20200401/wkkbna3langebgitdkiru4v3ya.html
“A Chinese public outlet published that in just one day, 5000 burial urns were delivered to a single crematorium…
The news portal assures that in one day they came to deliver 5,000 urns, double the deaths that the authorities admit, and that the total
number of deaths could be greater than 40,000…
The news has caused an uproar in the social networks like Weibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter…”
Source: Jorge Ospina Sardi, “La OMS es cómplice en la tragedia del coronavirus (The WHO is complicit in the coronavirus tragedy),” La
Nota, Bogotá, 20 March 2020. https://lanota.com/index.php/CONFIDENCIAS/la-oms-es-complice-en-la-tragedia-del-coronavirus.html
“…At two months from its appearance, the Communist Party of China informed the WHO that one of the most contagious diseases that has
been known to man was not contagious. How is it possible that that organization welcomed without evidence such a falsehood?...
…the WHO, which is allegedly supposed to be on top of and expert in these matters, became the pimp of these lying Chinese rulers…”
OE Watch | May 2020

86

LATIN AMERICA
Ecuador Worst Hit by COVID-19?
OE Watch Commentary: It appears, judging from reportage, that Ecuador has suffered greatly from the pandemic. Why is not yet clear,
although the elevated level of Chinese presence in the Ecuadoran economy has been the subject of past OE Watch reporting. The first accompanying
reference is local Ecuadoran reporting from early in the spread of the epidemic. The second accompanying reference is from a widely read Peruvian
sports reporting outlet which has taken to extensively report on the pandemic in Ecuador. That outlet has been keeping an ongoing timeline of
events there. It appears to be relatively neutral politically. The third reference is a commentary regarding the situation in Ecuador from Venezuelan
dictator Nicolas Maduro. He has been attacking the President of Ecuador, Lenin Moreno, since last year when Moreno pulled Ecuador away
from the Bolivarian bloc and failed to support Maduro as Juan Guaidó was being recognized as the legitimate interim president there. Maduro is
showing world-class chutzpah on YouTube by hyping the coronavirus situation in Ecuador and offering to be larger than their difference to provide
Venezuelan scientific, technical and medical assistance to the people of Ecuador. Whatever the relative truth about Ecuador’s pandemic suffering,
its government is clearly in the gunsights of Bolivarian propaganda. Maduro’s play is enough to warn analysts to wait before judging the course
of the virus or the performance of the government in Ecuador relative to other countries of the region, and to watch for other efforts, especially by
the Bolivarian left, to use the crisis to oust the President Moreno. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“This day [5 April], the Ecuadoran territory ends with 3,646
case of COVID-19, as well as 180 total deaths.”
Source: Victoria de Sousa, “Ecuador: Catorce muertos y casi 800 contagiados por Covid-19 (Ecuador: Fourteen deaths and almost 800
contracted by COVID-19),” Venepress, Caracas, 23 March 2020. https://venepress.com/article/Catorce-muertos-y-casi-800-contagiados-porCovid19-en-Ecuad1584906145139
“The numbers represent a doubling of deaths in relation to the reporting this Saturday. As well as 200 new positives. According to official
data, 1347 persons are in the epidemiological containment, 872 cases negative and three have recovered…”

Source: Editors, “Coronavirus en Ecuador, resumen del domingo 5 de abril: últimos reportes y cifras oficiales del COVID-19 (Coronavirus in
Ecuador, summary of Sunday, 5 April: latest reports and official numbers of COVICD-19),” Depor, 5 April 2020. https://depor.com/off-side/
coronavirus-ecuador-vivo-hoy-sabado-4-de-abril-casos-confirmados-covid-19-muertos-cifras-oficiales-y-minuto-a-minuto-en-guayaquilquito-y-otras-ciudades-del-pais-tiempo-real-noticia/?ref=depr
“The country of the north [Ecuador] is one of those that has suffered the most from this pandemic, which has caused the collapse of
mortuary systems
And sewn terror in the population. This day, the Ecuadoran territory ends with 3,646 case of OCVID-19, as well as 180 total deaths.
Coronavirus in Ecuador with all of the incidences and the minute by minute for this Sunday, 5 April. The country has turned into a veritable
nightmare, especially in Guayaquil.”

Source: Nicolas Maduro, “Nicolas Maduro presidente de Venezuela habla sobre Lenin Moreno y el Coronavirus (Nicolas Maduro president of
Venezuela talks about Lenin Moreno),” Youtube, 5 April 2020. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w-WJSFVyInE
“…hundreds of corpses in the houses, decomposing, rotting in the home…
We offer them support – scientific, technical, medical to the people of Ecuador…
Lenin Moreno, we have tremendous differences, ideological, political, personal even, but we will put them aside…”

OE Watch | May 2020

87

LATIN AMERICA
Gulf Cartel Distributes Food and Supplies to Residents of
Ciudad Victoria, Tamaulipas
OE Watch Commentary: Residents of Tamaulipas took to social media to post
photos of supplies allegedly provided by the Gulf Cartel. According to Economía
Hoy and La Hoguera, two Mexican based news outlets, the supplies were
distributed in the capitol city of Ciudad Victoria to assist low-income residents
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Photos on social media show white boxes with
“Gulf Cartel in support of Ciudad Victoria, Mr. 46, Vaquero” on the side. The
report notes that each box contained pantry items like oil, rice, cornmeal, cans of
tuna, crackers, cereal, sugar, coffee, soups, and condensed milk.
MTP Noticias, another Mexico news outlet, reports that some residents
who received the boxes stated that members of the Gulf Cartel who delivered
the supplies wanted the people to know that it was from the cartel and not the
government. This is not the first time the Gulf Cartel supplied aid to residents. In
2013, the cartel provided aid after Hurricane Ingrid, and again in September 2017
following a massive earthquake in the state of Guerrero.
Supplies allegedly provided by the Gulf Cartel.
The COVID-19 pandemic is now seeing delivery of ‘public goods’ competition Source: La Hoguera, https://lahoguera.mx/cartel-del-golfo-reparte-despensas-en-tamaulipas-por-covid-19/.
Reposting of
Gulf Cartel social media.
taking place both between the cartels and the state in Mexico and between the
cartels themselves, with the Jalisco New Generation Cartel and the Sinaloa Cartel (indirectly linked via the ‘El Chapo’ 701 line) in addition to
the Gulf Cartel now giving out aid. The providing of such aid represents a challenge to state authority as well as reinforcing the social banditry
narratives promoted by the cartels, which seek to place them in a protector role vis-à-vis the local communities in which they operate. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bunker/Keshavarz)

“According to sources, during delivery of more than 100 boxes,
the criminal group told residents that the supplies are from the
‘Gulf Cartel’ so that they knew where the items came from, and
not think that it came from the government or company.”

Source: Fernando Eslava, “Cártel del Golfo reparte despensas en Tamaulipas por Covid-19 (Gulf Cartel distributes supplies in Tamaulipas for
Covid-19),” La Hoguera, 6 April 2020. https://lahoguera.mx/cartel-del-golfo-reparte-despensas-en-tamaulipas-por-covid-19/
During this health emergency due to Covid-19, Tamaulipas was allegedly supported by members of the Gulf Cartel, who delivered pantry
items to low-income families in the capitol city of Ciudad Victoria.

Source: “Cartel del Golfo reparte despensas a familias de escasos recursos ante la contingencia de Coronavirus (Gulf Cartel distributes pantry
items to low-income families facing the coronavirus pandemic),” MTP Noticias, 6 April 2020. https://mtpnoticias.com/viral/virales/cartel-delgolfo-reparte-despensas-a-familias-de-escasos-recursos-ante-la-contingencia-de-coronavirus/
Some of those who received the boxes said that the same gunmen who delivered the items made it a point to tell them that it was support from
the cartel and not the government.

OE Watch | May 2020

88

LATIN AMERICA
Mexico: Another Car Bomb Explosion Near National
Guard in Celaya, Guanajuato
OE Watch Commentary: On 6 April, a car bomb exploded in Celaya, Guanajuato, around
2100. According to the accompanying Mexico-based news outlet Heraldo Mexico, a Honda
CRV filled with explosives was abandoned near the La Laja community, towards Apasea el
Grande. This is the second car bomb to be reported in the municipality this year, the previous
one being on 8 March (see: “Car Bomb Explodes Outside National Guard Headquarters in
Celaya, Guanajuato” OE Watch, April 2020). According to another news source La Verdad,
witnesses reported seeing two subjects arriving at the site and abandoning the Honda CRV.
The vehicle exploded minutes later, according to the eyewitnesses. A second explosion
occurred as the flames reached the fuel tank.
Heraldo Mexico also reported on another incident that occurred earlier in the afternoon.
Around 1400, there was a shootout in Jerécuaro between unidentified armed men and the
National Guard. According to Mexico-based news Noticieros en Linea, the National Guard
was attacked by a group of men in a white car with Guanajuato license plates. A total of five
attackers were killed – four men and one woman.
This new car bombing—essentially a small IED detonation within a car boosted by a
Mexican National Guard Shield.
Guardia Nacional - Secretaría de Seguridad y Protección Ciudadana del Gobierno de México
secondary fuel tank explosion—was within the vicinity of the National Guard Headquarters Source:
via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Guardia_Nacional_Mexicana.png, Public
domain
as was the previous one that took place on 8 March. As in the earlier bombing, it appears to
be a messaging activity meant to warn off the National Guard from its operations focused on one of the local organized crime groupings—either
the Santa Rosa de Lima Cartel (CSRL) or the Jalisco New Generation Cartel (CJNG) who are battling each other for control of the region. This
incident should be considered another irregular warfare event within Guanajuato related to escalating car bomb employment potentials related
to anti-personnel—as opposed to anti-infrastructure—targeting of National Guard forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Bunker/Keshavarz)

“[This] is the second car bomb that exploded against
that military corporation within the same municipality
[so far this year].”
Source: “Explota coche bomba en Celaya; no hay lesionados: VIDEO (Car bomb explodes in Celaya; no injuries: VIDEO),” Heraldo Mexico,
7 April 2020. https://heraldodemexico.com.mx/estados/exposion-coche-bomba-incendio-celaya-guanajuato-inseguridad/
The incident occurred on Monday night when members of the General Directorate of Traffic and Road Police were patrolling Constitution Avenue and
located an abandoned vehicle, which was reported as stolen and involved in a robbery.
...
In the afternoon in a confrontation in Jerécuaro between hired killers and elements of the National Guard, left five people dead.
The event was recorded shortly after 2 in the afternoon on Monday when a shooting was reported on the Jerécuaro-Apaseo el Alto highway , at the
height of the Rancho de Guadalupe community.
Preliminary data indicates that shortly before 2:00 in the afternoon, armed men aboard at least two trucks collided head-on with elements of the
National Guard.

Source: “Otro “coche bomba” explota cerca de cuartel de la Guardia Nacional en Celaya (Another ‘car bomb’ explodes near the National
Guard headquarters in Celaya),” La Verdad, 7 April 2020. https://laverdadnoticias.com/crimen/Otro-coche-bomba-explota-cerca-de-cuartelde-la-Guardia-Nacional-en-Celaya-20200407-0144.html
So far this year, it is the second car bomb that exploded against that military corporation within the same municipality.
Some witnesses reported seeing two subjects arriving at the site aboard a Honda CR-V truck, which they later left at the site. All this happened just a few
meters from the aforementioned National Guard checkpoint. Minutes later, the vehicle exploded.

Source: “Otro “coche bomba” explota cerca de cuartel de la Guardia Nacional en Celaya (Another ‘car bomb’ explodes near the National
Guard headquarters in Celaya),” La Verdad, 7 April 2020. https://laverdadnoticias.com/crimen/Otro-coche-bomba-explota-cerca-de-cuartelde-la-Guardia-Nacional-en-Celaya-20200407-0144.html
So far this year, it is the second car bomb that exploded against that military corporation within the same municipality.
Some witnesses reported seeing two subjects arriving at the site aboard a Honda CR-V truck, which they later left at the site. All this happened just a few
meters from the aforementioned National Guard checkpoint. Minutes later, the vehicle exploded.

OE Watch | May 2020

89

