https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 Details of Russia’s Auxiliary Fleet
4 Russia: Technologies of Weapons Based Upon ‘New Physical Principles’
6 Wet Gap Crossing as a High Priority for Russian Engineers
8 Russian Plans to Lay Undersea Cable in the Arctic
9 The Russian Airborne Troops (VDV) Turn 90
12 Russian Aerospace Forces Reinstitutes Provisional Airfield Capability
13 More Restrictions on Defense Information in Russia
14 Elimination of Dedovshchina (Hazing in the Russian Military)?
15 Army Games and Russian Soft Power
16 Uniform Changes in Russia’s Military
17 Back to School at the Russian General Staff
18 The Russian BMP-3 Is Not Ready for the Scrap Yard
20 Rolling Out Russia’s New BMP-2M
22 Russia Conducts Fourth Arctic Riverine Exercise
23 Brigade Field Training in Russia’s Eastern Military District
25 Russia Increasing Northern Fleet Year-Around Capabilities
27 Turkey Inaugurates Space Technology Center
28 Russian-Military Historical Film Festival Cultivates Patriotism
29 Forming a Militia in Armenia
30 Russian Capabilities in Tajikistan
INDO-PACIFIC
31 Chinese Foreign Minister Calls on Resolved Land Border Disputes with Vietnam to
Influence Pending Chinese-Vietnamese Maritime Disputes
32 India’s Special Frontier Force
34 Philippines Female Suicide Bombing Has ISIS Fingerprints
35 Indonesian Counter-Terrorism Crackdown Spans Regions
36 Indonesian Papuan Rebel Killed Amid Battle of Narratives
37 China: “New Concepts” in Unmanned Combat
39 China: Seizing Cyber and Electronic Dominance on the Battlefield
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
41 The UAE-Israel Agreement: Implications for Defense and Airspace
43 How the Turkish Military is Mitigating the Impact of COVID-19
45 Israeli Perspectives on How to Fight Weaponized Information
46 Iran Stockpiling Supplies through Chahbahar
47 Russia Supports the Inclusion of Syrian Kurds in Talks to Resolve Syria Conflict 49
Economic Warfare: UAE Reportedly Seeking to Target Turkish Investments in
Egypt
50 New Jihadist Group Targets Joint Turkish-Russian Patrols in Idlib, Syria
52 The Evolving Russian-Syrian Pressure Campaign in Northeast Syria
AFRICA
54 The Militarization of Turkey’s Africa Policy
56 Chad’s Drug Trade Fuels Regional Terrorism
57 The African Union’s African Peace and Security Architecture: Underfunded and
with Mixed Results
58 Mali: Why All of Its Coups Attempts Are Successful
59 South Sudan’s Disarmament Disaster Leaves Over 120 Dead
60 Polio Is Eradicated and Spreading in Africa: Explaining This Seeming
Contradiction
61 Mozambique: Security Agreement for Natural Gas Project Raises Sovereignty
Concerns
63 Rwanda-Burundi Security Relations Beginning to Thaw
65 France Avenges ISIS’s Killings of Aid Workers in Niger
66 French Colonel Assesses Counter-Terrorism Strategy in the Sahel
67 Southern Nigerian Officials Express Concern about Boko Haram
68 Corruption Frequently Plagues African Arms Deals
69 Deficiencies in Governance and the African Union’s “No” to Coups
70 South African National Defence Force Losing Strategic Capabilities
LATIN AMERICA
71 Opposition Parties in Venezuela
72 Peru Pandemic News
73 Economic Report from Dominican Republic
74 Drug War in Mexico
75 Report of Secret Police Killings in Venezuela
76 Urban Unrest in Bogota
78 Cattle Death in Cuba

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED

Volume 10
Issue #10
October 2020

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 10 | Issue 10

October | 2020

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Ray Finch
Ihsan Gunduz
Les Grau
Adam Rodger
Matthew Stein

Indo-Pacific

Dodge Billingsley
Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Jacob Zenn

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:

Victory Day Parade in Turkey.

Source: Nérostrateur via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tag_des_Sieges_2.JPG,
CC BY-SA 3.0

Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gündüz
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman
Ihsan Gündüz
Joseph Hartung
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
		

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Tom Wilhelm

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
Details of Russia’s Auxiliary Fleet
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted
article from Krasnaya Zvezda discusses Russian plans to
upgrade its Auxiliary Fleet. According to Krasnaya Zvezda
the Auxiliary Fleet consists of 445 seagoing and harbor vessels
with plans to build another 180 vessels by 2028. Russia’s
Auxiliary Fleet is not only an important asset for Russian force
projection, reportedly transporting over 112,000 tons of cargo
to Syria since 2015, but is also important for routine military
operations. In 2019, Auxiliary Fleet vessels traversed 476,000
nautical miles, transported 328,000 tons of cargo, performed
175 ice breaking missions, repaired 308 kilometers of undersea
cables, and conducted 14,962 towing operations. As explained,
the future of Russia’s Auxiliary Fleet involves a reduction in
Project 23130, Medium Sea Tanker “Akademik Pashin”.
the number of types of vessels. As older vessels retire, they
Source: Darina Aveegres, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_23130_replenishment_oiler#/media/File:Средний_морской_
танкер_проекта_23130_”Академик_Пашин”.jpg, CC BY 4.0
are intended to be replaced with four general ship designs
(mooring lighter, general-purpose tanker, general-purpose transport, logistic support vessel) based on a standardized platform that will fulfill
most Auxiliary Fleet requirements. In general, this development plan for the Auxiliary Fleet is in tune with other developments in the Russian
Armed Forces emphasizing standardization and modularity to promote interoperability, and reduce production and maintenance costs. End OE
Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The main priority in developing the Auxiliary Fleet is the construction

of general-purpose and multifunctional vessels, a reduction in the number
of types of ships, and capability of performing integrated logistic support
missions, above all in supporting ship groupings in remote ocean areas.”
Source: Vladimir Mokhov, “Время обновления [Time for Renewal],” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 5 August 2020, http://redstar.ru/vremyaobnovleniya/
The Auxiliary Fleet currently numbers 445 seagoing and harbor vessels maintained at a level guaranteeing support to performance of assigned missions
of supporting Navy ship groupings in the far sea zone as well as combat training activities and day-to-day activity of fleets in base facilities and in the
near sea zone. Today the Auxiliary Fleet is a large (over 10,000 personnel), highly professional, cohesive collective performing diverse logistic support
missions in all fleets and flotillas and in all base facilities.
In accordance with the Concept for Auxiliary Fleet Development From 2012 Through 2020, 105 state-of-the-art vessels (27 seagoing support vessels, 78
harbor support vessels) have been built. The main priority in developing the Auxiliary Fleet is the construction of general-purpose and multifunctional
vessels, a reduction in the number of types of ships, and capability of performing integrated logistic support missions, above all in supporting ship
groupings in remote ocean areas. The tug fleet is also being updated. Over 50 of the newest seagoing and harbor tugs have been built and transferred
to the fleets in recent years. The makeup of seagoing self-propelled floating cranes is being updated. A series of 11 vessels already has been built, and
another eight seagoing self-propelled floating cranes will be delivered up to 2028… The diesel-electric icebreaker Ilya Muromets, which will perform
icebreaker support missions in Northern Fleet, became operational with the Navy in 2017. Delivery of a shallow-draft icebreaker to Pacific Fleet is
planned in 2027...
A medium oceangoing tanker became operational in the Navy for the first time in the last 37 years. The vessel was built using state-of-the-art
technologies, has a reinforced ice class, and is capable of carrying over 7,500 tons of cargo of varying nomenclature and transferring it underway to
three ships simultaneously. In accordance with a decision of the Russian Federation defense minister, it is envisaged building a series of five Project
23130 medium sea tankers, which will permit updating the composition of the tanker fleet.
The development of Russian shipbuilding permitted beginning the construction of state-of-the-art cable vessels, small tankers, and armament transports.
New vessel projects such as a general-purpose vessel for monitoring physical fields and degaussing, a lighter, clean-up boat, and passenger boat also are
being developed as part of experimental design work. Approaches to standardization of Auxiliary Fleet vessels were determined and four engineering
designs (mooring lighter, general-purpose tanker, general-purpose transport, multifunctional logistic support vessel) developed for Auxiliary Fleet vessels
based on a standardized platform as a result of experimental design work by Platforma-DTO. Standardized modular compartments have been used on
these vessels that permit reducing vessel construction time and expanding their specifications and performance characteristics and their capabilities.
Over another 180 seagoing and harbor support vessels will be built up to 2028 (in accordance with the State Armaments Program), which will increase
the proportion of state-of-the-art vessels in the Auxiliary Fleet to 70 percent…

OE Watch | October 2020

3

EURASIA
Russia: Technologies of Weapons Based Upon ‘New
Physical Principles’
OE Watch Commentary: Russian military theorists often use the phrase “weapons based on new physical principles” to describe the weapons
that will be employed in future operating environments. Often, the descriptions of these weapons are vague, but the accompanying excerpted
article from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, provides some illumination. The author, Konstantin Sivkov, posits that the weapons of tomorrow
will be based upon the theoretical science of today. Sivkov describes how advances in the fields of unified field theory, geophysics and climate
control, biological modifications, directed energy, quantum computing, and nano technology may result in these technologies being implemented
as weapons. Although Sivkov is a journalist for Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, he can be can considered an expert in modernization and future
warfare in his own right. Sivkov is a retired naval officer and General Staff Academy graduate that served in the Center for Military-Strategic
Research of the General Staff, who has published over 200 articles regarding the processes of armed struggle, the nature of modern wars and
armed conflicts, and the organizational development and development of the Armed Forces, among other topics. End OE Watch Commentary
(Bartles)

“Thus, in future, the appearance of weapons, able to

unleash on an enemy a real weather cataclysm and even
to destroy them with earthquakes, is possible.”

Source: Konstantin Sivkov, “Оружие будущего создается сегодня [The Weaponry of the Future is Being Created Today],” VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 11 August 2020, https://vpk-news.ru/articles/58124
Scientific research efforts, directed toward solving current problems, which, as it turns out, have a very remote relationship to military
affairs, in the not-too-distant future may turn out to have a significant influence on the shape of weapons systems of the world’s leading
armies and correspondingly on the character and content of warfare. I propose to review those scientific problems, which represent the most
interesting and in future those most able to influence the development of arms and military equipment (VVST).
Unified Field Theory
Among the fundamental problems, one can include the development of a unified field theory (ETP), which soonest of all will be solved only
in the long-term future, while, correspondingly, its influence on the development of weapons will be demonstrated only in the distant future…
”Small-scale generators of super powerful UHF-beams may become the basis of a whole class of qualitatively new weapons, directed toward
the destruction of the electronics of military objects.”…Despite the exceptional complexity of the tasks of constructing an ETP, it is possible to
calculate that in the next 2-3 decades it will be created. The achievements of modern mathematics and cybernetics are the key to success…The
creation of that theory will generate a revolution in military affairs, similar to the one, which occurred as a result of the creation of quantum
theory…
Geophysics and Climate Control
The most interesting and important applied methodological problem, meaningful for the future development of VVST, speaks to the
development of methods, making it possible to control the development of geophysical or climatic processes in given areas of the planet…
The urgency of this problem for military affairs is conditioned by the fact that today the means has already appeared, making it possible to
have a sufficiently powerful influence on geophysics and the planet’s climate practically on a global scale…the geophysical processes is based
on the fact that the earth, from the point of view of electromagnetism, is a gigantic spherical condenser, in which the outer conducting shell is
represented by the ionosphere and the inner conducting core is the earth’s crust and magma, between which an insulator, the lower layers of
the atmosphere, is located – possessing weak electrical conductivity. As a result, sufficiently intensive fluctuations in the ionosphere can lead
to an echo in the deepest layers of the earth in the form of fluctuations of processes in magma. The consequence of this is “energy discharges”
in zones of geological stress at the meeting points of geological plates, which are manifested in the form of earthquakes…[this technology] will
be transformed into an exceptionally powerful geophysical and climatic weapon…Thus, in future, the appearance of weapons, able to unleash
on an enemy a real weather cataclysm and even to destroy them with earthquakes, is possible.

OE Watch | October 2020

4

EURASIA
Continued: Russia: Technologies of Weapons Based Upon
‘New Physical Principles’
Source: Konstantin Sivkov, “Оружие будущего создается сегодня [The Weaponry of the Future is Being Created Today],” VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 11 August 2020, https://vpk-news.ru/articles/58124
[Continued]
Biological Modifications
The first of the applied ontological problems must generate the problem of the creation of living beings with given properties by genetic
engineering methods. Developments in this field significant for military affairs lead in the direction of the creation of pathogenic bacteria
and viruses with a highly differentiated disease-causing ability by race – so that an infectious microorganism would be dangerous only for a
human organism with certain features in genetics and physiology, and defining its racial affiliation…As far as is known, for now the required
level of “racial selectivity” has not yet been reached, however there have already been definite successes – previously unknown pathogens
appeared, which are more dangerous for people of one race and for another – less. As illustrations we can offer atypical pneumonia and bird
flu…
Directed Energy
The creation of small-scale generators for super-powerful UHF waveband beams (as well as optical and x-ray beams) serves as a basic
condition for the creation of a whole family of highly effective light weapons of various purposes…Small-scale generators of super-powerful
UHF beams may become the basis of a whole class of qualitatively new weapons, directed toward the destruction of the electronics of military
objects. The impact of those beams on various flying vehicles may destroy them as a result of putting onboard electronic systems out of
operation.
Powerful generators of coherent optical and x-ray beams made it possible to create a laser weapon…In future they may become the primary
weapon of future space-based combat systems. This means in the remote future they will be fully able to destroy not just space objects, but
also ground ones. It is true, it is subject to the successful solution to the problem of conducting high-energy beams of electromagnetic energy
of the optical and X-ray bands through the atmosphere…
Quantum Computers
“The creation of those systems will generate a revolution in military cybernetics – the rate of data processing in an automated commandand-control system will grow by an order of magnitude, increasing the speed of carrying out military operations by means of a reduction
in the command-and-control cycle.” Solving the problem of using the effect of teleportation of the state of quantum particles in advanced
electronic systems will have great significance for military affairs…The creation of those systems will lead to a revolution in military
cybernetics – the rate of data processing in an automated command-and-control system will grow by an order of magnitude, increasing the
speed of carrying out military operations by means of reducing the cycle of command-and-control. By means of the use of more complex
models, calculating a larger number of factors, the quality of decisions made will increase qualitatively. The possibility of roboticization of the
Armed Forces will be significantly expanded and, most important, a qualitative leap in the level of intelligence, precision, reliability, accuracy
and functionality of systems for the command-and-control of weapons and technical assets will significantly increase. Even the most complex
code ciphers will be easily broken…
Nano Technology
The development of nano-scale technologies and technical applications with the required functional capabilities and the ability to selfreplicate will play an important role in the progress of weapon systems. In this sphere the primary complexities flow from the fact that in the
formation and production of nano objects quantum effects exercise a determining influence, making these processes probable. In essence, this
refers to the creation of exceptionally complicated macromolecules oriented toward the fulfillment of specific functions in specific conditions.
Being combined in conglomerates, the majority of those molecules can act as a vehicle for storing and processing information. Being located
in an environment of other molecules and atomic systems, they play the role of modifiers of their structure or destroyers of it…Moreover,
on the one hand, the possibility of the creation of qualitatively new military materials will appear, and on the other hand – fundamentally
innovative weapon systems, based on the dispersal of such nano robots, able in short time frames to destroy military objects, weaponry,
military equipment and enemy personnel...

OE Watch | October 2020

5

EURASIA
Wet Gap Crossing as a High Priority for Russian Engineers
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian military has a well-founded interest in wet gap
crossings. Most of Russia’s relief is flat with many wide and relatively shallow rivers.
In general, Russia has small rivers at 30-40 kilometer intervals, and average-sized rivers
at 50-70 kilometer intervals. This terrain characteristic has led to the design of most
Russian vehicles to either have some amphibious capability, or to be able to ford water.
In addition, Russia has invested in a number of capabilities that can span large bodies of
water, such as pontoon bridging systems, that are operated by Russia’s Engineer Troops.
The accompanying excerpted interview of Lieutenant General Yuriy Stavitskiy, Chief
of the Russian Federation Armed Forces Engineer Troops, from Rossiyskaya Gazeta,
discusses the Russian acquisition of new bridging kit to include the TMM-7 Heavy
Mechanical Bridge, MTU-2020 Armored Mechanical Bridge, and the PP-2005M Pontoon
Bridging System. The accompanying excerpted article from Krasnaya Zvezda explains
how a Railroad Troops’ Construction Brigade, could employ a REM-500 Collapsible
Steel Railway Bridging System to replace damaged or destroyed railroad bridges.
The Russian military’s engineer and bridging capabilities are often leveraged for civil
defense purposes during particularly severe Spring flooding. Russian military engineer
efforts to restore road and rail networks during these crises are well publicized in the
Russian mass media. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

Lieutenant General Yuriy Stavitskiy, Chief of the Russian
Federation Armed Forces Engineer Troops.
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ставицкий,_Юрий_
Михайлович#/media/Файл:Yuriy_Stavitskiy_(2020).jpg, CC BY 4.0

Source: Aleksandr Stepanov, “Разминирование на удаленке [Remote Mineclearing],” Rossiyskaya Gazeta Online, 13 May 2020, https://
rg.ru/2020/05/13/stavickij-robot-pomozhet-shturmovym-podrazdeleniiam-pod-ognem-protivnika.html
New models of equipment, including robotized complexes, are being developed and created for needs of the Engineer Troops. The technical reequipping
of formations [soyedineniye] and military units with advanced and state-of-the-art models will permit almost a 30-percent increase in efficiency of the
work of military engineers. Yuriy Mikhaylovich Stavitskiy, Chief of the Russian Federation Armed Forces Engineer Troops, told Rossiyskaya Gazeta
about innovations coming to the troops.
What other innovations may appear in the Engineer Troops?
New means for negotiating demolished areas and obstacles and for mechanizing earthwork now are being created for increasing troop mobility. Thus,
the UBIM general-purpose armored engineer vehicle, created using T-72B3 tank assemblies and components, has been developed and already is in state
testing. This vehicle has a combat module for engaging enemy personnel and lightly armored vehicles. This innovation is being created in place of the
IMR-3M engineer obstacle-clearing vehicle and BAT-2 route clearance vehicle.
In addition, work now is being done to create the MTU-2020 armored mechanical bridge. Its load-carrying capacity has been increased to 60 tons,
which permits promptly supporting the crossing of the newest T-14 Armata tanks, among others. The MTU-2020 should replace armored mechanical
bridges now supplied to the troops. We also are developing the TMM-7 heavy mechanical bridge. Light composite materials have been used in this
vehicle, which permitted increasing the length of a bridge structure to 16 meters. The new bridge opening arrangement, modern hydraulic equipment,
and increased level of automation of the bridge assembly process will reduce the time for launching bridge crossings…
What models of new munitions and equipment and of special equipment entered the Engineer Troops in the past year and how many is it planned to
supply in 2020?
Last year more than 133,000 suites of engineer property were supplied to the troops. In particular, these were engineer vehicles -- TMT-K mineclearing
tank attachments, BUM-2 percussion drilling vehicles, mobile field sawmill complexes, KRVD suites for operationally laying temporary roads, PP-2005M
pontoon bridging system, SKO-10 integrated water treatment stations, power generators, mobile repair complexes, BMK-MO bridge erection boats,
excavators, truck cranes of varying load-lift capacity, and much more. The delivery of more than 600 pieces of engineer equipment is planned as part of
the State Defense Order in 2020.

OE Watch | October 2020

6

EURASIA
Continued: Wet Gap Crossing as a High Priority for
Russian Engineers
Source: Vladimir Sosnitsky, “Построить и защитить мост [Build and Defend a
Bridge],” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 19 August 2020, http://redstar.ru/postroit-izashhitit-most/
Having carried out a combined march, the brigade’s subunits moved out to the banks
of the Laba River from the side of the Republic of Adygea, where, according to available
data, the “enemy” had delivered a bombing strike, destroying a railroad bridge and its
access roads…A technical reconnaissance platoon is sent…to promptly determine the
nature and amount of damage to the track structure, artificial structures, earth work,
communications and signaling devices, and power systems in the area of the destroyed
bridge across the Laba River…One of the platoon groups is studying the conditions for
building detours and the possibility of using local construction and restoration materials.
And the bridge crossings reconnaissance group will examine the nature of the damage
in surviving parts of the bridge, the status of the bridge bays, and the position of their
elements…The scouts carefully record the bridge dimensions, bridge crossing plan and
profile, design, size and condition of the supports, specs of the watercourse and soils, and
the status of the access roads to the bridge. All this is at the basis of the assessment of the
situation, and the decision-making by the commander. And the decision made by Colonel
Andrey Kuzmin, the formation commander, was as follows: in the interests of restoring
interrupted train traffic, it is necessary to promptly begin the construction of a near
bypass, 3 km downstream the river, with a combined railroad bridge assembled from the
REM-500 and the SRP-33.6 collapsible superstructure inventories.
Literally in a matter of minutes, after receiving the combat order, the mechanized
armada of the subunit began productive work. A comprehensive assault on the barrier
obstacle on the path of military transport began in several directions. Subunits of the
mechanization battalion under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Oleg Minko has
immediately begun earthworks. The earthmoving effort amounted to thousands of cubic
meters of soil, removed by powerful bulldozers, excavators, and transported by dump
trucks. Literally before one’s eyes, the mechanizers of the subunit transformed the
surrounding landscape into clear, calibrated geometry of the mound, designed to support
the railroad.

MTU-2020 Armored Mechanical Bridge.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2019-Static-part-4/ixZQd87S , Creative Commons license - CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

TMM-7 Heavy Mechanical Bridge.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/search?q=%E2%80%A2%09TMM-7He
avy+Mechanized+Bridge+#q=%E2%80%A2%09TMM-7+Bridge , Creative Commons license
- CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

Lieutenant Colonel Yevgeniy Smoliy’s railway battalion took the baton of this truly
striking work without missing a beat. The soldiers of his subunits, equipped with modern
vehicles and equipment, turned the earthen mound quickly and smoothly into a reliable
steel path to the Laba river. Their main technical armament – track layers -- were rapidly
building up the upper structure of the tracks. After that, the operational service platoon
began finishing and filling the sand-gravel mixture for the purpose of ballasting the path.
At the same time, the railroad troops employed various equipment for the continuous
process of straightening, realigning, and setting the path on the axle. As a result, the
2-kilometer long bypass path was constructed well ahead of the combat standard…
The construction of the bridge is considered to be one of the most difficult tasks for
military railroad men. And with the 300-meter breadth of the Laba River in this section,
the complexity of the task required special skills of bridge builders. In the process, the
technological operation of erecting the supports, on which the superstructure was to be
mounted, became especially important. The production of frames from bars, driving the
piles in the water using the USA-2 universal pile driving unit is all very labor intensive
work. It was skillfully performed in the course of the exercise by Lieutenant Colonel Ramiz
Guseynov’s bridge battalion personnel.
In the course of the current special tactical exercise, during the construction of the
bridge, the formation’s railroad workers simultaneously used the REM-500 metal
dismountable overpass and the steel superstructure of the SRP-33.6 for the first time.
Specialists of captain Aleksey Legenkiy’s equipment assembly company skillfully coped
with this oversized and quite complex in the technical sense equipment. Not only the
personal proficiency of military railroad personnel, but also the teamwork of the crews,
which contributed to the reduction of the established time standards, reflected in each
technological operation…the quality of the accomplishment of the task by the railroad
servicemen is checked by a real military echelon consisting of a locomotive and 10
cars carrying various purpose equipment. The command’s order to restore operational
transportation was successfully accomplished by the railroad brigade…

Pontoon Section of the PP-2005M Bridging System.

Source: Mil.ru, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PP-2005_-_Bridging2017-05.jpg /
CC BY (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)

REM-500 Collapsible Steel Railway Bridging System.

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, https://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.
htm?id=11830171@egNewsg, CC BY 4.0

OE Watch | October 2020

7

EURASIA
Russian Plans to Lay Undersea Cable in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Vedomosti discusses Russian plans to lay the first undersea fiber optic
cable in the arctic by 2023. If the project is completed the cable would reportedly be the shortest route to transfer data between Europe and Asia.
This would allow Russia to become an undersea cable operator in the global transmission capacity market. Although not mentioned by name, this
cable may be a reimagined version of the Russian Trans-Arctic Cable System (ROTAKS) [Российская трансарктическая кабельная система
(РОТАКС)] that Russia has previously proposed to bridge Europe to Asia.
An additional benefit that Russia sees in this plan is that the cable will have 11 ‘jump-off’ points along the Russian coast. These communication
nodes would do much to improve civil and military communications in the region. Former Minister of Digital Development, Communications
and Mass Media Igor Shchyogolev has stated that “Reinforcing Russia’s northern borders is a strategically important topic…As per the decision
of the Security Council, it requires development the information and communication environment in the Arctic.” This can also be considered a
further step in the Russian government’s stated desire for centrally controlled, sovereign data and communications infrastructure. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“The Megafon telecommunications company and

Rosgeologiya, the state-owned mineral exploration
conglomerate, have announced the start of exploration
work to build a transarctic communications line.”

Diver Checking Underwater Cable.

Source: The Official CTBTO Photostream / CC BY (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0); https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diver_
Checking_Underwater_Protection_of_Cable_-_Flickr_-_The_Official_CTBTO_Photostream.jpg

Source: Yekaterina Kinyakina “«Мегафон» начал строить сеть связи в Арктике [‘Megafon’ Starts Building Communication Network in
Arctic],” Vedomosti Online, 20 July 2020, https://www.vedomosti.ru/technology/articles/2020/07/19/834927-megafon-nachal-stroit
The Megafon telecommunications company and Rosgeologiya, the state-owned mineral exploration conglomerate, have announced the
start of exploration work to build a transarctic communications line. According to their representatives, a research expedition will start in
Murmansk on 5 August and last for three months. During that period the Professor Logachev vessel will have to study 6,500 kilometers of the
bottom relief of the Arctic Ocean along the Russian coast…
The line, which Megafon and Finnish infrastructure operator Cinia expect to build by 2023, will be the first in the Arctic, and this will be
the shortest route to transfer data from Europe to Asia, says Megafon General Director Gevork Vermishyan. He estimates investments in the
construction of the line at $0.8-1.2 billion. However, the exact amount can only be named after research has been conducted, he adds.
At present, most of the underwater fiber optic lines pass through the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, says the Megafon representative.
Meanwhile, data traffic between continents is growing rapidly: In the next five years, it will increase by 200 percent, the Vedomosti
interlocutor predicts. Demand is being fueled by digital services, content providers, international telecom operators, and large corporate
customers, so the construction of a new underwater communication line from Europe to Asia will help meet this demand, the representative
of the operator said…The new line is needed not just for traffic transit. The project provides for the construction of 11 branches from the main
line to Russian territory, which would allow users, including fuel and energy companies in Russia’s remote northern regions, to be connected
to the Internet, Vermishyan said…
OE Watch | October 2020

8

EURASIA
The Russian Airborne Troops (VDV) Turn 90
OE Watch Commentary: The world’s first parachute assault was
conducted by Soviet troops, during an exercise, on 2 August 1930. This
date would later be considered the birth of the Airborne Troops (VDV).
Although the VDV did perform a few airborne operations during
the Second World War, the VDV was primarily used as elite (nonairborne) light infantry. The accompanying excerpted interview of
Vladimir Shamanov, former VDV commander (2009-2016) and current
Chairman of the State Duma Committee for Defense, in Izvestiya,
contains Shamanov’s thoughts on the VDV’s past and future prospects
in the context of the VDV’s 90th birthday. Of particular interest,
Shamanov mentions the low number of conscripts the VDV currently
has in its ranks: approximately 30%. Additionally, he points out that
most VDV personnel, presumably meaning just the VDV officer corps,
have deployed to Syria. The accompanying excerpted article from
Nezavisimaya Gazeta provides an excellent description of the current
force structure of the Russian VDV, including how the Airborne has
earned the moniker “the polite people.” End OE Watch Commentary

“Wherever the Supreme Commander-in-

Chief orders us to be, that is where we will
head out to, in coordination with the Russian
Aerospace Forces. A poster can be seen in the
Ryazan Airborne School: “Whoever insults
Russia will have to deal with the VDV.” This is
not a simple bravado, but a specific warning:
you will have to deal with us.”
-Colonel General (ret.) Vladimir Shamanov,
Chairman of the State Duma Committee for
Defense

Colonel General (ret) Vladimir Shamanov.

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladimir_Shamanov#/media/File:Vladimir_
Shamanov._Cabinet_photo.jpg, CC BY 3.0

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download

OE Watch | October 2020

9

EURASIA
Continued: The Russian Airborne Troops (VDV) Turn 90
Source: Roman Krezul and Alexey Ramm, “«Мы там, где национальные интересы России» [We are where Russia’s national interests lie],”
Izvestiya Online, 2 August 2020, https://iz.ru/1042545/roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm/my-tam-gde-natcionalnye-interesy-rossii
On 2 August, Russia’s Airborne Troops (VDV) celebrate the 90th anniversary since they were formed. Today, the VDV is the most mobile and
versatile service branch, which happens to be at the stage of serious reforms. In the next few years they will have own army aviation, and will
be able to operate autonomously all over the world. On the eve of the holiday, Colonel General Vladimir Shamanov, Chairman of the State
Duma Committee for Defense, VDV commander from 2009 through 2016, and Hero of Russia, spoke with Izvestiya about the VDV’s new
image, of the draft law aimed at protecting the servicemen, and the difficulties of becoming a separate service branch.
In your view, what is the role of the Airborne Troops in the military conflicts of the 21st century? What is the difference between the missions
of the present-day VDV and those they faced during the Cold War?
During the times of the Soviet Union, there was a powerful organization -- the Warsaw Pact. Nowadays, several countries have joined
Russia to form the Collective Security Treaty Organization -- the CSTO. And Russia is the backbone of this defensive bloc. Our main task
is to preserve our sovereignty, so that no one in the world would even think of laying claims on our wealth and our territories…A new
geopolitical situation has developed today, and conditions have changed globally. Look -- global warming forces us to closely monitor the
development of the situation in the Arctic zone. We have restored a radar field there, created polar stations, infrastructure, and the Northern
Fleet operational-strategic command. And this is just the naval component. The ground missions are assigned to the Airborne Troops, among
others. It is not by chance that we landed on Kotelnyy Island and regularly perform airdrops at the North Pole.
We tell our partners, as they call them, although I call them our opponents: we are where Russia’s national interests lie. And above all, that
is a reference to our Airborne Troops. Today they have received new models of weapons with increased fire potential. There are the latest air
defense, electronic warfare, and fire weapons systems. We have formed entire battalion-level subunits equipped with guided parachutes. This
makes it possible to airdrop forces over many tens of kilometers from the battlefield, and, using the element of surprise, to resolve missions set
by the country’s political leadership.
It should be noted that, according to the CSTO Charter, an attack on any of the participating countries is an attack on Russia. This scenario
also needs to be considered. And we are preparing to repel any threat. The CSTO rapid response grouping consists of two VDV formations:
the 98th Airborne Division (Ivanovo) and the 31st Separate Airborne Assault Brigade (Ulyanovsk). This outlines the role assigned to the
Airborne Troops in our country’s defense strategy…As of today, virtually all the troops have acquired the practical experience of employing
forces and assets via rotational tours under the conditions of the Syrian conflict, rendering assistance to the people of the Republic…
On the whole, how would you assess the level of training of today’s paratroopers? How have their combat skills changed in recent years?
The increase of the share of contract employees has sharply improved the skills of servicemen of all categories, and above all -- on the
platoon/company level. As a rule, these are people with unfinished higher or secondary specialized education, as well as those with an
additional military specialty…Today, draftees make up only 30 percent of the Airborne Troops servicemen. Tentatively speaking, there is
one draftee per two contract servicemen. And, as we all know, only contract servicemen may be engaged in the accomplishment of combat
missions abroad -- as was the case with ensuring security in Crimea during the historic referendum in 2014, for example.
In other words, is the VDV becoming a multifunctional force capable of performing the most diverse missions around the world?
Even now the VDV is the most versatile troops in our Armed Forces. Moreover, they are the best in terms of morale and combat capabilities.
There are attempts to compare us with the American Marine Corps. But the US Marines are the formations, which protect, as they say, the
US national interests around the world. Whereas the Russian Airborne Troops are an instrument, that first and foremost makes it possible to
accomplish tasks of defending the territory of the country, and of cooperation with the CSTO allies. And, if necessary -- to carry out missions
abroad.
Wherever the Supreme Commander-in-Chief orders us to be, that is where we will head out to, in coordination with the Russian Aerospace
Forces. A poster can be seen in the Ryazan Airborne School: “Whoever insults Russia will have to deal with the VDV.” This is not a simple
bravado, but a specific warning: you will have to deal with us.

OE Watch | October 2020

10

EURASIA
Continued: The Russian Airborne Troops (VDV) Turn 90
“Well, and we need to point out that the image of the Russian airborne troop has been

branded even by the Americans in recent years thanks to the well-known events. The “polite
people” - are now an integral part of the world political picture. And this image was not
at all formed through the efforts of public relations specialists or the press. To be blunt, it
created itself, from what and whom the Russian airborne troops are in fact - polite people.
With precise missions and professional training.”

Source: Ivan Konovalov, “«Войска дяди Васи» стали мировым брендом [‘Uncle Vasya’s Troops’ Have Become a Global Brand],”
Nezavisimaya Gazeta Online, 7 August 2020, https://nvo.ng.ru/nvo/2020-08-07/1_1103_brand.html
Right now - there are four divisions and five separate brigades in the composition of the Airborne Troops. The reforms of the Russian Armed
Forces, which began in 2008, affected first and foremost the VDV. And there were quite a few worrisome moments in the initial phase,
when the very existence of the VDV was in doubt…In 2010, during the course of the first phase of the Ministry of Defense reforms, which the
infamous Anatoliy Serdyukov headed at that time, the General Staff decided on the reduction of the VDV’s combat and numerical strength by
approximately twofold. They proposed to disband two of the four divisions, while being motivated to do this by the absence of an articulated
VDV employment concept and an adequate Military Transport Aviation fleet.
In 2013, they managed to return three air assaults brigades (11th, 56th, an 83rd) and 242nd (Sergeant) Training Center to the VDV’s
composition, which had previously been transferred to the Ground Troops, thanks to the efforts of well-known airborne troops, who had gone
into politics, also including General Vladimir Shamanov. At that same time, 45th Separate Guards Spetsnaz Regiment was transformed into
45th Brigade…In 2014, separate reconnaissance battalions were formed in 76th and 7th Guards Air Assault Divisions and 31st Air Assault
Brigade (DShB). Two electronic warfare companies were created in 11th and 83rd Air Assault Brigades. Organic repair subunits were
recreated in the VDV formations.
Separate tank companies were formed in all six VDV air assault formations -7th and 76th guards divisions, and 11th, 31st, 56th, and 83rd
separate guards’ brigades - in 2016. Three more reconnaissance battalions, two electronic warfare companies, and two unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) companies were formed. The first of three regiments in the VDV divisions - 76th Division’s 237th Guards Air Assault Regiment
(as a result of these reductions, all of the Airborne Troops’ divisions were transitioned from a three regiment to a two-regiment composition.
- Editor’s comment), and 38th Regiment was upgraded to a command and control brigade. The tank companies of the 76th and 7th Divisions’
and 56th Brigade were upgraded to tank battalions. The VDV Force Structure and Development Concept envisions the transition of the
31st Guards Air Assault Brigade into 104th Guards Division and the creation of a VDV artillery brigade. So, there will be five divisions in
the VDV’s composition - two airborne and three air assault. The Airborne Troops’ personnel strength is approximately 45,000 personnel at
present.
The Airborne Troops became one of the first in the RF Armed Forces Structure to transition to the contract manning principle. This was an
obvious decision. The service of a well-trained airborne troop over the course of only a year is nonsense. All the more so that the VDV are the
Supreme Commander-in-Chief’s reserve and the main Rapid Reaction Forces in the current Russian Armed Farces Force Structure Concept,
which equates them with the Strategic Missile Troops, where only military professionals are also serving right now…
76th Guards Airborne Division became the first contract service division in the Russian Army in 2003. Later 7th and 98th Divisions, 31st
Separate Air Assault Brigade, and 45th Reconnaissance Regiment, which has been deployed into a brigade, transitioned to the contract. 106th
Guards Airborne Division is manned based upon the mixed principle. Approximately 30 percent conscripts serve in the VDV to this day. The
NCO Corps is totally contract servicemen. Right now, in order to perform service in the airborne infantry, a conscript needs to withstand a
very serious competition, which consists of not only tests on physical fitness but also on psychological stability…The VDV training system
includes: Ryazan Higher Airborne Command (RVVDKU), 242nd Omsk Training Center, 332nd Warrant Officers’ School, and Ulyanovsk
Guards Suvorov Military School…
Well, and we need to point out that the image of the Russian airborne troop has been branded even by the Americans in recent years thanks
to the well-known events. The “polite people” - are now an integral part of the world political picture. And this image was not at all formed
through the efforts of public relations specialists or the press. To be blunt, it created itself, from what and whom the Russian airborne troops
are in fact - polite people. With precise missions and professional training.
OE Watch | October 2020

11

EURASIA
Russian Aerospace Forces Reinstitutes Provisional
Airfield Capability
OE Watch Commentary: In Soviet times, the Soviet Air Force had
engineer-airfield battalions that were designed to create provisional airfields.
These units were capable of preparing unpaved landing strips and parking
areas, deploying fueling tank, and operating and maintaining equipment
necessary for servicing aircraft. At some point, presumably after the
collapse of the Soviet Union when the Russian military was at its low point,
the engineer-airfield battalions were disbanded and the use of provisional
airfields became less common. The accompanying excerpted article from
Izvestiya, discusses Russian plans to reintroduce engineer-airfield battalions
into the organizational structures of the Military District’s respective Air
and Air Defense Armies. Apparently, the Aerospace Forces now see a
need for this capability. As Lieutenant General (ret.) Valeriy Gorbenko, the
Mi-26 Heavy Transport Helicopter.
former commander of the Southern Military District’s 4th Air Force and
Source: Dmitry Terekhov from Odintsovo, Russian Federation, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mil_Mi-26_(4322158204).jpg , CC BY-SA
Air Defense Army, states: “This is especially relevant in modern conditions,
when airfields are marked on the maps and everyone knows what is based where. It is quite another matter, when aircraft takeoff on a combat
mission and then land on a provisional airfield.” Gorbenko’s comment makes it clear that he sees reliance upon fixed, well known airbases, in
an era of precision guided long-range munitions as folly. Aside from the tactical considerations of airfield protection, provisional airfields will
be particularly valuable for Russia’s growing expeditionary military capabilities, as the VKS has already been experimenting with provisional
airfields in the Arctic. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“This [provisional airfields] is especially relevant in modern conditions, when airfields are

marked on the maps and everyone knows what is based where. It is quite another matter,
when aircraft takeoff on a combat mission and then land on a provisional airfield.”
-Lieutenant General Valeriy Gorbenko, former commander of the 4th Air Force and Air
Defense Army
Source: Roman Krezul and Alexey Ramm, “Посадить в поле: ВКС смогут оборудовать аэродромы в любой местности [Setup in the
Field: The VKS Will Be Able to Create Airfields on Any Terrain],” 7 September 2020, https://iz.ru/1057563/roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm/
posadit-v-pole-vks-smogut-oborudovat-aerodromy-v-liuboi-mestnosti

Russia’s Aerospace Forces (VKS) will be able to create provisional airfields in an open fields. Unique military units — special engineer-airfield
battalions — will perform this. The question of forming such units in each air and air defense army is currently being addressed. Whenever necessary,
they will build a rough airstrip and will erect the entire infrastructure for the landing of helicopters and aircraft. According to experts, this will make it
possible to promptly redeploy aviation to any area where it is needed.
The first separate engineer-airfield battalion was deployed on the base of the State Flight Test Center. In August, it took part in maneuvers in the
Southern Military District, having built an unpaved airfield. In the future, such units will appear in all the VKS armies, Izvestiya’s sources in the military
department reported…”We are resorting to previous experience,” Lieutenant General Valeriy Gorbenko, former commander of the 4th Air Force and Air
Defense Army, told Izvestiya. “There were such battalions in Soviet times. They stood the test of the Great Patriotic War, where they played a serious role.
I had three such battalions in the Army. During the tough times, however, the Armed Forces began to reduce everything, including these units. But they
are necessary. We still have aircraft that take off from rough airstrips. But the runway has to be prepared for the landing and takeoff of the vehicles.”
According to Valeriy Gorbenko, previously, each aviation regiment had both a base airfield and a field airfield — the so-called staging airfield. “This
is especially relevant in modern conditions, when airfields are marked on the maps and everyone knows what is based where. It is quite another matter,
when aircraft takeoff on a combat mission and then land on a provisional airfield.” the expert noted…
In recent years, the leadership of the Defense Ministry and the VKS command have been paying a lot of attention to issues related to the operational
redeployment of aviation groupings from one direction to another. In addition, technologies are being developed that allow aviation to depend on
permanent airfields to a lesser extent. Since the beginning of the 2010’s, aircraft have begun to regularly perform landings on highways during exercises.
Initially, these missions were performed by fighters and bombers. Two years ago, an An-26 military transport aircraft landed on a highway for the first
time…
Last year, the Baltic Fleet aviation tested the first mobile airfield. During special tactical exercises in the Gulf of Finland, the engineer services built a
complete infrastructure with five landing grounds for combat and transport helicopters on the island of Gogland. All the equipment and technical assets
were delivered by a single Mi-26 helicopter. The temporary airfield was ready to receive and service aircraft within a few hours from the start of the
works. If necessary, such facilities will be able to take in all types of Navy combat and transport helicopters, as well as some frontline aviation aircraft…

OE Watch | October 2020

12

EURASIA
More Restrictions on Defense Information in Russia
OE Watch Commentary: As reported last month (“Tightening Security Info Space,” Sept 2020 OE Watch), the Kremlin continues to take
steps to limit reporting on issues involving security and national defense. As the excerpt from the largely independent Kommersant news source
suggests, operational security may not be the only driving factor behind proposed new restrictions on covering national security topics. The
article begins by asserting that there is currently legislation pending, which “if adopted, will allow the overwhelming majority of information on
the country’s defense to be withdrawn from legal public circulation.” It explains that if this law is passed, Russian defense information, even if
the material is “not related to state secrets,” will be regarded as “confidential and limited in its dissemination, equating it to attorney’s or medical
secrets.”
The author points out that as opposed to the Soviet period, when all material related to security was classified, “by the 2000s, a certain
consensus had developed, within which the media and public organizations actively discussed military topics of interest to society, and the military
department, industry, and government bodies shared relevant information.” This relatively open dialogue helped to resolve “disputes between
industry and the military about the quality and cost of weapons, discussions about ways of developing certain types of armed forces and the
military machine as a whole,” hinting that classifying all information regarding security will likely lead to greater corruption. The author goes
on to argue that “these discussions turned out to be all the more weighty because people who were involved in decision-making in the field of the
country’s defense regularly took part in them.”
The article concludes by asserting that “in recent years, this free movement [of defense information] has been increasingly curtailed, and if this
new law is adopted, “will make it almost impossible for any discussion of the Russian armed forces.” The author warns that Russia, as “one of the
leading military powers of the planet… is of interest to many,” and if all military information becomes classified (except for official press releases),
readers will turn to foreign sources. These foreign sources will likely not paint a flattering picture of Russian defense topics, and Russian defense
officials “won’t like the result.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… The balance between secrecy and the need to share information with

citizens about the state of the country’s defense has always been one of the
most pressing issues for all states…”
Source: Ilya Kramnik, “В обстановке повышенной подозрительности,” [In an atmosphere of heightened suspicion] Kommersant, 14
August 2020. https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/4457101
The Russian Ministry of Defense has developed a bill that, if adopted, will allow the overwhelming majority of information on the country’s defense to be
withdrawn from legal public circulation. The authors of the initiative propose to consider information “generated during the implementation of measures
in the field of defense” and not related to state secrets, confidential and limit its dissemination, equating to attorney’s or medical secrets.
The balance between secrecy and the need to share information with citizens about the state of the country’s defense has always been one of the most
pressing issues for all states. They searched for it in different ways: someone closed almost tightly, someone, on the contrary, published a lot, classifying
a narrow set of really serious topics. The choice of this or that approach was dictated mainly by the organization of the state machine: where decisions in
the field of military development could not be made without taking into account the position of the parliament, which is closely related to public opinion,
total classification did not make sense.
Russia is not one of the countries where the opinion of parliament and society would have to be taken into account in matters of military development the prerogative of the president of the country in this area was not in doubt either in the 1990s or now.
However, by the 2000s, a certain consensus had developed, within which the media and public organizations actively discussed military topics of interest
to society, and the military department, industry, and government bodies shared relevant information. Among other things, there were disputes between
industry and the military about the quality and cost of weapons, discussions about ways of developing certain types of armed forces and the military
machine as a whole. These discussions turned out to be all the more weighty because people who were involved in decision-making in the field of the
country’s defense regularly took part in them.
In recent years, this free movement has been increasingly curtailed, not without the participation of the military department, and the bill under
discussion is a logical development of this process.
Its adoption will make it almost impossible for any discussion of the Russian armed forces, except for the reprint of press releases with predictable
content, “not inferior, but superior in a number of parameters.”
…The problem, however, remains. The Russian media and the Russian segment of the Internet do not end at the state border, but exist within the
framework of the global information field, where Russia, being one of the leading military powers of the planet, is inevitably of interest to many, and this
interest is not exhausted and cannot be exhausted by press releases.
It is not known what effect the authors of the idea wanted to achieve, but the closure of almost all significant information on the Russian armed forces
will not lead to the termination of the discussion of this topic. They will simply discuss it now, first of all, with reference to foreign sources - because if you
do not tell about yourself, be prepared for what others will tell about you. You won’t like the result.

OE Watch | October 2020

13

EURASIA
Elimination of Dedovshchina (Hazing in the Russian
Military)?
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past several years, the reputation of Russia’s military has
improved dramatically. Despite this more favorable image, however, a large number of young
Russian men still remain reluctant to complete their one-year term of obligatory conscript
service. One of the primary reasons behind their unwillingness stems from a tradition of
vicious hazing (дедовщина/dedovshchina) within the ranks. During the past decade, to
reduce hazing, the Ministry of Defense (MoD) has enacted various prophylactic policies (e.g.
reduce term of service, daily physical inspections, a confidential hotline, etc.). This may now
be changing. Or not.
Quoting a recent announcement by Deputy Defense Minister Andrei Kartapolov, the first
accompanying excerpt from the official news agency, RIA Novosti states that “the Russian
army has completely eradicated hazing and barracks hooliganism.” Kartapolov goes on to
assert that some of this positive change is due to “the quality of conscription and the desire of
Russian citizens to do military service in the ranks of the Armed Forces.” His comments are
echoed by “Colonel-General Sergei Kuralenko, head of the Main Directorate of the Military
Police of the Ministry of Defense,” who “noted that positive results were achieved thanks to
the well-coordinated work of all relevant departments.”
Not surprisingly, not all Russians share this optimistic assessment regarding the elimination
of hazing. The second excerpt, from the pro-Kremlin source, Izvestiya, quotes a representative
from the Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers, who explains that while there may be “less cruelty
and torture in the army… they have not been eradicated.” This source asserts that, every
day, their committee “receives dozens of calls and letters on completely different situations.
Somewhere soldiers are beat up, somewhere they extort money, somewhere they get injured.”
The source goes on to claim that “extortion of money prevails in the army, extortion is total
left and right.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

Head of the Main Military-Political Directorate
of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation,
Colonel-General Andrei Kartapolov.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Andrey_Kartapolov,_2018.jpg
mil.ru CCA 4.0 Intl

Source: “Минобороны заявило о полном искоренении дедовщины,” [The Ministry of Defense announced the complete eradication of
bullying] RIA Novosti, 26 August 2020. https://ria.ru/20200826/armiya-1576316232.html
The Russian army has completely eradicated hazing and barracks hooliganism, Deputy Defense Minister Andrei Kartapolov said at a roundtable at the
Army-2020 forum.
…According to the general, this, in turn, “influenced the quality of conscription and the desire of Russian citizens to do military service in the ranks of
the Armed Forces.”
Colonel-General Sergei Kuralenko, head of the Main Directorate of the Military Police of the Ministry of Defense , noted that positive results were
achieved thanks to the well-coordinated work of all relevant departments.

Source: “Солдатские матери не согласились с заявлением о победе над дедовщиной в армии,” [Soldiers’ mothers disagree with
declaration of victory over bullying in the army] Izvestiya, 26 August 2020. https://iz.ru/1052924/2020-08-26/soldatskie-materi-ne-soglasiliss-zaiavleniem-o-pobede-nad-dedovshchinoi-v-armii
The Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers does not agree with the statements of the Ministry of Defense on the eradication of bullying in the army. This was
reported to Izvestia by Andrey Kurochkin, deputy chairman of the all-Russian public organization Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers, on August 26.
“There is less cruelty and torture in the army, although they still exist. Just now extortion of money prevails in the army, extortion is total left and right.
But there is less torture and cruelty, but they have not been eradicated, we do not agree with that,” said Kurochkin.
According to him, every day the committee receives dozens of calls and letters on completely different situations. “Somewhere soldiers are beat,
somewhere they extort money, somewhere they get injured…” the deputy chairman of the committee said…

OE Watch | October 2020

14

EURASIA
Army Games and Russian Soft Power
OE Watch Commentary: As expected, Russia proved victorious during the 6th
annual International Army Games, which were held from 23 August to 5 September.
Russia has won every year since its inception in 2015. While concerns over COVID-19
kept some invitees at home, 32 countries (to include newcomers Abkhazia, South
Ossetia and Palestine among others) competed in 30 different events designed to test
military proficiency. Besides the training value and a forum to show off its weapon
systems, the Army Games also provide Kremlin and defense officials with the
opportunity to exercise Russian soft power. In the accompanying excerpt from the
mostly independent Nezavisimoye Voennoye Obezreniye, the author describes how the
games provided Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu with the prospect of calming
tensions between Azerbaijan and Armenia, and also perhaps increase weapon sales.
The article begins by describing how Shoigu met with both the Azeri President and Defense Minister Shoigu speaking at the closing ceremony
Defense Minister during one of the games and used the opportunity to inform them
of the 2020 Army Games, 5 Sep.
Source: https://xn--80ahclcogc6ci4h.xn--90anlfbebar6i.xn--p1ai/images/upload/2019/
that “Russia is not interested in escalating tensions in the Trans Caucasus region, and
zakritie_armygames_05.09.2020_1200_3.jpg CCA 4.0 Intl
its [Russia’s] actions are not directed against third countries in this region.” The author
goes on to suggest that President Ilham Aliyev and General of the Army Sergei Shoigu “most likely spoke about the situation in the Tovuz region
on the border of Armenia and Azerbaijan.” Tensions between Azerbaijan and Armenia have increased over the past few months, and because
Armenia is a member of the Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), with Russia having military forces stationed in Armenia,
Shoigu stressed that “all our actions have never been directed and are not directed now against Azerbaijan, our neighbor and our partner.”
The article then reviews the major military equipment Azerbaijan has purchased from Russia over the past decade ($5 billion worth), to include
“T-90S tanks, BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicles, BTR-82A armored personnel carriers, artillery systems, including Msta-S self-propelled howitzers,
Smerch multiple launch rocket systems and TOS heavy flamethrower systems,” as well as helicopters, air defense systems and small arms. It also
points out that Azeri defense officials “announced the interest of the republic’s air force in the Russian MiG-35 and Su-35 aircraft.” The author
posits that this proposed purchase “may be a response to the purchase of 12 Su-30SM fighters by Armenia.”
The author concludes by asserting that “Moscow is pursuing a fairly balanced policy in the region,” whereby it ensures that “Armenia and
Azerbaijan maintain a balance of power, [thus] preventing either side from going over to large-scale hostilities.” The International Army Games
provide Russian defense officials with unique opportunities to both prevent, and perhaps profit from, conflict among participants and their
customers.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… the competition also has a political component…”
Source: Dmitry Litovkin, “Сергей Шойгу нашел новый способ предотвращать конфликты,” [Sergei Shoigu found a new way to prevent
conflicts} Nezavisimoye Voennoye Obezreniye, 28 August 2020. https://nvo.ng.ru/realty/2020-08-28/1_1106_games.html
The visit of the Russian Defense Minister to Azerbaijan, formally connected with the need to launch one of the stages of the International Army Games
“Sea Cup,” showed that the military are capable of solving complex problems not only on the battlefield, but also at the negotiating table. In one day,
Sergei Shoigu met with the country’s President Ilham Aliyev, and also held a meeting with the head of the military department Zakir Hasanov….
Army games are an invention of Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu…. However, the competition also has a political component. Its essence is the ability of
the heads of the military departments to meet directly face to face and discuss current problems. At a meeting with Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev,
the head of the Russian military department said that Russia is not interested in escalating tensions in the Trans Caucasus and its actions are not directed
against third countries in this region….
The topic of the ARMY-2020 exhibition held in Kubinka outside Moscow was casually touched upon. Sergei Shoigu noted that there are a lot of novelties
in its exposition that could interest the Azerbaijani military….
It is clear that in the first case, already in the closed part of the meeting, President Ilham Aliyev and General of the Army Sergei Shoigu most likely spoke
about the situation in the Tovuz region on the border of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
“We know and watched with concern the events that took place on the border with Armenia…. I want to say right away: all our actions have never
been directed and are not directed now against Azerbaijan, our neighbor and our partner. Russia is not interested in escalating tensions in the Trans
Caucasus,” Sergei Shoigu assured Ilham Aliyev.
…As for the ARMY 2020 exhibition, everything is completely transparent here: Baku is among the largest buyers of Russian weapons in the region.
Over the past decade, Azerbaijan has purchased Russian arms and military equipment for about $ 5 billion… Currently, the country has already received
modern T-90S tanks, BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicles, BTR-82A armored personnel carriers, artillery systems, including Msta-S self-propelled howitzers,
Smerch multiple launch rocket systems and TOS heavy flamethrower systems….
…Earlier, the Ministry of Defense of Azerbaijan announced the interest of the republic’s air force in the Russian MiG-35 and Su-35 aircraft…. The
purchase of these aircraft may be a response to the purchase of 12 Su-30SM fighters by Armenia. The word “answer” can be considered a key word.
Moscow is pursuing a fairly balanced policy in the region. The supply of modern equipment to Armenia and Azerbaijan allows maintaining a balance of
power, preventing either side from going over to large-scale hostilities….

OE Watch | October 2020

15

EURASIA
Uniform Changes in Russia’s Military
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past eight years, Defense Minister,
Sergei Shoigu has done much to increase the combat readiness, status,
and image of the Russian armed forces. By mandating numerous uniform
changes, Shoigu has worked to improve the general appearance of those
associated with the Ministry of Defense. However, not all these uniform
directives have been warmly welcomed. In the brief excerpt from an
article in the relatively independent, Svobodnaya Pressa, the author
describes what he regards as excessive uniform changes implemented
under Defense Minister Shoigu.
The author begins by criticizing the new duty uniform, claiming that
it “resembles the soldiers of (Soviet) student construction brigades.” Nor
does he care for the new dress uniform, asserting that it reminds him of
“the actors in a provincial performance with homemade decorations about
the Imperial Guard.” The author goes on to suggest that when Shoigu Russian military personnel in Tajikistan in summer uniforms, May 2020.
Source: http://mil.ru/et/news/more.htm?id=12292762@egNews CCA 4.0 Intl
first started, he was offended when he saw civil servants working in the
Defense Ministry in civilian clothes. Therefore, “a year later, in 2013, Shoigu ordered all civil servants subordinate to him to put shoulder straps
on their shoulders in accordance with the official ‘table of ranks.’” Today, everyone working in the Defense Ministry wears a uniform.
The excerpt goes on to describe how Shoigu even suggested “introducing a unified standard of clothing for defense workers within industry,” but
this proposal was not supported by “the chiefs of the major firms in the Russian military-industrial complex, [which are] subordinate to completely
different departments.” The author concludes by discussing that uniforms worn during the annual Victory Day parade “present to the amazed
people more and more new models of the military uniform just developed for the next solemn occasion.” He wonders “how much did it cost the
budget?” suggesting that “maybe it’s time to stop… the endless improvement of the military uniform of the Russian army.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Finch)

“… But one thing is certain - under Sergei Kuzhugetovich [Shoigu], the
military constantly changes her appearance.”
Source: Sergey Ischenko, “Форменное безобразие от Сергея Шойгу,” [Uniform disgrace from Sergei Shoigu] Svobodnaya Pressa, 10
August 2020. https://svpressa.ru/war21/article/273042/
You can argue as much as you like about whether our army became stronger under the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation Sergei Shoigu or
not? But one thing is certain - under Sergei Kuzhugetovich, the military constantly changes her appearance. Like a chameleon in the jungle. In any case,
the appearance of the military, which is determined mainly by the military uniform.
For eight years in the ministerial office, Shoigu proved to everyone that in this area he is simply inexhaustible for inventions. And I am not at all inclined
to pay any attention to such trifles as more and more billions of dollars in expenditures since the budget item “Clothing allowance.” As a result, today
Russian officers in everyday life in T-shirts, chewed caps and in baggy winter jackets with hoods, nicknamed by the owners themselves “blankets,”
strongly resemble the soldiers of student construction brigades of the Soviet shock five-year plans. And in the ceremonial formation - for the actors of the
provincial performance with homemade decorations about the Imperial Guard….
… it turned out that any civilian clothes seemed to the new minister in the corridors of the military department as simply disgusting. Whether male or
female. Therefore, a year later, in 2013, Shoigu ordered all civil servants subordinate to him to put shoulder straps on their shoulders in accordance with
the official “table of ranks.”
…The first to appear in public in August 2013 in a new dress were the civilian deputy defense ministers Tatyana Shevtsova and Anatoly Antonov (the
current Russian ambassador to the United States)….
…In 2016, during one of the summer meetings via videoconference, Shoigu was upset at the sight of the frivolous suits of some of the leaders of the
defense industry. Some of them were in T-shirts. On that hot day, Sergei Kuzhugetovich had the idea to develop a special paramilitary uniform for them.
The question of introducing a unified standard of clothing “ for defense workers” was brought up to the board of the Ministry of Defense. Collegium
- how amazing, right? - unanimously spoke in favor. But again, as one might suppose, below came the dull murmur of the chiefs of the flagships of the
Russian military-industrial complex, subordinate to completely different departments. In any case, not one of them in uniform has been seen yet….
Against this background, no one, in my opinion, should be surprised that almost every new Victory Parade presents to the amazed people more and more
new models of the military uniform just developed for the next solemn occasion.… The ceremonial crews of the battalions lined up on Red Square were
also dressed up in the same costumes as those of the minister. Don’t even try to imagine: how much did it cost the budget? …
…How else? If you frolic so non-stop for years in the field of the endless improvement of the military uniform of the Russian army, there will definitely not
be enough money for the army. Maybe it’s time to stop?

OE Watch | October 2020

16

EURASIA
Back to School at the Russian General Staff
OE Watch Commentary: Like many other countries, Russians value
the importance of a good education, and this same status is reflected in
their military education system. A recent article in the military weekly,
Nezavisimoye Voennoye Obozreniye (NVO), describes the opening ceremony
within the military’s most advanced institution of higher education, the
Military Academy of the General Staff (Военная академия Генерального
штаба) (VAGS), where, according to its website (https://vagsh.mil.ru/)
the “main task is to prepare officers with the highest military operationalstrategic training and specialists in the field of defense and national security
of the Russian Federation.” A few of the observations from the NVO article
merit closer attention.
The author begins by quoting Defense Minister S. Shoigu, who recently Military Academy of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia.
Source: http://function.mil.ru/news_page/person/more.htm?id=12041696@egNews CCA 4.0 Intl
stated that “the success of solving the tasks facing the Armed Forces
depends on the broad outlook, comprehensive education and military skill of
the command staff.” It then points out that “the academy has created 16 military-scientific schools in the current areas of development of military
science and military art.” The article asserts that those who teach in the academy are “highly qualified [where] more than 60 percent …have
combat experience.”
The academy has also developed special courses for foreign officers, and quoting the Chief of the General Staff, V. Gerasimov, “more than 4
thousand representatives of foreign countries have been trained,… [and where] today, officers and generals from 35 states will start their studies
at the special faculty, which is almost twice as much as last year.” The article goes on to quote the head of the academy, who asserts that “unlike
NATO military educational standards, which are limited to the tactical level, the academy provides students with the highest level of operational
and strategic training.” The academy does not merely confine itself to purely military theory, but has formed a “partnership with the civilian
sector,” to include “representatives of executive authorities, heads of constituent entities of the Russian Federation and heads of the militaryindustrial complex.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…The success of solving the tasks facing the Armed Forces depends on the broad
outlook, comprehensive education and military skill of the command staff…”
Source: Irina Dronina, “В Военной академии Генерального штаба начался новый учебный год,” [A new academic year has begun at the
Military Academy of the General Staff] Nezavisimoye Voennoye Obozreniye, 1 September 2020. https://nvo.ng.ru/nvoevents/2020-09-01/100_
nvo01092020.html
The new academic year has begun not only for schoolchildren and students; combatants and honored students of the Military Academy of the
General Staff (VAGS) of the RF Armed Forces sat down at their desks. The Russian army is one of the most powerful in the world, and the knowledge,
professionalism and talent of the leadership contribute to this in many respects. “The success of solving the tasks facing the Armed Forces depends on the
broad outlook, comprehensive education and military skill of the command staff,” Defense Minister General of the Army Sergei Shoigu said at a board
meeting at the National Defense Management Center of the Russian Federation on the eve of the new academic year.
Sergei Shoigu noted that the VAGS has extensive experience in the training of management personnel. For the development and professional growth of
senior command personnel, the academy has created 16 military-scientific schools in the current areas of development of military science and military
art, which contribute to the high-quality training of specialists in the field of managing the military organization of the state….
Classes are taught by highly qualified teachers and scientists, more than 60 percent of whom have combat experience…Students are trained at three
faculties: national security and state defense, retraining and advanced training, a special faculty.
…The course of study under the program “National Security and Defense of the State” covers a two-year period, under the program “Military Security
of the State” with an interpreter, it is possible to prepare for three, five or ten months.
…Valery Gerasimov also noted at the initiation ceremony that the Academy is in demand at the international level. “Within these walls, more than 4
thousand representatives of foreign countries have been trained, and many of them have been appointed in their countries to senior government and
military positions. Today, officers and generals from 35 states will start their studies at the special faculty, which is almost twice as much as last year,”
said the Chief of the General Staff.
…According to the head of the VAGS, Colonel-General Vladimir Zarudnitsky, unlike NATO military educational standards, which are limited to the
tactical level, the academy provides students with the highest level of operational and strategic training….
…VAGS is the only higher military educational institution that trains specialists at the strategic level of management, and not only for the Armed Forces.
To ensure military security, partnership with the civilian sector is important, in connection with which representatives of executive authorities, heads
of constituent entities of the Russian Federation and heads of the military-industrial complex undergo training and advanced training. At present, the
strategic management of the development of enterprises belonging to the defense industry complex is one of the most important areas of strengthening
Russia’s defense capability.

OE Watch | October 2020

17

EURASIA
The Russian BMP-3 Is Not Ready for the Scrap Yard
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has a long track record of upgrading and modernizing combat systems for greater savings and effectiveness.
The BMP-3 entered the Soviet ground forces inventory in 1987 and has a proven combat record as an infantry fighting vehicle. The new BMP-3
will be able to function more effectively with modern tanks and artillery, and its survivability and lethality is enhanced. Older BMP-3s can be
upgraded with the new Epokha unmanned universal combat module which is featured on the tracked Kurganets chassis. The upgraded BMP-3
has also been fitted with the new Berezhok turret, which is also going on the upgraded BMP-2. The BMP-3 has a three-man crew, but Russia is
attempting to develop the Epokha module to the point where the commander will handle the weapons as well: this potentially could allow for a
two-man crew. The enhanced BMP-3 will eventually be replaced by the Kurganets-25 infantry fighting vehicle. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

“The BMP-3 vehicles that will be delivered to the

troops have a significantly different configuration than
the base model. The vehicles will receive additional
protection against antitank missiles and the latest
optronic surveillance devices with a laser spotlight.”

BMP-3 with Epokha turret.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin , https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Exhibition-pavilions/i-DjMc6Ds/A

OE Watch | October 2020

18

EURASIA
Continued: The BMP-3 Is Not Ready For the Scrap Yard
Source: Anton Lavrov and Roman Kretsul “ Infantry Fighting Vehicles to receive New Protection, Powerful Laser “, Izvestia, https://
iz.ru/1044448/anton-lavrov-roman-kretcul/shchit-i-luch-boevye-mashiny-pekhoty-poluchat-novuiu-zashchitu-i-moshchnyi-lazer , 6 August
2020
Infantry Fighting Vehicles to receive New Protection, Powerful Laser
More BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicles will reinforce the Southern Military District. The Defense Ministry has signed an additional delivery contract for
168 BMP-3s. This version has enhanced protection against antitank missiles. The vehicle will also receive modern optronic surveillance devices and an
advanced laser spotlight for the conduct of nighttime combat. The updated BMP will enter service this year….
The contract between the Defense Ministry and the KBP AO [Joint Stock Company] for the acquisition of armored vehicles has become one of the
largest in recent years. The Military Department purchased 168 BMP-3 vehicles for more than 14 billion rubles with a delivery scheduled for 2021. The
agreement is already being fulfilled. This year the troops will receive 53 combat vehicles. And another 115 in the next year. This is sufficient to reequip
five to six motorized rifle battalions….
The BMP-3 contract became part of a large-scale plan of the military department for the rearmament of the ground troops with modern equipment.
According to the Defense Ministry’s information, thanks to mass procurements from 2012 through 2019, the share of new and upgraded weapons in the
ground forces has risen from 15 to 51.6 percent. The [State Armaments Plan 2020 signed in 2010] plans to bring this share to 70 percent by this years
end.
According to military expert Viktor Murakhovskiy, the Southern Military District traditionally is the first to receive all the most modern models of
weapons. “The district is considered to be one of the most important in terms of the threats near Russia’s borders. Suffice it to recall the famous events in
Ukraine, an increase in the intensity and scale of NATO exercises in the Black Sea waters and on the territories of neighboring countries, events in Syria,
an increase in tensions between Azerbaijan and Armenia, and significant efforts by Turkey to develop its armed forces. This is a strategically important
area, where it is necessary to ensure the security of our country.
The Ground Forces have been updated more slowly in recent years, compared to the aviation and the Navy. But now the process of rearmament with the
latest equipment has reached them as well Murakhovskiy noted.
The BMP-3 vehicles that will be delivered to the troops have a significantly different configuration than the base model. The vehicles will receive
additional protection against antitank missiles and the latest optronic surveillance devices with a laser spotlight.
According to Murakhovskiy,”The BMP-3 is a fairly modern vehicle. And if we implement existing ideas to increase firepower and protection, this
equipment will reach quite a modern level. It will seriously strengthen the potential of the Southern Military District. We must realize that when the
district troops have modern T-90A and T-72B3 tanks, but the BMP vehicles remain obsolete, it does not contribute to the effective use of other models of
equipment. Everything has to be balanced. Even with the most modern artillery systems and other weapons, the lag in the development of the BMP will
put the entire grouping at disadvantage.”
Mounted hinged protection will be the most striking change on the new BMP. The vehicles are equipped with a set of removable screens and slat armor.
Developed by the Steel Research Institute, they should reliably cover not only the hull, but also the turret. Such “transparent armor” destroys antitank
grenades and missiles that strike the vehicle before they can explode and harm it.
Additional reactive armor can also be installed on the BMP-3. The manufacturer previously demonstrated a version of the vehicle with hinged “soft”
armor for operations in the cities. It makes it possible to destroy the cumulative jet by detonating the explosives housed in soft covers on the armored
vehicles.
The machines produced under the state contract will also receive updated optics and electronics, compared to the original version. Not only the gunner,
but also the commander will have modern night vision thermal imaging devices.
The nighttime combat capability will also be increased thanks to the PL-1-01 laser spotlight. It highlights targets in the infrared range for night-vision
devices. At the same time, its emission remains almost invisible to the naked eye from a distance of 100 m.
The Ministry of Defense received around 200 new BMP-3 vehicles for Ground Forces re-equipment in 2015-2017. In the following two years, a contract
was executed for the production of a comparable batch. They had improvements in comparison with the Soviet models, but were purchased without
additional protection kits.
Equipping the older BMP-3 model upgrades with a fundamentally different combat module is being developed. The existing turret can be replaced with
the Epokha universal combat module. Its armament includes a 57-mm caliber automatic cannon and the Kornet antitank long-range guided missile. In
terms of their armor penetration, they are nearly twice as good as the standard Arkan antitank guided missile, launched through a 100-mm cannon.
There are also effective modern observation devices in the module.
The serial production of the heavily armored BMP began in 1987. In the post-Soviet period, the latest and most powerful BMP-3 vehicles of the time
quickly became the most popular export commodity. Over 1,500 of these vehicles were exported abroad. In the 1990s, the United Arab Emirates received
815 units via several contracts. Kuwait acquired another 122 vehicles. This armored equipment was also purchased by Cyprus and South Korea.
Later, in the 2000s, BMP-3 sales contracts were concluded with Azerbaijan, Venezuela, and Indonesia. Yet Iraq holds the record, having ordered 500
combat vehicles at once, in order to revive the national army and to combat terrorists.

OE Watch | October 2020

19

EURASIA
Rolling Out Russia’s New BMP-2M
OE Watch Commentary: The BMP-2M is part of the Russian military’s push to modernize 70% of its equipment by the end of this year. It has
been up-engined, up-armored, up-gunned and has a new sighting system and communications. Part of the package is the Berezhok, unmanned
turret system. The word berezhok means a little bit of beach or shoreline and could refer to the amphibious capabilities of the BMP-2M. The BMP2M is certainly an improvement, and Algeria and India are having their BMP-2s upgraded in the same program. End OE Watch Commentary
(Grau)

BMP-2M with B05Ya01 Berezhok turret.

Source: https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/Victory-Day-Rehearsal-in-Moscow-17-June-2020/i-GxsjQv9

“In the next two years, the Defense Ministry will receive over
120 of the latest BMP-2M Infantry fighting vehicles with the
Berezhok turret. This is enough to equip no fewer than four
motorized rifle battalions. It is expected that all the vehicles
will be sent to the Western Military District.”

OE Watch | October 2020

20

EURASIA
Continued: Rolling Out Russia’s New BMP-2M
Source: Anton Lavrov and Roman Kretcul, “Army receives first battalion sets of the new BMP-2M with the Berezhok turret”, Izvestia, https://
iz.ru/1055498/anton-lavrov-roman-kretcul/krutoi-berezhok-armiia-poluchit-pervye-batalony-novykh-bmp-2m, 2 September 2020
Army receives first battalion sets of the new BMP-2M with the Berezhok turret
In the next two years, the Defense Ministry will receive over 120 of the latest BMP-2M Infantry fighting vehicles with the Berezhok turret.
This is enough to equip no fewer than four motorized rifle battalions. It is expected that all the vehicles will be sent to the Western Military
District. The vehicle is equipped with a whole arsenal of weapons -- the Kornet antitank missile system, a machine gun, a 30-mm cannon,
and even an automatic grenade launcher. The updated combat vehicle is also equipped with the most modern optronic systems, onboard
computers, and digital sensors. According to experts, the BMP-2M with the Berezhok is now the most powerful infantry fighting vehicle in the
composition of the Russian Armed Forces.
According to the contract…the military will receive 124 BMP-2M with the Berezhok turret before the end of the 2022 year. The first batch of
updated combat vehicles may arrive as early as 2020. The BMP-2M is part of a complete overhaul of the BMP-2 infantry fighting vehicle...
The result is entirely new equipment… In addition to the Berezhok module new turbo-powered engines will be installed on the updated
vehicles, the suspension will be improved, and the armor will be enhanced…
Currently there are several dozen BMP-2M vehicles with the Berezhok turret in the army. Their experimental-troop employment and final
tests have been ongoing since 2018. They were shown at the 24 June parade in Moscow….
According to military expert Aleksei Khlopotov, the BMP-2M features significantly enhanced combat performance, new sighting systems and
thermal imaging devices installed. It is armed with newer and more powerful missiles. “Previously, before battle, it was necessary to get the
guided missile from the storage compartment, to reach out, and to install it on the rail. During the fight, the munition was quite vulnerable, as
it was protected only by a plastic case. The new vehicle carries four launchers of the latest Kornet missile with a tandem warhead. They are
capable of penetrating vehicles fitted with active armor. The missiles are protected against bullets and fragments with armored shields. The
missiles are now integrated with the fire control system. The updated BMP-2 has acquired a “long reach” of a sorts, and is now capable of
destroying tanks at a distance of five kilometers. It has improved search capabilities. And the 30-mm automatic cannon has been equipped
with an all-weather sighting system.
According to the developers’ data, the upgraded BMP-2M surpasses the American Bradley two fold, in terms of combat effectiveness, and
four fold over the original version of the BMP-2. This improvement was achieved thanks to the Berezhok turret, developed on the basis of an
ordinary turret of the BMP-2. In addition to the 30-mm cannon and coaxial machine gun, it now has four Kornet-E antitank missiles systems
mounted. Further, an automatic grenade launcher capable of conducting arching trajectory fire is included.
Depending on the model, the Kornet guided missiles can destroy ground and air targets at distances from 5 to 10 kilometers. Their 1,200-mm
armor penetration capability is sufficient to destroy any modern tank even if struck in the frontal armor... The possibility of overcoming the
latest enemy active protection systems by intercepting incoming is envisaged as well. In order to do this, the Berezhok fires two missiles at the
same target with a second-long interval. Even if the first missile is intercepted, the second one will hit the target.
Unlike the standard issue Konkurs antitank missile system for the BMP-2, the new missiles can be fired while on the move. They are no
longer linked by, as the new missiles are guided by a laser beam. If necessary, the Kornet systems are also capable of striking low-speed
airborne targets at low altitudes -- helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles, as well as buildings. For this purpose, the arsenal includes not
only armor-piercing, but also powerful thermobaric munitions.
The 30-mm automatic grenade launcher is much more effective than a BMP cannon when targeting the infantry, hiding in trenches or behind
shelters. Its maximum range is up to two kilometers with the new grenades.
The commander and the gunner have separate sights with night and thermal observation channels. The weapons and observation devices
are stabilized and can automatically hold the target in the sights day and night, as well as when on the move. The modern laser rangefinder
determines the distance to it up to 10 km away.
New Equipment
The BMP-2M with Berezhok turret was exhibited at the Army-2020 forum with a set of additional protection. It featured slat and applique
armor that protect the vehicle body against bullets from heavy-caliber machine guns and can withstand a hit by RPG-7 antitank grenades.
The weight of this kit is around one ton. It can be installed and dismantled by the crew.
The new diesel UTD-23 turbocharged engine is one-third stronger than the one installed in the pre-upgrade version. It achieves 400
horsepower. The high-power hydraulic shock-absorbers and reinforced bogeys make it possible to cope with the heavier BMP-2M carrying
increased protection. Rubber-metal tracks serve longer and cause less damage to roadways.
Its communications equipment has also been updated. The vehicles will receive the R-168 Akveduk modern digital radio station with
increased range and improved quality of communications. The ability to connect the BMP to modern automated combat operations control
systems is yet another important feature.
OE Watch | October 2020

21

EURASIA
Russia Conducts Fourth Arctic Riverine Exercise
OE Watch Commentary: The Northern Fleet is well into its summer training and the Northern Sea Route is ice free. The fleet conducted its
fourth Arctic Riverine exercise in five years up the Yenisei River to the port of Dudinka. Last year’s exercise was the largest ever—involving
ground forces, airborne forces, four SU-24 jets and an airborne tanker, the Ministry of Situations, and the Federal Penitentiary Ministry, and
it involved four times as many land combat vehicles (including T-80BVM tanks and BM-21 MRLS) than previous exercises. Arctic riverine
exercises are becoming routine for the Russian military, as are Arctic amphibious landings. Of interest is the exclusion of the sea tug Pamir
from the Riverine exercise. The Yenisei River current is strong and tugs were used in past exercises to keep the large amphibious landing ships
at right angles to the beach. Evidently, for this exercise, the fleet had confidence in keeping the landing ships aligned during disembarking and
embarking. The Russian Navy is also gaining skills in conducting shipboard artillery fire in a strong current. Readers may want to read “The
Russians Train for Arctic Riverine Operations” in the November 2019 Marine Corps Gazette https://mca-marines.org/wp-content/uploads/ArcticRiverine-Operations.pdf. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The exercise began with the conduct of an airstrike against the notional

terrorists’ positions. Then the AK-100 batteries of the Severomorsk’s and the AK725 batteries of the Kondopoga and the Aleksandr Otrakovskiy opened fire on the
aggressor coastal positions to suppress their fire.”
Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Eight Russian navy ships make ready for ice-free Northern Sea Route”, Barents Sea Independent Observer, https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2020/07/eight-russian-navy-ships-sail-ice-free-northern-sea-route, 31 July 2020
Eight Russian navy ships make ready for ice-free Northern Sea Route
This is the ninth year in a row that Russian Navy ships sail the Northern Sea Route. Destinations and port-calls are not yet announced, but traditionally
the annual flotilla sails all east to Kotelny Island, where Russia has one of its new Arctic bases. Kotelny is part of the New Siberian Islands in the Laptev
Sea in the eastern sector of the Northern Sea Route. This year, the voyage will not be challenged by sea-ice. Already by 20th July, there were completely
open waters across the Northern Sea Route. Normally, ice used to pack north of the Taymyr Peninsula, but for the 2020 season ships will find open waters
across the vast seaway.
Additional to Severomorsk news, the two landing ships Kondopoga and Aleksandr Otrakovsky will be sailing, as well as the new navy icebreaker Ilya
Muromets, the tanker Sergey Osipov, the minesweeper Vladimir Gumanenko and the rescue tugboat Pamir. Together with the crane ship KIL-143 all
these vessels trained together in the Barents Sea, but returned to port in Severomorsk, making ready for the Arctic voyage, according to the press service
of the Northern Fleet.
Several of the vessels participated in previous years’ voyage where live-fire exercises, amphibious landings, and anti-terror drills were conducted at
locations like Dudinka and the Kotelny Islands.
Source: Anton Alekseyev, “Severomorsk leads the Formation”, Krasnaya Zvezda, http://redstar.ru/severomorsk-vozglavlyaet-stroj/, 19 August 2020.
Severomorsk leads the Formation
The ships and vessels of the Northern Fleet Arctic Grouping, under the command of Fleet Deputy Commander Vice Admiral Oleg Golubev, continue
sailing along the Northern Maritime Route east to the Bering Sea. They have already conducted combat training at the anchorage in the Port of Dixon.
The transit from the Port of Dixon to Dudinka against the current of the Yenisei River took the Northern Fleet Arctic Group two days. The ships and
vessels sailed along the river channel in formation led by the Large Antisubmarine Warfare Ship Severomorsk with an average speed of approximately
10 knots. The Icebreaker Ilya Muromets and KIL-143 brought up the rear. The Salvage Tug Pamir, the Large Seagoing Tanker Sergey Osipov, and the
Minesweeper Vladimir Gumanenko remained at the Port of Dixon roadstead.
Upon arrival at Dudinka, the Severomorsk anchored at the mooring berth, and the Large Landing Ships Aleksandr Otrakovskiy and Kondopoga dropped
anchor at the port’s roadstead. The leaders of the Taymir Dolgano-Nenetskiy Municipal Rayon and of Dudinka and the city of Norilsk greeted the
Northern Fleet seamen here. After the meeting, they conducted a working session with the Arctic Grouping command authorities on organizational issues
for the conduct of the inter-service tactical exercise to defend the important industrial facility at Taymyr and joint athletic and mass cultural events.
Eight members of the Taymyr Yunarmiya [Young Army-a uniformed patriotic youth group formed to encourage interest in the armed forces], were
rewarded for their achievements in training, discipline, and social activities. They joined the sailors on the transit from Dixon to Dudinka onboard the
ships.
Over the course of two days, the sailors conducted training on the ships’ approach to the river banks and disembarking naval infantry and their
equipment onto an unimproved river front.
The Arctic Grouping’s tactical exercise … took place on 18 August. The Severomorsk, Aleksandr Otrakovskiy and Kondopoga along with naval infantry
and their equipment, and Ka-27 assault helicopters took part.
According to the exercise scenario, the force had to defeat a notional terrorist foothold and to support the landing of the amphibious assault force’s
equipment. The naval infantry would develop the offensive into the depth of the Peninsula’s territory to defend the important industrial facility in the
Arctic.
The exercise began with the conduct of an airstrike against the notional terrorists’ positions. Then the AK-100 batteries of the Severomorsk’s and the
AK-725 batteries of the Kondopoga and the Aleksandr Otrakovskiy opened fire on the aggressor coastal positions to suppress their fire. Then the subunits
of naval infantrymen, who provided security for the teams of military engineers, who were transported to the coast on fast boats to clear lanes through
mine fields and prepare the equipment landing area, landed on the beach from Ka-27 helicopters.
The Kondopoga and Aleksandr Otrakovskiy approached the beach when everything was ready for landing the amphibious assault force’s equipment.
More than 20 wheeled and tracked vehicles were landed using the “thrust” method from the ships’ tween-decks: BTR-82A personnel carriers, 2S1
“Gvozdika” 122mm self-propelled howitzers, and TTM-4902 PS-10 tracked, amphibious articulated transport vehicles….

OE Watch | October 2020

22

EURASIA
Brigade Field Training in Russia’s Eastern Military District
OE Watch Commentary: The 38th Guards Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade (Belogorsk, Amur District) and the 64th Separate Motor Rifle
Brigade (Knyaze-Volkonskoye, Khaborovski Region) conducted a combination of force-on-force and live-fire training exercise, moving east-west
along the Chinese border in the Russian Far East. The force-on-force involved movement to contact, river crossings, mobile defense, artillery
targeting, electronic jamming, road construction, as well as aerial, electronic and ground reconnaissance. Live fire was conducted on training area
ranges. A lot of the equipment used was state of the art, but the Eastern Military District sometimes lags in getting the latest equipment. The air
defense included the venerable ZSU 23-4 Shilka. Still, Russia is determined to meet its ground forces goal of 70% new equipment by the end of
2020. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“when subunits of the motorized rifle brigade prepared for combat on

the swampy woodland terrain of Trekhrech’ye Range, commanders laid
several new roads in the marshes and sent subunits across bodies of water
using ferries and amphibious transporters to achieve surprise.”

ZSU-23-4 Shilka.

Source: https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/MsSVU/i-6wVWKX7/A

OE Watch | October 2020

23

EURASIA
Continued: Brigade Field Training in Russia’s Eastern Military District
Source: Konstantin Lobkov, “ Trekhrech’ye and Bidzhan tested the Motorized Riflemen “, Krasnaya Zvezda, http://redstar.ru/motostrelkovproverili-tryohreche-i-bidzhan/, 12 August 2020
Trekhrech’ye and Bidzhan Tested the Motorized Riflemen
Two brigades of the 35th Combined-Arms Army opposed each other on two ranges. Practice battles and tactical actions were conducted over one and
one-half weeks on a vast territory intersected by woods and small round top mountains in the Bureyskiy Rayon of Amurskaya Oblast and in Leninskiy
Rayon of Jewish Autonomous Oblast. Here two Eastern Military District separate motorized rifle brigades under the command of Colonels Andrey
Kurbanov and Andrey Golubkov interacted in a near-real situation.
Colonel Pavel Lopanov, chief of staff of the exercise directorate stated that over 4,000 servicemen were called out on a practice alert prior to the
beginning of the exercise. Subunits and staffs moved out to Bidzhan Range in the Jewish Autonomous Oblast and Trekhrech’ye Range in Priamur’ye in
order for the two brigades to oppose each other in a mutual tactical exercise. Covert troop movement was practiced. Troops moved on main and lateral
roads under the cover of tactical air defense weapons.
During the movement to the training areas, military engineers of one of the brigades launched a dummy bridge to deceive a simulated enemy and
conducted a fast ferry crossing for a reinforced tank battalion across a water obstacle in the vicinity of Trekhrech’ye Range. According to the exercise
scenario, enemy forces had used a precision weapon strike to destroy the main bridge, the floodplain of which also proved to be an impassable sector.
Considering the danger of a repeat strike being delivered, engineers suggested using a pneumatic radar reflector as a bridge simulation while the main
crossing was conducted on another axis using sections of a PMP engineer floating bridge. This ferry crossing covertly moved heavy equipment on the
PMP sections, while personnel and other equipment moved on amphibious transporters.
Cover of the crossing against an “enemy” air raid was organized using Shilka self-propelled antiaircraft mounts and Igla shoulder-fired air defense
missiles. As a result of well-coordinated actions, around 100 pieces of equipment, including over 30 T-80BV tanks, crossed to the other bank in less than
two hours.
Subsequently, when subunits of the motorized rifle brigade prepared for combat on the swampy woodland terrain of Trekhrech’ye Range, commanders
laid several new roads in the marshes and sent subunits across bodies of water using ferries and amphibious transporters to achieve surprise.
Great attention was given to covert troop movement in areas difficult to negotiate, to the actions of reconnaissance patrols, and to employing tanks and
artillery in the limited expanse of forest roads…..
One of the exercise episodes in Amurskaya Oblast was the destruction of “enemy” command posts and an equipment concentration. They were detected
by reconnaissance teams up to 20 kilometers away using Strelets reconnaissance, command and control, and communications complexes (KRUS) that
recently arrived in the unit. On receiving coordinates, artillerymen conducted firing calculations and fired a Grad BM-21 multiple rocket launcher salvo
against detected targets. Immediately after this, they changed positions to avoid retaliatory counterfire.
The tankers, recently armed with T-80BV tanks along with other district units, were conspicuous during the exercise. During the combined-arms combat
on Trekhrech’ye Range, motorized rifle formation subunits inflicted damage on a simulated enemy’s troop grouping of a superior size. But the tank
battalion, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Vladimir Ivanov, was the main mobile striking force.
The motorized rifle brigade headquarters organized a mobile defense in the forest and on swampy terrain, engaging attacking “enemy” forces by fire on
the lines from all kinds of weapons and executing swift counterattacks by tank armored groups. Takhion UAVs and ground reconnaissance equipment,
including the Strelets KRUS, provided complete monitoring of the tactical situation.
The brigade was able to disrupt the system of command and control of “enemy” subunits by putting a station of the Borisoglebsk-2 complex into
operation. A total of over 2,000 servicemen and around 400 pieces of armored, automotive, and special military equipment, including Grad MLRS and
Akatsiya self-propelled howitzers, took part in this portion of the training.
During a tactical exercise with the motorized rifle brigade in early August, an electronic warfare [EW] subunit on Bidzhan Range in the Jewish
Autonomous Oblast comprehensively worked out new methods of opposing offensive air weapons and commando teams of the simulated enemy.
According to the exercise scenario, the “enemy” employed guided missiles and precision artillery projectiles to destroy the motorized rifle formation
command post. He also used commando teams with radio equipment for vectoring targets and adjusting fire.
EW specialists used the Rtut-BM modernized proximity fuze jammer and other systems including the Borisoglebsk-2 special equipment that arrived
recently. These were used to create a protective cupola above the electronically-guarded terrain sector, where artillery proximity fuses were disabled
at a safe distance. Using the Borisoglebsk-2, soldiers were able to scan for and suppress operation of radio equipment and also determine the location
of “enemy” commando and artillery observer teams. Major troop groupings opposed each other on the two ranges over the course of ten days. The
opposed-forces tactical exercise ended with a live-fire phase including mobile combat.
….The brigade commanders’ expanded their use of their automated command and control systems, UAVs, and teams for combating UAVs. The command
and control system that largely had been organized on Azart system radio equipment has been upgraded.
According to Col Lopanov, the 35th Army exercise staff used the opposed-forces brigade tactical exercise to analyze the brigade commanders’ decisions,
study their decisions chosen methods and forms of employing subunits, observe their mathematical modeling and determination of the best method of
executing a mission and conducting mobile live fire actions on the ranges.
Colonel Lopanov stated that “The final phase was distinguished by live fire with the employment of motorized rifle, artillery, and tank subunits and of
short-range and medium-range reconnaissance-fire complexes. It was held at a high tempo of modern combined-arms combat.”
Problems of the actions of tank subunits and their execution of lightning-swift counterattacks and raids into the depth of the enemy defense, and of the
organization of tank ambushes using Strelets KRUS reconnaissance complexes and Takhion UAVs were worked thoroughly during the exercise. Special
attention was given to mastering new reconnaissance, electronic warfare, and communications assets. New tactics were used in employing subunits and
their deception and camouflage measures….

OE Watch | October 2020

24

EURASIA
Russia Increasing Northern Fleet Year-Around
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: Russia has 41 active icebreakers with 13 under construction. Russia also has world’s largest icebreakers and the
most nuclear-powered icebreakers. Most are assigned to the Russian maritime fleet and can readily be converted into armed military icebreakers
in time of crisis. But the Northern Fleet wants more of its own icebreakers immediately available in times of crisis and calm. The border control
forces also need their own purpose-built icebreakers. Russia is already paying plenty for crushed ice, but it is also building her seaborne logistics
capability in conjunction with its 346 acre military logistics center being built near Arkhangelsk [see: “Major Investment in Arctic Logistics,” OE
Watch, July 2019]. As the accompanying article points out, the CONEX container weapons systems can be put onto any vessel converting it into
military strike or air defense vessel [see: “Russian Navy Adopting Modular ‘Shipping Container-Based’ Weapons,” OE Watch, August 2020]. Of
further interest is the mention that the Belomorsk [White Sea] naval base may become the headquarters of an arctic flotilla. Belomorsk is heavily
engaged in ship and submarine repairs and test firings of weapons systems. A de facto flotilla of Northern Fleet surface ships has frequently been
featured in summer training exercises of the Northern Fleet. Belomorsk always seems to be involved in their command and control. End OE
Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The formation of a grouping of auxiliary vessels

and combat icebreakers in the Arctic Region will be
completed in 2028...Quite a few new combat ships will
be assigned to the Northern Fleet during this period.
Currently, the Northern Fleet is Russia’s most powerful
and most active fleet.”

Yamal and other Russian Icebreakers.

Source: Christopher Michel / CC BY (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0); https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Yamal_and_other_Russian_Icebreakers_(19619184325).jpg

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign
militaries. While this activity gained attention, it
has not been collectively compiled. A compilation
of this activity can serve as a guide for current and
future military and security involvement in Central
Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | October 2020

25

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Increasing Northern Fleet Year-Around
Capabilities
Source: Anton Lavrov and Dmitry Boltenkov, “The North Will Obtain a Powerful Icebreaker Grouping by 2028”, Izvestia, https://
iz.ru/1045486/dmitrii-boltenkov-anton-lavrov/oborona-po-flotski-k-2028-godu-sever-poluchit-moshchnuiu-ledokolnuiu-gruppirovku, 9
August 2020.
The North Will Obtain a Powerful Icebreaker Grouping by 2028
The formation of a grouping of auxiliary vessels and combat icebreakers in the Arctic Region will be completed in 2028...Quite a few new combat ships
will be assigned to the Northern Fleet during this period. Currently, the Northern Fleet is Russia’s most powerful and most active fleet.
Prior to 1914, Russia did not have any military forces in its arctic possessions. The Arctic Ocean Flotilla was created during the First World War.
Russia began to explore the northern latitudes and to build cities and ports beyond the Arctic Circle. The Port of Romanov-na-Murmane was built, now
known as the Hero-City Murmansk.
The USSR began the active exploration of the Arctic Ocean and the search for, development, and production of raw materials in the Polar Region. As
a result, two missions were assigned to the Soviet Northern Fleet during the Great Patriotic War. The first - the acceptance and defense of convoys with
cargo, which arrived from the Allies in the Anti-Hitler Coalition. Second - ensuring the transportation of cargo along the waters of the Northern Sea
Route. Problems hindered these missions. There was not a military ship basing system in the Arctic and there were no special military ships, capable of
operations in ice. The navy had to send converted icebreaker-type vessels and fishing trawlers into battle.
After the end of World War II, the Arctic Ocean became a Cold War arena between the USSR and NATO. NATO and the Warsaw Pact planned to fight in
arctic waters using only submarines. Neither side built any special military ships for combat in ice-choked waters. The Northern Fleet’s surface forces of
the postwar period were oriented more on operations in the Atlantic. In the event of hostilities, mobilized civilian vessels were to provide the security and
support of shipping in the Northern Sea Route….
The change of the climatic conditions in the Arctic, the presence of significant Arctic oil, gas and mineral reserves, and the increased attention by a
number of countries to the
Arctic created the need to increase Russian military presence on those territories, which the Russian Federation considers in its zone of interests and
influence.
As a result, unprecedented military construction began in the most difficult climatic-geographic conditions. Besides the creation of outposts on the
islands and training special arctic ground troops, Russia is actively building a military fleet, which has been adapted for operations in the northern
latitudes.
The New Fleet
At the present time, two Project 23550 Icebreakers - the Ivan Papanin and the Nikolay Zubov are being built at the “Leningrad Admiralty Association”
in St. Petersburg. They are capable of accomplishing the missions of a combat ship, an icebreaker, and a tug. They carry a broad spectrum of systems
including naval guns, helicopters and assault boats. Containerized weapons systems can be accommodated on these ships so that they will become fullfledged combat icebreakers….The Papanin is the largest combat ship launched in the post-Soviet period....Besides breaking ice, combat icebreakers can
interdict unauthorized foreign combat ships in the waters of the Northern Sea Route.
….Ships, outpost and garrisons require petroleum, oil, and lubricants….The Project 23130 Medium Tanker Academic Pashin joined the Northern Fleet
at the beginning of 2020. It was not only the first tanker that was built for the Navy for several decades but also received everything necessary for
operations in arctic conditions….Two Project 03182 small tankers are being built in Vladivostok. They are multipurpose arctic vessel platforms developed
to transport various cargo and to participate in search and rescue and emergency response operations.
Simple icebreakers are also needed to support the deployment of ships and submarines. The first of them - the Project 21180 Ilya Muromets – is assigned
to the Northern Fleet. The icebreaker Yevpatiy Kolovrat is being built for the Pacific Fleet’s Kamchatka Grouping. Besides the primary mission of
breaking a path in the ice, they can also accomplish an extensive spectrum of missions, such as supply and scientific activity.
The Western sanctions caused serious adjustments in the schedule for the construction of ships and vessels. The cable-laying vessels Volga and Vyatka,
which are needed to construct various underwater communications and surveillance systems, have been stuck on the Zaliv shipyard’s boat slips. Russia
will have to resolve the issue of the development of underwater cable laying systems.
The Russian Navy plans to deploy new robotic combat systems for use in the Arctic waters. One of them is known as Garmoniya. The deployment of
surveillance and other underwater objects will become its mission. It will also provide for the defense of both Russian submarine cruisers with ballistic
missiles and our territories from the surprise launch of cruise missiles from under the water. The 20180 family of vessels are being built for these systems
deployment. The first of them - the Ice Class Oceanographic Vessel the Academic Aleksandrov” - is ready.
Other ships and vessels are also being created and developed for sailing under Arctic conditions. Moreover, the auxiliary vessels that are being built are
multifunctional and capable of accomplishing a wide range of missions.
The Russian Border Service has also ordered two slightly-modified combat icebreakers, which are similar to the Ivan Papanin. In Soviet times, the
border fleet was considered part of the Navy’s reserve in the event of war. Therefore, the border guards received practically the same ships as the navy,
which were not optimum for peace time border missions. Missiles, sea mines and torpedoes were not required. In the post-Soviet period, the border
guards are now ordering the ships they need, which have little in common with the ships of the new Russian Navy. The keel of the First Border Guards
icebreaker- the Purga was laid on 25 July 2020 in Vyborg.
The mass media previously reported that the testing of CONEX-container-concealed missile systems will begin in the Northern Fleet in the near future.
These are particularly significant for vessels of various civilian departments during mobilization. Having a supply of these container systems can
substantially increase the Northern Fleet’s fighting strength in a crisis period.
The Belomorsk Naval Base is part of the Northern Fleet. The Northern Fleet plans to create an arctic flotilla to conduct combat in the waters of the
Arctic Ocean. At the present time, the base supports the repair, construction, and testing of combat ships and submarines….

OE Watch | October 2020

26

EURASIA
Turkey Inaugurates Space Technology Center
OE Watch Commentary: Roketsan, one of
Turkey’s largest defense companies, has started
developing liquid-propellant rocket engine
technology, with hopes of putting Turkey into
space with a domestically made rocket. During the
inauguration ceremony of the center that would
develop and produce this technology, the Turkish
President announced that Turkey is “set to begin
the first space trials of our domestically developed
liquid-propellant rocket engine technology.” The
accompanying article provides insight into Turkey’s
announcement of developing this new technology.
According to the article, Roketsan’s Space
Technologies and Advanced Technologies Research
Center and Explosive Chemicals Raw Material
Manufacturing Plant in the capital Ankara will
carry out development and production of the
liquid-propellant rocket engine technology. Board
Cruise missile SOM-J of Roketsan at IDEF 2015.
Source: Ceegee via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:RoketsanIDEF2015_(11).JPG, CC-BY-SA-4.0
Chairman of Roketsan Prof. Dr. Faruk Yiğit stated
that the center develops advanced technologies such as a micro satellite launch system, precision guided mini and micro weapon systems, artificial
intelligence applications, hypersonic systems, laser weapons and technologies. In the past few years, Turkey has made significant progress in
developing its rocket technology and the Turkish defense industry has already produced short-range missiles and their engines. However, similar
to other ambitious projects Turkey has announced in the past, it is unclear how successfully it will be able carry out this project with domestic
technology. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“It is obvious that the studies on space systems in this center will
contribute to technological developments on strategic weapons,
ammunition and missile systems in our country.” Ismail Demir,
Undersecretary for Defense Industries”

Source: Göksel Yıldırım,“Türkiye savunmada iki yeni tesis kazandı (Turkey added two new defense industry facilities)”Anadolu Ajansı, 30
August 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/turkiye/turkiye-savunmada-iki-yeni-tesis-kazandi/1957983
Turkey, with ROKETSAN Space Technologies and Advanced Technologies Research Center and Explosive Chemicals Raw Material
Manufacturing Plant, has gained significant infrastructure in the defense industry…
Demir stated that in this center project such as the Micro Satellite Launch Project, solid and liquid fuel rocket engines as well as innovative
weapon systems that will be utilized in future warfare and existing missile defense systems are being developed. Demir gave the following
information about the facility:
“It is obvious that the studies on space systems in this center will contribute to technological developments on strategic weapons, ammunition
and missile systems in our country. Thus, foreign dependency in critical explosive technologies will be significantly reduced.”
…
Board Chairman of the Roketsan Prof. Dr. Faruk Yiğit stated that… at the Space Technologies and Advanced Technologies Research
Center the advanced technological studies such as micro satellite launch system, precision guided mini and micro weapon systems, artificial
intelligence applications, hypersonic systems, laser weapons and technologies are being carried out.

OE Watch | October 2020

27

EURASIA
Russian-Military Historical Film Festival Cultivates
OE Watch Commentary: Cultural media like cinema is a powerful tool for inspiring patriotism,
and that may have been the goal behind the second international “Days of Military-Historical Film”
Festival, which ran from 2-6 September in Moscow. It was held at the Victory Museum, an institution
dedicated to the history of the Great Patriotic War (WW II). The primary focus of the festival was to
emphasize the bravery and heroism of Red Army soldiers and the importance of Soviet participation
in WW II, as well as the impact that the legacy of that war has had upon Russian culture in the
decades since.
“We wanted as many people as possible to take part,” said Vladimir Medinsky, former Culture
Minister and now an aide to President Putin and Chairman of the Russian Military Historical Society,
during the festival’s opening ceremony. “I invite Muscovites and guests of the capital to the Victory
Museum.” There were a variety of military history-themed attractions, including an art exhibit called
“Chronical of War,” featuring paintings from Russia as well as Brazil, Israel, and the UK. There was
also a performance called “Operetta at War” by students from the Russian Institute for Theater Arts,
Former Culture Minister, Vladimir Medinsky.
and a piano concert entitled “Songs of Victory Cinema.”
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vladimir_
Medinski_06120_Courcy.JPG, CC-BY-SA-4.0

The main attraction, however, was the cinema itself, much of which centered on films made to
capture the Russian experience of WW II. Directors and producers presented their films, such as “Old Warrior,” which depicts the grief of an aging
veteran of WW I whose sons were lost in the Great Patriotic War. “Learning the Color of War” was also shown, a documentary about artists whose
lives were disrupted and left in tatters by the war. The festival included the first showing a series of films called “Eternal Patriotic,” a synthesis of
historical and archival documentation as well as soldier memoirs, which was produced by the Russian Ministry of Defense.
Perhaps more than any of the other films, “Eternal Patriotic” emphasizes the courage of Red Army soldiers and Heroes of the Soviet Union. The
film was designed specifically to develop and cultivate a spirit of patriotism among Russian youth. Finally, the festival was dedicated to the actor
Sergei Bondarchuk, and a major showcase was his film “They Fought for the Homeland,” which follows soldiers fighting bravely despite being
horrified by the destruction of the war.
WW II holds an enormous place in the consciousness of Russian culture, and since 2020 marks the 75th anniversary of the end of the war, there
has been a great upsurge in commemoration. The Russian government has been avidly encouraging these memorials, promoting cultural media
that will encourage the development and strengthening of patriotism and positive attitudes toward the military, especially among youth. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rodger)

“…We wanted as many people as possible to take in the events of the film

forum, given that all screenings are free. I invite all Muscovites and guests
of the capitol to the Victory Museum… where screenings will be held at
several wonderful venues,” said Vladimir Medinsky, Aide to the President
of Russia, Chairman of the Russian Military Historical Society…”
Source: “Кинофорум военно-исторического кино открылся в Музее Победы [Film Forum of Military-Historical Cinema Opened at the
Victory Museum],” Izvestiya, 3 September 2020. https://iz.ru/1056491/2020-09-03/kinoforum-voenno-istoricheskogo-kino-otkrylsia-v-muzeepobedy
During the festival, which will last until September 6, Igor Ugolnikov, Igor Prokopenko, Leonid Yakubovich will present their films. The
directors and producers of the films “Old Warrior”, “Happiness in an Envelope”, “Learning the Color of War” will present their films to
the public. For the first time, the general public will be shown a cycle of films “Eternal Patriotic”, provided by the Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation.
…“We wanted as many people as possible to take in the events of the film forum, given that all screenings are free. I invite all Muscovites and
guests of the capitol to the Victory Museum… where screenings will be held at several wonderful venues,” said Vladimir Medinsky, Aide to
the President of Russia, Chairman of the Russian Military Historical Society, during the opening ceremony. Russian Minister of Culture Olga
Lyubimova sent her greetings to the participants of the film forum. “It’s great that during the festival, viewers will have the opportunity to…
take part in a large cultural program,” the minister emphasized.
…
Among the partners of the film forum in 2020: the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, the Ministry of Culture of the Russian
Federation, the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation, the Moscow Government and others. The festival is supported by the Presidential
Grants Fund.
OE Watch | October 2020

28

EURASIA
Forming a Militia in Armenia
OE Watch Commentary: The Ministry of Defense of
Armenia has been carrying out several notable reforms of its
armed forces since the April 2016 clashes with Azerbaijan.
Most of the reforms have focused on building up specific
capabilities in the armed forces in order to avoid a similar
situation as the 2016 clashes, which resulted in Azerbaijan
taking control of a few pockets of territory of the occupied
Nagorno Karabakh region. The accompanying excerpted
article reports on a Armenian Ministry of Defense proposal
to create a militia to support the armed forces during a
conflict and there a few things worth noting.
The article, from the Armenian news website Lragir,
reports how the Armenian defense ministry “submitted a
proposal for the creation of a militia” and that the proposal
Nagorno-Karabakh Map.
outlined how the militia would be involved with “protecting
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nagorno-Karabakh_Map2.png, CC BY YA 4.0
Armenia (territory, population, and infrastructure) from
sabotage, terrorist or intelligence activities of the enemy.” Additionally, the article mentioned how militias could “be used in border defense or
dangerous parts of the line of contact with the enemy.” It is worth remembering that in April 2016 Azerbaijani forces pushed through the line
of contact following heavy rocket and artillery strikes in a couple of areas within the first few hours of the clashes and if the proposal is any
indication, the militia could play a role as a reserve force in a similar scenario.
The article goes on to discuss how “command of the units would be carried out by the Chief of the General Staff of the Armenian Armed Forces
with help from a newly-formed militia headquarters,” how the militia’s will be made up of citizens under contract and that “the contract cannot
be made with someone who has yet to complete compulsory service, a soldier, a first responder or employee of a prison, as well as those with a
criminal background.” The article also states that “weapons will be assigned to militias, they will be given uniforms, appointed to appropriate
positions and go through appropriate training.” The article does not mention a timeline for when the Armenian government would approve or reject
the proposal, but the creation of a militia marks another effort to bolster the armed forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Command of the units would be carried out by the Chief of the General Staff of the
Armenian Armed Forces with help from a newly formed militia headquarters”
Source: “В Армении создается ополчение (A militia is being created in Armenia),” Lragir, 25 August 2020.
https://www.lragir.am/ru/2020/08/25/181582/
The Ministry of Defense of Armenia has submitted a proposal for the creation of a militia for public discussion according to the press
secretary Sushan Stepanyan…
As noted in the bill, the militia is a system of voluntary participation of citizens in the defense of Armenia during an armed attack or military
action. Among the goals of the militia – protecting Armenia (territory, population, infrastructure) from sabotage, terrorist or intelligence
activities of the enemy…
The militia can be used in border defense or dangerous parts of the line of contact with the enemy, in the battle against sabotage or
reconnaissance groups, in the protection of objects of special significance and communications of soldiers or the population, and the
organization of civil defense.
The militia will operate on a territorial basis, according to administrative departments. It will be made up of military formation, divided into
brigades and battalions.
Command of the units would be carried out by the Chief of the General Staff of the Armenian Armed Forces with help from a newly formed
militia headquarters…
The basis for recruiting the militias is a contract with a citizen. The contract cannot be made with someone who has yet to complete
compulsory service, a soldier, a first responder or employee of a prison, as well as those with a criminal background.
Weapons will be assigned to militias, they will be given uniforms, appointed to appropriate positions and go through appropriate training.

OE Watch | October 2020

29

EURASIA
Russian Capabilities in Tajikistan
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian 201st Motorized Rifle Division based in Tajikistan
has undergone several notable changes in recent years, including the addition of S-300 air
defense systems and unmanned aerial systems in 2019. The accompanying excerpted articles
report on how the 201st MRD recently carried out three exercises in as many weeks and it
provides a reminder of what capabilities are in place.
The articles are from Asia Plus, a website with news from Tajikistan, and the first one
reports on a “tactical exercise of a mountain motorized rifle unit” in early August that
involved “Orlan-10 unmanned aerial systems” being used to “carry out artillery strikes on
targets as well as to gather intelligence.” The article also notes that around 500 soldiers
participated in the exercise (500 soldiers also took part in the other exercises).
The second article reports on another tactical exercise in late August that focused on an
Orlan-10.
effort “to repulse an attack from a conditional enemy against military infrastructure.” The Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orlan-10_(2).jpg,
CC BY YA 4.0
article also mentions how the exercise “utilized multifunctional radios of the Azart system.”
The third article reports on the exercise in early September, which used Grad multiple rocket launcher and the Orlan-10 UAV and worked through
a scenario of eliminating “a hidden camp of a conditional enemy.” The article also notes how “full sized targets were used, imitating men and
equipment of a conditional enemy.” The article also mentions that “according to the agreement signed in October 2012, (the 201st military base)
will be in Tajikistan until 2042.”
Overall, the exercises of units of the Russian 201st are similar to various exercises they carry out in a given year, though the use of the Orlan-10
UAVs and Azart radio systems is notable. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“A total of about 500 soldiers from motorized rifle,

reconnaissance and artillery units were involved in the one day
exercise, which took place at the Sambuli training facility”
Source: “Активная фаза тактического учения российских мотострелков состоялась в Таджикистане (The active phase of the tactical
exercise of a Russian motorized rifle unit was held in Tajikistan),” Asia Plus, 11 August 2020.
https://www.asiaplustj.info/ru/news/tajikistan/security/20200811/aktivnaya-faza-takticheskogo-ucheniya-rossiiskih-motostrelkov-sostoyalasv-tadzhikistane
At the Lyaur training facility of the Russian 201st military base in Tajikistan, the active phase of a tactical exercise of a mountain motorized
rifle unit took place…
During the changing situation of the maneuvers, the motorized rifle units, with support from T-72 tanks, finished offensive and defensive
tasks…
Orlan-10 unmanned aerial systems were used to carry out artillery strikes on targets as well as to gather intelligence…more than 500
soldiers and around 100 pieces of military and special equipment were involved in the exercise.
Source: “Российские военнослужащие в Таджикистане защитили военные объекты от условных боевиков (Russian soldiers in
Tajikistan protected military objects from the conditional enemy),” Asia Plus, 26 August 2020. https://asiaplustj.info/ru/news/tajikistan/
security/20200826/rossiiskie-voennosluzhatshie-v-tadzhikistane-zatshitili-voennie-obekti-ot-uslovnih-boevikov
Russian soldiers of the 201st military base in Tajikistan have worked out tactics to repulse an attack from a conditional enemy against
military infrastructure…
…the soldiers worked out several tactical situations, including a clash in a village, maneuverable defense, and a reconnaissance-strike in
coordination with self-propelled artillery…commanders utilized multifunctional radios of the Azart system…about 500 soldiers and 50 pieces
of equipment were involved in the one day exercise.
Source: “Российские «Грады» уничтожили цели на учениях в горах Таджикистана (Russian “Grads” eliminated the targets at an exercise
in the mountains of Tajikistan),” Asia Plus, 2 September 2020. https://asiaplustj.info/ru/news/tajikistan/security/20200902/rossiiskie-gradiunichtozhili-tseli-na-ucheniyah-v-gorah-tadzhikistana
Grad multiple rocket launcher systems of the Russian 201st military base, with the support of unmanned aircraft, eliminated targets at an
exercise in the mountains of Tajikistan.
According to the scenario of the exercise, the crews of “Orlan-10” unmanned aerial vehicles discovered a hidden camp of a conditional
enemy. Artillery units, having received the coordinates of the target in the mountains, carried out a strike on the enemy…full sized targets
were used, imitating men and equipment of a conditional enemy.
A total of about 500 soldiers from motorized rifle, reconnaissance and artillery units were involved in the one day exercise, which took place
at the Sambuli training facility…According to the agreement signed in October 2012, (the 201st military base) will be in Tajikistan until 2042.
OE Watch | October 2020

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Foreign Minister Calls on Resolved Land Border
Disputes with Vietnam to Influence Pending ChineseVietnamese Maritime Disputes
OE Watch Commentary: China’s People’s Daily recently published Chinese
Foreign Minister Wang Yi’s speech commemorating the 20th anniversary of the
delimitation of the China-Vietnam land boundary. As the first excerpt highlights,
the foreign minister focused on the historic relationship between China and
Vietnam, drawing on the two country’s shared socialist path and history of
national liberation. The foreign minister also recalled his own role in the
negotiations that led to the border agreement. He offered up a conciliatory tone
toward finding mutually-beneficial border solutions in stark contrast to Chinese
actions elsewhere, primarily the South China Sea, where China and Vietnam
dispute ownership over numerous features.
However, Wang Yi used the speech at the border in the company of Vietnamese
officials to double down on the shared history between the two countries. He
Chinese messaging. Rock monuments located on Hainan
highlighted mutual respect and cooperation in regards to the land border issue Island. Inscriptions read Taiwan Island (left) and Hainan Island
as the way forward for yet unresolved maritime territorial claims. He called on
(right), both considered Chinese territory by the PRC.
Source: Photo by Dodge Billingsley
China and Vietnam to “resolve maritime issues at an early date,” at the same time
offering Vietnam a partnership to maintain the “peace and stability” of the South China Sea.
The speech also illustrated the Chinese approach to solving its border disputes, favoring a bi-lateral approach rather than a multi-lateral
approach. Although China and Vietnam continue to have maritime border disputes there is a history of bi-lateral partnership. According to the
transcript, Wang Yi’s speech mentions the Beibu Gulf twice. The Beibu Gulf, or Chinese name for the Gulf of Tonkin, was demarcated by a
French colonial treaty in the late 1800s. The treaty stipulated that the maritime border between the two countries was a straight line southward
from where the two countries’ land border touched the sea. The treaty was known by the Chinese as one of the unequal treaties, treaties imposed
on the Chinese by the European colonial powers when China was politically and militarily weak. Indeed, the French treaty gave Vietnam most of
Tonkin, or Beibu Gulf, and brought Vietnamese territorial waters very close to China’s Hainan Island in violation of standard maritime boundary
principles. The Beibu Gulf agreement between China and Vietnam was reached in December 2000 and took effect in June 2001. The current line
bends in the general shape of Hainan Island giving the Chinese an equal amount of the gulf.
Wang Yi suggests that if the two countries can solve that former maritime issue, and celebrate closure regarding prior land border disputes,
both China and Vietnam can solve any remaining territorial disputes, including the South China Sea. This one-on-one approach is a second track
of diplomacy in opposition to what was originally stated as a Declaration of Conduct between China and the Association of South East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) for resolving disputes in the South China Sea. The ASEAN nations, which also include Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and the
Philippines, have competing territorial claims in the South China Sea. While these four states have sought a mutual Code of Conduct relating to
boundary issues and resolving the maritime disputes in the South China Sea, China has dragged its feet.
As the foreign minister’s speech seems to suggest, China would prefer to continue to approach its issues with the other claimant states
bilaterally. In many ways the published speech presents nothing new in Chinese-Vietnamese border issues. It also is not a sure thing that Vietnam
will accept past agreements between the two countries as a standard to follow as they negotiate on-going disputes. End OE Watch Commentary
(Billingsley)

“China and Vietnam have accumulated valuable experience in

delimiting the land boundary and completing the demarcation of the
Beibu Gulf. The two countries are fully capable and wise to continue
negotiations and consultations to further resolve the maritime issues.”
Source: “王毅：我们愿同越方把中越陆地边界维护好、管理好、利用好 (Wang Yi: We are willing to work with Vietnam to maintain, manage and
utilize the land border between China and Vietnam)”, People’s Daily Overseas Network, 3 September 2020. http://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=16758586426
51967993&wfr=spider&for=pc&sa=vs_ob_realtime
Excerpt 1: China and Vietnam are socialist neighbors linked by mountains and rivers, and the traditional friendship between the two peoples has a long
history. In the arduous struggle for national independence and national liberation, the two sides fought side by side, shared life and death, and forged a
deep friendship of “comrades and brothers.” In advancing the cause of socialist construction in line with their own national conditions, the two sides go
hand in hand and work in the same boat to push the all-round cooperation between the two countries to a new level.
Excerpt 2: We must learn from the successful practice of land borders to resolve maritime issues at an early date. China and Vietnam have accumulated
valuable experience in delimiting the land boundary and completing the demarcation of the Beibu Gulf. The two countries are fully capable and wise to
continue negotiations and consultations to further resolve the maritime issues. We must implement the important instructions of the top leaders of the two
parties and two countries, focus on the overall situation of bilateral relations and the needs of long-term cooperation, actively carry out dialogue and
consultation, find a basic and long-term solution acceptable to both sides, and jointly maintain peace and stability in the South China Sea.

OE Watch | October 2020

31

INDO-PACIFIC
India’s Special Frontier Force
OE Watch Commentary: The ongoing conflict between Indian and Chinese forces along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) since early May of
this year has resulted a couple dozen casualties, particularly on the Indian side. The accompanying excerpted article reports on one of the latest
casualties and it sheds some light on how the Indian government might deploy forces to continue to deal with the situation on the LAC.
The article from the news website The Print reports on the casualty from an incident in late August on the LAC and how he “was a member of
the Special Frontier Force (SFF), an Indian security unit that is primarily drawn from the thousands of Tibetan refugees who now call India home.”
The article includes some history of the unit and mentions how it “formed in the immediate aftermath of the 1962 war with China” and “has played
an important role in multiple military operations—from the 1971 India-Pakistan war to the 1999 Kargil battle —but has largely functioned under
the shadows.” As the Indian government has utilized various units in the situation at the LAC, the article points out how “China has not been too
pleased about the reports, wary as it has been about the Tibetan government-in-exile.”
While it has not been widely reported how the Chinese government has reacted to any news of the SFF’s recent involvement on the LAC,
the article goes on to discuss how the unit is best suited to the region. The article quotes the former head of the Integrated Defence Staff, who
states that soldiers in the SFF “know the terrain well” in Ladakh. This is worth noting alongside reports from Indian officials about the logistical
difficulties of bringing in additional units up to the LAC, particularly needing better transportation infrastructure and having adequate time for
soldiers from other regions to acclimate to higher altitudes. As the Indian governments continues to work out logistics issues, units like the SFF
appear to be providing one option for the armed forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Nyima was a member of the Special Frontier Force (SFF),
an Indian security unit that is primarily drawn from the
thousands of Tibetan refugees who now call India home”

SFF badge.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SFF_badge.jpg CC BY YA 4.0

OE Watch | October 2020

32

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: India’s Special Frontier Force
Source: Amrita Nayak Dutta, “All about Special Frontier Force, the secretive Indian unit in news after Ladakh clash,” The Print, 6 September
2020. https://theprint.in/defence/all-about-special-frontier-force-the-secretive-indian-unit-in-news-after-ladakh-clash/496660/
News from the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in Ladakh this week included reports of a Tibetan trooper’s death in a blast at Pangong Tso, one
of the sites of tensions between India and China.
…images showing his body wrapped in the Indian and Tibetan flags, brought focus on an extremely secretive security force comprising
trained mountain warriors.
Nyima was a member of the Special Frontier Force (SFF), an Indian security unit that is primarily drawn from the thousands of Tibetan
refugees who now call India home. It was formed in the immediate aftermath of the 1962 war with China, which resulted in a defeat for India.
The SFF has played an important role in multiple military operations — from the 1971 India-Pakistan war to the 1999 Kargil battle — but
has largely functioned under the shadows….
SFF troopers, it is learnt, are among the additional personnel rushed to the border as tensions with China fester for five months and
counting. China has not been too pleased about the reports, wary as it has been about the Tibetan government-in-exile…
Not much is known about the force, but military experts say it comprises men as well as women, and receive the same training offered to
elite commandos.
Initially known as Establishment 22, the SFF was raised by an Army officer named Major General Sujan Singh Uban…With the wound of
occupation still fresh, many Tibetans volunteered for the force when approached by India, and the SFF soon had 6,000 members…
SFF units, also known as Vikas battalions, come under the direct purview of the Cabinet Secretariat, and is operationally involved with
the Army. The force and is headed by a Major General rank Army officer, who serves as Inspector General of the SFF. The SFF is based in
Chakrata, Uttarakhand, and its insignia is a snow lion. The exact strength of the force right now could not be determined…
Lt Gen. Satish Dua (Retd), former head of the Integrated Defence Staff, said the Indian Army follows a concept of deploying scouts regiments
comprising local residents for mountainous and border areas.
“This is because local residents are most suited to work and operate in high altitude and rugged terrain with harsh climate,” he added.
“They also have knowledge of ground and customs and language. We have Arunachal scouts, Dogra scouts, among others. Similarly, in
the Ladakh region, because they know the terrain well. The SFF also has a substantial percentage of Tibetan refugees who want to serve
voluntarily and are gainfully employed in the terrain that they are suited for,” he said…
Asked about the dual control of the SFF, he said, “We have different forces under different verticals. The central armed police forces
involved in border-guarding duties don’t come under the Ministry of Defence (MoD) but under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)…
The notable operations in which the SFF has participated include the 1971 war between India and Pakistan for the liberation East Pakistan
or present-day Bangladesh…They were tasked with attacking enemy positions to aid the Indian Army’s operations…they infiltrated into
Bangladesh for guerrilla campaigns to attack enemy soldiers, military infrastructure, communication lines, logistics and weapons supplies.
They also prevented Pakistani troops from escaping into Myanmar, according to a piece on the website of the Delhi-based think-tank
Observer Research Foundation (ORF),
“Their entire involvement, under the cover of plausible deniability with the R&AW’s blessings, was to train Bengali freedom fighters and
conduct special operations against Mizo and Naga insurgents,” states the article.
The Vikas battalions also played a critical role in the 1984 Operation Blue Star — when Indian forces laid siege to the Golden Temple in
Amritsar to counter Sikh militants — and the capture of Siachen Glacier in 1984, besides the Kargil battle of 1999…

OE Watch | October 2020

33

INDO-PACIFIC
Philippines Female Suicide Bombing Has ISIS
Fingerprints
OE Watch Commentary: The Philippines has seen varying
degrees of activities by militants loyal to ISIS. The excerpted
24 August article on rappler.com, which reports on terrorism
in the Philippines, discussed the latest operation conducted by
ISIS-loyal militants. The operation demonstrates that many of the
militants’ tactics and targets remain the same as they were several
years ago.
According to the article, on 24 August, 17 people, including four
soldiers, were killed and 75 others wounded in a suicide bombing
near a Jolo church and second bomb blast near a bank. The
church was the same one where ISIS-loyal militants, including a
female suicide bomber, killed 23 people, mostly worshippers, in
January 2019. The article also states that a female suicide bomber
detonated the second bomb near the bank. This female suicide
bomber’s tie to ISIS is that she has contacts to the nephew of Abu
Sayyaf’s leader, who is also the ISIS leader in the Philippines.

Aftermath of the Jolo Cathedral bombings.

Source: Albert Alcain/Presidential Photo, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aftermath_of_the_Jolo_Cathedral_bombings.
jpg CC 2.0 / Public Domain

Following the two bombings, the article notes that military
authorities urged civilians to stay vigilant. Even though there was a heavy security presence in the area where the bombings took place—which
is why several soldiers were killed—the suicide bomber and militants who planted the other bomb were still able to evade security.
The article also states that Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), which had previously fought the Philippines’ military, is actively supporting
counter-terrorism efforts. One of Abu Sayyaf’s former leaders, for example, was captured by the MNLF and handed over to the military. Despite
the progress the military has made in reaching peace with the MNLF, the article highlights how achieving the same peace with Abu Sayyaf and
its allied ISIS-loyal militants remains a remote possibility. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The second explosion was caused by a female suicide
bomber with suspected links to Abu Sayyaf bomber Mundi
Sawadjaan, nephew of Abu Sayyaf sub-leader and Islamic
State (ISIS) head in the Philippines Hajan Sawadjaan.”
Source: “14 People Killed, 75 Wounded as Twin Blasts Hit Jolo Town Center.” www.rappler.com, 24 August 2020. https://rappler.com/nation/
deadly-twin-explosions-jolo-town-center
Back-to-back explosions rocked downtown Jolo, Sulu, around noon on Monday, August 24, killing at least 14 people and wounding 75
others, the military said. The secondary blast was on the same street, just 100 meters from the first one. The second explosion was caused
by a female suicide bomber with suspected links to Abu Sayyaf bomber Mundi Sawadjaan, nephew of Abu Sayyaf sub-leader and Islamic
State (ISIS) head in the Philippines Hajan Sawadjaan, said Philippine Army 11th Infantry Division civil-military relations officer Lieutenant
Colonel Ronaldo Mateo.
The AFP Joint Task Force Sulu and the Philippine Army’s 11th Infantry Division are on high alert, AFP spokesperson Major General Edgard
Arevalo said. Presidential Spokesperson Harry Roque said in a statement, “We call on the residents of Jolo to stay vigilant, and report
suspicious personalities and unattended items in their areas.”
The island province of Sulu is the lair of the Abu Sayyaf terrorist group. One of its top leaders, Abduljihad “Idang” Susukan, was handed
over to police by Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) founding chairman Nur Misuari on August 13.

OE Watch | October 2020

34

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesian Counter-Terrorism Crackdown Spans Regions
OE Watch Commentary: Indonesia’s top counterterrorism unit is called Special Detachment 88, or simply
Densus 88. The excerpted Indonesian-language article for
the publication read.id, which covers current Indonesian
affairs, discussed several Densus 88 operations spanning
multiple regions of Indonesia. Several Densus 88 arrests
targeted Jamaat Ansharut Daula (JAD), which is seen as
the preaching arm of the more militant and historically alQaeda-aligned Jemaah Islamiyah. The article’s description
of one case also demonstrates how JAD can be gateway for
Indonesians to now join Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS).
The article mentions one student in South Kalimantan
Densus 88 operator with AUG.
studied with JAD members before pledging allegiance to
Source: Tribrata News Polri, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Densus_88_operator_with_AUG.jpg CC x 2.0
ISIS and carrying out an attack on a police station. Other
students had similar trajectories, including becoming JAD members, carrying out attacks, becoming loyal to ISIS, and funding terrorist activities.
The article also noted other individuals in Bima, West Nusa Tenggara worked for JAD and attempted to create fake passports to travel with their
families to ISIS territories outside of Indonesia.
Also notable was the article’s mentioning of Densus 88’s breaking up of a Jemaah Islamiyah cell in Bali that had scouted Chinese people in
Banten on Indonesia’s largest island of Java to attack them. Although it was unstated in the article, the motive of such an attack may have been
that Chinese are often not Muslims or otherwise the intense Islamist opposition in Indonesia toward Chinese policies in Xinjiang, China. Also in
Bali, the article reported three other Jemaah Islamiyah members arrested by Densus 88.
The article’s examination of Densus 88’s counter-terrorism operations spanning South Kalimantan, West Nusa Tenggara, and Bali demonstrates
extremism is prevalent in Indonesia. However, the growing professionalism of Densus 88 in curbing the violent activities of groups like JAD and
Jemaah Islamiyah is also evident in the article, and is given as one of the reasons why Indonesia no longer suffers from the same frequency of
terrorist attacks as it did a decade or more ago. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The National Police’s Special Detachment 88
succeeded in arresting 12 suspected terrorists in
three different regions in Indonesia, namely South
Kalimantan, Bali and Bima.”
Source: “Densus 88 Polri Tangkap 12 Terduga Teroris (Densus 88 Polri Arrests 12 Suspected Terrorists).” Read.id, 26 August 2020. https://
read.id/densus-88-polri-tangkap-12-terduga-teroris/
The National Police’s Special Detachment 88 succeeded in arresting 12 suspected terrorists in three different regions in Indonesia, namely
South Kalimantan, Bali and Bima. Head of Public Information Bureau (Karo Penmas), Police Public Relations Division, Brigadier General
Pol. Awi Setiyono, said the suspected terrorists were members of Jamaah Ansharut Daulah (JAD) and Jemaah Islamiyah.
Karo Penmas said that seven suspects were arrested in South Kalimantan. Several times they participated in JAD study activities. AS alias
Abu Halwa was self-employed. In 2014 he pledged allegiance to ISIS. The suspect became motivated to study the religion and manhaj of ISIS
to light the fire of jihad.
TA had self-employed work. He prepared a passport to move to join ISIS in Syria. He wanted to bring his wife and children to Syria and they
are members of JAD. The suspect was involved in funding terrorist acts against members of the police in Bima.
In Bali, Densus 88 arrested two terrorist suspects with the initials MRAH and MHAH. MRAH was arrested for being involved in scouting in
Lebak, Banten, to look for victims of Chinese descent who would later be targeted by Jemaah Islamiyah.

OE Watch | October 2020

35

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesian Papuan Rebel Killed Amid Battle of
Narratives
OE Watch Commentary: On 18 August, the excerpted
Indonesian-language website, terkini.id, which reports on
current events in Indonesia, published an article discussing
the killing of a rebel leader in Indonesia’s eastern-most
province of Papua. According to the article, the rebel
leader was Hengki Wanmang of the West Papua National
Liberation Army (TPNPB), which is the military arm of
the Free Papua Organization (OPM). The article indicates
there was urgency for the Indonesian military to find and
eliminate Wanmang because he had been conducting
attacks near gold and copper mines run by international
mining companies.
According to the article, the spokesman for the OPM,
Sebby Sambom, accused the Indonesian police and
military of working at the behest of foreign corporations
Sabhara Polri.
in Papua when acknowledging in a press statement that
Source: AWG97, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sabhara_Polri.jpg CC x 4.0
Wanmang had been killed. Because of the intensified level
of fighting in recent months Sambom lives across the Papuan border in Papua New Guinea. Adding to the battle of narratives surrounding OPM
and TPNPB, the article notes that the Indonesian authorities refer to OPM and TPNPB simply as “Armed Criminal Group,” or by the acronym
KKB in Indonesian. Indonesia seeks to deny any legitimacy to the Papuan rebels’ militant or political causes.
If the Indonesian authorities’ statements mentioned in the article are accurate, then they are confident Wanmang’s killing will beneficially
influence their counter-insurgency campaign. The authorities state that other group members have surrendered since Wanmang’s death. Moreover,
the military proceeded to identify and dismantle several TPNPB camps and bases.
Although the conflict in Papua is not well known internationally, it has several aspects similar to other conflicts. One similarity involves the
dueling narratives conveyed by the state and insurgents. While OPM decries Indonesia as serving foreign over local interests, Indonesia focuses
on the illegitimate violence that TPNPB conducts. Moreover, as in the excerpted article, the military also portrays itself as being the side with the
momentum, including by killing Wanmang and destroying several of his group’s bases. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“While occupying the KKB headquarters, officers also
shot dead the leader of the Free Papua Organization
(OPM), Makodap Timika Hengki Manwang.”
Source: “Gerebek Markas KKB, TNI-Polri Tembak Mati Pimpinan OPM Papua Hengki Manwang (In Raid of KKB Headquarters, TNIPolri Shoot Dead Papua OPM Leader Hengki Manwang).” terkini.id, 18 August 2020, https://terkini.id/news/gerebek-markas-kkb-tni-polritembak-mati-pimpinan-opm-papua-hengki-manwang/
A joint military-police team successfully occupied the headquarters of the Armed Criminal Group (KKB) in Kalikopi, Mimika Regency.
While occupying the KKB headquarters, officers also shot dead the leader of the Free Papua Organization (OPM), Hengki Manwang. During
the raid, the joint team confiscated items, such as a revolver, rifle, 381 rounds of ammunition, 6 magazines and more.
Surprised by the developments in Papua, 4 OPM fighters handed over their weapons and returned to Indonesian authorities. Previously,
Hengki Wanmang was involved in a series of shootings in the PT Freeport Indonesia area. According to the Regional Police Chief, the
shooting of the KKB frontman began on August 13, 2020, where the military-police joint team conducted an investigation of the Kali Kopi
KKB Headquarters and the troops separated into three groups to attack three targets, namely the New and Old Kali Kopi Headquarters and
the New Amoko Headquarters. Then on Sunday 16 August 2020, the joint military-police team conducted an investigation and succeeded in
eliminating one KKB member who was strongly suspected of being Hengki Wanmang.
The spokesman for the TPNPB-OPM, Sebby Sambom, who was in Papua New Guinea on an international telephone call, confirmed this
information. According to Sebby, one of their leaders, Hengki Wanmang, was shot during a military-police operation. Sebby indicated that the
military operation was carried out to safeguard the US-owned company’s financial assets in Timika, West Papua.
OE Watch | October 2020

36

INDO-PACIFIC
China: “New Concepts” in Unmanned Combat
OE Watch Commentary: Evolving concepts in unmanned combat and new technologies have prompted two Chinese military strategists
to explore different potential strategies that might be used in unmanned combat operations. In the first adjoining article excerpts, published in
Jiefangjun Bao, they describe ways China might achieve superiority through unmanned operations on the future battlefield.
Up front the authors offer a brief snapshot of swarming operations by pointing out that such operations are supported by network information
systems. The advantages of swarming operations are in intelligence, decision-making, coordination, and sheer numbers. According to the authors,
each unit (drone) is assigned a specific role. For example, some drones will be fitted for various modes of search or surveillance. Others might be
assigned an attack function. The units work together through networked operations to carry out their respective missions. The authors explain that
through these unique applications, swarms can carry out “omnidirectional defense penetration, distributed killing, and group defense.” They write
that in “omnidirectional defense penetration, massive numbers of drones can carry out simultaneous penetration.” It can be both multidirectional
and three-dimensional. In “distributed killing,” each platform has its own unique function and role: reconnaissance and detection, electronic
interference, network attack, or strike. These drones will then work together to collectively pursue a single high-value target or a group of targets
in a specific area. In pursuing these targets, according to the authors, a swarm will be able to carry out multi-domain, multi-dimensional attacks
from multiple directions. Finally, the authors explain that in carrying out group defense, a swarm can build a smart, self-adaptive defensive system
to create a protective “bubble” around a main assault force or important targets. Through each drone’s respective functions and their interaction
with the other units, they can then, for example, rapidly intercept targets. They can also help provide defense and counter enemy drone swarms.
In the next section of the article, the authors lay out a strategy that is somewhat analogous to the game of Chess. The operations, which they
refer to as “mother ship-launched operations,” are large-scale, flexible operations in which large sea- or air-based, manned or unmanned combat
platforms transport the drones to a specific location. After launching the drones, the mother ships can provide comprehensive background support,
such as launch, retrieval, and command and control. These operations can take place on land, in the air, or at sea. According to the authors,
mother ship-launched operations are advantageous because they can operate at long-range while also engaging in closeup combat. Mother shiplaunched operations are like “using a ‘rook’ to carry a ‘pawn’ to mobilize for combat, with the ‘rook’s’ easy maneuverability improving the
‘pawn’s mobilization speed and operational flexibility.” Mother ship-launched operations are also described as more versatile. They can more
efficiently perform emergency response and intervention, their operations can deliver “sustained suppression and attacks,” and they can coordinate
operations in multiple locations.
The authors also discuss the benefits of increasing interoperability between manned combat platforms and unmanned
platforms. In more traditional operations the battlefield might be controlled through a control center located at the
rear. However, they explain that by increasing the interoperability between manned and unmanned platforms,
control is spread throughout the battlefield to achieve a “more direct exchange of battlefield information,
operational support, and action coordination.”
It is worth noting that while the authors go in-depth in their discussion of unmanned combat
operations, they do not once mention artificial intelligence (AI), which is an area of great interest
in China. Looking at the second article excerpt, published by the Jiangsu Television Network, AI
is said to be essential to achieving swarming and other unmanned combat operations. End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Against a target, a swarm can execute
a multidirectional, saturated combined
attack that may be continuous or
simultaneous, achieving the
effect of the “small but
numerous” defeating the
“big but few.”

DJI Phantom 1 drones.

Source: Clément Bucco-Lechat / CC BY-SA (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0);
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:WMCH_Drone.jpg

OE Watch | October 2020

37

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China: “New Concepts” in Unmanned Combat
Source: Zhao Xiangang and Zhang Tieqiang, “新概念牵引无人作战新方向 (New Concept Leads to New Directions in Unmanned
Combat),” Jiefangjun Bao, 1 September 2020, http://www.81.cn/tz/2020-09/01/content_9894213.htm
New Concept Leads to New Directions in Unmanned Combat
The cluster effect of swarm operations enables a wholeness in combat operations that cannot be achieved by a single platform. Swarm
operations have the following advantages. The first [advantage] is an advantage in intelligence… The second [advantage] is an advantage in
decision making…The third [advantage] is an advantage in coordination... The fourth [advantage] is an advantage in numbers. … Against a
target, a swarm can execute a multidirectional, saturated combined attack that may be continuous or simultaneous, achieving the effect of the
“small but numerous” defeating the “big but few.”
A swarm is the aggregate of a large number of intelligent unmanned platforms with different functions, with a unique application method
that is not possessed by any single weapon system. First, a swarm can carry out omnidirectional defense penetration.… Next, a swarm
can carry out distributed killing… Third, a swarm can carry out group defense… A swarm not only can “intercept many [targets] with
few [drones],” it can also “intercept many [targets] with many [drones],” with a wide range of interception and a high success rate. This
constitutes an important application method in the future for coordinating the execution of air defense and anti-missile operations, defending
important targets at the endpoint, and countering enemy drone swarm attacks.
Mother ship-launched operations involve the use of large, sea- or air-based, manned or unmanned combat platforms as transport carriers
to provide support for the mobilization, projection, and retrieval of, command and control over, and comprehensive support for, various types
of unmanned systems on land, at sea, and in the air. Such operations enable the long-range mobilization, multi-domain deployment, and
coordinated use of unmanned systems, particularly small- or micro-sized unmanned systems, thereby giving full play to such systems’ overall
combat effectiveness.
The following advantages exist with unmanned platforms relying on a mother ship to carry out mobile operations and support services, as
opposed to relying on the rear to provide command and control and support services. The first [advantage] is an advantage in mobilization…
The second [advantage] is the advantage of clusters.… The third [advantage] is an advantage in [the diversity of] missions…
Mother ship-launched operations represent the organic combination of the advantages of a mother ship and of unmanned platforms, leading
to more versatile application methods. First, mother ship-launched operations can perform emergency response and intervention...Second,
mother ship-launched operations can deliver sustained suppression and attacks… Third, mother ship-launched operations can execute
coordinated operations at multiple locations…With dispersed unmanned platforms taking actions simultaneously at multiple locations, it [the
use of mother ships] also results in dispersal of the enemy’s forces and a decrease in the enemy’s defensive capabilities.
By increasing the interoperability of manned combat platforms and unmanned combat platforms, manned/unmanned coordinated operations
achieve an even more direct exchange of battlefield information, operational support, and action coordination, accomplishing unified
organization and integrate combat between manned and unmanned platforms, and fully, exploiting the complementary advantages of manned
and unmanned combat forces.

Source: “中国又创新记录！119架无人机“群飞”领先美国 (China Has Set Another New Record! A Group Flight of 119 Drones Has Taken
the Lead from the United States),” Jiangsu Network Television, 12 June 2017, http://news.jstv.com/a/20170612/1497249085391.shtml
China Has Set Another New Record! A Group Flight of 119 Drones Has Taken the Lead from the United States
… In just two short years, China and the United States have reset the scale of UAV swarm flights four times. The competition in this field has
become increasingly fierce…
“Swarm Intelligence” has always been regarded by all countries as the core of unmanned system artificial intelligence, and is the
breakthrough point for future intelligent unmanned systems. Fu Qianshao said that for the UAV swarm technology to really become practical,
the problem is not only the formation flight, but also it needs to be able to independently judge and decide according to different situations
like intelligent creatures. For example, the basis of drone swarm control is collaborative situational awareness. Drones are equipped with
different sensors and need to work together to achieve information sharing, thus reaching a greater sensing range and a higher precision.

OE Watch | October 2020

38

INDO-PACIFIC
China: Seizing Cyber and Electronic Dominance on the
Battlefield
OE Watch Commentary: The Chinese recognize that electronic and
cyber warfare complement each other and they are interested in the role
that the electromagnetic spectrum plays for both. This has prompted
three Chinese military strategists to carefully examine ways to achieve
cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield. In the following
excerpted article, published in Jiefangjun Bao, the authors explain that
in order to achieve cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield, it is
important to focus on influencing or breaking the enemy psychology and
perception system. This can be done by employing electronic deception
to “conceal the real by displaying the fake,” to “employ feint cooperation
to give out a false impression to lure the enemy,” and to “appear as the
enemy least expects in order to secure victory by surprise moves.”
The authors envision future informatized warfare as being complex
with multiple enemy targets. They write that it is impossible for cyber and
electronic forces to cover all the bases and attack on all fronts. Therefore,
cyber and electronic energy should be selectively harnessed and
controlled to dominate or attack prioritized targets. One of the measures
to accomplish this, they write, is through “flexible electromagnetic
maneuver.” This is where every platform not only collects data on the
enemy’s signals and informs the network, but they also dial up and down
Future Combat Systems network.
their own emissions to deceive the adversary. Another measure is “vast
Source: : https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Future_Combat_Systems_network.jpg
soldiersmediacenter CC BY 2.0
area suppression,” in which enemy units are suppressed to prevent them
from taking action. The authors then explain that a combination of cyber and electronic energy can strike enemy core points, destroy enemy nodes,
break enemy system of systems, and effectively support the main mission of the combined arms troops.
The authors make a surprisingly simplistic argument that the main way to seize cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield is by resorting
to electronic warfare and cyber warfare themselves. Electronic warfare, they say, should be used to “pool energy for external harassment.”
Patterns of “electromagnetic separation, electromagnetic obstruction, and electromagnetic destructions” might be used to completely or partially
incapacitate the enemy’s command system. For cyber warfare, which pools information for “internal attack,” the authors recommend implanting
viruses, logic bombs, and malicious software into the enemy’s internal battlefield information network. They can also be combined with firepower
to enhance target-specific strikes and to paralyze the enemy’s mission.
The authors conclude that it is impossible to attack all areas. Therefore, the optimal targets to strike must be carefully chosen to subdue the
enemy. In selecting targets, the priority must be to attack the enemy’s core combat system of systems. Forceful cyber and electronic attacks must
be launched straight into the enemy’s command center to destroy it. Finally, they explain that everything should be done to weaken or destroy the
enemy’s combat system of systems from the top down. Important targets, they note, include information nodes, communication hubs, and key
networks. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“In future operations, there should be more focus on
electronic and cyber space…”

OE Watch | October 2020

39

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China: Seizing Cyber and Electronic
Dominance on the Battlefield
Source: Liu Guojun et al, “如何有效夺取战场网电制权 (How to Effectively Seize Cyber and Electronic Dominance on the Battlefield),”
Jiefangjun Bao, 4 August 2020, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2020-08/04/content_267666.htm
How to Effectively Seize Cyber and Electronic Dominance on the Battlefield
In recent years, with the rapid advancement of information technology, the roles of the electromagnetic field and cyberspace have become
more prominent. Operations aiming to seize cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield by means of electronic warfare and cyber
warfare have especially become the focus of the battle between two opposing forces. In future operations, there should be more focus on
electronic and cyber space, explore the winning mechanisms and approaches to seize cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield,
scientifically harness and give play to the advantages of the cyber and electronic forces on the battlefield, ensure the establishment of
information advantages in the main direction, important areas, and key moments on the battlefield, and create favorable conditions to firmly
grasp the initiative on the battlefield.
… To seize cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield is to focus on influencing or breaking the enemy psychological and perception
system. Taking into consideration the features of the cyber and electronic space -- ease of concealment and strong penetrability and following
the operation rule of “strength stemming from the mind,” efforts should be made to fully tap into the arena of employing cyber and electronic
strategies and try all means to lull the enemy’s alertness and crush the enemy’s mind, thus resulting in misinformation, misjudgment, and
improper decision-making for the enemy.
Employ electronic deception to conceal the real by displaying the fake…
Employ feint cooperation to give out a false impression to lure the enemy…
Appear as the enemy least expects it to secure victory by surprise moves…
In future informatized warfare, there will be multiple enemy targets, together with the enemy consummate system of systems during
operations. It is impossible and unnecessary for the cyber and electronic forces to cover all bases and attack on all fronts. Efforts should be
made to give full play to factors such as flexible electromagnetic maneuver, vast area of suppression, and controllable cyber and electronic
energy, and dynamically combine the cyber and electronic energy on the battlefield based on the actual needs of the battlefield in different
phases and time segments, so as to strike the enemy core points, destroy the enemy nodes, break the enemy system of systems, and effectively
support the main mission of the combined arms troops.
The main ways to seize cyber and electronic dominance on the battlefield are electronic warfare and cyber warfare. In future operations, it
is important to technically and tactically integrate the employment of electronic warfare and cyber warfare to allow both means of attack to
give play to their respective advantages in coordinated operations, so as to achieve the best results.
…The organic integration of cyber and electronic operations and firepower strikes not only can play up the combat mechanism of soft-hard
integration and the synergy of effectiveness to achieve the organic combination of “decapitating and blinding” and “physically destroying
and damaging,” but also can achieve the concentrated release of combat effectiveness, so as to establish the dominant advantage in systemof-systems confrontations and contribute to the acceleration of combat development.
Focus on crucial points to subdue the enemy and select optimal targets to strike. It is a must to give the priority to the attack on the core part
of the enemy combat system of systems, launch forceful cyber and electronic attack straight on the enemy command center to destroy it, and
try all means to weaken or disintegrate the enemy combat system of systems from top down; to give the priority to the attack on the enemy
important battlefield pillars, such as information nodes, communication hubs, and key networks, and achieve the chain effect of “one slight
move affects the whole situation”; and to firmly pinpoint the deficiencies of the enemy combat system of systems, try to tackle the weaknesses
first, and create conditions for the launch of a preemptive cyber and electronic attack on the enemy and the favorable combat development.

OE Watch | October 2020

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The UAE-Israel Agreement: Implications for Defense and
Airspace
OE Watch Commentary: On 13 August, Israel and the UAE
signed an agreement establishing full diplomatic relations between
the two countries. With this deal, the UAE became the third Arab
state, after Egypt and Jordan, to fully recognize Israel. The deal has
important implications for the UAE’s air force, regional airspace
access, air defense deals, and civilian airspace. In fact, one regional
expert calls it “a weapons deal” rather than a peace deal. Indeed,
the agreement paves the way for the UAE’s air force to acquire
important new capabilities which could impact the regional balance
of power. As the UAE’s regional competitor, Turkey has a lot at
stake in this, and Turkish defense experts have analyzed these
implications in detail in the accompanying passages.
As the passages discuss, the peace agreement will enable several
important defense deals between Israel and the UAE, particularly the
modernization of the UAE’s fleet of F-16s. The UAE is apparently
also interested in an Iron Dome anti-missile system (which Israel has
Iron Dome - Israeli Air Defense and counter-rocket system.
Gershuni-Aylho via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flickr_-_Israel_Defense_Forces_-_
experience with) to protect against potential Houthi missile attacks Source: Israel Defense Forces and Nehemiya
Iron_Dome_Intercepts_Rockets_from_the_Gaza_Strip.jpg, CC BY-SA 3.0
from Yemen, as well as against threats to oil facilities in the region. The UAE is also reportedly looking to Israel for deals on more advanced
UAVs (such as the Heron) and electronic jamming systems, to support to its proxy forces in Libya, Syria and Yemen to achieve superiority in these
conflicts. The passages also claim that the UAE is cooperating with Israeli companies on facial recognition, cyber warfare, and command and
control systems.
Finally, the passages note that joint training in the Eastern Mediterranean with Israel, Greece and Egypt will likely increase the capabilities of
the UAE’s air force and enable the UAE to emerge as an air power in the Mediterranean. In terms of civilian airspace, the author speculates that
the UAE’s carriers Emirates and Etihad Airlines will emerge as serious competitors to Turkish Airlines, which currently has the second largest
market share (after Israel’s El-Al Airlines) on flights to Tel Aviv. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The UAE-Israel agreement is actually not a peace
deal; it is a weapons deal.”
Source: “İsrail ve Araplar neden anlaştı? Tolga Özbek savunma ve havacılık açısından bakıyor (Why did Israel and the Arabs agree? Tolga
Özbek looks [at the deal] from a defense and airspace perspective),” YouTube.com, 19 August 2020. https://www.youtube.com/channel/
UC7hyUqIcfDV3kRBFumYUlnA
Why did the UAE and Israel sign this deal? There are many different reasons. The UAE is taking serious steps to become very active in the
region. In Yemen, it is conducting operations against Houthis along with Saudi Arabia; and they are active in Syria and Libya as well. How
are they doing this? The UAE has generally western weapons, mostly US and European weapons.
…
The UAE needs weapons; especially sophisticated advanced weapons, like electronic jamming and UAVs. They have set their sights on
Israel for these weapons. Their yearly weapons expenses is $23 billion. This is a serious amount for such a small country; and $20 billion of
this amount is spent on weapons purchases. The UAE plans to buy advanced weapons from Israel to supply to its proxy forces in regional
conflicts to achieve superiority, such as Israel’s Heron. In Yemen, Houthis attack Saudi Arabia with missiles and threaten the UAE; and the
UAE wants to have an Iron Dome system against these missiles. Israel has serious experience in this, and Israeli defense companies are
happily welcoming these UAE interests in their technologies. This deal opens up a brand new market for Israeli defense companies.
The UAE’s F16’s will likely be modernized by Israel and a new agreement will likely be made for this. Joint trainings in the Eastern Med with
Israel, Egypt and Greece, will likely increase the standards of the UAE air forces…. Iron Dome anti-missile system will be sold to UAE by
Israel. Plus their UAV systems will also be advanced.
In terms of civilian aviation, with the diplomatic recognition, Israel’s flagship charter company Arkia immediately started charter flights
between Tel Aviv and Dubai…. Emirates and Etihad will start doing the same in the coming days. In the market for travel to Israel, Turkish
Airlines was right behind El Al. Now this market will include Etihad and Emirates, as serious competitors to Turkish Airlines. At its peak,
before coronavirus, Turkish Airlines flew 9 flights per day to Tel Aviv. …
OE Watch | October 2020

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: The UAE-Israel Agreement: Implications for
Defense and Airspace
Source: BAE-Israil Anlaşması Aslında bir Barış Anlaşması Değil bir Silah Anlaşması (The UAE-Israel Agreement is Actually not a Peace
Deal it is a Weapons Deal),” Twitter/Clash Report, 17 August 2020. https://twitter.com/clashreport/status/1295442260432162818/photo/2
… Following the “peace deal” between [Israel and the UAE], the sale of complex arms systems such as the UAVs from Israel to the UAE is
more likely.
… the UAE continues to cooperate with Israeli companies behind the scenes in fields such as drones, facial recognition, and cyber warfare.
… Many sources related to Israeli defense industries predict that following the normalization process between Israel and the Gulf states,
their sales on arms, cybersecurity, and equipment for command and control systems will increase over the region.
… The increasing threat to oil facilities located over the Gulf region pushes the Gulf states to consider anti-missile systems such as the
Israeli-made Iron Dome.

Book Review: A Look Back and Forward at
Turkey’s “Strategic Depth” Foreign Policy Doctrine
Karen Kaya
February 2020
“Strategic Depth (Stratejik Derinlik)” is a Turkish book published
in 2001. This was a time when international relations theorists were
describing new frameworks of world order and security modalities
following the end of the Cold War and bi-polar world. Works such as
Francis Fukuyama’s “End of History” and Samuel Huntington’s “Clash of
Civilizations” were icons of this intellectual period. It was in this context
of a changing international system that Turkish International Relations
Professor Ahmet Davutoğlu (who later served as Foreign Minister
between 2009-2014 and Prime Minister between 2014-2016) attempted
to define Turkey’s position in his book “Strategic Depth.” From around
2002 to 2012, the foreign policy that Davutoğlu outlined in his book
was considered the doctrine and roadmap for Turkish foreign policy.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/309386

OE Watch | October 2020

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
How the Turkish Military is Mitigating the Impact of
COVID-19

Victory Day Parade in Turkey, 30 August 2007.

Source: Nérostrateur via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tag_des_Sieges_2.JPG, CC BY-SA 3.0

OE Watch Commentary: Despite the outbreak of
COVID-19, the Turkish military is more active than ever.
It is currently fighting on two military fronts (Syria and
Libya) while conducting operations against Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) targets in northern Iraq and taking
part in multinational missions (such as in Afghanistan and
Somalia). Its navy is active in the eastern Mediterranean,
and recently took charge of the Joint Task Force to combat
piracy in the Gulf of Aden in the Indian Ocean. Meanwhile,
its air force actively participates in many multinational
exercises, including a recent one in which it demonsrated its
aerial refueling capabilities. At a time when many countries
are limiting their military activities due to the pandemic,
the Turkish military has emerged as one of the most active
in the region. The accompanying passages from Turkey’s
state-run Anadolu Ajansi provide a detailed look at some
of the steps that the Turkish military took to minimize the
impact of COVID-19 on military operations.

The article starts out by claiming that the Turkish Armed Forces has one of the lowest rates of COVID-19 in the world, due to special measures
taken by the Defense Ministry. The passage reports that the first thing the Defense Ministry did was to establish a “Center to Combat Coronavirus.”
This center was formed as a unit encompassing the entire military chain starting from the General Staff, to include all military branches, field
armies, and each of the navy and airbase commands. By establishing this unit, the Defense Ministry centralized the tracking of coronavirus cases
within the military in one database, which it also used for contact-tracing.
The passage explains that the Turkish Armed Forces closed its schools, units, headquarters and bases to outside visitors. As of 21 March, the
navy directed its warships to sail away from their homeports to outside ports, where they took isolation measures. Also in the other branches,
special measures were taken to enable critical and specialized personnel, particularly pilots, to work in shifts. Combat weapons and equipment
as well as surfaces were regularly disinfected. Soldiers who were supposed to be discharged saw their orders extended for a month, and were
quarantined for 14 days before being discharged. Soldiers with new orders were tested before being deployed.
The passage also discusses measures taken in areas of ongoing operations. The units deployed to Syria and Iraq were ordered to minimize
personnel movements, and those returning to Turkey were quarantined for 14 days prior to their return. For ongoing missions, the passage
points out “operation methods were identified to minimize the risk of contagion.” Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN)
defense teams were used to disinfect all vehicles coming in from Syria using CBRN cleaning systems. As the article claims, “the planning and
implementation of the measures…enabled the approximately 500,000 Turkish Armed Forces to have a very low incidence of coronavirus.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The planning and implementation of the measures…
enabled the approximately 500,000 Turkish Armed Forces
to have a very low incidence of coronavirus.”

Source: U.S. Army Photo; https://www.tradoc.army.mil/News/Photos/igphoto/2002258405/

OE Watch | October 2020

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: How the Turkish Military is Mitigating the
Impact of COVID-19
Source: “TSK’dan koronavirüs ile mücadelede göz dolduran basari (The Turkish Armed Forces’ significant success in fighting coronavirus),”
Anadolu Ajansi, 7 June 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/koronavirus/tskdan-koronavirus-ile-mucadelede-goz-dolduran-basari-/1868059
Thanks to the measures they took, the Turkish Armed Forces is among the militaries with the lowest cases of coronavirus.
In the fight against coronavirus, the Turkish Armed Forces has taken a unique place among world militaries. When looking at the ratio of
case numbers to personnel numbers, the Turkish Armed Forces emerged with the lowest number, and with this success, exceeded important
militaries such as those of the US, Russia, France and England.
According to information obtained by the AA [Anadolu Ajansi] correspondent, this success is due to the measures imposed across the
country by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s, and those taken by the National Defense Ministry in accordance with that guidance.
The planning and implementation of the measures, which were taken in coordination with the Health Ministry, enabled the approximately
500,000 Turkish Armed Forces to have a very low incidence of coronavirus…
In this framework, the first thing that was done was to establish a Center to Counter COVID-19 (KOMMER). KOMMER was formed as a
unit running across the chain from top to bottom, incorporating the General Staff, all military branches, field armies, all the way down to the
navy and airbase commands.
…
KOMMER established contact-tracing teams, and managed the situation successfully starting from the bases at the lowest levels to the ships
to the fleets; as well as tracked the cases over a Case Tracking Software.
…
Additional Measures in Operation Areas
In addition to fighting coronavirus, the Turkish Armed Forces has not skipped a beat in its fight against terror, and additional measures were
taken to prevent the virus from spreading in operation areas.
In addition to additional measures to all units in areas of operations, the areas of operations in northern Syria were regulated to limit
entries and exits… Unless absolutely necessary, personnel and unit movements were minimized.
In the areas of Operation Peace Shield, Operation Olive Branch and Operation Peace Spring [in Syria], trainings were conducted to
increase awareness and information. Operation methods that would minimize the risk of contagion were identified for on-going missions.
Those personnel coming into Turkey from areas of operation were quarantined for 14 days before entering Turkey, and their health checks
were conducted. Vehicles coming into the country from Syria were disinfected by CBRN teams using CBRN cleaning systems.
Protective health equipment (like thermometers) were sent to units in Syria…
…
The National Defense University schools were closed, and non-commissioned officers were not allowed to leave on the weekends. No
visitors were allowed on bases.
…
Isolation on Ships, Pilots Worked in Shifts
Force Commands also took special measures to add to this success. Per the Naval Forces Command, as of 21 March, warships were
directed to ports outside of their main bases, where they took effective isolation measures.
…
In the Force Commands, special measures were taken to enable critical personnel and specialized personnel, particularly pilots to work in
shifts. Combat weapons and equipment as well as any surface that was used by personnel were regularly disinfected. …
…
The November 2019 class of soldiers saw their orders extended for a month…. and were quarantined for 14 days before being discharged….
Soldiers with new orders were tested before being deployed.

OE Watch | October 2020

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Israeli Perspectives on How to Fight Weaponized
Information
OE Watch Commentary: Information warfare is nothing new, but new technologies that are
acting as force multipliers for misinformation are a relatively new phenomenon. Technologies that
employ machine learning, algorithms, artificial intelligence and social media bots can proliferate
misinformation by automating its spread and exponentially increasing its speed and reach. The
accompanying passages from Israeli sources shed light on some debates and initiatives within Israel
on how to tackle this phenomenon, including partnering with big tech and social media companies,
taking a whole of government approach and starting an anti-propaganda agency.
As the first passage discusses how Israel established the Ministry of Strategic Affairs and Public
Diplomacy “to fight the many delegitimization and boycott campaigns” against their country.
However, the author argues that this ministry has limited options and has not properly prioritized the
issues at stake. He further suggests that Israel “urgently needs a separate anti-propaganda agency…”
Social media icons.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Social_
The author says that this agency would not work to silence misinformation, but rather, to expose its Source: Ibrahim.ID via Wikimedia,
media_icon.png, CC BY-SA 4.0
perpetrators; something that would be difficult for the Ministry of Strategic Affairs and Public Diplomacy to do.
The second passage discusses a recent meeting between Israeli government officials, led by the Strategic Affairs Ministry, and senior
representatives of the video-sharing platform Tiktok. As the passage reports, Ministry officials want TikTok to devise a system to “locate and
remove” hate content. The system would also include an educational program targeting youth and educating them on the effects of hate speech.
The passage points out that the Strategic Affairs Minister met with TikTok alongside representatives from Israel’s Justice, Foreign Affairs,
Economy, Communications and Diaspora Ministries, suggesting that Israel is making an effort to take a whole-of-government approach to the
issue. It also points out that the Strategic Affairs Minister has already met with other tech giants, including Facebook and Twitter. End OE Watch
Commentary (Kaya)

“Strategic Affairs Minister Orit Farkash-Hacohen led
the discussion alongside representatives from the Justice,
Foreign Affairs, Economy, Communications and Diaspora
Affairs ministries. She has already met with representatives
from social media giants Facebook and Twitter.”
Source: Dr. Manfeld Gerstenfred, “Israel Needs an Anti-Propaganda Agency,” The Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies (Bar-Ilan
University), 9 September 2020. https://besacenter.org/perspectives-papers/israel-anti-propaganda-agency/
In October 2015, Israel’s political-security cabinet charged the Ministry of Strategic Affairs and Public Diplomacy with the responsibility to
fight the many delegitimization and boycott campaigns that have been set up against the State of Israel. This was an upgrading of the Israeli
government’s battle against hate campaigns.
…
For five years, the Israeli Ministry of Strategic Affairs and Public Diplomacy has been trying to combat the large number of international
delegitimization and boycott campaigns against the Jewish State. Its options to combat international antisemitism are limited, and it is
doubtful whether it has properly prioritized the issues at stake. Israel urgently needs a separate anti-propaganda agency…
…
In addition to the Ministry, an anti-propaganda agency is needed to fight effectively against anti-Israelism and antisemitism. It can use many
tools to contain the enemies of Israel and the Jewish people—tools that are not available to the Ministry of Strategic Affairs.
Source: “TikTok, Israeli gov’t team up to battle antisemitism, hate speech,” The Jerusalem Post, 9 September 2020. https://www.jpost.com/
breaking-news/senior-israeli-officials-meet-with-tiktok-representatives-in-israel-641580
Israeli government officials, led by the Strategic Affairs Ministry, hosted senior TikTok representatives on Tuesday to explore more effective
ways to combat hate speech, antisemitism and incitement on the Chinese-owned video-sharing platform. Ministry officials proposed an
agenda for TikTok to devise a “system of collaboration to locate and remove hate content.” It comprises an educational program targeting
young users focusing on the effects of hate speech on the wider public, schooling on antisemitism, and education regarding Israel.
…
Strategic Affairs Minister Orit Farkash-Hacohen led the discussion alongside representatives from the Justice, Foreign Affairs, Economy,
Communications and Diaspora Affairs ministries. She has already met with representatives from social media giants Facebook and Twitter.
OE Watch | October 2020

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Stockpiling Supplies through Chahbahar
OE Watch Commentary: The COVID-19 pandemic
has hit Iran particularly hard [see: “Iran: IRGC establishes
Biological Defense Headquarters,” OE Watch, April 2020].
The Iranian port of Chahbahar, however, has weathered
the storm well. According to the excerpted article from
an Iranian online financial website, commodity shipments
into the Arabian Sea port have increased dramatically.
There are several reasons for the increase in traffic: Iranian
authorities have invested tremendously in Chahbahar
and the port’s capacity has increased proportionately
[see: “Iran: Chahbahar Port Developments,” OE Watch,
December 2019]. Iran may also be stockpiling supplies
given the disruptions caused to normal supply chains by
COVID-19. Trans-shipment of goods from Chahbahar into
Afghanistan also helps landlocked Afghanistan and its
partners bypass Pakistan.

The Shahid Beheshti Port, Chahbahar, Iran.

Source: Islamic Consultative Assembly News Agency [ICANA] https://cdn.icana.ir/d/019/201903104605695437.jpg

Previously, diplomats representing countries seeking to import good into Chahbahar or transship goods through Chahbahar for Afghanistan or
Central Asia said that Iranian red tape hampered operations and Iran’s diplomats were unable to get the Iranian side to streamline processes even
when Iranian officials understood the necessity of doing so. Increased Chahbahar shipments, however, suggest that some of these impediments
have now been overcome.
While Iranian authorities report 560,000 tons of good offloaded in Chahbahar since March 2020, this is still a relative pittance compared to
larger ports: Rotterdam, for example, handled more than 467 million tons of cargo in 2017 and Busan, Republic of Korea, also exceeded 400
million tons. Seven different Chinese ports exceeded 500 million tons that same year. According to the U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics,
in 2018—the last year for which statistics are available—the top U.S. port was South Louisiana through which 275 million tons passed. Fiftiethranked Vancouver, Washington, still had more than ten times the traffic which will this year pass through Chahbahar.
While Chahbahar was previously well-known for being the source of goods which “fell off the truck” and were smuggled into Pakistan or
by sea into the United Arab Emirates, increased enforcement by both the Pakistani and Emirati coast guards and Pakistani border police have
significantly reduced smuggling emanating from Chahbahar. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“This year there was significant growth in the process of
unloading basic goods.”

Source: “Koshti 66 hazar toni Shuker Varad Bandar Chahbahar” (“Shipment of 66,000 tons of Sugar Enters Chahbahar”), Eghtesaad24.ir, 27
July 2020. https://eghtesaad24.ir/fa/news/73726/
Shipment of 66,000 Tons of Sugar Enters the Port of Chahbahar
He added that despite to the global spread of COVID-19 virus, which has had a direct impact on the amount of trade and exchange of
goods in the world, this year there was significant growth in the process of unloading basic goods; since the beginning of this year more than
506,702 tons of basic goods have entered this strategic port.
Emphasizing that the onward distribution of these goods was carried out around the clock using modern strategic port equipment with the
desired outcome, he added that the main basic goods needed by the eastern provinces of the country that enter this ocean port directly from
the countries of origin include corn, barley, wheat, rice, sugar and petroleum products.
The director-general of the Ports and Maritime Organization of Sistan and Baluchestan, emphasized preventing the delay of goods in Shahid
Beheshti and Shahid Kalantari ports so as to make optimal use of port capacities and accelerate the flow of imported goods as a priority
of the General Administration. He added that 1,365 tons of basic goods needed by the eastern provinces have entered the country through
Shahid Beheshti port.
He further added that joint efforts of all devices to unload and transport goods to consumer destinations with the aim of reducing the cost of
goods and also facilitating and accelerating the transfer of basic goods from the port to the country is another priority of this department.
OE Watch | October 2020

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia Supports the Inclusion of Syrian Kurds in Talks to
Resolve Syria Conflict
OE Watch Commentary: On August 31, the Russian Foreign Ministry
hosted two delegations from Syria. One was the Kurdish-led Syrian
Democratic Council (SDC), a political wing of the Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF) and the other was the People’s Will Party (PWP), a proMoscow Syrian party. The delegations signed a joint memorandum to
include Syrian Kurds in the discussions to find a political solution for the
Syrian conflict. Russia has been looking into integrating Syrian Kurds
into the political process and improving their ties with the al-Assad
regime. Pictures of İlham Ahmed, the co-President of the SDC, next
to Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov angered Turkish officials. Some
reports have speculated that these talks were part of Russian efforts to
include the SDC in the ongoing UN-facilitated talks between the Syrian
opposition and the regime. The accompanying articles from Kurdish
sources provide insight into the SDC delegation’s visit to Moscow.
The first article analyzes the joint memorandum signed by the SDC
and PWD with Russian mediation. According to the article, Russia
seems to be pushing for the Kurds to be included in the Geneva peace
process and this memorandum might be the first step in that direction.
The article states that the memorandum pointed out the role the SDF
played in the war against terrorism and stressed that the SDF should
be incorporated into the Syrian Army. The memorandum includes five
major points for a political solution in Syria. The first point focuses
Ilham Ahmed in Tabqa.
Source: Voice of America via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ilham_Ahmed_in_Tabqa.jpg, CC-PD-Mark | PD VOA
on equal citizenship for all peoples of Syria including Arabs, Kurds,
Assyrians, Syriacs, Armenians, Turkmen and Circassians. The second point states that a political solution is the only way to solve the Syrian
conflict. The third point emphasizes the need to find a democratic solution to the Kurdish issue. The fourth point presents the Kurdish autonomous
region in Syria as a model for the future of Syria and the need to benefit from the experience of this region. The final point addresses the role of
the SDF and the Syrian army in the future of Syria.
The second article reports the statements made by SDC Executive Committee Vice Chairman Hikmet Hebîb who was in the delegation. As
Hebîb stated, the Russian Foreign Ministry indicated that without the participation of the SDC, finding a political solution in Syria might not be
possible. According to Hebîb, during the meeting, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov stated that it is the SDC’s right to join efforts such as the
Astana and Geneva peace processes to find a political solution to the Syrian conflict. Additionally,
as the article portrays, Turkish military activities in Syria were among the issues the parties
discussed with Russian officials. Russia hosting the Kurdish delegation on the same
day when a Turkish delegation was in Moscow led to speculations, whether this
was a message to Turkey, which considers the Syrian Kurdish groups controlling
the self-declared autonomous region in Syria to be terrorists, or whether this
was another Russian effort to drive a wedge between Syrian Kurds and
the United States by brokering a deal between the Kurds and al-Assad’s
regime. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“The [Russian Foreign]
Ministry will support the
participation of representatives
of North and East Syria in the
upcoming political process…”
Seal of the Syrian Democratic Council.

Source: Syrian Democratic Council, public domain; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Seal_of_MSD.png

OE Watch | October 2020

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia Supports the Inclusion of Syrian Kurds
in Talks to Resolve Syria Conflict
Source: “Rojava heyeti’nin Moskova’da imzaladığı müzakerenin ayrıntıları (Details of the negotiation signed by the Rojava delegation in
Moscow)” Rudaw, 1 September 2020. https://www.rudaw.net/turkish/middleeast/syria/010920201
For the first time [Russia] officially invited a delegation from the Rojava Autonomous Administration [to Moscow]. In addition to İlham
Ahmed, DSM Deputy Co-chair Hikmet Habib, Syriac Union Party President Sanherib Barsoum and DSM Egypt Representative Sihanok Dibo
were also present in the Rojava delegation.
İlham Ahmed in a statement said, “In fact, there were always meetings, but this is the first time it has been official... We must see this as a
very important step… [and] an intention to solve [the Kurdish issue].
1. The new Syria is a united Syria with its land and people. It is a democratic state that achieves equal citizenship and social justice, it is
proud of all of its peoples (Arabs, Assyrians, Syriacs, Kurds, Armenians, Turkmen, Circassians).
2. The political solution is the only way out of the Syrian crisis... In this context, the two parties support and work to fully implement [UN
Security Council] Resolution 2254, including the implementation of the Geneva Declaration and inclusion of other opposition platforms in
the Syrian political process, including the Syrian Democratic Council, as this resolution is a tool to enforce the right of the Syrian people to
regain Syrian sovereignty, and work to end…all occupations and forms of external intervention… leading to departure of all foreign forces
from Syrian territory.
3. Affirm Syria’s diversity, and commitment to finding a just, democratic solution to the Kurdish issue in Syria in accordance with
international covenants and the constitutional recognition of their rights … within Syria’s unity and territorial sovereignty.
4. The Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria is a necessity… It is important to benefit from the experience of the Autonomous
Administration…
5. The Syrian army is a national institution in which carrying of weapons is limited and does not interfere with politics. The Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF), which have seriously contributed to the war on terror and are still working to promote coexistence should be
involved within this institution…
Source: “MSD`ê encamên civîna bi Wezareta Karê Derve ya Rûsyayê re eşkere kir (SDC announced results of the meeting with Russian
Foreign Ministry)” Hawar News Agency, 31 August 2020. https://www.hawarnews.com/kr/haber/msd-encamn-civna-bi-wezareta-kar-derveya-rsyay-re-eskere-kir-h35508.html
After signing a protocol with the People’s Will Party on a political solution in Syria, the SDC’s delegation met with Russian Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov in Moscow.
Giving information about the details of the meeting, SDC Executive Committee Vice Chairman Hikmet Hebîb said, “We discussed the
political situation and projects with the Russian Foreign Minister according to the UNSC’s resolution 2254.
The [Russian Foreign] Ministry will support the participation of representatives of North and East Syria in the upcoming political process...
In his assessment of the meeting, Hebîb said, “We understood that during the meeting, the Ministry is of the opinion that the political
solution in Syria will not be possible without the participation of the peoples, especially the Autonomous Administration and SDC. During the
meeting, Lavrov said that participation in the political process regarding finding a solution in Syria is the right of the SDC and that meetings
on Syria such as Astana and Geneva will be incomplete if the SDC does not participate.”

RUSSIA MILITARY STRATEGY: IMPACTING 21ST CENTURY
REFORM AND GEOPOLITICS by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
Russian military’s main tasks are to maintain the combat readiness of the Armed Forces and to
ensure the Russian Federation’s defensive capability. Russia’s military heritage will assist this process tremendously. Combat readiness includes updated strategic thought, new equipment revelations, and future-war projections. Defensive capability includes not just protecting Russia’s territory, but also the security of the nation’s national interests and conduct of geopolitics. Capturing
the essence of these developments is the goal of this book. In the process a few templates for
understanding Russian military thought and actions are offered for further consideration and use.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195605/download
OE Watch | October 2020

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Economic Warfare: UAE Reportedly Seeking to Target
Turkish Investments in Egypt
OE Watch Commentary: Tensions between Turkey and Egypt peaked momentarily last summer, as disputes regarding Libya and the
delimiting of Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) in the eastern Mediterranean escalated into blustery saber-rattling by the domestic media
and political leaders of both countries. Behind these disputes, though, observers have highlighted the robust economic bilateral relationship.
The accompanying passage from al-Jazeera, for instance, argues that the relationship “takes place on two separate tracks,” one of them
economic and “on the upswing,” the other political and “on the decline.” The article’s somewhat rosy outlook notwithstanding, TurkishEgyptian trade volumes declined in the first six months of 2020, according to figures released by the Egyptian government and cited in the
second accompanying excerpt (so did trade with Egypt’s other partners across the globe, largely due to the pandemic). Recently, according
to the passage from al-Araby al-Jadid, authorities in the United Arab Emirates have begun collecting information to target Egyptian sectors
that have extensive Turkish investments, with the aim of crowding out Turkish businesses. The article’s author attributes the purported
Emirati plan to a broader strategy aimed at severing the sole remaining link and potential zone of reconciliation between Egypt and Turkey,
i.e. bilateral trade. In addition, the article adds, the strategy will seek to “poison the atmosphere between Erdogan and Turkish businessmen”
at a time of declining global commercial activity. The article’s author is skeptical that the approach will work, however, noting that “there is
an Egyptian preference for Turkish investments, as they are based on productive projects, and many of them are based on real partnerships
rather than on sales, as is the case with many Emirati projects, especially in the real estate sector.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…Official Egyptian sources revealed Emirati
moves to isolate Turkish investments and what
remains of Qatari investments in Egypt…”
Source:
‫ عداء سيايس يخطف األضواء من تعاون اقتصادي متنام‬..‫مرص وتركيا‬
“Egypt and Turkey… Political Enmity Obscures Developing Economic Cooperation,” al-Jazeera, 19 July 2020. https://tinyurl.com/y6f5b5hd

Media watchers may think that there is deep hostility between Egypt and Turkey. In fact, there is a combination of political conflict and
the realities of cooperation, especially in the field of trade. Looking closely, it seems that the relationship between the two countries takes
place on two separate tracks. One of them is on the upswing, involves trade and is in the interest of both parties. The other is on the decline,
involves politics and has been marred by tensions since the July 2013 coup in Egypt and then worsened by the impact of the conflict in Libya…
Observers say that the exclusion of Turkey - one of the major countries in the eastern Mediterranean region - by countries such as Cyprus or
Greece, in cooperation with Egypt and Israel, is like trying to ignore a large and ancient family within their sphere of influence, something
Source:
‫ مرص تخفض مستوى تجارتها مع تركيا‬..‫باألرقام‬
“In Numbers… Egyptian Trade Volume with Turkey Declines,” al-Ain, 22 July 2020. https://al-ain.com/article/egypt-cuts-trade-exchange-turkey

Trade exchange between Egypt and Turkey decreased during the period from January to May 2020, according to official data. Today
(Wednesday), the Egyptian Statistics Authority said that imports from Turkey decreased to 1.2 billion dollars, compared to 1.5 billion dollars
in 2019, adding that exports also decreased to 619 million dollars compared to 774 million dollars…
Cairo is preparing to deal a commercial slap to Ankara at the international level, over the attempts to flood the Egyptian market with Turkish
machine-made carpets. According to Ibrahim El-Sigini, head of the Egyptian Commercial Processing Sector, the details of the story go
back to early July, when Egypt, through that agency, requested that the World Trade Organization start a comprehensive investigation into
mechanical carpets, about which many dumping complaints had been received.
Source:
‫تحركات إماراتية لحصار االستثامرات الرتكية والقطرية يف مرص‬
“Emirati Moves to Isolate Turkish and Qatari Investments in Egypt,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 6 September 2020. https://tinyurl.com/y6khgoz3

Official Egyptian sources revealed Emirati moves to isolate Turkish investments and what remains of Qatari investments in Egypt by pushing
for huge investments in areas where these two countries have investments. According to the sources who spoke to al-Araby al-Jadid, Emirati
authorities have recently collaborated with various research companies to collect economic information on the sectors in which Turkish and
Qatari investments exist, particularly Ankara’s investments, in order to bring new Emirati groups into the Egyptian market and to isolate
Turkey’s economy. Turkish investments in Egypt are worth about $ 2.2 billion…
The sources attributed Emirati targeting of Turkish investments in Egypt by virtue of their being the only current avenue for the continuation
of relations between Cairo and Ankara as well as the path through which relations between the two countries can be repaired. According
to the sources, the UAE is seeking to poison the atmosphere between Erdogan and Turkish businessmen, on the grounds that his regional
policies have brought about crises to the Turkish economy and businessmen in many capitals, due to his antagonism to regional powers such
as Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the UAE…
The sources revealed that there is an Egyptian preference for Turkish investments, as they are based on productive projects, and many of
them are based on real partnerships rather than on sales, as is the case with many Emirati projects, especially in the real estate sector.
OE Watch | October 2020

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
New Jihadist Group Targets Joint Turkish-Russian Patrols
in Idlib, Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Over the summer, the hitherto unknown jihadist group “Khattab the Chechen Brigades” claimed several attacks
against Russian-Turkish patrols along Syria’s M4 highway. As of early September, they included at least two RPG attacks and a SVBIED that
injured one Turkish and three Russian soldiers. As noted in the first accompanying article, from al-Modon, Turkey and Russia responded by
conducting two impromptu training exercises to beef up patrol capabilities, the first on using drones to identify and target hostile forces along the
M4 patrol route and the second focused on equipment retrieval, medical aid provision, and “joint fire targeting operations.” The article notes that
the trainings were disclosed in a statement by the Russian Forces’ Hmeimim Air Base Headquarters, although there was no official comment from
Turkey.
Based on their claimed attacks, the Khattab Brigades’ objective is to disrupt Turkish-Russian patrols along the M4 highway and, more broadly,
put pressure on the tenuous status quo in Idlib Province. The group’s emergence remains murky and has become the object of intense speculation
in Arabic-language media. The name alludes to a charismatic Saudi jihadist leader who gained fame leading Arab fighters in the Chechen
Wars, until his death by poisoning in 2002. Various analysts refer to the group as the Khattab Brigades or the Chechen Brigades. The second
and third accompanying excerpts, from 180post and al-Araby al-Jadid, discuss several prominent hypotheses regarding the group’s origin. One
interpretation sees the Khattab Brigades as the work of experienced jihadists seeking to benefit from the strategic opportunities available in Idlib,
and more specifically the vulnerabilities or openings (‫ )تارغث‬created by the Russian-Turkish patrols. The group released a video on its Telegram
social media channel showing drone footage of the SVBIED attack and in which it refers to Turkish forces as the “NATO Turkish Army.” As ISIS
proved in the past, the information domain can be a cheap and effective force multiplier in Syria. Based on the attention they have received, the
Khattab Brigades have leveraged information effectively thus far, though it is unclear whether they are anything more than a temporary blip in
the age of endless information.
The Syrian government, perhaps with Iranian assistance, is mentioned in both accompanying excerpts as a potential backer of the new jihadist
group. The evidence is circumstantial, based largely on the idea it would benefit from greater disorder in the Russian-Turkish agreement on
Idlib. One of the articles mentions Turkish adversaries in the Gulf (i.e. the UAE) as potential backers of the Khattab Brigades. Jihadist-focused
interpretations in the articles include one that considers the group a surviving ISIS kernel seeking a return to Idlib and another that sees it as a
cell carrying out the dirty work for Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), Idlib’s dominant pro-status quo jihadist group. Whatever the case, the RussianTurkish agreement on Idlib signed last March appears to be coming under pressure and all parties involved in Syria are undoubtedly taking note.
End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…fighters who assessed the Idlib scene in light of external

interventions and found, in the crowding of players, holes to exploit in
order to change the strategic landscape and reshuffle its deck based on
the conflict of interests and contradictory goals of these players…”

Source:
‫مجموعة سلفية جديدة تستهدف “جيش الناتو الرتيك‬:‫”إدلب‬
“Idlib: New Salafist Group Targets the ‘NATO Turkish Army’,” al-Modon, 2 September 2020. https://tinyurl.com/y56jylaa

On Wednesday, the Turkish and Russian forces in Idlib conducted a joint training on using drones, “with the aim of destroying targets
determined by the two parties on the aforementioned international road,” according to a statement issued by the Russian Hmeimim Air Base.
This is the second training of the Turkish and Russian forces in Idlib, after a first training took place on Monday on “ joint fire targeting
operations against armed groups that refuse reconciliation, withdrawing damaged military equipment, and providing medical assistance”
according to the Russian base. There was no comment from Turkey on this matter.

OE Watch | October 2020

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: New Jihadist Group Targets Joint TurkishRussian Patrols in Idlib, Syria
Source:
“‫كتائب الشيشاين”… والدة مشبوهة ورسائل متشعبة‬
“Chechen Brigades… Suspicious Birth and Divergent Messages,” 180post.com, 18 August 2020. https://180post.com/archives/12338

In this context, some did not rule out that the Chechen Brigades were the creation of Syrian and Iranian intelligence, which they argue has
an interest in thwarting the Russian-Turkish agreement and returning to a military solution. Others speak of a plan led by Gulf countries,
aimed at embarrassing Ankara and making it appear unable to abide by its agreements signed with Moscow. A third group opines that the
leader of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, Abu Muhammad al-Julani, and his security apparatus, were the ones behind the formation of the Chechen
Brigades in order to act as a ready-made tool to do the dirty work that al-Julani cannot publicly claim because it is inconsistent with the new
image that he is working to market for himself, as a political leader leading a national liberation process against the Russian and Iranian
occupiers.
In the midst of this, two possibilities remain. The first is that the Chechen Brigades are merely a new name for ISIS cells that for months have
been the subject of jihadist tensions, in order to reintegrate them into the Idlib scene… The second possibility is that an elite group of foreign
and Syrian fighters who assessed the Idlib scene in light of external interventions and found, in the crowding of players, holes to exploit in
order to change the strategic landscape and reshuffle its deck based on the conflict of interests and contradictory goals of these players,
allowing them to form a new faction. Such group could potentially inherit the roles played by some factions, headed by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham.

Source:
“New Organization Emerges in Idlib: What’s the Truth?” al-Araby al-Jadid, 15 July 2020. https://tinyurl.com/y4742j8s

‫ ما حقيقته؟‬:‫تنظيم جديد يظهر يف إدلب‬

Al-Mustafa elaborated his three interpretations in a conversation with al-Araby al-Jadid, noting that “the first of them lies in the desire of
some sub-groups in larger organizations such as Hurras al-Din and the Turkistani Party to restart their military activity after a period of
forced calm imposed on them by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham and the Turkish army.”
The second interpretation relates to the struggle of these organizations with HTS, which came to the surface after the formation of
the“Fathbatu” operation room, which included defectors from the Nusra Front, including its leader in Qalamoun, Abu Malik al-Tali, and
which HTS defeated by force. In other words, it may be a message to HTS that the battle is not over, and that its presence as de-facto
government in Idlib does not mean it controls the military scene.
As for the third interpretation, according to al-Mustafa, it revolves around “regime infiltration, especially since the organization is new and
unknown, not to mention the regime’s desire to return to the military field in Idlib to temporarily cover the growing economic crisis, especially
after the Caesar Act.”
Al-Mustafa leans toward the second interpretation, saying, “This is the norm of jihadist organizations in all fields.”

In 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and
reestablished the nation’s military prowess.
This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to describe
how control over the security services and the
military have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | October 2020

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Evolving Russian-Syrian Pressure Campaign in
Northeast Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Per Arabic-language media reporting, joint Russian-Syrian efforts are underway to extend their influence in
northeast Syria at the expense of the US and its allies in the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). For Damascus, a key component of these efforts
involves mobilizing “popular resistance” against the US and the SDF, primarily by exploiting Arab-Kurdish fault lines in Deir Ezzor and Hasakah
provinces. Recent popular resistance actions described in the article in northeast Syria include protests and blockades, the formation of Arab tribal
militias, and an ongoing campaign highlighting the misdeeds of the US and its SDF allies. According to the accompanying article from al-Araby
al-Jadid, the coming months may see direct attacks against American interests and personnel that will be “attributed to unknown persons or to
ISIS,” as the Syrian government seeks to exploit the upcoming US elections in order to put further pressure on areas beyond its control in the
country’s northeast.
As seen in another article from al-Araby al-Jadid, the evolving Russian-Syrian pressure campaign has also leveraged rifts within Syria’s main
Kurdish political party, the Democratic Union Party (YPG), between the pro-US faction led by SDF commander Mazloum Abdi and loyalists to
the Turkish-based leadership of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). Cemîl Bayik, often described as the PKK’s operational leader, has become
the public face of the anti-Abdi camp and is naturally being courted by Damascus.
In the third accompanying article, Moscow recently hosted leaders of the Syrian Democratic Council (SDC), the SDF’s political counterpart,
to sign a “memorandum of understanding” with the head of the “People’s Will,” a “tolerated opposition” Syrian political party led by a Syrian
Kurdish politician named Qadri Jamil. Jamil has lived in Moscow for much of the past decade and is emerging as a key fulcrum for Russian
influence in northeast Syria. The Syrian and Turkish governments have both reacted tepidly to the agreement, though for different reasons. Some
commentary interprets the agreement as a hedge by the YPG’s pro-US camp, encouraged both by US policy uncertainty and by the evolving
Russian-Syrian pressure campaign in northeast Syria.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“…during the coming period, the regime may try to increase
pressure on the Americans in coordination with Russia…”
Source:
‫ استاملة العشائر ضد األمريكيني و”قسد‬:‫”النظام السوري رشقي الفرات‬
“The Syrian Regime East of the Euphrates: Using the Tribes Against the Americans and the SDF,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 20 August 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
y27j5qwd

In the context of its exploitation of these incidents, the regime encouraged some residents of Hasakah province to organize protests in front
of the Hasakah city Justice Palace and the Qamishli Cultural Center denouncing “the American aggression” at its forces’ checkpoint in the
countryside of Qamishli… The regime is also trying to win over the Arab tribes east of the Euphrates, taking advantage of the state of popular
frustration against the SDF and its practices, such as random arrests, recruitment of youth in its ranks, and its monopolizing of oil wealth and
leadership in areas with an Arab majority, backed by American support…
The Al Bouassi clan in al-Hasakah province also announced its readiness to join the uprising of the al-Akaidat and al-Bakara clans in the
eastern villages of Deir Al-Zour countryside, against the American forces and the SDF… On August 9, the al-Akaidat tribe announced the
formation of a military wing in coordination with regime forces, after the assassination of Mutashhar Al-Hafl, one of its most prominent
sheikhs at the beginning of the month…
These efforts on the part of the regime are carried out in coordination with the Russian side, which began to penetrate east of the Euphrates
with the start of the most recent Turkish military operation there last year. This came in conjunction with a Russian move to control the
Qamishli airport and other areas under the regime’s control, and to bring aid to the region. The Russian expansion east of the Euphrates
came after a decline in the Iranian role in the region after the killing of the Quds Force commander Qassem Soleimani, which paved the
way for the Russians to co-opt some tribal sheikhs in the Tayy and Harb regions and the tribes of Bani Sab’a, Al-Buassi, Albu Rashid and
Al-Ghanamah. The Russians put forward plans to recruit members of the tribes into irregular military battalions, with the aim of pulling the
popular and tribal rug from under the feet of the Americans in that region.
In a statement to al-Araby al-Jadid, political analyst Shadi Abdullah said that the Syrian regime is trying to take advantage of developments
east of the Euphrates and of the presidential elections in the United States to increase pressure on the American presence in the region…
According to the political analyst, “during the coming period, the regime may try to increase pressure on the Americans in coordination with
Russia. It is not unlikely that we will witness bombing operations on American sites or patrols attributed to unknown persons or to ISIS, that
will kill American soldiers with the aim of pressuring Washington and get it to think again about withdrawing from Syria, or at least from the
oil wells that the regime is in dire need of now, in light of the suffocating economic crisis.”
OE Watch | October 2020

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: The Evolving Russian-Syrian Pressure
Campaign in Northeast Syria

Qadri Jamil (2012).

Source: kassioun newspaper, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Qadri_Jamil_%D9%82%D8%AF%D8%B1%D9%8A_%D8%AC%D9%85
%D9%8A%D9%84.jpg, / CC BY-SA (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)

Source:
‫إرضاء روسيا أم مناكفة األمريكيني؟‬..‫األكراد يطبعون مع قدري جميل‬
“Kurds Normalize with Qadri Jamil… Pleasing Russia or Opposing the Americans?” al-Araby al-Jadid, 1 September 2020. https://tinyurl.com/y4nqgp9y

The Kurdish delegation included Ilham Ahmed, the head of the SDC executive body, its deputy Hikmat Al-Habib, Sanharib Barsoum, head of
the council’s Syriac Union, in addition to Sihanouk Dibo… There has been an increase in talks recently about factions pushing some towards
Russia and the regime, while other insist on continuing the full alliance with the United States. In a statement to al-Modon, the writer Hoshink
Osei said, “Despite the preponderance of the PYD’s relations with the Americans, its links with the Russians have not been cut off”… Many
believe that there is a sharp division within the “Democratic Union” (PYD), which has long been considered the Syrian wing of the PKK, as
party leaders in Syria, headed by Mazloum Abdi, the military leader of the SDF, head toward disengagement from the PKK, with American
support…
Source:
‫ ما هي دالالتها؟‬..‫ مذكرة تفاهم بني حليفي روسيا وأمريكا‬:‫سوريا‬
“Syria: Memorandum of Understanding Between Allies of Russia and America… What are its Implications?” 180post.com, 3 September 2020.
https://180post.com/archives/12707

Were it not that the Kurdish delegation that signed the memorandum of understanding was led by Ilham Ahmed, who is known for her
proximity to General Mazloum Abdi, commander in chief of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) and the godfather of the Kurdish alliance
with Washington, some of them could say that the signing of the memorandum comes in the context of Kurdish-Kurdish differences and
reflects the desire of a wing inside the SDC or the SDF to restore balance to the relationship with Moscow after it was severely disrupted by
the Kurdish push towards Washington led by Mazloum Abdi… The Kurdish leadership, led by General Mazloum Abdi, may have sensed this
Russian desire and found no objection to it, especially as it has its own concerns in the lead up to the US election…
But the memorandum’s messages are not limited to the Russian and American sides. Ankara undoubtedly is concerned by this memorandum,
not because its bitter Kurdish opponents signed it, but because the way the memorandum may be politically employed in ways that are of
disadvantage with Ankara’s expansionist policy… Ankara’s statements do not represent a final position of opposition until it becomes clear
whether the path of how the understanding and memoranda are employed is in its interests.
…Damascus is expected to avoid rejecting the memorandum in order to not disturb the Russian ally and also to not lose the terms it agrees
with. At the same time to highlight the memorandum as a document that rejects the idea of the occupation, which reinforces Damascus’s new
path in the east Euphrates, represented by attempts to launch popular resistance against the American occupation forces.
OE Watch | October 2020

53

AFRICA
The Militarization of Turkey’s Africa Policy
OE Watch Commentary: In the past two decades, Turkey has been
steadily raising its profile in several African countries. Turkey’s outreach
in Africa is multi-faceted. It includes establishing military bases, finding
a market for its defense industry, engaging in power and influence
competition with other regional rivals, and looking for markets and
investment opportunities for its business community and humanitarian
reasons. While the first article examines Turkey’s relations with countries
in Africa’s Sahel region, the second article analyzes Turkey’s military
activities in Africa.
The first article analyzes Turkey’s relations with Algeria, Morocco,
and Tunisia. In addition to a significant trade partnership, Turkey has
also shown its eagerness “to cooperate with Algeria in the defense and
military” sectors. When visiting Algeria in January 2020, the Turkish
President tried to secure access to Algeria’s air and naval bases for Turkey’s
operation in Libya. While Algeria did not commit to allowing access to its
bases, it showed interest in purchasing military hardware from Turkey.
Moroccan and Turkish relations are mostly based on trade and investment.
Turkish companies have invested heavily in Morocco in various sectors
including “construction, wholesale trade, textile, furniture, iron and steel.”
However, Morocco requested to renegotiate its trade agreement with
Turkey, claiming that the free trade agreement between the two countries
puts it at a disadvantage. Turkey’s recent engagement with Tunisia was to
ask for “logistics and strategic support in the Libyan conflict.” According
to the article, this was to use Tunisia’s Cerbe airport to intervene militarily
in Libya and for permission to use some military bases as logistics hubs.
Like Turkey, Tunisia also supports the Government of National Accord
in Libya, and this support has the potential to tilt the balance of power in
Turkey’s favor. However, as the author points out, the possibility of Tunisia
getting involved in the Libyan conflict is unlikely.
The second article states that during the Turkish President’s visit to the
continent, he advertised military hardware manufactured by the Turkish
defense industry and “sought to forge military collaboration.” The article
notes that Turkey’s Africa policy is shaped by a rivalry between Turkey and
its regional adversaries as evidenced by its military activities in Africa.
In 2017, Turkey established a military base in Mogadishu to counter the
activities of Gulf countries in the Horn of Africa. The same year, Turkey
Topographic map in English of the Red Sea.
also leased Suakin Island from Sudan to build “a port for civilian and Source: Eric Gaba via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ARed_Sea_topographic_map-en.jpg, CC BY-SA
4.0-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.0
military purposes” among other things. According to the author, these
actions prompted Turkey’s regional rivals Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia to establish bases in the region to counter Turkey.
The article indicates that besides the Horn of Africa, Turkey has been trying to cement its presence in Libya with a military intervention and
has been seeking to establish an air and naval base there. This intervention put Turkey at odds with Egypt and the UAE in Libya. Additionally,
the author says that Turkey’s engagement in Libya and with former French colonies (Chad, Gabon, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and Senegal) has
fueled tensions between Turkey and France. In July, Turkey’s Foreign Minister signed a cooperation deal on military training with Niger. The
article states that this deal “sparked speculation that Turkey is seeking a military base there.” Turkey has also tried to “add a military dimension”
to its relations with Chad. The author also cautions that Turkey’s policy to militarize Africa may risk Turkey’s non-military relations with various
African countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“Turkey’s opening to Africa… is becoming increasingly
militarized, fueling the regional influence wars between
Turkey and Qatar on one side and Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and France on the other.”
OE Watch | October 2020

54

AFRICA
Continued: The Militarization of Turkey’s Africa Policy
Source: Metin Gurcan,“Why Turkey is trying to improve its profile in the Maghreb” al-monitor, 10 July 2020. https://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/originals/2020/07/turkey-libya-tunisia-morocco-ankara-trying-improve-profile.html
Besides its geopolitical location that can serve as a logistics hub for Turkey’s Africa dossier, Algeria is the fourth-largest economy of
Africa with a population of some 40 million and with significant natural gas and oil reserves. It is also the fourth-largest liquefied natural
gas exporter to Turkey after Russia, Iran and Azerbaijan. In the energy field, a Turkish conglomerate reached an agreement with Algeria’s
Sonatrach in 2018, to establish a petrochemical site in Adana worth $1.4 billion. Mutual contacts between the two countries for joint deep sea
drilling and seismic research off the coast of Algeria are also underway.
…
Turkey is also keen to cooperate with Algeria in the defense and military field, in return for its logistics support for Libya. Given its arms
race with Morocco, Algeria spends some $10 billion a year and Turkey reportedly offers lucrative deals to the country. During his visit in
January, President Erdogan asked Algiers to access Algeria’s air and naval bases for its operations in Libya, reiterating these offers.
Algiers is reportedly interested in Turkish-made equipment including Kirpi and Vuran model armored vehicles, products of BMC; armed
drones; radars and surveillance systems; night-day vision systems; bulletproof vests; military textile and uniforms; and radios.
For Morocco, the bilateral trade with Turkey gained momentum following the free trade agreement in 2006… Turkish companies… operate in
various sectors including construction, wholesale trade, textile, furniture, iron and steel…
Yet economic ties soured as the huge trade deficit in favor of Turkey has forced Rabat to ask for a reevaluation of a free trade agreement
between the two countries.
…
…Possible Tunisian support for Turkey on Libya can tip the balance of power in the war-torn country in favor of Libya’s Turkish-backed
Government of National Accord. Turkey expressed its keenness for Tunisian logistics and strategic support in the Libyan conflict during
Erdogan’s unexpected visit to Tunis in December 2019. Reportedly, Ankara particularly asked Tunisia for the use of Cerbe airport to intervene
militarily in Libya and permission to use some military bases as logistics hubs…
However, Tunis’ open support for the Turkish stance over Libya seems highly unlikely given the widespread refusal of Tunisian society to get
involved in the Libyan conflict…

Source: Fehim Tastekin,“Turkey’s militarized Africa opening fuels influence wars” al-monitor, 31 August 2020. https://www.al-monitor.com/
pulse/originals/2020/08/turkey-africa-opening-fuels-cloud-wars-libya-somalia-niger.html
Turkey’s opening to Africa, which began as a diplomatic and humanitarian endeavor two decades ago, is becoming increasingly militarized,
fueling the regional influence wars between Turkey and Qatar on one side and Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and France on
the other.
…
Since 2002, the number of Turkish embassies in Africa has risen from 12 to 42 and its business cooperation councils from six to 46, while the
African routes of the Turkish Airlines have increased from four to 60. Drawing on this expanded network, Erdogan has moved to add military
dimensions to bilateral ties. In his visits to the continent, he has not only advertised Turkish military products but also sought to forge military
collaborations.
In the fall of 2017… Turkey inaugurated a $50-million military base in Mogadishu that established a new equilibrium in the Horn of Africa…
Later in the year, Sudan agreed to lease its Suakin Island to Turkey for 99 years, sparking anxiety of an “Ottoman return” to the Red Sea
among rival countries. The deal involved the restoration of historical monuments on the island, once an Ottoman post, but Turkey’s plans also
included the construction of a port for civilian and military purposes…
…
Erdogan’s ambitions in Africa, however, have flared up anew since the signing of two critical deals with the Tripoli government in November
2019 and the ensuing Turkish military intervention in Libya. Turkey is seeking a lasting air and naval presence in Libya, a plan that if realized
would further boost its Africa venture. Erdogan’s efforts to advance ties with former French colonies such as Chad, Gabon, Mali, Mauritania,
Niger and Senegal have already stoked the rivalry between Turkey and France.
…
Libya’s southern neighbor Niger is another country on Turkey’s radar in the influence war in Africa. Cavusoglu visited Niger July 21, signing
a cooperation deal on military training among others. The deal sparked speculation that Turkey is seeking a military base in Niger…
… And by militarizing its Africa policy, Turkey risks opening cracks in the network of ties it has built across the continent over the past two
decades.
OE Watch | October 2020

55

AFRICA
Chad’s Drug Trade Fuels Regional Terrorism
OE Watch Commentary: This past July a drug trafficking case tried in Chad was
unprecedented both for the quantity of drugs involved—246 cases of the synthetic opiate
Tramadol worth approximately 22 million USD—and the sentencing of ten high-ranking
security and intelligence officials. As the excerpted accompanying article from the South
African Institute for Security Studies explains, Tramadol is not the only contraband item
being trafficked through Chad. Hashish, weapons, stolen vehicles, and humans are also
being smuggled across the country that is frequently cited as one of Africa’s most corrupt.
This trafficking has implications not just for Chad but also several bordering nations as it
generates funds for terrorist groups, organized criminal enterprises, and armed gangs, with
the end result that violence and conflict become staples across the region.
Libya in particular has significant trafficking ties to Chad, in part because much of the
border area consists of desert that impedes effective policing. The large-scale trafficking
between the two has helped fuel the Libyan conflict, creating instability that has been difficult
to rectify. An attempt has been made by Chad to stop the flow of contraband by placing one
of the trafficking routes, the Cotonou Road, under surveillance, but traffickers have not only
changed routes, they have also increased the scale of their operations.
Other countries that border Chad, including the Central African Republic, Niger,
Cameroon, Nigeria, and the Sudan, have also been adversely affected by the transnational
trafficking operations. Also impacted has been Benin, which serves as a transit point for
Tramadol shipped from India. From Benin the drug makes its way to Chad via Niger.
The Tramadol trial is important in showing Chad is taking some steps to combat drug
trafficking even if the criminals are high ranking officials. However, as the article notes, since Much of the Chad-Libya border is open desert, impeding police
efforts to stop cross border drug trafficking.
this is a transnational problem solutions also need to be transnational. Stronger involvement Source: Abakar B/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Toyota_4X4.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
from Interpol as well as tapping existing regional organizations such as the Agence Nationale d’Investigation Financiere with its anti-money
laundering capabilities are some of the author’s suggestions. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Considering possible connections between trafficking and
insecurity in the country and the neighborhood, trafficking must be
curbed to prevent entrepreneurs of violence and insecurity (armed
gangs, highway robbers, highway criminals and violent extremist
groups) in Chad from creating destabilizing interdependencies.”
Source: Remadji Hoinathy, “Chad’s Illegal Drug Trade Contributes to Regional Insecurity,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 25
August 2020. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/chads-illegal-drug-trade-contributes-to-regional-insecurity
Considering possible connections between trafficking and insecurity in the country and the neighborhood, trafficking must be curbed to
prevent entrepreneurs of violence and insecurity (armed gangs, highway robbers, highway criminals and violent extremist groups) in Chad
from creating destabilizing interdependencies.
In other contexts, entrepreneurs of insecurity and violence take advantage of illicit activities to strengthen logistical, operational and
financial bases and enhance their resilience to state responses. In 2017, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime also warned of the
extent of tramadol trafficking in the Sahel and its use by non-state armed groups.
Addressing trafficking in Chad must begin within the state. Court documents reveal a vast transnational network with strong Chadian
connections and huge sums of money circulating between those involved in trafficking. This is sometimes used in attempts to corrupt the
judiciary and security environment.
Even with prominent members of the network – those sentenced on 24 July – behind bars, fighting drug trafficking will be long and arduous.
The involvement of senior members of the army and intelligence services presents hurdles. The investigation by Chad’s National Security
Agency (ANS) following the Tramadol case implicated 11 people, including two army generals and a colonel, as well as ANS, police and
gendarmerie officials, traders and diverse intermediaries.
OE Watch | October 2020

56

AFRICA
The African Union’s African Peace and Security
Architecture: Underfunded and with Mixed Results
OE Watch Commentary: Shortly after the inception of the African Union (AU)
in 2002, the foundation was laid for the creation of the AU’s African Peace and
Security Architecture, APSA. As the accompanying excerpted article from the
South African news site The Conversation explains, APSA is guided by the AU’s
mandate, which allows intervention in a country under certain circumstances,
such as genocide. This was a substantial change from the non-interventionist
policy of the AU’s predecessor, the Organization of African Unity. According to
the article, even with the new policy, the ability of APSA to bring about peace on
the continent has had mixed results due to several shortcomings.
Before describing those shortcomings it is necessary to first look at APSA’s
structure. It is comprised of five pillars: the Peace and Security Council, which
serves as the main decision making body; The Panel of the Wise, which advises
the Peace and Security Council; the Continental Early Warning System; the
African Standby Force; and the Peace Fund, tasked with funding APSA’s The African Standby Force will incorporate troops from many countries, such
these from Burundi.
activities. It is the last, the Peace Fund, which may cause the APSA its most Source: US Army Africa/Wikimedia Commons,ashttps://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Burundi_peacekeepers_prepare_for_
next_rotation_to_Somalia,_Bjumbura,_Burundi_012210_(4325510666).jpg, CC BY 2.0
significant problems. As the article notes, so far it has raised only $160 million of
its $400 million target, thus impeding the ability of the other components to successfully complete their work.
Besides money issues, the author discusses the role politics plays in decision making by the Peace and Security Council and indicates that it can
hamper APSA’s response to conflicts or potential conflicts. While the Council was quick to suspend Mali from the AU after the recent coup, it has
remained relatively quiet with regards to the escalating conflict in Cameroon.
Another pillar described in this article, the African Standby Force, reflects the difficulties when trying to organize multiple nations for military
purposes. Its formation came after a long struggle with issues such as diverse states of readiness among the member nations, as well as their
varying degrees of interest in intervention. Though it is reportedly now fully operational, it still has not been deployed, and questions remain
regarding its capabilities.
Despite these difficulties, as the article notes, APSA is still a valuable resource for Africa, with its work with regional economic communities
and mechanisms in helping to prevent or manage conflict being particularly notable. However, its financial problems, which constrain many of its
activities ranging from providing early warnings of potential conflicts to actually paying for troops when necessary, remain a chronic issue. End
OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Overall, the success of the African Peace and Security Architecture is
paramount for Africa’s development and human security. Its value in the
continent’s peace and security agenda should not be underestimated”
Source: Dominique Mystris, “The AU’s peace and security architecture: filling the gaps,” The Conversation (South Africa),” 23 August 2020.
https://theconversation.com/the-aus-peace-and-security-architecture-filling-the-gaps-144554
Overall, the success of the African Peace and Security Architecture is paramount for Africa’s development and human security. Its value in
the continent’s peace and security agenda should not be underestimated.
The AU’s African Peace and Security Architecture was established when the organization adopted the Protocol on the Establishment of the
Peace and Security Council in July 2002. It is guided by the AU’s mandate and its interventionist approach.
The mandate of the Continental Early Warning System is conflict prevention and anticipating events…Both are notoriously difficult.
Prevention and anticipation rely on accurate data and political will to act, yet the Peace and Security Council tends to react more to conflicts
rather than preempt them.
Composed of contingents from the five regions, the African Standby Force’s job is to implement decisions made by the Peace and Security
Council. This includes authorized interventions, conflict and dispute prevention, observation, monitoring and any type of peace support
mission, humanitarian assistance and peacebuilding.
OE Watch | October 2020

57

AFRICA
Mali: Why All of Its Coups Attempts Are Successful
OE Watch Commentary: For those keeping count
of the number of successful versus attempted coups in
Mali, as the excerpted accompanying article from African
Arguments—a leading scholarly publication about the
region—the tally is now up to four out of four, or 100%.
That is an impressive number, especially considering that
worldwide coups are becoming less frequent and when
they do occur, only about 40% are successful. The article’s
author explains that Mali’s coup success rate can be traced
to at least two factors.
The first factor is explained in context of Mali’s
independence from France in 1960. Mali was different from
many of the other African countries gaining independence
at about the same time. Prior to that independence
those nations had security forces established by their
colonial rulers to suppress dissent as well as protect the
colonial regime. The author’s argument states that when
independence occurred, many of the new governments
inherited these forces, and, expanding upon them, used
A Malian National Guard Soldier at the airport during 2012 protests.
Source: VOA/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VOA_Mali_National_Guard_soldier.jpg, Public Domain
them to repress their own people. Mali however did not
establish its army until after independence. With no serious external foes and also no history of repression, this new army became the protector of
the country’s peace and security, thus creating what the article describes as a tacit social contract between the army and the people.
According to the author, in 1968, an economic crisis coupled with frustration of the president’s management of it, triggered the first coup. It was
a popularly supported one. Rather than transition to a civilian government as was supposed to happen, the coup leader instituted a police state that
lasted for 22 years. However, despite that outcome, additional coups occurred against unpopular presidents again in 1991, 2012, and most recently
in August of this year. With parliament and the judiciary unable to implement sufficient checks on executive power, the author believes that these
coups were seen by many as necessary and perhaps the only way to rid the country of an unwanted leader.
The second factor behind Mali’s numerous and successful coups, as explained in the article, is related to foreign countries having a strong
interest in Mali’s security situation. This has led to foreign governments bolstering Malian military strength through training and/or donations.
At the same time, Malian leaders, including ineffectual ones, are also bolstered. This results in a situation the article essentially describes as an
emphasis on security at the expense of good governance. The author’s conclusion is that, based the past paradigms, the recent August coup was
similarly a result of a strong military coupled with an unpopular president. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“In fact, if we exclude short-lived interim leaders, Mali – which until not too
long ago was held up as a beacon of democracy in the region – has only had
one president that has not left office at the barrel of a gun.”
Source: Kodjo Tchioffo, “4 out of 4: Why has Mali had so many successful coups?” African Arguments, 27 August 2020. https://
africanarguments.org/2020/08/27/4-out-of-4-why-has-mali-coups-had-so-many-successful-coups/
In fact, if we exclude short-lived interim leaders, Mali – which until not too long ago was held up as a beacon of democracy in the region –
has only had one president that has not left office at the barrel of a gun.
In the just 60 years since independence, Mali has experienced four coups. They have all been successful. They have all be welcomed by
citizens at the time. And, sadly, they have all failed to meet the aspirations of the people. The 1968 coup led to nearly 25 years of dictatorship.
The 1991 coup ushered in relatively stable but ineffectual leadership. The 2012 coup prompted devastating military losses in the north. In all
these instances, it was only a matter of time before Malian soldiers again felt the need to intervene, starting the same cycle anew.
Mali’s very first president, Modibo Keita, was deposed in a coup in 1968. Mali’s second president, Moussa Traoré, met the same fate in 1991.
A period of relative political stability followed, until Amani Toumani Touré (known as ATT) was ousted too in 2012. Eight years later, IBK has
left office the same way.
OE Watch | October 2020

58

AFRICA
South Sudan’s Disarmament Disaster Leaves Over 120
Dead
OE Watch Commentary: In what the excerpted accompanying
article from Radio France Internationale describes as a
disarmament exercise gone awry, over 120 people were killed in
South Sudan’s Warrap State. The death toll included 45 soldiers
and 82 young people from the local area, but the numbers on both
sides are expected to rise.
The exact details of what led to the violent confrontation
are a bit uncertain. A spokesman from South Sudan People’s
Defense Forces—the country’s army—said the trouble began
when soldiers and armed young people started to argue. After
that initial confrontation was dealt with, the youths then gathered
to attack an army position. However, local sources claim the
violence began when a scuffle occurred in the market, resulting
in a soldier killing a young person who had refused to hand over
his weapon during the disarmament operation. This led to the
locals attacking the soldiers. Whatever the initial cause of the
confrontation, fighting between the two armed groups ensued
In South Sudan weapons are often used for fighting ethnic conflicts and to prevent cattle rustling.
and the number of dead on both sides soon increased.
Source: Steve Evans/Wikimedia/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:South_Sudan_022.jpg, CC BY 2.0
As the article notes, six years into a civil war and the country is awash in weapons. These are not only for use in the fighting among opposing
ethnic groups but also for the largely rural population to protect themselves against looting and cattle rustling. As these people do not have
confidence in the military and other security forces to protect them, they are very hesitant to surrender their arms, deeming them essential.
While this brief article does not mention it, a peace deal signed this year, which included an agreement on disarmament of civilians, is supposed
to end the civil war. However, the world’s newest country has had several failed peace deals before, and strong concerns over the present one give
many people pause as to whether the fighting will really end. It is against this backdrop, uncertainty regarding peace as well as a desire to protect
themselves from local crime, that the disarmament operation was attempted. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“More than 120
people have been
killed in South
Sudan’s Warrap
State during a
disarmament
exercise gone awry,
the country’s army
spokesperson said on
Wednesday”
Warrap State, South Sudan.
Source: TRADOC G2

Source: “127 soldiers and civilians killed in South Sudan over disarmament dispute,” RFI (Radio France Internationale), 12 August 2020.
https://www.rfi.fr/en/africa/20200812-127-soldiers-and-civilians-killed-in-south-sudan-over-disarmament-dispute
More than 120 people have been killed in South Sudan’s Warrap State during a disarmament exercise gone awry, the country’s army
spokesperson said on Wednesday. Clashes between soldiers and armed civilians in Tonj town, some 430 kilometres north west of the capital
Juba, were sparked by a disagreement over an operation to disarm civilians.
Dujarric said women and children had fled in fear of their lives and the UN was sending a peacekeeping patrol to assess security.
OE Watch | October 2020

59

AFRICA
Polio Is Eradicated and Spreading in Africa: Explaining
This Seeming Contradiction
OE Watch Commentary: While the world’s eyes
and headlines are focused on the comparatively recent
COVID-19 disease, news of spread in Africa of polio
tends, tends to be buried. However, as the excerpted article
from the Sudanese website Dabanga explains, nine cases
of polio have been detected in Sudan. And it is not just
Sudan experiencing polio outbreaks. So far this year there
have been 133 cases in 14 African countries.
When there is news from Africa this year regarding
polio, it is often declaring the eradication of the disease on
the continent. This seeming contradiction—the eradication
of a disease that is still spreading—can be explained by
examining the virus that causes the paralyzing disease
and the vaccine against it in more depth. The polio that
was eradicated from Africa was caused by the “wild type”
virus, meaning it was naturally occurring. Actually there
are three “wild types” of poliovirus—called serotypes
1, 2, and 3—and it is these that have purportedly been
successfully eliminated from Africa, mostly through the
use of vaccination.

Polio eradication efforts, such as pictured here, are being hampered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Source: Louie Rosencrans/CDC/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/cdcglobal/34692993536, CC BY 2.0

Many of the vaccines used contain a weakened version of one or more of the serotypes. Unfortunately, on rare occasions a weakened form can
revert back to one that can paralyze. That reverted form, which is called a vaccine-derived poliovirus, can spread to other individuals who were
not vaccinated. Those 133 cases in Africa this year are from vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2.
The worldwide campaign to totally eradicate polio has suffered several setbacks, including the inability to vaccinate in regions held by terrorists.
In 2020, as described in this and other articles, an additional problem has arisen in the form of COVID-19, which has diverted public health
resources from combating polio. As the article emphasizes, if preventive immunization campaigns are not restarted soon, the result could be bleak,
with the possibility of significantly more cases occurring in Sudan and other African countries, and health care systems already struggling with
COVID-19 straining even more under the additional pressure. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Across the African continent, 133 type 2 [polio] cases
in 14 countries have been reported in 2020, significantly
higher than 47 this time last year.”
Source: “Nine new polio cases confirmed by Sudan MoH,” Dabanga (Sudan), 14 August 2020. https://www.dabangasudan.org/en/all-news/
article/nine-new-polio-cases-confirmed-by-sudan-moh
Ethiopia, Chad, and the Central African Republic have reported vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) cases this year. Chad has
reported 62 cVDPV2 cases in 2020. Across the African continent, 133 type 2 cases in 14 countries have been reported in 2020, significantly
higher than 47 this time last year.
Polio cases are surging in many countries, and models paint a “pretty bleak picture” if campaigns don’t restart soon, said Michel Zaffran,
Director of the Polio Eradication Programme at the World Health Organization, last month: “For now, countries will only be responding to
outbreaks; preventive campaigns remain on hold.”
In “urgent” recommendations in late May, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative said it expected circulation of polioviruses “to increase
exponentially during the upcoming high season,” raising the possibility of “uncontrolled multi-country outbreaks.”

OE Watch | October 2020

60

AFRICA
Mozambique: Security Agreement for Natural Gas
Project Raises Sovereignty Concerns
OE Watch Commentary: On 21 August of this year, French
multinational oil and gas company Total signed a security
agreement with the Government of Mozambique (GoM) to
provide “logistic support” to Mozambican armed forces in
exchange for the protection of Total’s liquified natural gas
(LNG) project, according to the company’s accompanying
excerpted press release from 24 August 2020. The project is
being developed on the Afungi Peninsula along the country’s
northern coast. It is the largest single foreign direct investment
in Africa to date, drawing investments totaling $20 billion.

Map of Cabo Delgado Province, Mozambique.
Source: Joseph Hartung, October 2020

The agreement was made as the security situation in
northern Mozambique’s Cabo Delgado province, where
the project is based, continues to deteriorate. An Islamist
insurgent group, Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jammah (ASWJ),
took control of a key port town in the province in August.
According to second article from The Africa Report, an
English language magazine, ASWJ is capitalizing on low
morale, where “soldiers are ready to drop their uniforms and
weapons to ‘run away from a war which they do not see as
theirs.’” The article also points out that “the Mozambican
army currently lacks the financial resources or a coordinated
regional approach to effectively stem ASWJ’s advances.”

The article states that ASJW is becoming better equipped
and better organized, “closing the capability gap with the Mozambican military,” and compares the situation to the initial stages of the conflict
with Boko Haram in Nigeria. The Africa Report article assesses that while an imminent attack on the project “is unlikely,” the risk is growing.
The article also predicts an increasing frequency of opportunistic attacks on the project’s personnel and “key infrastructure installations” in the
province, causing greater disruption to supply lines.
In a commentary on the security pact between the GoM and Total, a Mozambican NGO, the Center for Democracy and Development (CDD),
argued that it was effectively “privatizing” the services of the military in violation of Mozambican law and “jeopardizing” the country’s sovereignty.
The CDD recognized the need for the military to protect LNG projects but asserted that the current arrangement, in addition to being illegal, would
create pay disparities between Mozambican troops protecting LNG assets and those conducting other operations in the province. This, according
to the CDD, could further “demoralize the troops deployed to protect the civilian population and other national interests” who lack Total’s logistic
support. End OE Watch Commentary (Hartung)

“…By allowing the deployment of the defense and security forces
(FDS) troops to protect private interests in exchange for monetary
payments, the government is privatizing the FDS services and,
consequently, violating the Defense and Security Policy…”

Source: “Total Signs Agreement with the Government of Mozambique Regarding the Security of Mozambique LNG Project,” Total S.A.
(France), 24 August 2020. https://www.total.com/media/news/communiques/total-signs-agreement-with-the-government-of-mozambiqueregarding-the
This new Memorandum of Understanding provides that a Joint Task Force shall ensure the security of Mozambique LNG project activities in
Afungi site and across the broader area of operations of the project. Mozambique LNG shall provide logistic support to the Joint Task Force.

OE Watch | October 2020

61

AFRICA
Continued: Mozambique: Security Agreement for Natural
Gas Project Raises Sovereignty Concerns
Source: Andrew MacDonald, “Mozambique: Sophistication of Islamic insurgency threatens LNG plans,” The Africa Report (France), 24
August 2020. https://www.theafricareport.com/38238/mozambique-sophistication-of-islamic-insurgency-threatens-lng-plans/
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jammah (ASWJ) has developed into a well-equipped and coordinated insurgency and is now closing the capability gap with
Mozambican security forces.”
As with the Nigerian army in the initial stages of the fight against Boko Haram, the Mozambican army currently lacks the financial resources
or a coordinated regional approach to effectively stem ASWJ’s advances.
Morale is low, and many soldiers are ready to drop their uniforms and weapons to ‘run away from a war which they do not see as theirs.’
Although an imminent attack on the Afungi peninsula is unlikely, the risk of such an attack has grown considerably in the last few months.
“Operators must anticipate further disruptions to their supply lines as ASWJ will likely continue to regularly target key infrastructure
installations across Cabo Delgado.

Source: Adriano Nuvunga, “Security Memorandum between the Government and Total jeopardizes national sovereignty,” Center for
Democracy and Development (Mozambique), 26 August 2020. https://cddmoz.org/protection-of-mozambique-lng-project-securitymemorandum-between-the-government-and-total-jeopardizes-national-sovereignty/
By allowing the deployment of FDS troops to protect private interests in exchange for monetary payments, the government is privatizing the
FDS services and, consequently, violating the Defense and Security Policy, approved by Law 17/97 of 1 October.
The staff assigned to Afungi will have better wage and working conditions than those who will be fighting terrorism elsewhere in the same
province of Cabo Delgado. This may demoralize the troops deployed to protect the civilian population and other national interests without the
right to subsidies.
In return, the Mozambique LNG project will provide logistical support to the Joint Task Force. In the communiqué, Total does not specify the
type of logistical support, but it is known that it should include equipment and money that should be used by the Government to pay subsidies
to the FDS troops deployed to protect oil operations in Afungi.

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment Watch
dating back to 2011. They provide
translated selections with background
from a diverse range of foreign
media that our analysts and expert
contributors believe will give security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | October 2020

62

AFRICA
Rwanda-Burundi Security Relations Beginning to Thaw
OE Watch Commentary: In June, 100 gunmen from Burundi attacked a
Rwandan Defense Force (RDF) position 1 kilometer inside Rwanda (four gunmen
were killed and three RDF troops injured). On August 26, the heads of military
intelligence from Rwanda and Burundi met publicly for the first time since 2015 in
an attempt to ease longstanding tensions over border security issues. The meeting,
which was facilitated by the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), ended with “promises to one another” but without an official agreement.

Evariste Ndayishimiye.

However, the first and second excerpted articles from the East African, a
moderate newspaper based in Kenya that covers regional issues, see the meeting
as an “olive branch” and a “move aimed at ending hostilities and a return to the
good relations [Rwanda and Burundi] once shared.” The ICGLR will continue to
monitor both sides to assess their respective willingness to “enforce the bargain.”
The morning after the meeting, up to 500 refugees in Rwanda returned to Burundi
following a separate repatriation deal coordinated by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, with more expected to return at a future date.

Source: Government of Burundi, https://ccsearch.creativecommons.org/photos/493f04fb-0a83-45d5-9652-364ba8e669af,
CC BY-SA 4.0

Diplomatic relations between Rwanda and Burundi deteriorated sharply
following the controversial re-election of then Burundian president Pierre Nkurunziza in 2015, the third article explains. Rwandan president Paul
Kagame criticized Nkurunziza for “doing little to stop the violence that was sparked by his presidential bid for a third term.” Since then, the two
countries have frequently accused one another of supporting armed opposition groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. However,
since Nkurunziza’s death in early June, experts (according to the East African article) assert that Burundi’s new president, Everiste Ndayishimiye,
and Kagame now have an opportunity to “pursue better relations and improve trade and cross border movements.” Despite his status as a “ruling
party diehard,” the article assesses that Ndayshimiye may decide to promote trade with Rwanda and other neighbors given the “bad economic
situation” in Burundi and his “desire to create his own legacy.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hartung)

“The meeting between the
intelligence officials now serves as
an olive branch and as a symbol of
intentions by both countries to end
the tensions….”
Source: Ivan Mugisha, “Rwanda, Burundi army spy chiefs end talks,
agree on border security.” The East African (Kenya), 27 August
2020. https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/tea/news/east-africa/rwandaburundi-army-spy-chiefs-agree-on-border-security-1926988
Rwanda and Burundi have negotiated a path towards enforcing
security at their common border, a move aimed at ending
longstanding hostilities and a return to the good relations they once
shared.
However, no agreement was signed between the two countries, and
the commitments they made remain as “promises to one another” that
the ICGLR will continue to monitor to assess each party’s willingness
to enforce the bargain.
In the wee hours of Thursday morning, up to 500 Burundian refugees
were facilitated to leave Rwanda for their home country, a move
indicating renewed cooperation between the two neighbours.
Rwanda and Burundi.
Source: TRADOC G2

OE Watch | October 2020

63

AFRICA
Continued: Rwanda-Burundi Security Relations
Beginning to Thaw
Source: Ivan Mugisha, “Rwanda, Burundi military intelligence chiefs meet
to quell tension.” The East African (Kenya), 26 August 2020. https://www.
theeastafrican.co.ke/tea/news/east-africa/rwanda-burundi-military-intelligencechiefs-meet-1926340
The two countries are striving to ease longstanding tensions that have
affected security, trade and movement along their common border.
The meeting is facilitated by Col Leon Mahoungou of the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism, a regional military framework under the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).
For the first time since 2015, Rwandan and Burundian military officials have
met publicly to discuss and find common ground on the longstanding tensions
that have affected security, trade and movement along their border.
Relations between Rwanda and Burundi turned sour in 2015 when Rwandan
President Paul Kagame criticized his counterpart, Pierre Nkurunziza, for
doing little to stop the violence that was sparked by his presidential bid for a
third term.
The meeting between the intelligence officials now serves as an olive branch
and as a symbol of intentions by both countries to end the tensions.

Rwanda President Paul Kagame.

Source: Veni Markovski, https://ccsearch.creativecommons.org/photos/da882171-3933-46fb-8ba8-ea833b7eaac8, CC BY-NC
2.0

Source: Ivan Mugisha, “Window opens for Burundi and Rwanda relations after frosty spell.” The East African (Kenya). 13 June 2020. https://
www.theeastafrican.co.ke/tea/news/east-africa/window-opens-for-burundi-and-rwanda-relations-after-frosty-spell-1443108
Experts say that leaders from both countries now have a window to pursue better relations and improve trade and cross border movements,
which have been adversely affected both by the tensions and the coronavirus pandemic.
The economic situation in the country has to change, and that cannot happen when politically the country is feuding with her immediate
neighbour. The president-elect has to use this to his advantage and find a way to encourage regional trade and cross border movement,” Mr
Gwet said.
However, political experts argue that although Nkurunziza’s likely successor is a ruling party diehard, the desire to create his own legacy
could compel him to have better relations with Rwanda.

OE Watch | October 2020

64

AFRICA
France Avenges ISIS’s Killings of Aid Workers in Niger
OE Watch Commentary: The local affiliate of Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in the Sahel is known as
Islamic State in Greater Sahara (ISGS). The group acquired
increased notoriety after being implicated in the killings
of six French aid workers, their Nigerien tour guide, and
another Nigerien outside of Niamey, Niger on 9 August. The
excerpted Arabic language article for Sahel News, which
reports on current Sahelian affairs from a politically neutral
perspective, examined the impact of France’s killing of
ISGS’s prominent commander, Abdel Hakim al-Sahrawi, in
the aftermath of the French aid workers’ deaths.
Although al-Sahrawi was a wanted commander before the
brutal killings, the article asserts that the timing of France’s
killing of al-Sahrawi indicates the two events were related.
France exacted revenge against ISGS by killing al-Sahrawi.
According to the article, a French drone operating along the
Niger-Mali border identified al-Sahrawi’s location before an
airstrike struck his convoy on 17 August.

Opération Barkhane.

Source: TM1972, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Op%C3%A9ration_Barkhane.jpg CC x 4.0

The article also details some ISGS videos in which al-Sahrawi appeared, including one where al-Sahrawi brutally executed the chief of a village.
There were, therefore, parallels between al-Sahrawi’s history and the way the French aid workers were beheaded or shot at point blank range.
Moreover, the article suggests al-Sahrawi’s contribution to ISGS involved transferring ISIS’s tactics to the Sahel arena. The attack on the French
aid workers would have been one such example, especially considering the attack’s high level of brutality.
As a result of al-Sahrawi being a key figure in ISGS, the article concludes that his elimination will have lasting repercussions for ISGS. At
the same time, the article notes he had been involved in leading ISGS in clashes with fighters loyal to al-Qaeda. It, therefore, remains to be seen
whether France’s weakening ISGS by killing al-Sahrawi might strengthen al-Qaeda in the Sahel by weakening its ideological rival. End OE
Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The killing of Abdel Hakim al-Sahrawi is considered to be a
painful blow to ISIS’s Sahel branch.”

Source: “‫“( ”)ةيرصح تامولعم( يوارحصلا ميكحلا دبع لحاسلا ةقطنمب شعاد ىف يدايقلا لتقم نع ابنأ‬News of the Killing of a Daesh Leader
in the Sahel, Abdel Hakim al-Sahrawi (exclusive information)),” sahelnews.info, 21 August 2020. https://sahelnews.info/%d8%a3%d9%86%d
8%a8%d8%a7%d8%a1-%d8%b9%d9%86-%d9%85%d9%82%d8%aa%d9%84-%d8%a7%d9%84%d9%82%d9%8a%d8%a7%d8%af%d9%
8a-%d9%81%d9%89-%d8%af%d8%a7%d8%b9%d8%b4-%d8%a8%d9%85%d9%86%d8%b7%d9%82%d8%a9-%d8%a7%d9%84/
Sahel News learned from private sources that the leader of the Islamic State in the Sahel region, Abdel Hakim al-Sahrawi, was killed on
August 17 by French forces after Operation Barkhane elements launched a drone attack on his convoy in the Manga region near the Nigerien
border. Observers link this news to the extremist ISIS group targeting six French tourists several days ago in Niger and consider the killing of
al-Sahrawi a powerful French response to the targeting of French citizens.
Al-Sahrawi notably appeared in a video broadcast in which he slaughtered a chief in 2019, which was a dangerous attempt to transfer ISIS’s
experience in Syria and Iraq to the Sahel region. Abdul Hakim al-Sahrawi led fierce confrontations between ISIS and al-Qaeda in Mali, which
were unprecedented in the Sahel region and left many dead. The killing of Abdel Hakim al-Sahrawi is considered to be a painful blow to
ISIS’s Sahel branch, and it will have repercussions on the movement in the coming period.
OE Watch | October 2020

65

AFRICA
French Colonel Assesses Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: On 24 August former French colonel and
current professor and political commentator, Michel Goya, posted the
excerpted French-language article on his blogspot.com blog. Goya sought to
exploit his own military experience and recollections of Mali’s civil war and
instability in 2012 to interpret the uptick in violence in Mali that continues
to the present. His main critique is that France often portrays its strategy as
long-term and well-planned when, in fact, the counter-insurgency effort is
hampered by short-term decision-making.
According to Goya, French operations in the Sahel often follow sudden
demands for action from France’s president or pressure from the media or
the United States. Goya suggests one of the political calculations of French
involvement in the Sahel is its desire to be a regional influencer, which
BarkhaneGao2017(10).
Source: France 3 Grand Est, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BarkhaneGao2017(10).jpg CC x 3.0
provides France international status. However, at the same time, this does
not necessarily lead to results on the ground. Based on this analysis, Goya argues the time horizon for French strategies in the Sahel is often only
one to three years.
Another factor presenting challenges for French strategy in Africa, according to Goya, is unpredictable international events and complex
environments. Goya cites the example of Central African Republic where the plan was for a six-month intervention, but it lasted three years. He
also points to other events that have disrupted French strategy, such as the Arab spring, spillover of conflicts from one country to another, including
from Mali into Burkina Faso and Niger, pandemics, such as the coronavirus, and economic crises. Goya argues France should be more prepared
for low probability, but high-impact events.
Toward the end of article, Goya returns to criticizing the politicization of French military activity in the Sahel, including arguing that hostage
exchanges often serve electoral interests. At the same, Goya contends the jihadists whom France is facing are not psychopaths, but are part of
political movements and comprise an “army of volunteers” and have local support. Further, they act where the state has defaulted.
Lastly, Goya compares France’s counter-insurgency efforts in the Sahel to the U.S. counter-insurgency efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, which
have lasted longer than originally anticipated. He further discusses difficulties of employing regional forces in military interventions and argues
France is in a dilemma of being criticized sometimes for not doing enough and other times for doing too much. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“We sometimes imagine that our foreign operations follow
grand designs and well thought out plans with clear long-term
strategic objectives. Nothing is further from the truth.”
Source: “Quand t’es dans le désert… (When You are In the Desert…).” https://lavoiedelepee.blogspot.com, 24 August 2020. https://
lavoiedelepee.blogspot.com/2020/08/quand-tes-dans-le-desert.html?m=1
We sometimes imagine that our foreign operations follow grand designs and well thought out plans with clear long-term strategic objectives.
Nothing is further from the truth. In fact, we act, or still more often, react because the President decided alone that something must be done,
and usually very quickly. There is often strong pressure conveyed by the media or a request from the United States, or much more rarely from
the European Union.
As for the time horizon, it rarely exceeds a year, or two or three at most. Let us remember the Minister of Defense, Jean-Yves Le Drian, at
the beginning of December 2013, announcing an engagement in the Central African Republic for six months, and then lambasting the “selfproclaimed experts” who pointed out that it was no doubt a too optimistic forecast. This operation, Sangaris, finally ended three years later.
Focused on current problems, we forget even more often that surrounding them, very important things can also happen, such as an economic
crisis, the Arab Spring, the collapse of a neighboring state in our area of operation, some serious crisis in eastern Europe, a major terrorist
attack on our soil, a pandemic, etc… there are many external things that in fact will change the local situation. It is true that we are rarely
interested in low probability events even if they are possible major shocks.
OE Watch | October 2020

66

AFRICA
Southern Nigerian Officials Express Concern about Boko
Haram
OE Watch Commentary: Boko Haram has been predominantly based in
northeastern Nigeria since launching its insurgency in 2010. However, since
2019 there have been growing signs of factions operating in northwestern
Nigeria. The excerpted 26 August article for Lagos-based Punch, which is
among the most popular southern Nigerian newspapers, suggests the group
may be establishing cells in southern Nigeria.
According to the article, Boko Haram’s Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS)-loyal faction set up bases in Oyo State, which is near Lagos. At
least two major political and intelligence officials in the state, including
Gani Adams and Colonel Kunle Togun, respectively, have made this claim.
However, their claims should warrant some skepticism because the article
notes the intelligence official, Col. Kunle Togun, has previously issued some
remarks that were not considered to be objective. Moreover, the article
indicates Togun conflated attacks by Fulani herders in Oyo State with
the terrorists in Boko Haram. Although herders and Boko Haram could
theoretically fight together, there are sometimes sectarian undertones when
southern Nigerian officials blame violence on northern Fulanis.

Boko Haram vehicles destroyed by Cameroon in Dec. 2018.

Source: M. Kindzeka (VOA), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boko_Haram_vehicles_destroyed_by_Cameroon_in_Dec._2018.
jpg CC x 2.0

The article also notes that the Council of Elders in Oyo State echoed Togun’s claims and asserted his claims were based on credible intelligence.
The Council also noted the ISIS-loyal Boko Haram faction had already moved into Niger State, which is north of Oyo. Nevertheless, it did not
explain the evidence for asserting that motorbikes and other supplies were being sent from Oyo State to Boko Haram or other terrorists in Sokoto,
northwestern Nigeria.
While Togun urged Nigeria’s government to do more to protect the people of Oyo State, the conclusion of the article also noted the Council of
Elders urged southern Nigerians to apply for gun licenses to defend themselves. Although some information provided in the article may be true
and based on actual intelligence, it also cannot be dismissed that several claims made in the article were politicized and intended energize southern
Nigerians for potential clashes with northerners, especially herders. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“More worrisome, the intelligence report also reveals that
suspected ISIS operatives have already positioned themselves in
Niger State.”
Source: “Amotekun backs Adams as Onakakanfo alleges terrorists’ presence in Oyo.” punchng.com, 26 August 2020. https://punchng.com/
amotekun-backs-adams-as-onakakanfo-alleges-terrorists-presence-in-oyo/
Gani Adams has raised the alarm that some fighters of the dreaded Islamic State in Iraq and Syria have been stationed in the Oke Ogun area
of Oyo State. Adams, who is the generalissimo of Yorubaland, said this on Tuesday in a communiqué at the end of the extraordinary meeting
of the Ààre Ònàkakanfò-in-Council. The Chairman of the Oyo State Security Network, codenamed Operation Amotekun, Col. Kunle Togun
(retd.), also confirmed Adam’s claim. Togun said, “I have been saying this for a long time that our land has been infiltrated. These so-called
Fulani herdsmen are not herdsmen but foreign terrorists.”
Adams called on the Federal Government to ensure that Nigerian borders were secure to prevent further infiltration by criminals and
terrorists. The communiqué read in part, “More worrisome, the intelligence report also reveals that suspected ISIS operatives have already
positioned themselves in Niger State via Ìbàrùbáland, and are now within the Òkè-Ogùn corridor of Òyó State.” Indeed, the intelligence also
revealed that about 500 power bikes and armours belonging to the terrorists have been physically sighted along the abandoned Lusada route
moving towards Sokoto, from Igbó-Orà in Òyo State. The council, therefore, “enjoin all South-West governors as well as the governors of
Kwara and Kogi states to emulate the Governor of Benue State, Mr Samuel Ortom, by directing their citizens to apply for gun licenses for selfdefence against the marauding terrorists and killer herdsmen.”

OE Watch | October 2020

67

AFRICA
Corruption Frequently Plagues African Arms Deals
OE Watch Commentary: With numerous African nations embroiled
in conflict, whether terrorist actions or civil wars, many of the continent’s
militaries have significant ongoing needs for weapons. Meeting this
demand are arms dealers, who, as the excerpted accompanying article from
Deutsche Welle points out, are frequently corrupt and often associated
with other corrupt individuals, particularly government officials. Since
enormous sums are spent on weapons, often with insufficient oversight,
the amounts siphoned off by fraud are estimated to be quite large.
South African author Andrew Feinstein, who was a former ruling
African National Congress MP, has been studying African arms deals
for over 20 years. His research leads him to conclude that increasingly
Africa is the hotspot for international arms trading and that “in most
cases” these deals involve corruption and fraud. One particularly blatant
scandal occurred in Niger, where the country has been battling Sahelbased insurgents. To combat them, the government purchased $1 billion
Soldiers from Niger, one of the countries implicated in corrupt arms deals.
worth of military equipment between 2011 and 2019, with much of that
Source: US Navy Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Michael Larson/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Niger_
Army_322nd_Parachute_Regiment.jpg, Public Domain
money coming from foreign governments. However, journalists showed
that businessmen from Niger, Russia, and Ukraine likely diverted a portion of those funds. As a result, as the article explains, far fewer arms were
purchased for Niger than originally intended, and some middlemen fraudsters became rich.
The transactions in the Niger weapons scandal, as described in the article, were often convoluted and opaque. For example, the offshore suppliers
used were owned by middlemen who submitted overpriced bids, funds were transferred through dubious financial institutions, amounts paid for
Russian aircraft were higher than their actual worth, and Russian companies laundered some of their ill-gotten gains through Germany. Feinstein
claims the reason the money was laundered through Germany and not Russia is that doing it through the former would arouse less suspicion by
American investigators than if done through the latter. As for the reason not all of the money was laundered through Germany, using multiple
banks in multiple countries helps obscure where the cash is really going.
Niger is certainly not alone in Africa when it comes to corrupt arms deals. Also, as the article notes, the corruption is not just limited to local
officials and middlemen. Bribable officials exist in several countries in the northern hemisphere, such as Russia, where these weapons and/or the
initial deals often originate. Thus, as the article describes, corruption can occur at one or multiple steps of the arms trade. This can make fighting
fraudulent arms deals quite difficult. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“In most cases, arms deals in Africa are a huge part of
corruption and fraud, says Feinstein, who penned the book
“The Shadow World: Inside the Global Arms Trade” in 2011.”
Source: Antonio Cascais, “Africa: The big rip-off in arms deals,” Deutsche Welle, 18 September 2020. https://www.dw.com/en/africa-the-bigrip-off-in-arms-deals/a-54951312
In most cases, arms deals in Africa are a huge part of corruption and fraud, says Feinstein, who penned the book “The Shadow World: Inside
the Global Arms Trade” in 2011.
According to Feinstein, one of the criminal masterminds in Niger, Aboubacar Hima, also had a personal relationship with Ukraine’s expresident Viktor Yanukovych and bought several apartments in Prague. Currently, Nigerien intermediaries are purchasing expensive villas in
Niamey, he says.
This information was contained in an internal Nigerien government audit document, which Feinstein and the OCCRP journalists obtained.
The audit report also listed numerous fraudulent arms deals. For example, in 2016, two MI-171Sh combat helicopters were purchased from
the Russian state-owned export agency Rosoboronexport for €55 million ($59 million), almost €20 million above the regular price.
For anti-corruption activist Paul Holden, the OCCRP report highlights how such businesses work. The arms trade is particularly prone to
corruption, says the South African, founder of the London-based anti-corruption organization Shadow World Investigations.
The Niger scandal is not an isolated incident, explains Paul Holden: “In Africa, there is definitely a lot more corrupt arms deals. The arms
trade is responsible for 40% of corruption in world trade, and unfortunately, this also affects many African countries.”
OE Watch | October 2020

68

AFRICA
Deficiencies in Governance and the African Union’s “No”
to Coups
OE Watch Commentary: The 18 August coup d’état in Mali that
toppled then-President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta was roundly condemned
by various international peace and security organizations. The African
Union (AU) and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), according to the excerpted accompanying article from South
Africa’s Institute for Security Studies, went a step further with their
condemnation; they imposed sanctions on the coups plotters. That was
a rather remarkable action for the AU to take as it is normally critical of
international sanctions imposed on African nations, and thus reflects its
deep disapproval of the overthrow. What the AU did not address in detail,
however, but which this article does, is what were the causes behind this
as well as many other coups in Africa.
The AU’s stance on removing governments other than through the ballot
box is strict and in large part based on the Lomé Declaration of 2000 and Malian soldiers, such as the ones pictured here, have launched several successful coups.
Source: US Air Force Master Sgt. Ken Bergmann/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mali_army_drill_Tombouctou_070904.
jpg, Public Domainjpg CC x 2.0
the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance of 2007,
both of which define what constitutes unconstitutional changes of government. The article gives several examples of these, including military
coups, interventions by mercenaries or rebels that replace an elected government, and refusal of a government fairly defeated by an election to
relinquish power.
However, as the article notes, while the concern at the time when those documents were signed was to protect civilian political institutions from
the “authoritarianism “of military interventions. Citizens’ priorities have since evolved to emphasize good governance, fair electoral processes, and
other qualities of a well-run democracy. Failure of a government to meet these priorities can lead to social discontent. Thus, in 2014 the AU Peace
and Security Council noted that unconstitutional changes of government originate from “deficiencies in governance.” Some of the deficiencies
mentioned in the pronouncement include greed, mismanagement, human rights violations, manipulation of constitutions, corruption, and several
others. However, the presence of these deficiencies still does not mean African organizations will countenance a coup.
The article’s authors point to Mali as an example where despite a popular uprising of the people against the president preceding the coup, the
AU and ECOWAS still condemned the overthrow. The authors further describe the response from those African organizations as prioritizing a
symptom, which is the coup, over the root causes, such as corruption and questionable legitimacy of the government. As a result, the AU and
ECOWAS appear to be protecting the incumbency, despite its many flaws. Thus, as the authors note, condemnation by the AU, ECOWAS, and
others of coups against unpopular leaders, such as the recent one in Mali, could be viewed as putting them at odds with the citizens of those
countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Censuring coups isn’t enough – African and international actors
should tackle the poor quality of democracy and governance.”
Source: Paul-Simon Handy, Fonteh Akum, Félicité Djilo, “What Causes Africa’s Coups? That Is the Question,” Institute for Security Studies
(South Africa), 8 September 2020. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/what-causes-africas-coups-that-is-the-question
Censuring coups isn’t enough – African and international actors should tackle the poor quality of democracy and governance.
The council’s call for ‘a zero tolerance for government policies and actions that may lead to a resort to unconstitutional means to overthrow
oppressive systems’ has not changed the dominant norms and actions. Despite the clarity provided by the PSC, in practice the AU and
regional organizations have reduced democracy to the holding of elections and selective respect for term limits.
In 2014, the AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) noted that unconstitutional changes of government originated from ‘deficiencies in
governance. Greed, selfishness, mismanagement of diversity, failure to seize opportunities, marginalization, human rights violations,
unwillingness to accept electoral defeat, manipulation of constitutions and their revision through unconstitutional means to serve narrow
interests, and corruption are all major contributors to unconstitutional changes of Governments and popular uprisings.’
Africa’s peace, security and governance norms and instruments will increasingly be tested by complex challenges. Reports from early
warning systems and civil society organizations often correctly predict governance failures. Without political commitment to conflict
prevention, the AU and regional organizations will increasingly react rather than pre-empt crises. It then becomes politically expedient to
condemn a coup rather than take bold political steps to address the causes of social discontent.
OE Watch | October 2020

69

AFRICA
South African National Defence Force Losing Strategic
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The downward spiral of South Africa’s defense budget continues to take
a toll. As the excerpted accompanying article from the South African website DefenceWeb notes, a
recent mini-symposium held by a defense committee found the South African National Defence Force
(SANDF) has deteriorated to the point that they have lost certain strategic capabilities. This diminished
SANDF is now unable to respond to regional crises such as the insurgency in neighboring Mozambique.
Part of the problem, as the article’s author describes, is SANDF has not been forceful enough in
asking for more money. Additionally, because SANDF often still manages to carry out many of their
assigned operations even while under-resourced, or as the article calls it “pulling a rabbit out of the hat,”
some people question whether they really require more funding. However, many others do recognize
the need for additional funds. One defense expert even commented that if the government won’t give
the navy more money for its extended deployment in the Mozambique Channel, then the navy should
return home.
Despite the calls and demonstrated need for additional funds, it is uncertain such help will materialize.
Indeed, according to the article the country’s economic troubles will result in revenue continuing to
decline, with the result that future budgets will actually be decreasing, not increasing. Against this
backdrop of financial woes, the author finds it will be necessary for the government to define what
roles SANDF should play and then to redesign the force, within the economic constraints imposed by
declining funding, to fulfill those roles.
Defining SANDF’s roles will in part include thinking about the country’s involvement in regional
conflicts. While South Africa has long thought of itself as a regional power, its economic decline and
concomitant military decline means that while it wants to help its northern neighbors, as the author puts
it: “there is no funding to back up that commitment.”

South African paratroopers.

Source: SPC Taryn Hagerman/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:South_African_soldiers_board_a_C-130_Hercules_aircraft_for_a_practice_
jump_at_Air_Force_Base_Bloemspruit_in_Bloemfontein,_South_Africa,_
July_23,_2013,_in_preparation_for_exercise_Shared_Accord_2013_130723-AFP002-005.jpg, Public Domain

As for redesigning the force, the author provides several suggestions. These include trimming personnel numbers in logistics and combat
support; providing an exit mechanism for some of the older troops in the junior ranks; and no longer having an independent military health system.
However, according to the article, cutting military personnel would be problematic not only because it would add to the country’s unemployment
numbers but also due to labor legislation and the costs associated with retrenchment packages.
There are significant obstacles to both defining SANDF’s roles and restructuring it to meet those roles. Meanwhile, as the article notes, SANDF
is in trouble as it tries “to be a regional force on a borderline budget.” End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The defence force is often its own worst enemy. It always seems
to pull a rabbit out of a hat and get the job done, therefore people
say okay, it doesn’t need more cash. Meanwhile the defence force
is cutting into muscle and bone.”
Source: Guy Martin, “The SANDF needs to put its foot down,” DefenceWeb (South Africa), 8 September 2020. https://www.defenceweb.
co.za/featured/feature-the-sandf-needs-to-put-its-foot-down/
“The defence force is often its own worst enemy. It always seems to pull a rabbit out of a hat and get the job done, therefore people say okay,
it doesn’t need more cash. Meanwhile the defence force is cutting into muscle and bone.”
Khanyile noted that “we need to help out our brothers and sister up north but there is no funding to back up that commitment.”
Defence expert Helmoed Romer Heitman said that most countries build defence forces to deal with identified threats with some agility to deal
with unforeseen threats. “If we look at the SANDF today we are too weak to meet that standard,” he said.
Nevertheless, the SANDF goes where government tells it to, but Heitman believes the SANDF needs to say “give us more money or else we
don’t go.” He added that the 2015 Defence Review argued for an operational deployment budget and the Department of Defence needs to
approach treasury to implement that.
The defence force is in trouble,” Heitman said. “Really, it is time for government to decide what they want the defence force to be able to do,”
as currently South Africa is “trying to be a regional force on a borderline budget.”
Professor Lindy Heinecken said the SANDF cannot address a new force design without consulting politicians and society. “What roles
should be prioritised given the current allocation of resources? Without understanding the SANDF’s role, one cannot design or plan a new
force design,” she said.
OE Watch | October 2020

70

LATIN AMERICA
Opposition Parties in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The various political parties that have together made up the formally organized opposition to the Bolivarian regime
in Venezuela have never been unified in form or ideological tendency. When it appeared in early 2019 that a viable coup attempt against the
regime was in the making, most of the opposition parties got behind the interim presidency of Juan Guaidó, who is a leader in the Popular Will
party. That party describes itself as a progressive social democrat party, and it is a member of the Socialist International. Judging from the
accompanying reportage, Guaidó has been seeking to consolidate the opposition to the Bolivarian regime, but under a strategy of seeking to work
with the Bolivarians toward a new set of national elections or consults. After the failure of the 2019 effort to oust the Bolivarians, Juan Guaidó’s
hold on support from various party leaders has been eroding. This month that support seems to have taken a precipitous downturn with rejection
of his leadership becoming more publicly expressed. As such, what remains of international acceptance of Guaidó as the Venezuelans’ legitimate
chief executive may be at imminent risk. According to the first accompanying reference, Maria Corina Machado, leader of Vente Venezuela
(conservative libertarian party) had a meeting with Juan Guaidó about the possibility of maintaining opposition unity. That meeting was evidently
a total failure, with Ms. Machado flatly stating that Guaidó had been a failure and that she rejected his proposed strategy of accommodation and
electoral exercise. Battle lines seem to have been drawn. As the second reference makes clear, Ms. Machado has rejected any further electoral
or referendum exercises as useless. She evidently favors a combination of all forms of struggle approach to taking back control of Venezuelan
territory from the Bolivarians. The reaction of Guaidó’s political party to Machado’s rejection came swiftly, as recorded by the third accompanying
reference. Another Popular Will leader, Yon Goicoechea, claims Machado is proposing immediate military action and calls Machado a ‘populist’.
If nothing else, a split in what had held itself out as the Venezuelan opposition is now defining itself more clearly. There is evidently one opposition
that is not willing to suggest the use of force of any kind. That side, led by the Popular Will party, is trying to organize another round of public
referenda and elections. The other side of the opposition, led evidently by Vente Venezuela, finds those exercises to have failed and aims instead
to organize other forms of resistance, and has not overtly stated that use-of-force is off the table. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…there is an alternative proposal for achieving the liberation of Venezuela…”
Source: María Corina Machado a Juan Guaidó: El país te dio una tarea que no has podido o querido cumplir (María Corina Machado a Juan
Guaidó: The country gave you a task that you have not been able or wanted to complete),” El Nacional and EFE 29 August 2020. https://
www.elnacional.com/venezuela/maria-corina-machado-a-juan-guaido-el-pais-te-dio-una-tarea-que-no-has-podido-o-querido-cumplir/
“The national coordinator of Vente Venezuela assured that there is an alternative proposal for achieving the liberation of Venezuela, but
that that route requires the escalation and coordination of internal and external forces…She claimed that they had changed route proposed
in 2019 to achieve the ouster of Nicolas Maduro from Miraflores in 2019 and that the opportunities that had then presented themselves in
the course of things had been lost…She rejected the proposal of making another consultation to the population, considering that a failure of
respect for the mandate of the citizens of 16 July 2017, that up to now has not been fulfilled: ‘It is not healthy, nor is it ethical and we would not
accompany it.’”

“…there nothing more to consult about…”
Source: Editors, “¡ Lo Acabo Todo! Guaidó no logra cohesionar a la oposición venezolana (Its all over! Guaidó not able to bring Venezuelan
opposition together),” Dolartoday and AP, 30 August 2020. https://dolartoday.com/se-desvanece-el-liderazgo-guaido-logra-cohesionar-laoposicion-venezolana/
“Director María Corina Machado, representative of the most radical wing of the Venezuelan opposition, rejected this Saturday 29 August
2020 joining the unity pact of the parliamentary chief Juan Guaidó…Machado stated in a video disseminated in her Twitter account after a
‘ frank’ conversation with Guaidó, ‘In answer to the question did we achieve a coordination, the answer is no.’…‘The country has it very clear
that we confront a criminal regime, there nothing more to consult about. The country also has it very clear that those criminals will not leave
as a result of votes’, the ex-deputy, who is forbidden to leave the country, continued.”

“…Machado is being a populist…”
Source: Editors, “Goicoechea a María Corina Machado: Lo que haces es populismo (Goicoechea a María Corina Machado: What you are
doing is populism),” El Nacional 30 August 2020. https://www.elnacional.com/venezuela/goicochea-a-maria-corina-machado-lo-que-haceses-populismo/
“For [Yon] Goicoechea [another leader in the Voluntad Popular party] María Corina Machado is being a populist with her message to the
Venezuelans. ‘María Corina, the truth is that you know well because you have said so expressly from the USA, that the option to use force
is not something immediate. Less so in full Trump campaign mode. Simply saying what the people want to hear knowing that it is a lie’, he
asserted.”
OE Watch | October 2020

71

LATIN AMERICA
Peru Pandemic News

Peruvian Army K9 patrol helping enforce the COVID-19 curfew in late March 2020.

Source: Peruvian Ministry of Defense, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Peruvian_army_K9_-_2020_coronavirus_pandemic_in_Peru.jpg Public Domain

OE Watch Commentary: Comments on
reportage in covering the COVID-19 pandemic
in the Ibero-American region have been
problematic because data sources and methods
have appeared so confusing, untrustworthy
and inconsistent, both across and within
countries. The accompanying reference from El
Comercio in Lima, however, appears to reflect a
simplification and clarity in terms of pandemic
measurement. Only total recorded deaths in the
country, month over month, are compared. The
article is a good-news story in that the periodic
rate of deaths in the country appears to finally
be going down after an abrupt increase starting
in April. Other indications, such as a decrease
in the number of seriously ill COVID-19
patients showing at health clinics, also call for
optimism. Nevertheless, the article stresses that
the citizenry should not lower its guard quite
yet. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…this is a moment for calm and optimism…”

Source: Sebastián Sevilla Ferrari, “En agosto disminuyó por primera vez la cifra de peruanos fallecidos por cualquier causa desde el inicio de
la pandemia (In August the number of Peruvians dying for any cause went down for the fitrst time since the beginning of the pandemic),” El
Comerico, Lima, 2 September 2020. https://elcomercio.pe/lima/sucesos/sinadef-coronavirus-en-peru-en-agosto-se-registro-la-primera-caidade-defunciones-por-cualquier-causa-en-el-peru-desde-el-inicio-de-la-pandemia-covid-19-estado-de-emergencia-nndc-noticia/
“…The Health Ministry reported Monday that fewer than 200 COVID-19 deaths per 24 hours for the eighth consecutive day, after peaking at
228 recorded on 9 August. About that, infections disease doctor…Juan Vilena, asserted that there is now a decrease in the number of persons
who arrive at medical centers in serious condition, and that, while it is true that there continue to be problems with access to medical oxygen,
‘this is a moment for calm and optimism’…given the propagation characteristics of the virus, it is too soon to talk about the tendency having
reversed, and the citizenry should not stop following the advice of the health ministry…
Ratio of total deaths for 2020:
January 9,868
February 9,350
March 9,773
April 12,898
May 25,086
June 26,861
July 28,236
August 26,520
This amounts to the first reduction in the number of deaths produced from one month to another since the beginning of the state of
emergency…”

OE Watch | October 2020

72

LATIN AMERICA
Economic Report from Dominican Republic
OE Watch Commentary: Commentary: The
accompanying article is from Listin Diario, a legacy
newspaper in the Dominican Republic in business
continuously since the 19th century. The article seems
to be a very significant and timely, strategic reminder.
To whom is not clear, but it might be to the country’s
president, Luis Abinader. President Abinader is a leader of
the Modern Revolutionary Party. That party is a member
of the Progressive Alliance and of the Forum of Sao Paulo.
As such, logically the party is influenced by the Cuban
Communist Party and the United Venezuelan Socialist
Party, and by extension, the Communist Party of China.
Notably, the Listin Diario article characterizes Abinader’s
ambivalence as having to maintain close relations with
the United States in spite of tensions between the United
States and China. The provided statistics suggest it should
be the other way around. In any case, the Dominican
Republic’s location in the Antilles makes it of particular
strategic importance, perhaps exceeded only by Colombia
and Brazil if the strategy conversation revolves around
Venezuela. Ultimately, the article paints a picture of the
United States having more potential influence with the
people of the Dominican Republic than the government
of China. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Luis Abinader, President of the Dominican Republic, 2020.
Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Luis_Abinader_2020.jpg Public Domain

“…China does not figure into the
countries sending remittances…”
Source: Jhenery Ramírez, “País exporta a EEUU US$5,125.9
millones y a China doscientos (The country exports
$5,125.9 million to USA and two hundred to China),”
Listin Diario, 3 September 2020. https://listindiario.com/
economia/2020/09/03/633599/pais-exporta-a-eeuu-us-5125-9millones-y-a-china-doscientos

Dominican Republic.
Source: TRADOC G2

“While in 2019 the Domincan Republic exported $5, 125.9
million to the United states, the value exported to the Asian
market was only $200 million…Nevertheless, Abinader clarifies
that diplomatic relations with China will be maintained and that
the Administration is open to whatever investment that Chinese
businessmen wish to make, so long as they are not in strategic
sectors of national security…President Abinader is quite clear
that he must maintain close relations with the United States in
spite of the tensions between that country and China. And it is that
for several years, the United States is the principal destination
of Dominican exports and imports…China is not within the first
five places…In 2018, the United States represented 77.4% of the
remittances that came to the Dominican Republic, in 2019 it
represented 76.4% and between January and July of the current
year it represented 81.8% of the $4, 302,6 million that came into
the country in this form. China does not figure into the countries
sending remittances of the Central Bank…In 2019, US Americans
represented the largest quantity of tourists that visited the country
by air, with a total of 2,030, 257, above other countries such as
Canada, or regions like South America or the continents, like
Europe. This year, only 11,880 tourists from China, according to
the central bank.”
OE Watch | October 2020

73

LATIN AMERICA
Drug War in Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying pair of articles is from Infobae, a major news website headquartered in Buenos Aires, but with a
strong reporter presence in Mexico. The first article, from mid-August, notes use of drones by the New Generation Jalisco Cartel (CJNG). It goes
on to note other uses of drones in Mexico including by the Mexican army, and it mentions Mexican law regulating their use. It appears that the
CJNG will not be entirely scrupulous in following them. The second reference is a follow-on article with some of the text from the August piece
repeated. It outlines what appears to be an expanding effort by the CJNG to gain territorial control in western Michoacán state, keying on the
county of Tepalcatepec, also known as Tepeque, which sits on the border with Jalisco state. Of particular interest is the continuing technological
experimentation by the CJNG. The local Tepeque community organized self-defense vigilante militias to defend against encroachments of the
CJNG in 2019, evidently holding their own. Now the CJNG is using its aerial drones, loaded with explosives (apparently C4 and grapeshot), to
remotely detonate over the population as a terror tactic. So far, according to local spokespersons, the CJNG has not yet perfected their remote
guidance. The self-defense organizations are seeking ways to detect and defend against the new terror weapon. This little buzz-bomb twist in the
Mexican drug war should not be dismissed. The cartel will learn how to better guide the drones, and that knowledge will spread [see also: “CJNG
Using Attack Drones in Michoacán Region,” OE Watch, September 2020]. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…Light, cheap and able to fly autonomously…”
Source: Editors, “Drones con explosivos, la más reciente arma del CJNG para atacar desde el aire (Drones with explosives, the most recent
CJNG weapon for attacking from the air),” Infobae, 14 August 2020. https://www.infobae.com/america/mexico/2020/08/15/drones-conexplosivos-la-mas-reciente-arma-del-cjng-para-atacar-desde-el-aire/
“Light, cheap and able to fly autonomously are the advantages of the drones that the Jalisco Cartel uses to attack its enemies…The
antecedents for drones with explosives date back to 2017 when the Guanajuato DA’s office reported the take-down of one of those aircraft
together with a radio frequency detonator, according to the French news agency AFP…In Mexico, the Army uses drones as part of toolkit
for combating organized crime…In 2019 the details of the Official Mexican Norm 107 or NOM-107 were introduced, that establishes the
requirements for operating a remotely piloted aircraft, such as a drone, in the country’s airspace. It came into effect this year…To use them,
each drone has to be registered with the Federal Aviation Agency and both non-commercial, private-use and commercial drones have to carry
liability insurance…”

“…The main
targets are the
self-defense
groups that
formed to defend
themselves…”
Tepalcatepec County, Michoacán.
Source: TRADOC G2

Source: Editors, “El CJNG recurre a tácticas terroristas en su batalla territorial en Michoacán (The JNGC returns to terrorist tactics in its
territorial battle in Michoacán),” Infobae, 3 September 2020. https://www.infobae.com/america/mexico/2020/09/03/el-cjng-recurre-a-tacticasterroristas-en-su-batalla-territorial-en-michoacan/
“The main targets are the self-defense groups that formed to defend themselves from a terror campaign of the cartels…In May, more of the
C4 drones were discovered in Puebla, less than an hour drive by car from Mexico City…According to the website, La Silla Rota, the CJNG
had used small planes to attack the population by air. The situation led to the greater vigilance on the part of the authorities, which made that
type of aggression more difficult. Because of that, the cartel, led by Nemesio ‘El Mencho’ Oseguera, recurred to the drones…One resident
of that community said that until now there have been no injuries, but that the explosions can be heard for a distance of kilometers…For the
local self-defense units, the members of the New Generation Jalisco Cartel still have not learned to use the artefacts with precision…”
OE Watch | October 2020

74

LATIN AMERICA
Report of Secret Police Killings in Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: The reportage in the
accompanying reference seems stunning, or perhaps
would be in any other year. The well-established,
serious news outlet Infobae reports on the findings of a
pair of NGOs working discreetly inside Venezuela that
the Maduro regime has been systematically murdering
persons identified as opposing the regime, but not just a
few—hundreds. One of the NGOs, Provea, is evidently
recognized by the United Nations Human Rights
Council and is an offshoot of Amnesty International,
was founded in the 1980s. It has a prominent Facebook
page and its website is https://www.derechos.org.ve/
provea. The other NGO, the Centro Gumilla, is older,
dating from the 1960s. Its webpage is https://www.
Intelligence and Secret Police HQ in Caracas, circa 2008.
Source: Damián D. Fossi Salas, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Helicoide_roca_tarpeya_caracas.jpg
gumilla.org/?p=page&id=1217965631. Some of the
details of the alleged activities included names, localities, and event histories. However, Infobae says this is an initial report and more information
is to come. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…more

than 1500 extrajudicial executions…”

Source: Editors, “Las fuerzas del régimen de Maduro asesinaron a más de 1.500 personas en ejecuciones extrajudiciales en los primeros
seis meses del año (In the first six months of the year, the forces of the Maduro regime murdered more than 1500 persons in extrajudicial
executions),” Infobae, 6 September. https://www.infobae.com/america/venezuela/2020/09/06/las-fuerzas-del-regimen-de-maduro-asesinarona-mas-de-1500-personas-en-ejecuciones-extrajudiciales-en-los-primeros-seis-meses-del-ano/
“The NGO, Programa Venezolano de Educación-Acción (Venezuelan Program of Education-Action, PROVEA) and the Gumilla Center
documented the cases…The number is horrifying: more than 1500 extrajudicial executions in only the first half of this 2020. To this point,
there is data from Caracas, Miranda, Aragua, Carabobo, Sucre, Bolívar, Táchira, Mérida Trujillo y Zulia. But they still have not processed
data from some other states, so the number might increase…These incidents happened mostly in low income areas to men between 18 and 30
years of age.”

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | October 2020

75

LATIN AMERICA
Urban Unrest in Bogota
OE Watch Commentary: This past month, the people of Bogotá witnessed a spate of extreme urban violence the unfolding of which may sound
familiar to many readers. An incident occurred on 9 September in which 45-year-old Javier Ordóñez died while in police custody, evidently of
being beaten either during his arrest or shortly after. A video of part the arrest, taken by a bystander, was soon posted to the internet, went viral
and can be viewed on YouTube (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QXjwIy5qP_0). The first accompanying reference gives a (still early) report
from a few days later, based on witnesses and official documents. The facts surrounding the incident, including the video, are anything but clearcut. As reported in the second accompanying reference, protests against the police followed, and within the context of those protests, rioting.
The ostensible theme of the protests was police brutality and the need for police reform. As noted in the third reference, the mayor of Bogota,
Claudia López, supported the protestors. She publicly apologized for what had happened, claimed that the authorities should have anticipated the
disturbances and repeated that the horrible behavior of the police would be carefully reviewed. As reported in the fourth accompanying reference,
the civil disturbance was very likely planned and coordinated, probably by the ELN. Considerable public counter-reaction ensued, with many
commenters (as reflected by the fifth accompanying reference) in support of the police. In any case, the larger picture seems to include an effort
by leftist leadership to change institutional control of the national police force. The Mayor of Bogotá perhaps the second most powerful elected
official in Colombia, is a leader in the progressive Green Alliance Party. The national police, as an institution, is formally part of the Ministry of
Defense. It apparently has not yet fallen under the de facto control of progressive or Marxist interests, as have many of the bureaucracies within the
Colombian national government. Greater separation between the police and military hierarchies could be a step toward the left parties being able
to better control the country’s police establishment. That could in turn enhance the prospects of implementing deep social changes sought by those
parties. Political analyst Eduardo Mackenzie (sixth accompanying reference) provides the punchline. The authorities admitted after the events that
an urban guerrilla organization existed in the city. Mackenzie wonders aloud how long the authorities had known that the urban guerrilla structure
existed. The accusation is that it was in place since 2015, well before the Santos-FARC power sharing agreement began to take effect. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…With

the help of three backup patrolmen…
they were able to handcuff him…”

Source: Jenny Rocío Angarita and Pepe Morón, “Javier Ordóñez tenía nueve fracturas en el cráneo: Medicina Legal (Forensic report: Javier
Ordóñez had nine skull fractures),” RCN Radio, 12 September 2020. https://www.rcnradio.com/bogota/policia-que-descargo-taser-en-javierordonez-dice-que-hubo-uso-moderado-de-la-fuerza
Two subjects and Javier Ordóñez attacked two policemen who were trying to calm the first…With the help of three backup patrolmen,
according to the agent, they were able to handcuff him, while the companion, with the green jacket, was handcuffed without him offering
resistance and they put the two of them in an institutional vehicle…In his version, the agent did not indicate the presence of Juan David Uribe,
one of Javier Ordóñez’s companions. Uribe is the person who made the video that went viral on social media, and the day of the events he told
RCN Radio that it was on his insistence, seeing him unconscious, that they transferred the victim to the clinic…

“…changes

are underway inside the Police in
order to strengthen the institution…”

Source: Vanesa Peralta, “Sube a siete la cifra de muertos, y a 93 policías heridos, tras los disturbios en Bogotá (THe number of dead rises
to seven, and of wounded policemen to 93 from the disturbances in Bogota),” RCN Radio, 10 September 2020. https://www.rcnradio.com/
bogota/sube-siete-la-cifra-de-muertos-tras-los-disturbios-en-bogota
Also reported are 56 police installations affected, of which 22 were set ablaze. To this account is added 77 vehicles affected, 49 from the SITP
[NFI] vandalized, eight Transmilenio [large fixed-course buses] vehicles affected and eight set on fire…About a possible reform of the Police,
Holmes Trujillo assured that, ‘changes are underway inside the Police in order to strengthen the institution, they are within the framework of
the program of security and coexistence that were presented by the President of the Republic’…

OE Watch | October 2020

76

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Urban Unrest in Bogota
“…The Mayor of Bogota, Claudia López, asked
forgiveness of the citizenry …”
Source: Daniel Arias Bonfante, “Pido perdón a la ciudadanía, debimos anticipar lo que pasó”: Claudia López (Claudia López: ‘I ask the
citizenry for forgiveness, we should have anticipated what happened’),” RCN Radio, 12 September 2020. https://www.rcnradio.com/bogota/
pido-perdon-la-ciudadania-debimos-anticipar-lo-que-paso-claudia-lopez
The Mayor of Bogota, Claudia López, asked forgiveness of the citizenry for the disturbances and periods of violence that became of the
protests in the last few days after the death of Javier Ordóñez…Additionally, the functionary again placed emphasis on police reform
and reiterated that it be a civil corps and not military, the end being to improve its action protocols as regards the public. Responding to
accusations in the matter, the mayor assured that the acts of vandalism that happened in several zones of the city were reproachable and
should be punished, but that they could not be compared with the excesses of force by the authorities.

“…We need a guerrilla able to move the military
conflict to urban surroundings…”
Source: Editors, “Lo que hay detrás de las horas de zozobra que se vivieron en Bogotá (What is behind the hours of uneasiness seen in
Bogota),” El Tiempo, 12 September 2020. https://www.eltiempo.com/unidad-investigativa/bogota-vandalos-eln-y-disidencias-detras-dejornadas-violentas-537552
One of the documents captured from the ELN says textually: ‘We need a guerrilla able to move the military conflict to urban surroundings.
If it is not that way, in the countryside we might be able to unleash a thousand combats that surely the media would take it upon themselves to
make invisible and the enemy to minimize their real impact’. In fact, an intelligence official told El Tiempo that the CAI were to be destroyed
in a mobilization planned for March, but the pandemic stopped it…This evidence notwithstanding, various analysts consulted by El Tiempo
indicate that behind the violence lived in the last few days, and that left 13 dead in Bogotá and Soacha, 175 wounded and 147 police injured,
there are also foundational causes that should be analyzed and solved…
Read the document captured from the ELN about planning for actions in cities: https://www.eltiempo.com/unidad-investigativa/gobiernodice-que-eln-y-disidencias-de-ivan-marquez-estan-detras-de-desmanes-en-ciudades-537483

“…I did not see the President… give a forceful backup
to the police institution…”
Source: Nelson Roberto Pardo Giraldo, “Apoyo total de los colombianos a nuestra Policía Nacional (Total support of the Colombians for our
National Police) La Linterna Azul, 11 September 2020. http://www.lalinternaazul.info/2020/09/12/apoyo-total-de-los-colombianos-a-nuestrapolicia-nacional/
I did not see the President, or the Attorney general either, give a forceful backup to the police institution, only requests for rigorous
investigations of the two policemen…I move to a second point no less important, and that is of the wave of violence unleashed in a savage
and criminal way against good citizens by a gang of misfits, lunatics and resentful, who in a very organized way and having been paid, were
trained by the guerrilla groups, obeying a terrorist politic from abroad, with direction from the Forum of Sao Paulo, the Puebla Group and
XXI Century Socialism, among others…
Source: Eduardo Mackenzie, “Una nueva guerrilla urbana golpea a Colombia (A new urban guerrilla strikes Colombia),” Twishort, 13
September 2020. https://twishort.com/JqSnc
The Minister of Defense, Carlos Holmes Trujillo, admitted, in effect, that in those ‘protests’ there was an ‘infiltration of the ELN, an
infiltration of FARC dissidents and an infiltration of other groups with clear denominations as anarchists and terrorists that do no more than
destroy public property and citizen infrastructure’. The Minister added: ‘This has an international origin and it is directed against the police
of specific countries of the world’…The question is: Since when have those government leaders known that those urban militias of the ELN and
FARC dissidents were acting in the capitals and that they were financed and trained to attack and destroy neurological points in Bogota and
other capitals, passing them off as out of control demonstrations?...Hours after the incidents [in February 2019], Oscar Ramírez, journalist
from the RCN radio group, confirmed that, according to intelligence officials, the ELN as much as the FARC dissidents had formed 14 armed
groups that operate in five localities in Bogota. He detailed that the operation had been in progress ‘since 2015’…And worst of all: If they
knew that the violent protests over the death of Mr. Javier Ordonez were in great part the opportunistic action of those armed cells of the ELN
and the FARC dissidents, why did President Duque, the minister of Defense and other functionaries appear so timid in facing the avalanche
of insults against the Police…?
OE Watch | October 2020

77

LATIN AMERICA
Cattle Death in Cuba
OE Watch Commentary: An odd and disconcerting piece of news comes out of Cuba this month. According to 14ymedio, a news site covering
events inside Cuba, official and non-official reportage from the island country indicates some 25,000 cattle died recently of malnutrition. According
to 14ymedio, the government’s official press is claiming that the reason for lowered milk and meat production is the malnutrition of the cattle, a
clear non-answer as to why the widespread malnutrition. The loss of herd has caused the government to import more dairy products and meat.
Interestingly, according to 14ymedio, Cuba does not import much dairy and meat from what would seem to be the most logical trade partner in that
sector, Nicaragua. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“…diminished

national production of milk and meat is
due to the malnutrition of the cattle…”

Source: Editors, “En Cuba han muerto más de 25.000 vacas por desnutrición en lo que va de año (In Cuba, more tan 25000 cattle have died
from malnutrition so far this year),” 14yMedio, 11 September 2020. https://www.14ymedio.com/economia/Cuba-muerto-vacas-desnutricionano_0_2946905291.html; http://translatingcuba.com/category/14ymedio/
The official press explains that diminished national production of milk and meat is due to the malnutrition of the cattle…Camaguay
alone reported, in the first half of 2020, the death of more than 17,000 cows from malnutrition and a decline of approximately 30% in milk
production…The great quantity of milk, cheese and meat that is commercialized in Cuba is imported, mostly from Uruguay and is destined
maily to the tourist sector and to hard-currency stores…It is interesting that although Cuba has good relations with Nicaragua, a country
considered the largest dairy exporter in Central America with 5.5 million head of cattle in 2019, there exists no more than good intentions
between the two nations in this commercial sector…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | October 2020

78

